In Silico Identification and Analysis of Genes Associated with the Biosynthesis of Secondary Metabolites and Other Economically Important Products in Abaca (Musa textilis Née) and Wild Banana (Musa balbisiana Colla)

LLOYD ONGPAUCO BALINADO

UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES LOS BAÑOS

DOCTOR OF PHILOSPHY in Botany

AUGUST 2022

ABSTRACT

This study was conducted to review the medicinal and other non-fiber economic uses of
M. textilis, and analyze the available genomes and transcriptomes of M. textilis and M.
balbisiana in silico to identify genes associated with their production of secondary
metabolites. Results showed that the abaca plant is traditionally utilized to address medical conditions
such as wound, relapse, fatigue, muscle pain, and gastrointestinal problems. It also exhibits
the potential to be used in other non-fiber industries such as in cosmetics, colorant, food,
and fuel and energy industries. In addition, phytochemicals including phenolic compounds,
phytosterols, phenylphenalenone type compounds, and cyanogenic glycosides were
reported in abaca and could support its efficacy as a traditional medicinal plant and its
applications for other economic purposes. Using the available genomic and transcriptomic data for M. textilis and M. balbisiana,
putative genes which are participatory in the biosynthesis of secondary metabolites
including terpenes, phenylpropanoids, and flavonoids were identified. The presence of
putative biosynthetic gene clusters in the genomes of these two Musa plants, which are
likely involved in the synthesis of saccharides, polyketides, lignans, and terpenes, was also
reported, Further, the STRING database analysis considering the commonly upregulated
genes in the abaca pseudostem resulted in a protein-protein interaction network that has
181 protein nodes and 2147 edges showing the interactions among the proteins involved in
the biosynthesis of terpenes, phenylpropanoids, flavonoids, glucan, and cytoskeleton. This study therefore presents the wide range of economic uses of abaca which are beyond
its applications in the fiber industry, and the potential of its underexplored secondary
metabolites for medical, industrial, and agricultural applications.

CHAPTER 1

INTRODUCTION

Musa, a plant genus that is known for the different kinds of bananas and plantains it
provides worldwide (Cizkova, et al., 2015), is a member of the Musaceae family that is
mainly distributed in the Malesia and in India (Ploetz, Kepler, Daniells, & Nelson, 2007;
Sulistyaningsih, 2016). The genus is subclassified into two sections as a result of DNA
analyses. These are sections Musa and Callimusa, in which the former has a ploidy level
of n=x=11, while the latter is n=x=9 or 10 (Hakkinen, 2013). In the Philippines, the section
‘Musa has two known member species: M. acuminata and M. balbisiana; while the section
Callimusa has three: M. alinsaya, M. peekelii, and M. textilis (Pereira & Maraschin, 2015;

OGTR, 2016).

M. textilis Née, more popularly known as abaca or Manila hemp, is an indigenous plant
inthe Philippines that is widely cultivated for its very strong fiber (Aspuria & Garcia, 2018;
Tapado & Palaoag, 2018) derived from the leaf sheaths that surround its pseudostem
(Milan & Géltenboth, 2005; DOST-PCARRD, 2007; PhilFIDA, 2016; Suhelmidawati,
2016). This abaca fiber is utilized as raw material for a variety of products like banknotes,
fabric (e.g., Philippine sinamay), fixture, handicrafts, paper, ropes, retrofitting materials,
and many more (Lacuna-Richman, 2002; Del Rio & Gutierrez, 2006; DOST-PCARRD,
2007; Armecin R. , 2008; Hayase, 2018; Tapado & Palaoag, 2018; Yassin, Hassan, & Sean,

2018).

Since the 19" century, Philippine abaca has already been a global source of cordage
fiber (Abueg, 2017). It even has retained its top rank when it comes to worldwide abaca
fiber production and exportation. It produced 14.57 thousand metric tons of abaca fiber
during the first quarter of 2022 with Bicol as the top producing region, and Catanduanes
as the top producing province (PSA, 2022). Several abaca varieties are being cultivated
locally, three of which have already been registered with the National Seed Industry
Council (NSIC). These are Abuab (NSIC 2017 Mt 001), Inosa (NSIC 2017 Mt 002), and
Tangongon (NSIC 2017 Mt 003) which, respectively, are a recommended variety for
cultivation in Bicol, Visayas, and Mindanao (PhilFIDA website, 2017). There are also
abaca hybrids which were developed by local experts to help this plant adapt to changing
environmental conditions, and at the same time, to address the needs of local abaca farmers.
An example of these is the Bandala abaca hybrid, a crossbreed of abaca and M. balbisiana
var. Pacol, which is notable for its high yield, drought tolerance, and resistance to abaca

bunchy-top virus or ABTV (DOST, 2020).

M. balbisiana, on the other hand, is one of the progenitors of the cultivated bananas and
plantains which are known today (Rabara, Sotto, & Salas, 2020). Also known as wild
banana, M. balbisiana is of widespread distribution in the country. This could be due to its
robustness, fast growth, and resistance to both abiotic and biotic stresses (Ploetz, Kepler,
Daniells, & Nelson, 2007; Venkataramana, Sampangi-Ramaiah, Ajitha, Khadke, &
Chellam, 2015; Santos, Amorim, Ferreira, & Pirovani, 2018; Dela Cruz, et al., 2019). Aside
from being used for food like in the case of the Saba variety, M. balbisiana is also known

for offering traditional medicinal services. It was reported to exhibit antibacterial,

anticancer, antidiarrheal, antihypertensive, anti-inflammatory, hepatoprotective, and
hypoglycemic properties, and these could be attributed to the different secondary
metabolites it contains like phenolic compounds and terpenoids (Kumari S. , et al., 2020;

Swargiary, Boro, Roy, & Akram, 2021).

However, limitations exist when it comes to M. textilis and M. balbisiana production
and research. Abaca fiber production, despite its high demand, is adversely aflected by
pests and diseases, low crop productivity (PhilFIDA, 2016; PhilFIDA, GIZ GmbH, &
Glatfelter GmbH, 2016), and in some, by the production of poor-quality fibers (Dapar,
2019). Wild banana, on the other hand, needs more investment on research to exploit its
advantageous characters which could serve as source of genetic resources in banana
breeding programs, and as source of possible pharmacological products in the future
(Venkataramana, Sampangi-Ramaiah, Ajitha, Khadke, & Chellam, 2015; Swargiary, Boro,
Roy, & Akram, 2021). To address these constraints, there is a need to integrate
conventional, biotechnological, and molecular breeding tools to produce improved
varieties of abaca and wild banana, including their secondary metabolic products (Moreno
& Protacio, 2012; Femandez & Amores, 2015; Aspuria & Garcia, 2018; Nansamba, et al.,
2020; DA, 2018). Here, the use of genomic and transcriptomic data produced by
sequencing technologies could be of help by providing insights about the functions and

expressions of desirable genes (Nadarajah, 2018).

Over the recent years, a number of genome sequencing technologies have been
developed providing huge sequence datasets. This has encouraged the use of

bioinformatics tools to transform such raw sequence data into biological knowledge that

will help to better understand an organism at a molecular level (Ejigu & Jung, 2020). To
do this, bioinformatics technologies equipped with well-trained algorithms, robust
ontologies, curated datasets, and well-designed integrative methods are employed
(Ouyang, Thibaud-Nissen, Childs, Zhu, & Buell, 2009). These powerful tools could help
in the advancement of functional genomics and transcriptomics in abaca and wild banana
by facilitating the discovery of desirable genes related to fiber quality, environmental stress
resistance, seed oil production, and secondary metabolism that can later be applied for the

improvement and/or maximization of their economic values.

In this study, the availability of the genome and transcriptome datasets for two available
Musa species, namely, M. textilis and M. balbisiana, paved the way for the exploration of
the biosynthesis of secondary mctabolitcs in thesc plants using available computational
gene prediction tools. Here, genomic analysis involved the datasets for M. fextilis var.
Abuab, a high fiber quality abaca variety, and M. balbisiana cv DH-PKW, a double haploid
of the wild diploid genotype Pisang Klutuk Wulung; while transcriptomic analysis
involved three M. extilis varieties (i.e., Abuab, Inosa, and Tangongon), two developed M.
textilis backcross genotypes (i.e, BC2 and BC3), and the indigenous M. balbisiana var.
Pacol. Generally, this study aims to make a review of the medicinal and other non-fiber
economic uses of M. textilis, and in silico (meaning, in a computer) analyze the genomes
and transcriptomes of M. textilis and M. balbisiana to maximize the discovery of genes
associated with their production of secondary metabolites like terpenoids and phenolic
compounds which could be of promising economic value. This study is composed of the

three following parts.

Study 1: More Than Just a Fiber: A Mini-Review on the Ethnomedicinal and Other
Non-Fiber Applications of Abaca (Musa fextilis Née)

Specifically, this study aimed to:

1. Identify the practices of using abaca in the traditional health care system;
2. Determine the other non-fiber applications and potentials of abaca; and

3. Describe the known phytochemicals of abaca and their economic potentials,

Study 2: Genomic Insights into the Biosynthesis of Secondary Metabolites in M.
textilis (Abaca) var. Abuab and M. balbisiana (Wild Banana) cv DH-PKW

Specifically, this study aimed to:

1. Describe in the context of metabolic pathways the genes with putative functions in
secondary metabolism;

2. Compare the genes involved in secondary metabolism between M. fextilis var. Abuab
and M, balbisiana ev DH-PKW; and

3. Identify the gene clusters which are putatively involved in specific plant secondary

metabolic pathways in M. textilis var. Abuab and M. balbisiana cv DH-PKW.

Study 3: Transcriptomic Analysis Reveals the Biosynth:
in the Pseudostems of Selected Musa textilis Née (Abaca) Genotypes with
High Fiber Quality

Specifically, this study aimed to:

1. Identify the differentially expressed transcripts associated with secondary metabolites

biosynthesis in selected five high fiber quality M. fextilis genotypes; and

2. Describe the protein-protein interactions among the candidate genes related to

secondary metabolites biosynthesis and high fiber quality in M. textilis genotypes.

CHAPTER 2

REVIEW OF LITERATURE

Overview of the Genus Musa

The genus Musa includes the most important and oldest food crops having been
cultivated as early as 4000 BCE (Nayar, 2010). It derives its name from mouz, an Arabic
name for the plant, and which may have been used in honor of Antonio Musa (63-14 BC),
a physician to Rome's first emperor, Octavius Augustus (Hyam & Pankhurst, 1995). The
genus Musa belongs to the family Musaceae together with another genus, Ensete, as
comprehensively classified and described by Cheesman (1947). Between these two, Musi
has a larger number of member species. It has more or less 500 known cultivars and
subspecies belonging to 85 accepted species names (WCSP website, n.d.) encompassing
all the known wild and domesticated plantains and bananas worldwide (Cizkova, et al.,
2015).

‘The members of the genus Musa commonly thrive in the tropics and subtropics (Wong,
et al., 2001) usually alongside rivers, and in forests and open areas (Sulistyaningsih, 2016).
The primary center of distribution of Musa spp. is Malesia followed by India. The former
is a biogeographical region comprised of the following countries: Brunei Darussalam,
Indonesia, Malaysia, Papua New Guinea, Philippines, Singapore, and Timor Leste (Ploetz,
Kepler, Daniells, & Nelson, 2007; Sulistyaningsih, 2016; Flora Malesiana website, 2022).

There is a likelihood, therefore, that the distribution of these plants outside the Asian

region, like in the Latin America, Africa, Caribbean, and Pacific, could be entirely due to
human migration (Daniells, Jenny, Karamura, & Tomekpe, 2001; Nansamba, et al., 2020).

‘Musa spp. are perennial monocotyledonous herbs that can grow up to 15 m in height
(OGTR, 2016), and are believed to be the pioneer tall herbs of rainforests in the
aforementioned regions (Kallow, et al., 2020). They are characterized by having a
pseudostem made up of clasping leaf sheaths that swell at its base; spirally arranged large
leaves; an inflorescence that erects or hangs atop the stem; and berry fruits (OGTR, 2016;
Sulistyaningsih, 2016).

The genus Musa was first subclassified into four sections primarily based on basic

chromosome and morphology as proposed by Cheesman (1947). These are (a)

Australimusa (1 0; n refers to the haploid number of chromosomes) that is commonly
cultivated for its fiber and fruit, (b and c) Callimusa (n=x=9 or 10) and Rhodochlamys
(n=x=11) that are composed of non-parthenocarpic species whose fruits are non-
nutritionally valuable, and (4) Eumusa (n=x=11) that provides fruit, vegetable, ornamental,
and wrapping values (OGTR, 2016; Hastuti, Purnomo, Sumardi, & Daryono, 2019; Wang,
et al., 2019). After further reviewing this classification, Hakkinen restructured the genus,
and reclassified the sections into two based on DNA analyses. These are sections Musa
(n=11; which merges Eumusa and Rhodochlamys) and Callimusa (n=9 or 10; which
includes Australimusa) (Hakkinen, 2013; Lopes, Borges, Cardoso, da Rocha, & Maraschin,
2020). Further, the group is classified based on the relative proportion of Musa acuminata
(A genome, 2n=2x=22), M. balbisiana (B, 2n=2x=22), M. schizocarpa (S, 2n=2x=22), and

M. textilis (T, 2n=2x=20) chromosome sets in their genome (Nelson, 2008; Lopes, Borges,

Cardoso, da Rocha, & Maraschin, 2020). The combination of these four species then served
as the origin of a wide array of diploid and triploid varieties with diverse genetic
compositions: AA, AB, AS, AT, AAA, AAB, ABB, AAS to AAT (Sardos, et al., 2016).
The commercially edible bananas are diploid (AA, BB, AB), triploid (AAA, AAB, ABB),
and tetraploid (AAAB, AABB, ABBB) varieties produced from intraspecific or
interspecific hybridization between the wild M. acuminata and M. halhisiana species
(Wang, et al., 2019); here, the allopolyploid triploid variants are the predominantly
cultivated variety worldwide: AAA (dessert banana), AAB (plantains), and ABB (cooking
bananas) (Venkataramana, Sampangi-Ramaiah, Ajitha, Khadke, & Chellam, 2015).
Sterility and parthenocarpy then appear once these resulting species and subspecies are
intercrossed (Creste, Neto, Vencovsky, & Figueira, 2004).

In the Philippines, several member species of the genus Musa are known to be present.
These are as follows:

Table 1. Indicative listing of the Musa species in the Philippines (Pereira & Maraschin,
2015; OGTR, 2016)

‘CHROMOSOME ‘MINOR?
NUMBER SECTION SECTION SPECIES
2n=2x=20 Callimusa Australimusa __ M. alinsanaya
M.peekelii”
M. textilis
2n=2x=22 Musa Eumusa M. acuminata’

M. balbisiana’

* Contains a number of subspec
** Contains a number of subspecies and distinct varieties
*** Contains a number of distinct varieties

The immediate succeeding sections of the paper will focus on two of the listed locally

available Musa species, namely, M. textilis and M. balbisiana.

Musa textilis Née (Abaca)

Botanical Description

Abaca, scientifically known as M. ‘extilis, was first taxonomically described by Don
Luis Née in 1801, and made the earliest confirmation that abaca is native to the Philippines.
Asearly as the 16" century, clothes made from abaca fiber were already being wom by the
natives in Cebu Island as recorded by Pigafetta, the Spanish priest who was part of

Magellan’s 1521 voyage (Spencer, 1953; Tabora, 1978).

Abaca is a close relative of the bananas. It differs from other Musa species by having
upright, narrower, pointed, and morc tapering Icaves that cxtend from a pscudostem that
can reach as high as 6.5 m. This pseudostem usually measures 15-20 cm in diameter at the
base, and is mostly green in color although irregular deep brown to red to purple to almost
black streaks may be present towards the base. It is made up of 10 to 25 sheaths, with the
new ones growing from the central core leaving the oldest sheaths at the periphery. A
distinct and more pronounced dark line is also present on the right-hand side of the adaxial
surface of the leaf blade. In addition, small fruits are produced by the plant. These are full
of big black seeds, i.e., about 36-160 seeds per finger, making them non-edible. These
seeds can be used for propagation in addition to rhizomes, suckers, and tissue culture
materials, and can grow in bundles called a hill or a mat. Abaca prefers growing in clay
loam soil types, preferably with 60-80% water table saturation and 6.0-7.0 pH level, in

<1000 masl elevation, under 40-50% shade, and in areas with 78-85% relative humidity

i

and evenly distributed annual rainfall (Milan & Géltenboth, 2005; DOST-PCARRD, 2007;

PhilFIDA, 2016; PhilFIDA, GIZ GmbH, & Glatfelter GmbH, 2016; Suhelmidawati, 2016).

Due to favorable agroclimatic conditions particularly the tropical weather, rich volcanic
soil, and good moisture retention, abaca grows well in defined regions of the Philippines
(Secretaria, Eroy, & Macarayan, 2012; Lobrigo, 2008; Bande, 2012). Its cultivation then
later has spread to Borneo, Costa Rica, Ecuador, Guatemala, Indonesia, Malaysia, Panama,
Sumatra, and some other countries (Brink & Escobin, 2003; Suhelmidawati, 2016; Tapado

& Palaoag, 2018) primarily for the role it plays in the global fiber industry.

Local Varieties of M. textilis

Internationally known as the Manila hemp, although it is not related to Cannabis sativa
or the true hemp (Lobrigo, 2008; Cheesman E. , 1949), abaca produces one of the strongest
known natural fibers (Suhelmidawati, 2016). Being the top abaca producing and exporting
nation worldwide, several varieties of abaca are known to be cultivated in the country.
According to PhilFIDA (2016), the following are the varieties recommended per region:
(a) Abuab, Musa Tex $1, and Tinawagan Puti for Bicol, (b) Inosa, Laylay, and Linawaan
for Visayas, and (c) Bangolanon, Maguindanao, and Tangongon for Mindanao. Among
these commercially known abaca varieties, three have already been registered with the
National Seed Industry Council (NSIC) after meeting the set criteria: (1) its yield is > 800
kg/ha dried fiber; (2) its fiber recovery is > 1.5%; (3) it is commercially planted as of the

registration time; and (d) its technical information is available in at least two credible


papers or reports (PhilFIDA website, 2017). These NSIC-registered abaca varieties are the

following, and are recommended for planting to specific regions due to yield and

adaptability considerations (Galvez, et al., 2021).


Abuab

M, textilis var. Abuab (NSIC 2017 Mt 001) is the recommended abaca variety
for the Bicol region. It has a potential yield of 1,723 kg per hectare per year
(PhilFIDA, 2016). It exhibits high fiber quality trait such as good fiber tensile
strength, but has susceptibility to abaca bunchy top disease (Melendres, Parducho,

Abustan, & Lalusin, 2015).

Tnosa

M. textilis var. Inosa (NSIC 2017 Mt 002) is best adapted to the Visayas region.
It has a potential yield of 1,270 kg per hectare of land per year (PhilFIDA, 2016).
The fibers collected from this plant exhibit high alpha-, holo-, and hemicellulose
contents, and low lignin and ash content which are desirable chemical
characteristics for pulping and paper production purposes (Moreno & Protacio,
2012). Some Inosa variants confer selective resistance against Fusarium oxysporum
var. cubense (Foc), the causative agent of the Fusarial wilt (a.k.a. Panama disease)

in members of the genus Musa (Stover, 1962).

3. Tangongon
M. textilis var. Tangongon (NSIC 2017 Mt 003) is recommended for cultivation
in the Mindanao region. It can yield about 1,590 kg of fiber per hectare per year
(PhilFIDA, 2016). Similar with Inosa, some Tangongon variants were also reported
to show immunity and resistance to Foc infection (Purwati, Harran, & Sudarsono,

2007).

Abaca hybrids are also available in the country. These have been developed through the
collaboration of local agencies such as DOST-PCAARRD, UPLB, and DA-BIOTECH.
The production of these abaca hybrids addresses the issues concerning adaptation to
changes in the environment, and the needs of local abaca farmers (DOST, 2020). Examples

of these hybrids are presented below.

1. BC: or Bandala

The BC2 abaca hybrid was developed by crossbreeding BC: (i.e., a crossbreed
of M. textilis var. Abuab and one of its closest relatives, M. balbisiana var. Pacol
which is uscd in breeding activitics to produce discasc-frec abaca brecds), and M.
textilis var. Abuab. It is locally referred to as “Bandala” which stands for “Backcross
Abaca with Native and Desirable Accessions to Lift up the Abaca industry) (Ereful,
Lalusin, & Laurena, 2022). This abaca hybrid is known for its high yield, drought
tolerance, and resistance to abaca bunchy-top virus or ABTV. This also produces
high quality fiber that shows a promise in the pulp and paper industry (DOST, 2020).

Aside from Luzon, Bandala is also grown in the Visayas and Mindanao regions


indicating its ability to adapt to different environmental settings (Parducho, Rama,

& Lalusin, 2020).

2. BCs
The BCs hybrid is also a backcross abaca genotype that was developed by
crossbreeding BC? and M. textilis var. Abuab. It exhibits high fiber dry weight and
high fiber recovery percentage, and a tensile strength that is not significantly
different from that of Abuab. These characteristics then make BC3 a very promising
genotype that could potentially exceed the performance of currently known abaca

varieties (Labrador, Lalusin, Mendoza, & dela Viiia, 2020).

Economic Importance of Abaca

The abaca plant exhibits versatility in terms of economic applications. It is utilized in
various industries such as in the fiber, food, and cosmetic industries, and is also used for
its environmental and agricultural benefits. Presented below are some of the known uses

of abaca.

1. Fiber industry
The abaca plant has long been serving as a source of natural fibers obtained from
its leaf sheaths. Due to its high tensile strength, buoyancy, flexibility, and saltwater
resistance, the abaca fiber is actually considered as one of the strongest known fibers

(Suhelmidawati, 2016; Valé3ek, D'Amato, Miiller, & Ruggiero, 2018) which is


thrice stronger than cotton and twice as strong as sisal fibers (Parac, Lalusin, Pangga,
& Sta, Cruz, 2020).

Ranked as the top abaca producing and exporting nation worldwide (i.e., sharing
85% of global fiber production) next to Ecuador, abaca becomes its most significant
cultivated plant fiber based on production, plantation area, and economic
contribution (Aspuria & Garcia, 2018; Tapado & Palaoag, 2018). In 2016, about
2.48 thousand metric tons of raw abaca fiber were exported by the country to the
United Kingdom and it valued at US$ 3.54 million (DA, 2018). During the first
quarter of 2022, the country produced 14.57 thousand metric tons of abaca fiber
where the Bicol Region had the highest production with 5.97 thousand metric tons,
equivalent to 40.9% of the total national production (PSA, 2022). This could be
attributed to its soil environment enriched by the active Mayon volcano (Hayase,
2018). It was then followed by the Davao Region (12.1%) where the active Apo
volcano stands and where typhoons less likely come (Hayase, 2018), and the Eastern
Visayas (11.3%). Among the Bicol provinces, Catanduanes topped the abaca fiber
production (PSA, 2022). It was also the biggest abaca producing province in the
country (DA, 2018). Here, abaca is often the crop chosen to be planted by
households particularly those living at the forest edge and in forest plots that have

become less fertile due to slash-and-burn activities (Lacuna-Richman, 2002).

Morphologically, an abaca fiber usually measures three to nine feet, and exhibits
a variation in color, i.e., ivory white to light brown to dark brown (Suhelmidawati,

2016). It is made up of fiber cells that have similar widths with hemp fiber cells, ie.,


0.02-0.05 mm, and length that is comparable to that of jute fiber cells. Among the
locally grown abaca varieties, differences in fiber cell length, diameter, and
thickness are also observed. Comparing the varieties Inosa, Laylay, Linawaan,
Lagwis, and Minenoga, var. Laylay produces the longest fiber cells (=3.35 mm) and
thickest fiber cells walls (=1.8 pm), while var. Linawaan produces the widest fiber
cells (=0.034 mm). In addition, in terms of the age of leaf stalks, more uniform and
longer fiber cells with thicker walls are observed in mature stalks compared to that
in younger stalks (Armecin, Sinon, & Moreno, 2014).

Abaca fiber is used as a raw material to manufacture various products like
banknotes, boxes, cable insulator, cordage, fabric (e.g., Philippine sinamay fabric),
fixture, footwear, handicrafts, hospital textiles, paper, ropes, etc. (Lacuna-Richman,
2002; Del Rio & Gutierrez, 2006; DOST-PCARRD, 2007; Armecin R. , 2008;
Hayase, 2018; Tapado & Palaoag, 2018; Yassin, Hassan, & Sean, 2018). Its known
strength also contributes to its use in the production of retrofitting materials, marine
vessel cables and ropes, and fishing nets (Suhelmidawati, 2016; Suardi, Homma, &
Abubakar, 2018; ValaSek, D'Amato, Miller, & Ruggiero, 2018). Specifically, the
fibers taken from 8 to 10 months old abaca var. Inosa were found to possess
chemical properties (i.e., high alpha-, holo-, and hemi-cellulose contents; low lignin;
low ash content) which are desirable for pulping and paper production, and which
are even better than the mature fibers obtained from Linawaan and Laylay varieties

(Moreno & Protacio, 2012).

. Non-Fiber Industries

Aside from its role in the fiber industry, some other parts of the abaca plant are
also utilized for other purposes. Cosmetics and wellness products such as bath soap
and lotion can be made using the enzymes derived from abaca seeds and even from
extraction wastes (DA, 2018). Industrial colorants (e.g., non-toxic paints, inks,
lacquers, dyes, and vamishes) can also be produced using abaca seed oil as an
ingredient, while pastry goods (e.g., breads, cookies) can be made using the
nutritional-grade abaca seed oil (Tapado & Palaoag, 2018). Additionally, the wastes
that come from abaca fiber processing, like tuxy waste sheaths and stripping wastes,
are suitable for pulp and papermaking (Mari, O., Torres, & Domingo, 2019).

Aside from these industrial applications, abaca also has the potential to be used
in the medical industry as this plant has local reports of being utilized for medicinal

purposes; however, this aspect remains underexplored.

Environmental Benefits

In addition to its industrial contribution, planting abaca offers environmental and
agricultural benefits. When intercropped with other crops and tree species (e.g.,
coconut, fruit trees, timber trees), it can assist in the improvement of biodiversity
conditions. It can help in minimizing soil erosion and problems with sedimentation
in coastal areas. Being a source of biodegradable material, abaca also contributes in
the reduction of hazardous wastes which are produced when making and using

synthetic fibers (Milan & Géltenboth, 2005; Bande, Grenz, Asio, & Sauerborn,


2013; Aspuria & Garcia, 2018; Tapado & Palaoag, 2018). An example of this is the
recent production of abaca face masks to help prevent the spread of COVID-19.
These masks exhibit water resistance and porosity which are within the standards of
the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. These are also as durable as
polyester but can decompose in two months; hence, it prevents the piling up of non-
biodegradable face masks made of synthetic fiber in the environment (Bloomberg,

2020).

Problems with Abaca Production

Despite the high demand for abaca fiber, local production still faces limitations
primarily due to pests such as brown aphid and corm weevil, and fungal and viral diseases
such as abaca bunchy-top, abaca mosaic, bacterial wilt, and Fusarium wilt (Gambley,
Thomas, Magnaye, & Herradura, 2004; Milan & Géltenboth, 2005; Bastasa & Baliad,
2005; Fernandez & Amores, 2015; Aspuria & Garcia, 2018; Barbosa, Koh, Aquino, &
Galvez, 2020). Logistical issues within the supply chain, and technological restrictions also
limit the performance of the local abaca industry. There are problems on fiber production
and fiber quality due to outdated and lowly efficient postharvest devices and facilities,
existence of spurious abaca varieties commercially, and use of low yielding planting

materials (DA, 2018).

Musa balbisiana Colla (Wild Banana)

Botanical Description

The section Musa of the genus Musa is known for its member species that produce most
of the world’s edible bananas (Wong, et al., 2001). One of these is M. halhisiana, a wild
banana species that is considered to be one of the progenitors of today’s commercially

cultivated bananas and plantains (Wong, et al., 2001; Rabara, Sotto, & Salas, 2020).

The first description of M. balbisiana as a species was made in 1820 by Luigi Aloysius
Colla, an Italian botanist who used a type specimen collected from Oriental India, Further

descriptions werc then laid by Checsman (1948) and Moore (1957).

M. balbisiana is a monocotyledonous herb (Swargiary, Boro, Roy, & Akram, 2021)
native to Southeast Asia (Valmayor, et al., 2000), but is also widely distributed and
cultivated in some other Asian countries like India and China (Wong, et al., 2001; Kumari
S. , et al., 2020) for its edible bananas (i.e., due to its undeveloped and/or underdeveloped
seeds compared to the seeds of abaca fruits) and its use as windbreak (Ploetz, Kepler,
Daniells, & Nelson, 2007). In the Philippines, M. balbisiana has a widespread distribution,
and this could be attributed to its extreme robustness, fast growth, and drought, pest, and
disease resistance (Ploetz, Kepler, Daniells, & Nelson, 2007; Venkataramana, Sampangi-
Ramaiah, Ajitha, Khadke, & Chellam, 2015; Santos, Amorim, Ferreira, & Pirovani, 2018;
Dela Cruz, et al., 2019). This Musa species also has a good level of infraspecific variability,

a variation occurring within a cultivated taxon (Joe, Sreejith, & Sabu, 2014).


Morphologically, members of local M. balbisiana varieties exhibit lax to highly compact
bunch appearance, and produce mature fruits which are green to light green in terms of
color, and ellipsoid to roundish with acute to prominently bottle-necked apex in terms of
shape. In terms of its male flower buds, most are ellipsoid in shape, and are creamy to
variably touched with pink in color. Its leaves, on the other hand, may possess a straight
petiolar canal with erect margins, or a petiolar canal with inwardly curved margins; and a

leaf base that may either be equilateral or non-equilateral (Sotto & Rabara, 2000).

Local Varieties of Musa balbisiana

M. balbisiana is commonly called as starchy banana, seedy banana, and wild banana. In
Maui, Hawai’, this is known as the devil banana and seeded ‘apple’ banana, while in the
Philippines where there are two known M. balbisiana types, the descriptive names Pacol
and Butuhan were given (Valmayor, Espino, & Pascua, 2002; Ploetz, Kepler, Daniells, &

Nelson, 2007). The difference between Pacol and Butuhan are presented below.

1. Butuhan
Butuhan, which means ‘seedy’ in Tagalog, is a tall, vigorous M. balbisiana plant
with a large bunch and which produces a beak-formed fruit, which at its immature
state (i.e., prior to the hardening of the seeds) is usually eaten (Valmayor, Espino,

& Pascua, 2002).


2. Pacol

Pacol, in comparison to Butuhan, is relatively smaller having an average plant
height of 223 cm (Labrador, Lalusin, Mendoza, & dela Vifia, 2020), and produces
edible fruits that contain soft and sterile seeds (Valmayor, Espino, & Pascua, 2002).
It is known to produce low quality fiber, is being used as an adulterant to abaca,
and is used as source of resistance genes to develop resistant abaca varieties
(Fernandez, Dela Torre, Fabon, & Lalusin, 2015). In Bicol, natural hybrids of abaca
and Pacol exist and are called “Canton” and “Minay” (Brew Baker, Gorres, &

Umali, 1956).

Of the 14 pure M. balbisiana cultivars known locally (i.e., BB genome: Abuhon; BBB
genome: Bigihan, Cardaba, Dali-an, Gubao, Inabaniko/Binendito, Kalimpos, Mundo, Pa-a
Dalaga, Pondol, Saba, Saba sa Hapon, Sabang Puti, Turangkog/Sab-a), five of these are of
economic importance, and one of these is the Saba banana (triploid BBB) (Valmayor, et
al., 2000; Valmayor, Espino, & Pascua, 2002; Doloiras-Larafio, et al., 2018). Of the 2.08
million metric tons of banana produced in the country from January to March 2021, the
Saba banana production made a 25.6% share equivalent to 0.53 million metric tons of
produce (PSA, 20216).

Another variety of M. balbisiana which is not common in the country but has an
available reference genome and which will be encountered in this paper is M. balbisiana
DH-PKW. It is the double haploid of the Pisang Klutuk Wulung (DH-PKW, 2n=2x=22), a
wild diploid genotype (Wang, et al., 2019). It was developed through anther culture and

spontaneous doubling of chromosomes (Assani, et al., 2003).


Economic Importance of Wild Banana

Aside from providing food, wild banana is also known to exhibit bioactivities which are

of pharmacological significance. It also possesses desirable characteristics which may be

used in banana breeding programs. More details on these economic services of M.

halhisiana are presented below.

1.

Pharmacological Importance

M. balbisiana is known to serve traditional and medicinal significance
(Swargiary, Boro, Roy, & Akram, 2021). Aside from being used for food. the plant
is also utilized for several ethnoreligious rites in other countries. Different parts of
the plant are also customarily reported to exhibit various medicinal properties
including antibacterial, anticancer, antidiarrheal, antihypertensive, _anti-
inflammatory, hepatoprotective, and hypoglycemic properties (Kumari S. , et al.,
2020; Swargiary, Boro, Roy, & Akram, 2021). It was reported that M. balbisiana
fruit pulp powder exhibits promising activity of modulating oxidative stress and
inflammation that could prevent cardiac hypertrophy. It could be attributed to the
various phenolic compounds it contains that act as antioxidants such as apigenin,
catechol, kaempferol, quercetin, rutin, and chlorogenic acid (Kumari S. , et al.,
2020). In addition, inulin-type fructans were detected in M. balbisiana fruit (Cruz-
CArdenas, et al., 2015). These compounds are known to promote growth in the
colon of bifidobacteria which, in turn, increases mineral absorption, modifies lipid

metabolism, improves systemic defense function, and prevents inflammatory bowel


disease and colon cancer (Sangeetha, Ramesh, & Prapulla, 2005). Further, vitamins
A and C are contained in M. balbisiana, which together with flavonoids, can lower
blood sugar level, lower cholesterol, and enhance the fermentation capacity of the
colon (Castelo-Branco, et al., 2017). Aside from the phenolic compounds, M.
balbisiana also contains monoterpenes, sesquiterpenes, triterpenes, and saponins
which also exhibit antioxidant, anticancer, anti-inflammatory, and antibaterial

activities among others (Swargiary, Boro, Roy, & Akram, 2021).

. Source of Genetic Resources

In addition to its pharmacological properties, M. balbisiana offers an important
role in banana breeding programs by providing advantageous characters such as the
previously mentioned resistance to pests, diseases, and some abiotic stress factors
(Venkataramana, Sampangi-Ramaiah, Ajitha, Khadke, & Chellam, 2015). An
example of its utilization for breeding purposes is its participation in the production
of abaca hybrids made from a cross between the disease-resistant M. balbisiana
var. Pacol and the high fiber quality-producing but disease-susceptible abaca var.
Abuab. This resulted in hybrids that exhibit promising resistance to banana bunchy

top virus (BBTV) (Parac, Lalusin, Pangga, & Sta. Cruz, 2020).


Problems with Wild Banana Production

Similar to abaca, the cultivation of wild banana is threatened by pests and diseases,
although it naturally exhibits some superiority over those Musa species that has the A
genome when it comes to manifesting defense responses (Santos, Amorim, Ferreira, &
Pirovani, 2018). Meanwhile, the wide utilization of the wild banana for medicinal purposes
also calls for more research on this area as understanding the production of secondary
metabolites in M. balbisiana could lead to its application in the medical field, and could

also help in future breeding initiatives that will confer selective advantage to the plant.

Plant Secondary Products
and the Applications of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology

As presented, abaca is well-known for its fiber uses; however, its non-fiber applications
which include its medicinal, pharmacological, and agricultural potentials are still out of the
research limelight. Wild banana, on the other hand, is known to serve food services but it
also shows pharmacological potentials as it is traditionally used in addressing several
human ailments. Apparently, one thing that is commonly lacking yet is of huge economic
significance in abaca and wild banana research is the understanding of the identity,
synthesis, and potentials of their plant secondary metabolites—compounds which could be

associated with the aforementioned activities. In this section, plant secondary metabolites


will be discussed, and the applications of molecular biology tools and approaches in

understanding plant secondary metabolism will be introduced.

An Overview of Plant Secondary Metabolism

A special feature that higher plants, including Musa spp., exhibit is their metabolic
plasticity which evolves and exploits a range of inherent systems (Ncube & Staden, 2015)
to synthesize a wide variety of organic chemicals called secondary metabolites which are
derived from primary metabolic pathways (Wink, 1987; Thirumurugan, Cholarajan, Raja,
& Vijayakumar, 2018). The term ‘secondary’ was introduced in 1891 by A. Kossel. It
implies that while primary metabolites are produced in every dividing cell playing a role
in normal plant growth and development including an active photosynthetic and respiratory
function, the secondary metabolites are only incidentally present in certain plant parts, thus,
its absence does not immediately result to plant death but rather a possible long-term
impairment in their survivability in different ecological niches (Irchhaiya, et al., 2015;

Neube & Staden, 2015; Thirumurugan, Cholarajan, Raja, & Vijayakumar, 2018).

Plant secondary metabolites can be categorized into four major classes: (1) terpenoids,
(2) phenolic compounds, (3) alkaloids, and (4) sulfur-containing compounds (Guerriero, et
al. 2018). These compounds offer a variety of functions in plants. These include deterring
herbivory by vertebrates, insects or nematodes, protecting plants against pathogenic
infection, and attracting symbionts such as insect and vertebrate pollinators (Pichersky &

Gang, 2000; Gutzeit & Ludwig-Muller, 2014).


In addition to giving advantages to plants themselves, secondary metabolites also offer
benefits to humans, other organisms, and the environment. These secondary metabolites
make plants a tremendous source of medicinally valued new products which are essential
for drug development (Vanisree, et al., 2004). Of the 1562 approved drugs during the
period 1981 to 2014, about 25% were directly or indirectly derived from secondary
metabolites, be it sourced from plants, fungi, or microorganisms (Swargiary, Boro, Roy, &
Akram, 2021). In addition, they serve as a unique source of compounds for food additives,
colorants, flavors, fragrances, and other agricultural and industrial applications such as for
the development of biopesticides and herbicides, and development of plant breeds with
resistance to biotic and abiotic stresses (Tiwari & Rana, 2015; Anulika, Ignatius, Raymond,
Osasere, & Abiola, 2016; Rani, Neelima, Mukhopadhyay, Jyothi, & Sulakshana, 2018;
Thirumurugan, Cholarajan, Raja, & Vijayakumar, 2018). However, only a small
percentage of all known plant species have been explored for their economic potentials.
Hence, testing these plants and the secondary metabolites that can be derived from them
for safety, efficacy, bioactivity, and other economic potentials must be considered for

possible pharmaceutical, environmental, and agricultural applications.

Secondary Metabolites of Musa spp., Abaca, and Wild Banana

Musa spp. provides several medicinal applications reflecting the wide array of
secondary metabolites that this group synthesizes. It produces carotenoids, polyamines,

terpenoids, sterols, and phenolic compounds such as flavonoids which could be attributed


to its antioxidant, anticholesteremic, antitumor, anti-ulcerogenic, anti-inflammatory, and
hepatoprotective activities (Hansel, Keller, Rimpler, & Schneider, 1993; Evans, 2009;
Lopes, Borges, Cardoso, da Rocha, & Maraschin, 2020; Ayoola-Oresanya, Sonibare,
Gueye, Abberton, & Morlock, 2021). Specifically, Musa spp. leaves produce higher
concentration of phenolic compounds than its fruits (Ayoola, Gueye, & Sonibare, 2017).
The fruit compartments, on the other hand, are rich in dietary phytoconstituents such as
anthocyanins, catechins, catecholamines, carotenoids, phytosterols, terpenoids, and
tocopherols (Oycyinka & Afolayan, 2020). Further, an anticholinergic alkaloid was
detected using high-performance thin-layer chromatography in in vitro grown Musa spp.
which, on the other hand, was not detected in field and acclimatized Musa samples
Suggesting its de novo synthesis and the use of tissue cultures as an alternative approach to

upscale the production of bioactive plant constituents (Ayoola-Oresanya, et al., 2020).

In the case of abaca, a study analyzing the chemical composition of its leaf fibers
revealed its high lignin and p-hydroxycinnamic acid composition. A high concentration of
4-vinylphenol arising from p-coumaric acid by pyrolysis was also detected. Coniferyl and
sinapyl acetates, which are monomer precursors of lignin, were also found (Sun R. , Fang,
Goodwin, Lawther, & Bolton, 1998; Del Rio & Gutierrez, 2006). Additionally,
phenylphenalenone-type phytoalexins were found to be synthesized in abaca fibers with
red color parts—a possible indicator of the presence of infection. Here, a novel compound
was detected, (1R)-2,3-dihydro-4,9-dihydroxy-8-methoxy-1-phenylphenalene (Del Rio,

Jimenez-Barbero, Chavez, Politi, & Gutierrez, 2006).


Wild banana, on the other hand, contains flavonoids, monoterpenoids, polyphenols,
quinones, saponins, sesquiterpenes, and tannins in its different organs (Kusuma, Mita,
Firdayani, & Mustarichie, 2017). Its fruits contain flavonoids, proanthocyanidins,
triterpenoids, saponins, and volatile oils revealing its antioxidant potential (Trieu, et al.,
2020). Carotenoids such as lycopene, lutein, a-carotene, f-carotene, and B-cryptoxanthin
are also contained in the flesh of the fruit (Revadigar, et al., 2017), while its pulp contains
apigenin, catechol, chlorogenic acid, kaempferol, quercetin, and rutin. Rutin was also
detected in banana Icaves (Yingyuen, Sukrong, & Phisalaphong, 2020). The sced, on the
other hand, was found to synthesize apiforol, ferulic acid, and polyphenols (Revadigar, et
al., 2017; Gopalan, et al., 2019). The inflorescence produces triterpenes (Tin, et al., 2016),
and cyanidin-3-glucoside and peonidin-3-glucoside (Brahma, Mondal, Mishra, & Das,
2020). Furthermore, the sap of M. balbisiana contains aromatic compounds such as
apigenin glycoside, dopamine, kaempferol, myricetin glycoside, quercetin, and serotonin

(Pothavorn, et al., 2010).

Studies on Plant Secondary Metabolites Using Molecular Biology and Biotechnology
Approaches

With all the information on the diversity and potentials of plant secondary products
becoming available to the public, several studies have been and are being conducted to
exploit these compounds for possible medical, industrial, and agricultural applications. In

these studies, the field of molecular biology and biotechnology plays a very significant


role. The following are landmark studies on plant secondary metabolites which were

investigated biotechnologically for the improvement of their production in plants.

Deacetyllanatoside C from Digitoxin

Deacetyllanatoside C is a cardiac glycoside reported to be stored in Digitalis
Janata cells. It is synthesized via a 12B-hydroxylation and a 16’-O-glucosylation of
digitoxin, a phytosteroid used in treating congestive heart failure (Kreis &
Reinhard, 1985).

To improve the synthesis of deacetyllanatoside C, D. lanata cells were first
grown to proliferate in a medium before transferring into a production medium
under optimum conditions. After 12 days of incubation, all the substrates added in
the production medium were biotransformed into deacetyllanatoside C and
purpureaglycoside A. These compounds accumulated in the cultured D. lanata cells
(Kreis & Reinhard, 1989). In 1990, the cardenolide content in hairy root cultures of
D, anata was investigated using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). It
was found that the green hairy roots cultured under light had a cardenolide content

that was 600-fold higher than in the hairy roots cultured in the dark.

. Shikonin

Shikonin, a phytochemical derived from the roots of Lithospermum
erythrorhizon, was the first commercially produced compound from

dedifferentiated plant cell cultures in the 1980’s. It is a natural red colorant that is


commonly used in Japan as a traditional silk dye, and as a traditional medicine for
the treatment of external injuries such as wounds, burns and hemorrhoids (Fujita,
Hara, Ogino, & Suga, 1981). The problem with shikonin production then was the
long period it usually took (i.e., 4 years) before L. erythrorhizon plants could be
harvested for shikonin extraction, and at the same time, its low yield (Kreis &
Reinhard, 1989).

In 1981, shikonin derivatives were produced for the first time using cell
suspension cultures of L. erythrorhizon. Here, the stable production of these
derivatives was observed when nitrate was used as the nitrogen source in culture
medium (Fujita, Hara, Ogino, & Suga, 1981). This was further improved by
establishing an effective system which made use of Linsmaier-Skoog medium to
vigorously produce L. erythrorhizon cells, and the subsequent use of M-9 medium
to excellently produce shikonin derivatives. Using the M-9 medium, a 1,400 mg/L
yield of shikonin derivatives and 12% yield for dried cells were reported (Fujita,
Hara, Suga, & Morimoto, 1981). In 1987, a key enzyme in the biosynthesis of
shikonin, p-hydroxybenzoate-m-geranyltransferase, was first detected. This
enzyme allows the formation of m-geranyl-p-hydroxybenzoic acid, a shikonin
derivative, from geranylpyrophosphate and p-hydroxybenzoic acid (Heide &
Tabata, 1987). The large-scale production of shikonin was then achieved with the
help of Mitsui Petrochemical Industries. A two-stage fermentation process using
large bioreactors was established. Here, the cells were first allowed to proliferate

in a 200-L stirred-tank bioreactor. Once a sufficient amount of cell mass was

3.


reached, the cells were inoculated with a suitable production medium into a 750-L
bioreactor. This method allowed the cells to be harvested and the red pigment to be
extracted in just 14 days. In a single run of this 750-L bioreactor, the production of
shikonin was found to be 800 times more efficient than with field-grown L.

erythrorhizon plants (Kreis & Reinhard, 1989).

Rosmarinic

Rosmarinic acid, a phenolic molecule, is the second most common caffeoylester
occurring in plants (Zenk, El-Shagi, & Ulbrich, 1977). It has applications in food
preservation and cosmetics, and in pharmaceutical industries (Marchev, et al.,
2021) especially due to its antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, antibacterial, and
antiviral activities (Petersen & Simmonds, Rosmarinic acid, 2003).

Rosmarinic acid was found to be produced in Coleus blumei and in its tissue
cultures (Zenk, El-Shagi, & Ulbrich, 1977); however, similar with shikonin, this
was produced in small amounts only. In response, A. Nattermann Company
initiated the large-scale production of this compound using bioreactors. It also
followed a two-stage fermentation process, in which C. blumei cells were first
allowed to grow in a 42-L airlift bioreactor, and then transferred about 30-50% of
the resulting suspension to a stirred-tank bioreactor with production medium when
an appropriate cell density was reached. This method resulted in the extraction of
5.5 g of rosmarinic acid per L of cell suspension after 6 days of cultivation (Kreis

& Reinhard, 1989). Years later, the enzymes involved in rosmarinic acid


biosynthesis were investigated in C. blumei cultures and its associated pathway was
proposed (Petersen, Hasuler, Karwatzki, & Meinhard, 1993). Using fungal
elicitors, the enhanced activities of phenylalanine ammonia lyase and rosmarinic

acid synthase were also observed (Szabo, Thelen, & Petersen, 1999).

Over time, molecular biology and biotechnology tools used in studying plant secondary
metabolites have advanced. These tools allow these compounds to be extracted, identified,
quantified, and structurally elucidated in many different ways. In addition, these
biotechnological techniques can allow the regulation of plant biosynthetic pathways to
either upregulate or downregulate the production of a particular phytochemical, and the

isolation of desirable goncs for plant brecding purposes.

Potential Applications of Genomic and Transcriptomic Analysis

Over the recent years, several genome and transcriptome sequencing technologies have
been developed to provide quality and cost-effective sequence datasets. The availability of
these huge computer data has encouraged the use and further improvement of
bioinformatics tools that can determine and analyze genes, their function and expression,
and their roles in cellular metabolism (Nadarajah, 2018) including secondary metabolism.
One plant species in which genomes and transcriptomes have been worked on is M. fextilis
and M. balbisiana, The focus of interest in these plants, however, is on genes related to

fiber quality and pest resilience of these plants, and not on its secondary products which


could present biological activities with potentials to be used for other economic

applications.

The advancement in Musa genomics beginning from its first completed genomic
sequence in 2012 (D'Hont. et al., 2012) to the most recent sequencing activities involving
other genotypes has paved the way for more efficient Musa spp. breeding (MusaNet, 2016).
The genomic sequence data of the A-genome M. acuminata banana, for instance, has
presented insights about monocot plants evolution, and this has served as a vital step
towards the genetic improvement of bananas (Wang, et al., 2019). The genomic and
transcriptomic data for M. balbisiana, a B-genome species, on the other hand, are important
to discover gene sequences for traits such as quality, stress tolerance, and shelf life that can
later be used for whole-genome association rescarches, germplasm enhancement, and
varietal improvement (Wang, Chiang, Roux, Hao, & Ge, 2007; Backiyarani, Uma,
Saraswathi, & Chandrasekar, 2014; Backirayani, Uma, Saraswathi, Saravanakumar, &
Chandrasekar, 2015; Wang, et al., 2019). Characterizing abaca at a molecular level is
needed. Just recently, Galvez et al., (2021) reported the availability of the draft genomic
sequence for the abaca var. Abuab. It was revealed that the estimated genome size of Abuab
is 616 Mbp, 95.28% of which have been mapped. The study also predicted a total of 33,277
gene structures, This advancement in abaca genomics can facilitate the discovery of
desirable genes related to fiber quality, yield, disease and environmental stress resistance,

and stooling capacity that will lead to the development of elite abaca varieties.

The availability of genomic and transcriptomic data, and the advancement in

bioinformatics tools have also significantly revolutionized the field of secondary


metabolites research. Genomics- and transcriptomics-based methods are now being
employed to identify and characterize secondary metabolites much quicker than the usual
analytical and chemical approaches (Weber & Kim, 2016). This approach also paves the
way to study even non-model plant species, like M. textilis and M. balbisiana, to identify
secondary metabolites-related genes, predict their functions, and give information on the
regulation of their biosynthesis (Nadarajah, 2018). These in silico characterization
methods, therefore, provide more innovative and more sophisticated approach to better
understand secondary metabolism in plants, improve plant responses to biotic and abiotic
stressors, contribute in metabolic engineering, and discover novel drugs (Weber & Kim,

2016; Nadarajah, 2018; Rani, Neelima, Mukhopadhyay, Jyothi, & Sulakshana, 2018).

Computational Genome Annotation

With the increasing availability of high-quality genomic data, there is a pressing need
to transform such raw sequence data into knowledge that will aid in better understanding
an organism and its evolution (Ejigu & Jung, 2020), This process of decoding the
information stored in a sequence is called genome annotation, and this must be
accomplished prior to depositing an assembled genomic sequence into a database (Xiong

J. , 2006).

A huge part of genome annotation is finding and identifying genes. ‘This can be done
using bioinformatics technologies equipped with well-trained algorithms, robust

ontologies, curated datasets, and well-designed integrative methods (Ouyang, Thibaud-


Nissen, Childs, Zhu, & Buell, 2009). These powerful tools then help to discover genes in
different organisms and to be able to define their functions (Zhang S. , et al., 2018). These
annotation tools would require varying input format types while providing different output
types. The selection of which depends on the researcher and the research environment

(Ejigu & Jung, 2020).

Genome annotation involves two annotation processes—structural and functional
annotation—which analyze the genomic sequence (McDonnell, Strasser, & Tsang) and use

approaches that are discussed in the succeeding sections.

1. Structural Annotation

Structural annotation is a process of identifying the regions in a genome called
genes that encode for proteins (Ghorbani & Karimi, 2015). It is a prerequisite to
functionally annotate genes and genomes in detail (Mathe, Sagot, Schiez, & Rouze,
2002; Xiong J. , 2006).

By definition, a gene is “a sequence region necessary for generating functional
products” which are RNAs and proteins (Spieth & Lawson, 2005). ‘The genes that
produce proteins are known as protein-coding genes, while those that do not code
for proteins, but instead produce functional RNA molecules (e.g., RNA, tRNA,
miRNA, snRNA, snoRNA, IncRNA), are known as noncoding genes (Ejigu &
Jung, 2020). Structurally, a gene consists of the following parts: an upstream

intergenic region, a promoter region, exons, introns, star/stop codons, polyA.


insertion sites, and downstream intergenic regions. It has to take note as well that
there are differences between prokaryotic and eukaryotic genes. A prokaryotic
genome is smaller in size, does not undergo RNA processing, and has high density
of genes which are overlapping, do not possess introns, and where promoters are
similar and terminator is important. A eukaryotic genome, on the other hand, is
larger, undergoes RNA processing, and has low density of genes which possess
introns and where promoters are heterogeneous. Further, the recognition of other
gene features is necessary prior to doing gene finding. These include coding
sequences (e.g., open reading frames or ORFs, CpG content, GC-rich region),
polyA signals, translational start/stop sites, splicing sites, and promoter regions
(Ghorbani & Karimi, 2015).

Computational gene prediction can be done using any of its three major
methodological categories: (1) ab initio prediction, (2) similarity/homology-based

search, and (3) combined methods.

a. Ab initio prediction method. The ab initio prediction method uses the structure
of the nucleotide sequence as a template for the detection of genes. It relies on
two sequence information types: (a) signal sensors, which are short-sequenced

motifs like branch points, splice sites.

starV/stop codons, and polypyrimidine
tracts, and (b) content sensors, which are species-specific codon usage patterns
that make codon sequences distinguishable from the non-coding sequences that

surround it (Wang, Chen, & Li, 2004). This approach uses statistical models


(e.g., hidden Markov model, HMM) to identify such regions in the genome

sequence (Ejigu & Jung, 2020).

Similarity- or Homology-based search. The similarity/homology-based
search, on the other hand, looks into the gene sequences that are similar between.
the input genome and the expressed sequence tags (FSTs), protein evidence, or
other genomes. It relies on the assumption that exons, compared to introns, are
more evolutionarily conserved. There are two methods that are used in
homology searches. These are local alignment and global alignment methods.
The most common tool for local alignment is the BLAST family of programs
which aid in the detection of sequence similarity to known ESTs, genes, or
proteins (Wang, Chen, & Li, 2004). Once similarity is detected, the information
can be utilized to predict genes of a particular genomic region (Wang, Chen, &
Li, 2004; Ghorbani & Karimi, 2015). Compared to ab initio method, the
homology-based approach is more utilized in genome annotation due to the
availability of EST and cDNA sequences that can easily be retrieved from

databases (Ejigu & Jung, 2020).

Combined methods. Lastly, the combined methods simply rely on programs
that employ a combination of ab initio and homology-based approaches to

enhance the process of predicting genes.


To aid in the process of structural annotation, several publicly available
databases can be accessed for necessary nucleotide and protein sequences and
structures. These include GenBank, DNA Databank of Japan (DDBJ), European
Nucleotide Archive (ENA), UniProt, InterPro, and many more (Ejigu & Jung,

2020).

. Functional Annotation

Functional annotation is the process that assigns functional description to gene
or protein sequences determined during the structural annotation step. It couples
with structural annotation to promote a more accurate genome annotation and to
better understand gene and genome evolution (Ouyang, Thibaud-Nissen, Childs,
Zhu, & Buell, 2009). Functional annotation does its job through the identification
of a similar sequence using bioinformatics tools (e.g, BLAST). Aside from
similarity in sequence, it also looks into the variation in genes especially between
members of the same species that can result from single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs), or from structural rearrangements (Pavlopoulos, et al., 2013).

In response to the increasing number of available genomic data, automatic
functional annotation is widely being used. This is achieved by discovering
paralogous (in which genes within the same genome arose from duplications) and
orthologous relations (in which genes originated from a single ancestral gene in the

last common ancestor of the genomes being compared) between sequences which


reflect evolutionary relationships. Here, local alignment tools, like BLAST, are
utilized. It assigns function to an unknown query sequence based on high-scoring
alignments that are searched from a protein database (Koonin, 2005).

The most widely used and most comprehensive knowledgebase for gene
function is the GO (Gene Ontology) resource. It covers the gene function’s three
aspects: (1) biological process, which is a biological program that uses the gene’s
function, (2) cellular component, which identifies the gene product’s location, and
(3) molecular function, which describes the activity at the molecular level of the
gene product (The Gene Ontology Consortium, 2000). Some other databases for
functional annotation include Kyoto Encyclopedia of Gene and Genomes (KEGG),

Rhea, ChEBI, NCBI's Conserved Domain Database (CDD), and many more.

In summary, this review reveals the economic importance of abaca and wild banana,
and their promise in the field of secondary metabolites research. The emergence and
advancement of gene prediction tools can aid in analyzing the available genomes and
transcriptomes of these Musa spp. to in silico identify putative genes and pathways
associated with the biosynthesis of plant secondary metabolites. This opportunity at hand
provided by accessible bioinformatics tools is enough to foresee the benefits that these
‘computational gene prediction tools promise for the abaca and wild banana industry—the
possibility of developing abaca and wild banana exhibiting desirable characteristics, and
with novel and important secondary metabolites and other products being exploited for

various applications.

CHAPTER 3

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Study 1: More Than Just a Fil -Review on the Ethnomedicinal and Other
Non-Fiber Applications of Abaca (Musa textilis Née)

Literature Survey

A literature survey was carried out using online platforms such as Google, Google
scholar, PubMed, Philippine Traditional Knowledge Digital Library on Health
(www.tkdl.ph), Health Research and Development Information Network Plus (Herdin
Plus; www.herdin.ph), and journal databases such as Journal of Ethnopharmacology,
Philippine Journal of Health Research and Development, Frontiers in Pharmacology,
Pharmacognosy Journal, and Phytochemistry among others. Some of the keywords used
were Musa textilis, abaca, phytochemicals, pharmacological property, ethnomedicine,
traditional knowledge, etc. Other resources were obtained from the libraries of the
Philippine Fiber Industry Development Authority-Fiber Processing and Utilization
Laboratory (PhilFIDA-FPUL), Diliman, Quezon City, and University of the Philippines

Los Bafios, Laguna.


Study 2: Genomic Insights into the Biosynthesis of Secondary Metabolites in M.
textilis (Abaca) var. Abuab and M. balbisiana
(Wild Banana) ev DH-PKW

Genomic Data

The assembled genomic data for M. textilis var. Abuab made available by Galvez et al.
(2021) in the Data Dryad Digital Repository under the DOI 10.5061 /dryad.95x69p8kt were
accessed and downloaded at hups://datadryad.ory/stash/share

YkOLslqgw7WOts47103iPEchuiw6kMKBJBy60al-JNOO. The assembly has the following

characteristics: genome size = 616 Mbp; final assembly length = 587 Mbp; scaffold NSO =
0.047 Mbp; GC content = 40.23%; and repeat length = 53.6% of the genome. For M.
balbisiana cv DH-PKW (Wang, et al., 2019), it was accessed at the National Center for
Biotechnology Information (NCBI) under the GenBank ID: PYDT00000000.1. Its genome
assembly has the following characteristics: genome size = 554 Mbp; final assembly length

= 430 Mbp; scaffold NSO = 5.05 Mbp; and repeat length = 55.75% of the genome.

Assignment of Secondary Metabolic Pathway

The KEGG (Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes) platform was used to
systematically analyze the functions of genes predicted in M. textilis and M. balbisiana.
The ASSIGN KO tool available in the KEGG Mapper (hitps://\ww.keve.ip/keey/mapper’)

was employed to assign KEGG Ontology (KO) terms to the protein sequence data of M.


textilis and M. balbisiana, Here, the NCBI taxonomy number 4637 which corresponds to
the Musaceae family was used as the genomic information to be searched in the KEGG
GENES database. The ASSIGN KO tool is an interactive interface to the BlastKOALA
server which assigns KO identifiers (i.e., K numbers) to a given set of sequence data for
subsequent analysis with the KEGG Reconstruct tool. The latter was then utilized to link

the K number assignment data to KEGG pathway maps.

Identification of Biosynthetic Gene Clusters (BGCs)

BGCs in M. textilis var. Abuab and M. balbisiana cv DH-PKW genomes were
automatedly identified using the web server version of PlantiSMASH (Plant Secondary
Metabolite Analysis Shell) v. 1.0.0-beta accessed through the following link:

htip://plantismash.secondarymetabolites.org/. The available genomic data for M. textilis

var. Abuab allowed the analysis at the level of sequence scaffolds only, while for M.

balbisiana, it allowed the analysis at the chromosome level.


Study 3: Transcriptomic Analysis of Pseudostems with High Fiber Quality
Reveals the Biosynthesis of Secondary Metabolites
in Musa textilis Née (Abaca)

Transcriptomic Data

The transcriptomic data used in this study were generously provided by Dr. Nelzo C.
Ereful who worked on the differential expression (DE) of fiber quality genes in M. textilis
(Ereful, Lalusin, & Laurcna, 2022). In brief, the study made use of five M. textilis
genotypes comprised of three local M. fextilis varieties, namely, Abuab, Inosa, and
Tangongon, and two hybrids of M. fextilis var. Abuab x M. balbisiana var. Pacol, namely,
BC2 (a.k.a. Bandala) and BCs. All the plant genotypes were grown at the Feeds and
Industrial Crop Section (FICS) collection site at the Institute of Plant Breeding, University
of the Philippines Los Bafios, Laguna (14°09009.7” N, 121°15039.2” E). RNA-seq using
Illumina Novaseq 6000, Paired-End was performed using the samples obtained on June 22,
2021 (10 to 11 AM) from the innermost whorls of the midparts of the pseudostems of 3-
month-old suckers of each M. textilis genotype. The resulting datasets were then subjected

to DE analysis.

The current study specifically utilized the available datasets from the pairwise

differential expression (PDE) and non-differential expression (NDE) analyses.


Identification of DE Transcripts Associated with Secondary Metabolites Biosynthesis
in M. textilis

The PDE analysis was previously carried out to determine the DEGs in each M. textilis
genotype of high fiber quality when compared with M. halbisiana var. Pacol of low fiber
quality (Ereful, Lalusin, & Laurena, 2022). The datasets derived from this analysis were
further analyzed in the current study using the KEGG-derived pathways (see Study 1) to
identify the DE transcripts related to the biosynthesis of secondary metabolites in each of

the five M. textilis genotypes.

The results of the non-DE (NDE) analysis, which treated all the M. fextilis genotypes as
one group excluding M. balbisiana var. Pacol in the analysis, were used to identify the
secondary metabolites transcripts that are commonly and significantly expressed within the

tested high fiber quality group.

Protein-Protein Interaction (PPI) of DE Transcripts Associated with Secondary
Metabolites Biosynthesis

The interactions among the candidate genes related to secondary metabolites
biosynthesis and high fiber quality in M. textilis genotypes were determined by assigning
the identified DEGs to PPI network of Arabidopsis thaliana in STRING database
(Szklarezyk, et al., 2017). The 100 first neighbors of the mapped proteins (labelled using
protein identifiers or IDs) were selected to predict the PPI. Only the interactions with
combined score of > 0.4 were chosen for the network construction (Maritim, Seth, Parmar,

& Sharma, 2021). This value represents a good estimate of STRING’s confidence on the


biological significance of the proposed protein-protein associations given all the available

evidences (i.

textmining, neighborhood, experiments, gene fusion, databases, co-
occurrence, and co-expression) to establish these connections. To visualize the resulting

PPI network, Cytoscape v3.9.1 was used (Shannon, et al., 2003).

CHAPTER 4

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Secondary metabolites play a wide range of ecological roles in plants from
environmental adaptation, to pollination, and to chemical communication. These
compounds help plants to survive biotic and abiotic stresses, and communicate with its
pollinators to perform their reproductive roles and with its predators as an act of defense.
To synthesize these chemicals, plants need to balance their available resources between
primary and secondary metabolism. These metabolic costs are brought about by the
complex machinery of plant secondary metabolism both at gene and protein levels.

Over the recent decades, the economic potentials of these secondary metabolites have
been explored primarily for use in the medical, food, and agricultural industries. These
have been even enhanced by the growing numbers of bioinformatic tools which have
allowed the analysis of plant secondary metabolites at the molecular level. However, many
plants are still lacking in terms of their secondary metabolite information, and these include
some economically important members of the genus Musa such as M. textilis and M.
balbisiana. Given the availability of the genomic and transcriptomic data for these two
species, literature review and in silico studies were performed to explore the biosynthesis
of secondary metabolites in these plants.

This chapter provides a preview of the results of the three studies performed which are
discussed in detail in Chapters 5 to 7, respectively. Each chapter follows a publication-

oriented format each having its own introduction, methodology, results and discussion, and


conclusions. A summary of the general results of these studies and their interconnections
are presented in Figure 4.1.

The first study is titled “More Than Just a Fiber: A Mini-Review on the Ethnomedicinal
and Other Non-Fiber Applications of Abaca (Musa textilis Née)”. It establishes the
economic uses of abaca especially for ethnomedicinal and other non-fiber applications.
This study also makes a presentation of its reported secondary metabolites based on
existing literature which include phenolic compounds, phytosterols, phenylphenalenone

type compounds, and cyanogenic glycosides.

The second study, “Genomic Insights into the Biosynthesis of Secondary Metabolites
in M. textilis (Abaca) var. Abuab and M. balbisiana (Wild Banana) cv DH-PKW”,
describes in the context of metabolic pathways the gencs and biosynthetic gene clusters
(BGCs) with putative functions on secondary metabolism in M. textilis var. Abuab and M.
balbisiana cv DH-PKW. This study reports eight groups of secondary metabolites
potentially synthesized in these plants. These include terpenoid backbone, sesquiterpenoid,
brassinosteroid, phenylpropanoid, diarylheptanoid, flavonoid, and the alkaloids tyramine

and dopamine.

The third study titled “Transcriptomic Analysis Reveals the Biosynthesis of Secondary
Metabolites in the Pseudostems of Selected Musa textilis Née (Abaca) Genotypes with
High Fiber Quality” presents the differentially expressed transcripts associated with
secondary metabolites biosynthesis in five high fiber quality M. textilis genotypes (i.e.,
Abuab, BC2, BCs, Inosa, and Tangongon), and describes the protein-protein interactions

among its associated genes. Based on the results of the second study, this study reports the


upregulated transcripts associated with the biosynthesis of —_ terpenoid

backbone/sesquiterpenoid, pheny|propanoid, and flavonoid.

The identification of secondary metabolites in abaca based on available literature and
based on the results of the in silico analyses is important as it supplements the reported
economic uses of abaca. These compounds may act to mediate the efficacy of abaca for
wound healing, and in treating gastrointestinal problems, pains, and fatigue, among others.
These secondary metabolites, some of which may be biologically active, therefore, need to
be further investigated to ultimately exploit their economic potentials. These also support
the potential use of abaca seed and seed oil, and the wastes produced during abaca

processing in the cosmetic, fuel, food, medical, and agri-ecological industries.


“SUONI9UUODIDIUT IY] pue SoIpNys 99I4} 94) JO s}[nsou fes9Uad Jo ArewuMs ay) SuLmoys WeIBEIP Y “["p aaNSLy

~ i aumturedog ~
=
sayoqureut Srepuoaas Jo sisaxpussorg amp uta saqoquiatt <tepttos9s Jo sisatpmisorq.

L VIVO SUNOLdLSSVaL YIVd DTWKONID. SITIINTL Wt 40 $48.1 JINOXOIT


CHAPTER 5

MORE THAN JUST A FIBER: A MINI-REVIEW ON THE ETHNOMEDICINAL
AND OTHER NON-FIBER APPLICATIONS OF ABACA
(MUSA TEXTILIS NEE)

INTRODUCTION

Abaca, scientifically known as M. textilis Néc and internationally called as the Manila
hemp, is a native plant to the Philippines that is a close relative of the bananas (Aspuria &
Garcia, 2018; Tapado & Palaoag, 2018). It plays an essential role in the global fiber
industry where the Philippines ranks as its top producer and exporter (DTI, 2017). It
produces one of the strongest known natural fibers given its high tensile strength,
buoyancy, flexibility, and saltwater resistance (Suhelmidawati, 2016; ValaSek, D'Amato,
Miiller, & Ruggiero, 2018). The abaca fiber is widely used as raw material to manufacture
various products including banknotes, boxes, cable insulator, cordage, fabric (e.g.,
Philippine sinamay fabric), fixture, footwear, handicrafts, hospital textiles, paper, ropes,
etc. (Lacuna-Richman, 2002; Del Rio & Gutierrez, 2006; DOST-PCARRD, 2007; Armecin
R. , 2008; Hayase, 2018; Tapado & Palaoag, 2018; Yassin, Hassan, & Sean, 2018).

Other members of the genus Musa are known to provide further economic applications.
For example, M. balbisiana, aside from being used for food, is also utilized for several
ethnoreligious rites. It exhibits various bioactive properties including antibacterial,

anticancer, antidiarrheal, antihypertensive, anti-inflammatory, hepatoprotective, and


hypoglycemic properties (Kumari S. , et al., 2020; Swargiary, Boro, Roy, & Akram, 2021).
M. acuminata, on the other hand, is known to contain a diverse set of phytochemicals like
alkaloids, anthocyanins, phenols, saponins, tannins, and terpenoids. These contribute to its
pharmacological importance, and to its efficiency in traditionally addressing several
ailments including hypertension, diabetes, anemia, wounds, and respiratory problems
(Mathew & Negi, 2016).

However, in the case of abaca, its non-fiber applications remain underexplored and less
documented. For this reason, this review paper was written to highlight the economic
importance of abaca outside the fiber industry. It presents the traditional medicinal uses of
abaca, its potential applications in other industries, and its biologically active
phytochemicals reported so far. This provides additional information that can serve as basis,
in the conduct of further studies than can investigate the biological activities of abaca, its
active components, and their exploitation for agricultural, industrial, and pharmacological
uses, This can also give an idea on how the wastes produced during the abaca fiber

processing can be further upcycled or exploited to be of greater economic quality.

TAXONOMIC CLASSIFICATION OF ABACA

M. textilis is a member of the family Musaceae under the genus Musa, a taxon of all the
known wild and domesticated plantains and bananas worldwide (Cizkov, et al., 2015).

The complete taxonomic classification of this plant is as follows:


Kingdom: Plantae
Division: Magnoliopsida
Class: Liliopsida
Order:  Zingiberales Griseb. (1854)
Family: Musaceae Juss. (1789)
Genus: Musa 1.. (1753)

Species: M. textilis Née (1801)

BOTANICAL DESCRIPTION OF ABACA

Musa textilis Née or abaca can easily be distinguished from other members of the genus
Musa by having an upright, pointed, and more tapering leaves that extend from its
pseudostem. The leaves are oblong in shape measuring 1.5-2 m in length and 40-50 cm in
width, has a rounded base that is unequal on both sides, and are held at a high angle by 40-
50 cm long, stout and stiff wax-free leaf petioles. It also differs from other Musa species
by possessing a distinct and more pronounced dark line that is present on the right-hand
side of the adaxial surface of its leaf blade. Its cylindrical pseudostem can reach as high as
6.5 m with a base measuring 15-20 cm in diameter, and is mostly green in color although
imegular deep brown to red to purple to almost black streaks may be present towards the
base. It is made up of 10 to 25 leaf sheaths, which are also devoid of wax, with the new
ones growing from the central core leaving the oldest sheaths at the periphery. Abaca

produces a terminal, drooping, racemiform spike inflorescence with most of the peduncle


included in the pseudostem, and with a transversely arranged axis comprised of 1-2 combs
of 8-14 flowers, where each comb is located in the axil of a bract. The bracts measure 10-
50 om x 6-12 cm, and are lanceolate, closely overlapping, leathery, and reddish brown to
green in color. The flowers are unisexual in which the male flowers develop in the upper
portion of the inflorescence, while the female flowers are in the basal part. The fruits are
narrowly ovoid or ellipsoid berries measuring 5-9 cm x 2-5 cm, and occur in bunch
arranged horizontally. Each fruit contains numerous black seeds, usually 36-160 seeds per
finger, that make them non-edible. These sceds can be used for propagation in addition to
thizomes, suckers, and tissue culture materials, and can grow in bundles called a hill or a
mat (Cheesman E. , 1949; Milan & Géltenboth, 2005; DOST-PCARRD, 2007; PhilFIDA,

2016; PhilFIDA, GIZ GmbH, & Glatfelter GmbH, 2016; Suhelmidawati, 2016).

CULTIVATION AND DISTRIBUTION OF ABACA

Abaca prefers growing in clay loam soil types, usually in rolling to hilly or mountainous
areas at <1000 masl clevation, and preferably with 60-80% water table saturation and 6.0-
7.0 pH level, under 40-50% shade, and in areas with 78-85% relative humidity and evenly
distributed annual rainfall (PhiIFIDA, 2016). It grows well in defined regions of the
Philippines such as in the Bicol, Easter Visayas, and Davao regions primarily due to their
favorable agroclimatic conditions particularly the tropical weather, rich volcanic soil, and
good moisture retention (Secretaria, Eroy, & Macarayan, 2012; Lobrigo, 2008; Bande,

2012). Its cultivation then later on spread to some other countries like Costa Rica, Ecuador,


Guatemala, Indonesia, Malaysia, Panama, and Sumatra (Brink & Escobin, 2003;

Suhelmidawati, 2016) due to its promising economic value.

TRADITIONAL MEDICINAL USES OF ABACA

‘Abaca has been traditionally used to manage several ailments in the Philippines,
especially in isolated regions where people have inaccessibility to modern health care
services. Due to the natural abundance, accessibility, and cost-effectiveness of medicinal
plants, the use of abaca as a medicinal plant in different cultures still exist. The continuous
societal modernization, however, makes younger generations in these cultures become
more integrated into the mainstream society (Morilla, Sumaya, Rivero, & Madamba,
2014). This then causes the ethnomedicinal knowledge and practices, which are commonly
transferred by word of mouth from one generation to the next, to be lost if these remain
undocumented (Abe & Ohtani, 2013). For this reason, a growing number of ethnomedicinal
studies have been conducted during the recent decades to make a record of these crucial
decadcs- to century-old cthnobotanical information.

Generally, the ethnomedicinal studies which reported abaca as a medicinal plant
involved community immersion, and were carried out following a descriptive survey
research design. With prior informed consent, the target groups of informants, who were
identified either by purposive, convenience, or snowball sampling methods, were
informally interviewed using a set of guide questions about their knowledge on the

utilization of different medicinal plants in their respective areas. Some studies also


performed participant observation to witness and understand further the traditional
medicinal practices of the group, and focus group discussions to validate the gathered
ethnomedicinal data. These activities were then usually coupled with field visits to photo
document and/or collect plant specimens for verification of plant identity. The summary of
the individual methods followed by the ethnomedicinal studies cited in this paper is

presented in Appendix A.

Geographical Distribution of Groups Using Abaca as Medicinal Plant

Based on existing ethnomedicinal reports, abaca has been identified as a medicinal plant
by different local groups in the country. ‘These include the ‘Tau-buid Mangyan and Sambal
Tina Ati group from the Luzon region; the Panay Bukidnon group from the Visayas region;
the Ata-Manobo, Bagobo, Higaonon, Mandaya, Manobo-Matigsalug, Mansaka,
Matigsalug, Muslim Maranao, Subanen, and Talaandig from the Mindanao region; and the
non-tribal local people and healers across these regions. These approximately represent
12% of the >110 indigenous groups identified in the country. These Indigenous Peoples
(IPs) generally reside in isolated areas preventing them from availing basic social services
while allowing them to retain some of their traditional and precolonial cultural practices
(The International Work Group for Indigenous A fairs, 2021). These groups are primarily
concentrated in Mindanao (61%), and in Luzon (33%) especially in the Cordillera

Administrative Region, and with few groups from the Visayas (Asian Development Bank,


2002; Hirai, 2015), then reflecting the corresponding number of groups per region included
in this review.

The continuous practice of using abaca as a medicinal plant could also reflect the
availability of this plant in these regions (Figure 5.1). Based on the regional production
data of abaca during the first quarter of 2022 (PSA, 2022), Region V or the Bicol Region
in Luzon had the highest production in the country with 5,967.5 metric tons (mt),
equivalent to 40.9% of the total national production. The two ethnomedicinal reports
documented in the Luzon area are from Regions III (in the province of Zambales) and IV-
Bor MIMAROPA (Oriental Mindoro) which are regions with 3.3 mt and 12.3 mt of abaca
yield, respectively. Given the fact that abaca exists and thrive in Luzon, and that it covers
the top abaca producing region and province (i.e., Catanduanes) of the Philippines, related
documentation studies in these other areas are needed to be conducted as these may hold

undocumented and relevant information on the medicinal value of this plant.


Metric Tons

No Production 4g) 5 J

< 500

[wi 500- 1,000
HB 1.001 - 2,000
HB > 2.000

min: 1.61 ; max: 5,967.46

Figure 5.1. Abaca production map per region of the Philippines for January-March 2022
(lifted with permission from PSA, 2022) with numerical labels (which
correspond to the entries in list of ethnomedicinal uses of abaca at the end
of this section) showing the locations where the medicinal uses of abaca
were reported. Labels in red, blue, and orange are parts of Luzon, Visayas,
and Mindanao, respectively.


For the Visayas, Regions VI (Iloilo) and VIII (Leyte and Samar) had reports on the
medicinal utilization of abaca. This could be attributed to the reported high production of
abaca in these regions which measured 772.7 mt and 1,645.4 mt, respectively. Equivalent
to 11.3% of the national abaca production, this report made Region VIII as the third highest
abaca producing region in the country; thus, this could also explain this region having two
provinces with ethnomedicinal reports on abaca.

Mindanao, on the other hand, had the highest number of groups which cited the
medicinal value of abaca. These 15 groups belong to Regions X (Bukidnon, Lanao del
Norte, and Misamis Occidental), XI (Compostela Valley, Davao City, Davao del Norte,
and Davao Oriental), and XIII (Agusan del Sur) which correspondingly had 1,126.0 mt,
1,763.9 mt, and 1,591.0 mt of abaca production, and Region IX (Zamboanga del Norte and
Zamboanga del Sur) which had 181.9 mt of production. Among these regions, Region XI
or the Davao Region had the highest abaca production in Mindanao making it the second
highest abaca-producing region in the country with 12.1% national production share. It also
has the highest number of groups (ie., six) in the country which have records on the
ethnomedicinal uses of abaca. Mindanao is known for its diverse traditional cultures, and
could be attributed to their precolonial well-established cultures along with the strong
resistance of the Muslim people against the various colonizers in the past. These prevented
the latter from dominating or governing their territory and from significantly affecting the
traditional knowledge and practices in Mindanao (Herrera, 2015) including those that relate

to ethnomedicine.


Abaca has also been reported as a medicinal plant by the Sanger and Dayak Jangkang
tribes of the North Sulawesi and West Kalimantan provinces of Indonesia, respectively.
Despite being more westernized, the Philippines shares common cultural values with
Indonesia especially in terms of nature of religious belief, value of time, formality in social
customs and traditions, and being a communal society (Lee & Lee, 2006). North Sulawesi,
in particular, is geographically close to Mindanao provinces such as Sarangani, South
Cotabato, and Davao del Sur. These southern Mindanao areas are reported to be inhabited
by Indonesians from Sulawesi who historically took a risk to sail across the sca to seck for
security and livelihood opportunities (Talampas, 2015). The adjacency between Mindanao
and Indonesia could then explain the cultural connection, including the similarity in

ethnomedicinal knowledge and practices, between them.

Ethnomedicinal Uses of Abaca

Abaca is used for a number of medicinal applications such as for wound healing, relapse,
fatigue and muscle pain, and gastrointestinal problems. Different plant parts are utilized
for these medicinal purposes. These include the abaca leaf blade, petiole, pseudostem,
sucker, and root. However, there are other terminologies used to describe these parts in
existing reports such as ‘stem’ and ‘trunk’ to refer to the pseudostem, and ‘plantlet’,
‘shoot’, and ‘leaf bud’ to refer to the sucker. To establish clarity prior to the discussion of
its ethnomedicinal uses, these terminologies and their corresponding botanical terms and

plant positions on an abaca plant are illustrated in Figure 5.2.

PSEUDOSTEM/
LEAF SHEATH”

(STEM, TRUNK)

INFLORESCENCE h CORM

(PLANTLET, SHOOT,
LEAF BUD)

Figure 5.2. An illustration of an M. extilis habit plant parts with other corresponding
terms (italicized and enclosed in parentheses) used in the cited
ethnomedicinal studies. Plant parts marked with an asterisk (°) have reports
of medicinal utilization.


1, Use for wound healing

The Mansaka people of Compostela Valley and the Bagobo people of Davao City
use the stem of abaca to treat wounds and stop its bleeding (DOH-PITAHC, UP Manila,
& UP Mindanao, 2000[a]; DOH-PITAHC, UP-Manila, & UP-Mindanao, 2000[b]),
while the Ata-Manobo people of Davao del Norte and the Dayak Jangkang tribe of
West Kalimantan, Indonesia use the leaves and the stem instead (DOH-PITAHC, UP
Manila, & UP Mindanao, 2000[d]; Supiandi, Ege, Julung, Zubaidah, & Mahanal,
2021). The medicinal treatment is prepared by pounding the stem and leaves to collect
its extract before applying the juice onto the wound. For circumcision wounds, the
scraped stem of abaca is rubbed immediately onto the wound, and washed afterwards
with guava (Psidium guajava) leaves decoction for faster healing (Elago, Dando, Pizon,
Galang, & Sia, 2013). Decoction is a medicinal plant preparation in which the collected
fresh or dried plant parts are boiled in water until softened, or until a certain volume is
achieved, and the resulting liquid is either taken as drink or applied externally. The
Mandaya people of Davao Oriental, on the other hand, administers the stem of abaca
as poultice by directly using it as a wound cover (DOH-PITAHC, UP Manila, & UP
Mindanao, 2000[c]). Poultice is a type of medicinal preparation in which fresh,
pounded, or heated plant parts are applied directly to the affected skin area and are
usually bound by a bandage. The lowland farmers of Leyte Island. Eastern Visayas do
the same by wrapping the inner portion of the pseudostem around wounds to control

its bleeding, and speed up healing (Langenberger, Prigge, Martin, Belonias, &


Sauerborn, 2009). The sap obtained from the petiole of abaca also helps in wound
treatment by applying it directly on the affected area (Pucot & Demayo, 2021[b]). In
addition, the sap from abaca is also utilized to treat wounds and cuts in dogs. This is
practiced by the Manobo-Matigsalug people of Davao City (Celeste, Condino, Dadang,
& Amoroso, 2020).

One important factor that could have led to the wide utilization of abaca for wound
healing is the commonness of wounds and other injuries in these areas due to accidents
and conflicts. Among the indigenous peoples of the Philippines, conflict and related
injuries are a considerable problem, and are important when describing indigenous
health. In addition, these groups are less prepared for injury problems brought about by
disasters such as typhoons (United Nations, 2016). Hence, they rely on the utilization
of accessible medicinal plants such as abaca in the treatment of wound and other

injuries.

. Use for relapse

Relapse is a condition in which a person becomes ill again after a period of
recovery. In local Filipino term, this is referred to as binat or baynat (Unilab, n.d.).
‘Abaca has been reported to be utilized to cure relapse. The leaves and roots of abaca
are collected by the Talaandig tribe of Bukidnon to prepare an infusion that is
administered to new mothers (Naive, Binag, & Alejandro, 2021). Infusion is acommon

method of medicinal preparation that involves pouring boiled water over an herb and


having it set for a few minutes before straining and drinking. This can also be done by
drying the herb for weeks before consuming as tea. The Matigsalug tribe of Davao City,
on the other hand, prepares the roots of abaca as decoction and administers it as drink
(Guevara & Garcia, 2018). The same is followed by the Ata-Manobo tribe of Davao
del Norte but they specifically scrape the roots into smaller pieces first before decocting
it in two glasses of water (DOH-PITAHC, UP Manila, & UP Mindanao, 2000{d]).
Meanwhile, the Sambal Tina Ati group in Zambales addresses postpartum relapse by
preparing a decoction of abaca pith. This is administered as steam bath that focuses on
the mother’s breast, and as drink until her first bath after giving birth (Cagayan, et al.,
2017). Interestingly, a polyherbal treatment that involves abaca is also practiced by the
healers and locals of Aurora, Zamboanga del Sur. The central portions of three palm-
sized petioles each of abaca, Corypha utan (buli), M. acuminata x M. balbisiana
(saging kardaba), and Musa sp. (saging bulongan) or M. acuminata (saging murado)
are heated, and the sap is given to the patient as drink (Pucot & Demayo, 2021 [a]; Pucot
& Demayo, 2021[b]).

High maternal morbidity and mortality is one of the major health problems of
indigenous peoples (United Nations, 2016). This explains why relapse, which is a
common postpartum problem of indigenous women, is one of the medical problems

addressed by medicinal plants such as abaca in these communities.


3. Use for fatigue and muscle pain

The Subanen tribe of Ozamis City, Misamis Occidental uses the abaca palm in
easing overfatigue in women. The palm is roasted and pounded to extract the juice that
is then applied onto the body as massage. This practice is usually employed as a
polyherbal treatment that also includes the use of M. sapientum and Corypha elata
extracts (Alduhisa & Demayo, 2019). For Muslim Maranaos of Iligan City in Lanao
del Norte, this overfatiguc and muscle pain is treated using the juice from the partly
toasted abaca shoot or leaf bud that is either drank or used as body massage (Olowa &

Demayo, 2015).

*

Use for gastrointestinal problems

The Panay Bukidnon group in Lambunao, Iloilo uses abaca to treat various
gastrointestinal problems. The shoots of abaca, for instance, are decocted or grilled
before drinking to cure bloody stool or diarrhea, respectively. The water content of its
stem, on the other hand, is directly drank to resolve stomachache (Cordero, Meve, &
Alejandro, 2022). The young abaca shoots are also utilized by the Higaonon tribe of

Lanao del Norte in treating diarrhea by partly roasting them before squeezing to obtain

the juice to be internally administered to the patient (Olowa, Torres, Aranico, &
Demayo, 2012). Grilling and roasting of plant parts are common traditional medicinal

preparations which augment biological activities for the treatment of gastrointestinal


problems. These methods are believed to enhance medicinal efficacy and reduce severe
purgation (Nazari, Azadi, Ashrafi, & Badr, 2018). This is also comparable to the use
of activated charcoal to treat overdoses and flatulence, among others, due to its toxin-
absorbing properties (Neuvonen & Olkkola, 1988). Further, the local people of Samar
Island Natural Park make use of the leaf and sap of abaca to address diarrhea with
accompanied vomiting. The collected plant parts are prepared by crushing the leaves
soaked in water to get the extract, and mixing it with the sap obtained from one stalk
before drinking (DOH-PITAHC, DENR-PAWB, Samar Island Natural Park Office, UP
Tacloban, University of Eastern Philippines, UP Manila, 2012). Although it is not
mentioned how abaca is prepared for medicinal use, the Tau-buid Mangyan of Oriental
Mindoro also uses abaca for the treatment of bloody stool (Sebastian, et al., 2013).
These reports clearly show that gastrointestinal problems such as diarrhea and
stomachache are a common problem in indigenous communities. This is primarily
caused by poverty conditions which include poor hygiene and sanitation, unavailability
of clean drinking water, and usual presence of contaminants in the environment (United

Nations, 2016).

. Other ethnomedicinal uses

There are other medical problems that are traditionally addressed by abaca aside
from the aforementioned ethnomedicinal uses. The Bagobo people of Davao City make

use of abaca roots decocted with red sugarcane roots and/or faw-angi roots and


amisetas toots/seeds to control vomiting with blood (DOH-PITAHC, UP-Manila, &
UP-Mindanao, 2000[b]). The Ata-Manobo people of Davao del Norte, on the other
hand, enhance the milk production of lactating mothers by administering to them the
juice obtained from the stem of abaca suckers or plantlets, and address irregular
menstruation by chewing abaca roots and swallowing its juice (DOH-PITAHC, UP
Manila, & UP Mindanao, 2000{d]). Additionally, the healers and locals of Aurora,
Zamboanga del Sur believe that animal and insect bites can be cured by applying the
sap ftom abaca petioles on the affected area (Pucot & Demayo, 2021[b]). Furthermore,
as reported by the Subanen tribe from Lapuyan, Zamboanga del Sur, paralysis can be
treated with a heated stem of abaca that is rolled over the paralyzed body part (Pizon,
Nufieza, Uy, & Senarath, 2016). Lastly, in the Sanger tribe of North Sulawesi,
Indonesia, abaca is utilized to treat kidney problems (Pandiangan, Silalahi, Dapas, &

Kandou, 2019).

The majority of the cited ethnomedicinal studies report the utilization of the abaca

pseudostem, which is made up of leaf sheaths and its sap, in making medicinal preparations

that are administered either topically or internally to patients to address various ailments.
The use of this plant part for medicinal purposes has also been reported for other members
of the genus Musa. The pseudostem of Musa spp. is used by the Manobo tribe of Agusan
del Sur to treat muscle pain and spasm by drinking its extract or by using it as wash

(Paraguison, Tandang, & Alejandro, 2020). Drinking the sap of Musa spp. is also practiced

by the indigenous people of Batan Island of Batanes to ease abdominal pain (Abe & Ohtani,


2013). M. paradisiaca, specifically, was reported to be used in addressing wound problems
by preparing it as poultice (Balinado & Chan, 2017) or by directly applying its sap onto
the wound (Abe & Ohtani, 2013), and in addressing indigestion by drinking its decoction
(Tantengco, Condes, Estadilla, & Ragragio, 2018). The high utilization of the abaca
pseudostem could then imply its high composition of active ingredients. The reported
internal administration of its medicinal preparation, however, needs further safety
investigation as it can directly target delicate organs, unlike with external application which
is safer while it results in indirect yet immediate localized effects.

The summary of the ethnomedicinal uses of abaca which includes their reference

studies, study sites, and key informants is presented in Table 5.1.


“was:
Woy JVM YUU  ayseysewoig «= wag
(zz0z “yoRsXo
‘oupuefery UU pue [ID voyueid yous a
Bona -oueuesinieg <3ig
‘olaps0) “uons02ap YUL Joois Kpoorg yooys, your ]eyeqy uoupryng Aeueg Oo, g
i i Ean a Sonos esourddiyry
“yuigpryo - _
Jaye yreq sayy
Joy jun
aiminsqns sayem se
uonsosap ay) yuu
Jay 197] “soyjour
yp Jo iseaiq ayy uO
uonsosap ayy
(L107 “Te Jo. wreays ayy snoog asdeyar eal wegmeg “BIg Kg
ye ‘uededeQ) — uonoovap aredaig = umred-ysog Wd eyeqy ny euLy jequieg rsajequiez = Z
‘uexejeureurg “Surges
(107 “Te uedsueyy Kedueseg ‘yes Onis
19 ‘uenseqas) AN Joos fpooig WN WAN Ping-ney ——:ox0pul [eH |
es a a ae z i Torry soup
SONAUIITA =NOLLVEVdTd NOLLVOIGNI aasn aINYN SLNVWYOINI =NOILVIOT ‘ON
JuVd UVINOVNUIA 4OdNOUdD
INVTd INV1d

‘pouonuaus jou ‘yyy “eoege Jo sasn jeulorpauoutpe poriodas ay JO 3SI] “T'S 148


(oz vamyxtus
MEW day YUU >yPeIS uO
‘somddyyg wo pauresqo des

wayseq oup Yum yoBNXe ay

Jo Aussoatup)
‘uegojoe| df 10 azaanbs pue
“20130 ed saava] ay) ysMaD,
Teen purjsy —-s0yem Bury

Fours ‘GMVd JO Sse[3 B/1 Ur yLOS

imqung ‘ouasoy"1 “Yeung
A3ig :poyssore
wefnquieg ‘A
SoXeqye> “ueiouowreurg
8g {poysioTe A

exepuen “ueng ap 2505
eg “ewounpiyy “21g,

Siqmey ‘sea
se “oupis] ues “<iq
“peyssore;y ‘PIAEUED

“piaeue,) ‘uodereg

“Adag “paysaare yy Koseg

“ana pure ‘A]ySnoioyp eyeq eu sepeyy “foseg “Sueuing “A819,
‘HV Lid ysem ‘soneay Sunwoa des pue-—‘Buoqein3ey Dyed feamen
-HOG) waAas 199]10) YIM eOyLRI = eo] seoege PIA ajdoad [e907 puejsj seus ¢
“Buryeay aaoduit
(6007 pue Surpaaiq
“wioquaneg, dojs 0} syno [jews
wR ‘seuojag —_40 sastnuq punore (Buyjeay a
‘unmeyy ‘988ug —utaisopnasdjo eos ‘Butue9]9) siourey omg pur epuai5
‘reBioquaBue7) ued sour ap deiqy—_ spun, wig voeqy puejmoy : ¢
QONTAGATA NOWLVAVdMAd NOLLVOIGNI aasn aWYN SINVWYOINI NOLLVOOT ‘ON
LaVd UVINOVNYIA 40 dNOUd

INV1d

AINVTd

(P,10D) “T'S AGL


(ozoz
‘osoloury
3 posi Boje
7B ‘Buepeq nee ee
‘ourpuoy, sBop wy sino SnpesBneW neq “eine sg
“2183]99) WN uw puna des poeqy soqoueW, ol
(810¢ “BED
P BRAID) “uonoooep YUU asdejoy J00y WN ‘Snyesdney :Aygoraeq §=6
(eloo0z “punom
‘oeuepuyy = ap ur aoinf Addy CUT ay)
any eu —“201Mfazsonbs ——--Burpaaiq sdows suedeudey “4319,
dQ ‘OHVLId — pue ‘dind punod saoupaodd Aa[eA,
-Hoa) ‘wars adesog 40) punoy, was eyreqy eyesuRyA, Bjasoduioy
(1z0z
‘ompuefary 7p sioipour mou 00
‘Seurg ‘9AIeN) uorsnyuy soy asdejay Jeary pyeqy Sipueeyey L
(S102 “eimay
® AOURTLA.
“eprueyey pepuiadsoig
‘uomnbry) WN spunom uedg WN WN ajdoad jeooy = mg japuesnBy
joa ae yay Dey [= Onuopiagy samddyiyg
QONTNIATA NOLLVAVdaYd NOLLVOIGNI Gasn aWYN SLNVWYOINI = NOLLVDOT
LuvVd UYVINOVNYIA 4OdNOUD

ANV1d

ANV1Td

(p,MoD) “T'S AGEL

”

“aus Surpaayq ayy
ye penxa kiddy
-soinf oy 138
01 y]eIs ay) punog

omyxqu
yuug ‘spjasuun
Jo spaas/s}oor

‘ueozefns Jo s}o01

“8un-a} JO S104
YM sjoos [og

“amyxtur
uu sa1eM Jo
qunoure ayenbape
ut (ogn}) aueoeSns
pal jo sjoor

([q]oooz YM s}oor [log

‘oeuepury,
“dB URN,
“dN ‘OHVLId

-HOa)
SONaUaITA

“punom ye aon
Atdde pue ‘soinf
198 Squnn punog

Suiposig, 4S

(od8ns
40) poorq

YM BunIWOA —- 00

(oqo8eg) eeqQ
‘(ouengaa)
yuna, worqy

(soqnyseq0
aup Atteoistoads)

Puno, oqofeg

i

NOILVUVdddd NOILVOIGNI

aasn GWYN
Luvd = YAVINDVNAGA
ANVTd INV1d

SINVWUOINI
40 dnowd.

NOLLVDOT ‘ON

(p.1moD) “TS 198L


wae) “qeBURE ONS

=Aeuey “VBuR900],
(lo00z -Adsg “euodeue|
soeuepulyy] “punom “epuedeyy pur
aN Bee at z2409 pute suber peo
df ‘OHVLId urays sopeayes uog “sK8agq
-Ho) y8nous soyeD uno, waig vorqy eAepuey sJewuauig oeaeq —¢}
“saint
ay mojjems pue = uonennsuowt
M2YD “S100 Yse A seindauyy yoy
“uonoosep
yuu ‘Jaen
Jo sassej3 omy ur
[log ‘ssoaid jews asdejar
o}U! s}oo1 adel9g umpedysog oy
‘soinf yuu ‘aoinf § —_uoneioe|
({(P]oooz Wajjoo oO} Was quig suey] —19[IueIg
“oeuepul,
dN F eye — “eae pajoayye uo
aN ‘OHVLd — 20Inf Addy “aot ras (ouengag po8ueye
-HOd) 9BNXO 0} punog spuno, Bee “ery) eoeqy: oqouey-e1y :9U0N [ap oRAeq = ZI
QONTAIATA §=NOLLVAVdaad NOLLVOIGNI aasn GWYN SLNVAUOANI NOLLVDOT “ON

LaVd UVINOVNYFA 4AOdNOND
ANVTd ANV1Td

(p,1u0D) “VS 19BL


“syaennxo (DI0j2
pydéao;5) wing
pur (wniuardos yy)
‘eueueg YIM pasn
Aitensp) “Apog ayy
uo 11 aBessew pue
(6107 ‘Oke = ‘a01nf ay joeNxa

ustiom
Jo (0y8nq

2 esIUNPIV) ‘punod ‘iseoy Jo) anBneyeaQ wed eyeqv uaueqns o1
‘o8esseul Apoq “Bornpueyy *Aeyeceyeyy
40} des Surureuar uatiom “(orge) vourydeuyy
amp as) des omy 40 (smy8ing Peis)
(s10z ‘oXewraq © yuu pue‘szaanbs 40) anSeyion0 png jeay ovuerey a shiig
2 PMOIO) ‘Aqued seoy, dajosny —_SJ00yS eyeqy ways !QUON Jap ORUET CI
(2102 ‘okewaq
2p ‘oouery ‘sont 10 des yp
‘sauioy, yuu pur ‘azaanbs yooys
“emoo) ‘Kued jseoy ——eayzreip steary, — unox, pyeqy uouoe8iy] a
SONTUIATA =NOWVAVdHYd NOILVOIGNI aasn aN SLINVWYOINI = NOLLVIOT ‘ON
Juvd UYVINOVNYAA = 4OdNOdd
INV'Td INVTd

(p,wod) "T'S 1GeL


“(uoBu0jng
BuBos) “ds vsnyy
pue ‘(oqupany
8u)S0s) puisiq}q
x pipununan yy
“(yng) wre] won

pydtio) ‘eoeqe —aurexBiut ‘1onay

uomy “asof ues pue
“auesewoy “uedeseuy
‘seq undeceyey,

Jo ypea sajoned ‘ured <poq a
(e]z0z pazis-wyed aanp “oysepeay, -audoqy ‘pray 3g
‘okewrag Jo 191U20 payeay ‘on8ney [P90] umg
2p wand) woy des yuuq ‘osdepoy ajoned eyeqy pur si9jeaH [op eBueoquez 61
“SOABD]
Baen8 pa}oo90p
Sursn ysem
(€10z FIS Bay ABYe punom oonais Te<eIeW *<8q
“uvjeg ‘uozig 24) ojo qnu pue punom :2UON
‘opueq ‘o8e]q) ways eoequedeiog §—uorsiownon) = wa, woeqy uouegng [ep eBueoquiez gy.
(120z ‘peiseN aun aye BIG,
2 ‘ZanBupoy —“wonjd02ap yup ananey JeIW2p1999
‘ezounN) pueiqeM UI flog — ‘a9In yNOW —S}OOY eoeqy uaueqng sIuRst LI
GONTUGATA =NOLLVYVdTYd NOLLVOIGNI Gas aIWYN SLNVWAOINI = NOLLVDO71
LaVd UVINOVNUIA 40 dNOUd

ANV1d

ANVTd

(p, mod) “VS 198L


adeyLowiay
‘sanq
ware yoasul pue
paoaye ayy uo Jeuue ‘sino
des ajouod kiddy — puespunoy == deg. eioimy “asor wes pur
“aiueewoy “cexndeyy,
“pig “uedeseuy
Janay ‘iseg uededeyey ‘ou
ned ‘ured Xpoq ‘dure ‘0907 edeg
pozis-wyed puey ‘oypepeay ‘ } eee
(falizoz_ = -2ampeyouorod §—‘ssouyeam Suey ‘peoy ‘sé8ig
‘okewaq zaqU99 pareay ‘andney ‘s[eooy umg
wrong) ap woy des yu ‘osdejoy deg pyreqyv pur sua[eapy Jap eBuvoquez 07
“(opoanu
Bu8vs) pyoununso
W pur (172g)
wey] unin 5 Jo
sojonod pozis-wyed
ary) pure sajonad
vouge pezis-wyed
amp Jo uorod ‘syoepeay
91099 pareoy ‘onBney
ayn woy des yuu ‘osdejoy ajonad
SONANAATA ~=NOLLVAVdaad NOIWLVOIGNI Gash GWYN SLNVAUMOINI = NOILLVOOT ‘ON

Lavd UVINOVNAAA JOdNOUD
ANV1d INV 1d

(P.1mu0D) “VS AABL


(era “Ap0q

“peueye Le enuag Sueyduey

9 ‘yepreqnZ 11 doup pur ‘r972m_ Jer] “raqurey Surqoy,

“sung oye) ‘sued eoege sino “wis :20ULAOIg
‘a8q ‘tpueidng) papaau ay pmog —_puespunom —_‘dumyy Suipoy = SueySuep yedeq ueeUNTey Sam EZ

“omeg pur siounsiqy

“spams aes

“weynge| YON BYEN

pure eye yy “2Qnye [ey

pene

(6102 ‘nopuey en aeaT

7 sedeq pue “esa ‘ayamaimeg

“werens “20ULA0g
‘ueduerpueg) WN aseasip Soup WN aroy ws so8ueg OMBING YON ZZ

me a = aa pisauopuy

(102 “wed pazkjesed oy —

“ipereuag Uo J9A0 [Jo1 pue weindey

‘AT woUNN was axp Jo uoRIOd ung

‘uozig) [Tess & apy sisAjereg waig eyeqy uouegng [ep edueoqurez

SONGUGITY NOILVAVdHYd NOLLVOIGNI aasn GWYN SINVAYOUNI NOLLVDOT

LUVd UVINOVNAFA AOdNOUD
INVTd ANVTd

(P.mo0d) “T'S 1ABL


OTHER NON-FIBER APPLICATIONS AND POTENTIALS OF ABACA

Aside from its essential role in the global fiber industry and the cconomic service it
provides as a traditional medicine, abaca has been used in other applications, and displays

added potentials.

1. Abaca seed and seed oil as an ingredient in cosmetic and industrial products

Since abaca is primarily planted for fiber production and is harvested prior to
reaching its reproductive stage, the potential of abaca seeds to be used for various
human and industrial uses is often overlooked. Each abaca fruit often contains 36-160
seeds (Halos, 2008). These seeds are made up of carbohydrates (57.26 mg per 100 g
seed), insoluble fiber (8.28%), protein (4.86%), and fats (3.92%). It also contains
minerals such as calcium (104.62 mg per 100 g of seed), phosphorus (72.46 mg),
magnesium (15.84 mg), zinc (1.40 mg), and iron (0.66). Due to this nutritional
composition, abaca seeds can be used in the food industry (Villafuerte-Abonal, 2006).
It can be toasted and added to baked products; hulled and added to food preparations
or processed to make flour; and roasted and blended with coffee beans to make an abaca
coffee. Another reason that makes abaca seeds a good choice in food preparation is the
presence of iron and zine which are rarely detected in other plant seeds.

The oil that can be derived from the abaca seeds by cold pressing, on the other hand,

contains high amounts of oleic acid (34.18%) and linoleic acid (29.56%), and small

amounts of palmitic (8.67%), stearic (4.48%), and linolenic acid (0.56) acids
(Villafuerte-Abonal, 2006). Oleic acid is a monounsaturated omega-9 fatty acid that is
naturally found in foods and is abundant in vegetable oils (Farag & Gad, 2022). The %
composition of oleic acid in abaca seed oil is higher than the oleic acid content of
coconut (6%), palm (13%), safflower (13%), cottonseed (21%), sunflower (23%), and
corn (24%) oils, but is lower than that of sesame (42%), peanut (47%), canola (54%),
avocado (70%), and olive (76%) oils (Villafuerte-Abonal, 2006). Linoleic acid, on the
other hand, is an essential polyunsaturated omega-6 fatty acid that can be sourced from
vegetable oils, seeds, nuts, meats, and eggs (Whelan & Fritsche, 2013). The linoleic
acid composition of abaca seed oil is higher than that of palm (2%), coconut (3%), olive
(8%), and avocado (10%) oils, but is way lower than the linoleic acid content of sesame
(45%), cottonseed (50%), soy (50%), corn (59%), sunflower (65%), and safflower
(75%) oils (Villafuerte-Abonal, 2006). Given its composition, the abaca seed oil has
been reported to have the potential to be used for various commercial applications.

Refined abaca seed oil can be used as an ingredient to manufacture several cosmetic
and beauty products such as skin creams, lipstick, lip balms, liquid make-up, and
powders. The polyunsaturated fatty acids (ie., linoleic acid and linolenic acid)
contained in cosmetic-grade abaca seed oil can address dry skin problems (Villafuerte-
Abonal, 2006). Abaca extracts can also be added in hair shampoos and conditioners,
together with other plant extracts such as banana extract and virgin coconut oil. This
helps in revitalizing hair strands and in inhibiting bacterial and fungal growth (Car,

2022),


Plant-derived oils are commonly used in cosmetics as they help in changing the
epidermal barrier properties and enriching the skin with nutrients and phytochemicals
(Mank & Polonska, 2016). These lipid compounds are also known to exhibit anti-
inflammatory activities that can help cure acne and minor skin injuries (Linder, 2008;
Balic, Vlasic, Zuzul, Marinovic, & Mokos, 2020). In the case of refined coconut oil
applied in the cosmetics industry, the lauric and myristic acids it primarily contains
help in softening the skin, and in forming a protective film on the skin and hair. Sesame
oil, on the other hand, contains high amounts of linoleic acid like the abaca seed oil,
and is also used in the production of nourishing cosmetic items that address dry and
damaged sensitive skin (Mank & Polonska, 2016).

The nutritional-grade abaca seed oil, on the other hand, can be best used in food
sauces, dressings, dips, guacamole, and smoothies as a flavor enhancer (Villafuerte-
Abonal, 2006).

Similar to this application, pre-emulsified safflower seed oil was found to be
effective in enhancing the flavor and quality of Nemipterus virgatus surimi-based food
products (Song, Lin, Hong, Liu, & Zhou, 2022). This flavor enhancing capacity of seed
oils could be attributed to the volatiles (e.g., pyrazines, aldehydes, furans, ketones,
alcohols, acids, esters, sulfides, hydrocarbons) released during the degradation of fatty
acids (Li & Hou, 2018). In com oil, for instance, volatiles are largely produced from
the degradation of linoleic and oleic acyl groups (Goicoechea & Guillen, 2014) which

are also present in abaca seed oil.


Lastly, the technical-grade abaca seed oil, which results when the cosmetic-grade
abaca seed oil ages one week older, can serve as an ingredient in the production of
colorants such as non-toxic paints, inks, lacquers, dycs, scalants, stain removers, and
varnishes. In these products, the abaca oil acts as a drying agent (Villafuerte-Abonal,
2006; Tapado & Palaoag, 2018).

Drying oils are usually derived from plant seeds (e.g., castor, linseed, safflower,
soybean, sunflower) and from fish, and are generally used as raw material for binders.
The drying effect of these oils is attributed to the presence of double bonds in its
triglycerides, It exhibits the capacity to react with oxygen in the air to form cross-linked
films and promote drying (Jones, Nichols, & Pappas, 2017).

The commercial production of abaca seed oil, however, will require the
establishment of abaca plantations dedicated only for oil production. The plantations
of abaca in the country are mostly for fiber production, and this entails cutting down
the plant before it reaches its reproductive stage—the stage when fruits and seeds are

produced.

. Abaca processing wastes as source of economically valuable products

‘An abaca plant is ready for harvesting and for fiber extraction once it has reached
its flagleaf stage. A series of steps is followed to extract its fiber. First, the stalk to be
harvested is topped by cutting its leaves, and then tumbled down by separating it from

the ground using a bolo. Second, the abaca leaf sheaths are either tuxied to separate the

sheaths and extract the fiber, or decorticated using a machine to scrape the leaf sheaths.
Third, the abaca fibers are cleaned either by hand-stripping or spindle-stripping. Lastly,
all fibers arc dricd before storing (PhilFIDA, GIZ GmbH, & Glatfcltcr GmbH, 2016).
During this process, several wastes are produced and can be converted to other
economically valuable products.

The leaves which remain when an abaca tree is topped for fiber extraction can serve
as a source of natural colorant. These leaves can be processed to extract chlorophylls
and turn into a natural eco-dye, while its waste product can be applied as compost
(Villanueva, 1982). A good example for this application is the reported utilization of
chlorophyllin which is a natural chlorophyll derivative. Using the CuSOs-extracted
chlorophyllin from Sasa veitchii and with chitosan as a mordant, cotton fabrics were
successfully dyed and even exhibited high antimicrobial activity (Park & Park, 2010).
The chlorophyll dye also has the potential to be used in assembling dye-sensitized solar
cells (DSSC). This can support low-cost production of solar cells that can be used as
energy source (Syanifar, Gomesh, Irwanto, Fareq, & Irwan, 2015; Sharma, Sharma, &
Sharma, 2018). Further, abaca leaves can serve as environmentally-friendly alternative
to package fresh produce. This is similar to using banana leaves as food wrappers
instead of plastics.

Some other wastes are also produced when abaca stalks are defibered during
tuxying and stripping. The parenchyma tissues which can be obtained from these
wastes can be hydrolyzed and processed to produce fuel alcohol (Villanueva, 1982). In

connection with this economic application, a study was conducted to investigate the

3.

production of ethanol by oil palm trunk subjected to high solid-state simultaneous
saccharification and fermentation (HSS-SSF). Results revealed that the use of
scparated parenchyma and vascular bundles of oil palm trunk is an effective
fermentation strategy to yield 6.1 to 8.5% (w/v) ethanol (Prawitwong, et al., 2012). In
addition, the stripping waste can be used in making handmade paper, fiber boards, and
as growing medium for mushroom culture (Villafuerte-Abonal, 2006). Furthermore,
the pharmacological potential of abaca extracts can be explored, and if its efficacy in
addressing a particular ailment is proven, the extracts produced during fiber processing
may be collected and utilized for medical purposes. In a related study, an ointment was
formulated using the pseudostem extract of M. paradisiaca and was found to be
effective in promoting wound healing. The extract was found to contain flavonoids,

terpenoids, alkaloids, saponins, and tannins (Weremfo, Pappoe, & Adinortey, 2011).

Abaca plant and its agri-ecological applications

In addition to its medicinal and industrial contributions, planting abaca offers
environmental and agricultural benefits. When intercropped with other crops and tree
species (e.g., coconut, fruit trees, timber trees), abaca can assist in the improvement of
biodiversity conditions allowing the better growth of these plants. The integration of
abaca into these existing farms or plantations can also provide additional income for
farmers due its fiber production and the other products that can be derived from it.

Additionally, organic fertilizers may be produced using the waste materials of abaca

processing and, thus, could help in improving agricultural yields. Further, planting
abaca can help in minimizing soil erosion, landslides, and floods by improving the
soil’s water holding capacity. It also addresses problems with sedimentation in coastal
areas which act as breeding grounds for fishes (Milan & Géltenboth, 2005; Bande,
Grenz, Asio, & Sauerborn, 2013; Aspuria & Garcia, 2018; Tapado & Palaoag, 2018).

As a source of biodegradable material, abaca also contributes in the reduction of
hazardous wastes which are often released when making and using synthetic fibers
(Milan & Géltenboth, 2005), An example of this is the recent production of abaca face
masks to help prevent the spread of COVID-19. These masks exhibit water resistance
and porosity which are within the standards of the US Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention. These are also as durable as polyester but can decompose in two months;
hence, it prevents the piling up of non-biodegradable face masks made of synthetic

fiber in the environment (Bloomberg, 2020).

REPORTED PHYTOCHEMICALS IN ABACA

Plant secondary metabolites, or phytochemicals, are compounds in plants that allow
them to respond to environmental stresses, and also interact with their pollinators (Gutzeit
& Ludwig-Muller, 2014). This wide array of plant compounds also provides humans with

several medicinal, industrial, and agricultural servic ‘or members of the genus Musa,

their reported antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, anti-ulcerogenic, and hepatoprotective

activities could be attributed to the phytochemicals that they synthesize which include

carotenoids, terpenoids, sterols, and phenolic compounds (Hiinsel, Keller, Rimpler, &
Schneider, 1993; Evans, 2009; Lopes, Borges, Cardoso, da Rocha, & Maraschin, 2020;
Ayoola-Oresanya, Sonibare, Gueye, Abberton, & Morlock, 2021). For abaca, there is,
however, limited available information on the phytochemicals it synthesizes. These are as

follows:

1. Phenolic compounds

Phenolic compounds are phytochemicals which are considered to be the most
abundant and most pronounced in plants as it participates in the entire metabolic
process. These include a variety of compounds (e.g., simple flavonoids, anthocyanins,
phenolic acids, lignin, tannins) that play a role in plant defense and in other important
plant processes like attracting pollinators, promoting camouflage, and providing
antimicrobial capacity (Lin, et al., 2016).

As a plant widely utilized in the fiber industry, it is apparent that most abaca
varieties are rich in lignin. Lignin is a complex phenolic compound that forms the fiber-
binding middle lamella making these fibers strong and rigid (Abdul Khalil, Siti Alwani,
& Omar, 2006). It is synthesized from its p-hydroxycinnamy! alcohol and acylated
precursors (also known as monolignols), namely, p-coumaryl, coniferyl, and sinapy!
alcohols, sinapyl acetate, and sinapyl p-coumarate (Martinez, et al., 2008). The first
three compounds mentioned give rise to phenylpropanoid units that include p-
hydroxyphenyl (H), guaiacyl (G), and syringyl (S) units (Sun R. , Fang, Goodwin,

Lawther, & Bolton, 1998). The lignin of abaca is an HGS-type lignin made up of B-O-

4 linkages and with considerable amounts of hydroxycinnamic acids which are
primarily p-coumaric acid (Ma, et al., 2020). In relation to this description, a study
analyzing the chemical composition of the Icaf fibers of abaca revealed its high lignin
and p-hydroxycinnamic acid (ie., ferulic and p-coumaric acids) composition. A high
concentration of 4-vinylphenol arising from p-coumaric acid analyzed by pyrolysis
coupled to gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (Py-GC/MS) was also detected
(Del Rio & Gutierrez, 2006). 4-Vinylphenol, together with 4-vinylguaiacol, are the
same plant compounds that give the distinctive phenolic, herbal, clove-like, barbeque,
or smoky aroma to top-fermented wheat beers (Cui, Wang, Zhang, & Speers, 2015).
In addition, benzaldehyde products derived from the aforementioned phenylpropanoid
units including p-hydroxybenzaldehyde, vanillin, and syringaldehyde were
correspondingly spotted (Sun R. , Fang, Goodwin, Lawther, & Bolton, 1998) together
with the other monomeric precursors of lignin that include coniferyl and sinapyl
acetates (Del Rio & Gutierrez, 2006). Further, a series of hydroxycinnamate esters that
consist of p-coumaric and ferulic acids esterified to long-chain fatty alcohols (i.e., C20
to Cos) and w-hydroxyfatty acids (i.e, C22 to Cos) were detected in abaca (Del Rio,
Rodriguez, & Gutierrez, 2004).

Ina study which investigated the hypoglycemic activity of the ethanolic leaf extract
of abaca leaves, it was revealed that the extract could cause a decrease in blood glucose
level of male Swiss Webster mice at 100-mg/kg concentration. Phytochemical analysis
further revealed the presence of flavonoids, tannins, and other phenolic compounds in

the extract which could explain its hypoglycemic activity (Febryanto, Hajrah, & Rijai


2016). The presence of ferulic acids in abaca also contribute to its antioxidant activity.
It was reported that the antioxidant property of lignin is due to its ferulic acid subunits,
and the guaiacol and 4-vinylguaiacol that can be derived from its synthesis (Azadfar,
Gao, Bule, & Chen, 2015). The presence of these phenolic compounds, and the
observation of their antioxidant activity could then support the reported use of M.

textilis in traditionally addressing wound injury and infection.

Phenylphenalenone type compounds

Phenylphenalenones are specialized phenolic compounds formed from the
condensation of two phenylpropanoid units complexed with a malonate unit through
the diarylheptanoid pathway (Hidalgo, Kai, & Schneider, 2015), and are characterized
by having a tricyclic phenalene nucleus with a lateral pheny! ring and a ketone moiety.
It exhibits a wide range of biological activities primarily due to the ring system’s
phototoxic properties which are commonly observed among the members of the
Musaceae family (Norman, Lever, Brkljaéa, & Urban, 2019). The phenylphenalenones
from Musaceae and other plant families, i.e., Haemodoraceae, Pontederiaceae, and
Strelitziaceae (Del Rio, Jimenez-Barbero, Chavez, Politi, & Gutierrez, 2006), are of
special interest due to their potential in acting as phytoalexins and phytoanticipins
(Echeverri, Torres, Quifiones, Escobar, & Archbold, 2012). Phytoalexins are

antimicrobial compounds of low molecular weight which are synthesized by plants in

response to biotic and abiotic stresses (Jeandet, 2015). Phytoanticipins, on the other

hand, give plants a constitutive defense system even without the induction caused by
wounding or herbivore or pathogen attack (Gleadow & Moller, 2014).

From the acctone extracts of dark-colored Icaf fibers of abaca, several
phenylphenalenone type compounds were identified. These were (1R)-2,3-dihydro-
4,9-dihydroxy-8-methoxy-I-phenylphenalene, anigorufone, _—-2-hydroxy-4-
phenylphenalen-1-one, methoxyanigorufone, 9-(4'-hydroxyphenyl)-2-
methoxyphenalen-1-one, 4'-methoxyirenolone, and 2-methoxy-9-(4'-methoxyphenyl)-
phenalen-l-one. Since these phenylphenalenone type compounds are known
phytoalexins, the detection of these compounds in abaca leaf fibers could then indicate
the occurrence of a microbial attack or a kind of disease which could have led to their
synthesis (Del Rio, Jimenez-Barbero, Chavez, Politi, & Gutierrez, 2006). The presence
of these phytoalexins in abaca and its associated antimicrobial activity could also
support the efficacy of abaca in mediating wound cleaning and healing, and the

treatment of diarrhea.

. Phytosterols

Phytosterols, or plant sterols, are steroidal substances in plants that are similar to
cholesterol of animals in terms of structure and function. These are important plant cell
constituents that belong to the triterpene family being derived from squalene (Marineli,
et al., 2015). Unlike animal and fungal cells which synthesize only one major sterol,

plants contain a complex range of sterol compounds which are often predominated by

sitosterol, stigmasterol, campesterol, and 24-methylcholesterol (Hartmann, 1998).
Aside from contributing to cell membrane function, phytosterols also provide services
to humans by being uscd as pharmacological agent primarily duc to its
hypocholesterolemic (Mantovani & Pugliese, 2021; Poli, et al., 2021), anti-
inflammatory, antioxidant, chemoprotective, and antidiabetic actions (Salehi, et al.,
2021). Through its anti-inflammatory and antioxidant properties, phytosterols could
then be associated with the efficacy of abaca in traditionally addressing some medical
ailments.

In a study which explored the composition of the lipophilic extractives from
nonwoody lignocellulosic crops which included abaca, several free sterols/triterpenols
were identified. These were 7-oxositosterol, sitosterol, campesterol, and stigmasterol.
Sterol glycosides like sitosterol 3B-D-glucopyranoside and campesterol 3B-D-
glucopyranoside, and sterol esters like sitosterol esters were also detected but in minute
concentration (Marques, del Rio, & Gutierrez, 2010). Campesterol, stigmasterol, and
sitosterol were also detected from the acetone extracts of abaca leaf fibers (Del Rio,
Jimenez-Barbero, Chavez, Politi, & Gutierrez, 2006). There are, however, only few
studies that look into the phytosterol composition of abaca unlike with other Musa spp.
Three phytosterols, for example, were isolated from flowers of Musa spp. These were
identified as B-sitosterol, 31-norcyclolaudenone, and (24R)-4a,14a,4-trimethyl-Sa-
cholesta-8,25(27)-dien-38-ol. These were found to significantly inhibit hydrolyzation
and glycation reactions which are mediated by a-glucosidase and a-amylase enzymes,

and which indicate the potential of these phytosterols in preventing diseases associated

with abnormal AGEs (advanced glycation end products) and sugar levels like diabetes
(Sheng, et al., 2017). The banana pulp extracts of several M. acuminata and M.
balbisiana cultivars, in addition, were found to contain phytosterols including
campesterol, stigmasterol, B-sitosterol, and cycloartenol. This phytosterol composition
then is indicative of the importance of banana pulps in the natural phytosterol intake in
the human diet, and its contribution in the reduction of plasma cholesterol among the

population (Vilela, et al., 2014).

|. Cyanogenic glycosides

Cyanogenic glycosides, also called cyanophore glycosides due to the presence in
the aglycone moiety of hydrocyanic acid (Kokate, Purohit, & Gokhale, 2008), are
nitrile-containing plant secondary metabolites which release the toxic hydrogen
cyanide following its enzymatic breakdown. It plays an important role against
herbivory and pathogenic infection, and also acts as a phytoanticipin (Gleadow &
Moller, 2014).

‘Abaca was reported to be a cyanophoric plant. Traces of cyanogenic glycosides
were detected in its leaf blade and fruit, while it was positively reported in its leaf sheath
(Quisumbing, 1978). Similarly, the leaves of young M. paradisiaca suckers were found
to contain cyanogenic glycosides (Wahua & Nkpumah, 2021). On the contrary, the
compound was found to be absent in the flowers of M. paradisiaca and M. chiliocarpa

(Swe, 2012), and in the peel of M. acuminata fruit (Sainn, Kyaw, & Than, 2020). The

limited information on the presence of cyanogenic glycosides in abaca then calls for a
more recent and thorough investigation to allow this compound to be described
structurally and functionally. It is also necessary to look into its safety as the abaca Icaf
sheaths prepared for traditional medicinal use are often taken as a drink. Nevertheless,
this information is important to explore its potentials especially that cyanogenic
glycosides have been recently patented for its medical applications specifically in

treating rheumatoid arthritis (Yulvianti & Zidorn, 2021).

CONCLUSION

Abaca is commonly utilized across the globe for its fiber uses; but more than the fiber,
abaca can also offer other services. This review demonstrates the diversity of uses of the
abaca plant. It supports the local health care system by serving as a traditional medicinal
plant for the treatment of wounds, relapse, fatigue, and gastro-intestinal problems. The
efficacy of abaca in addressing these ailments could be attributed to the secondary bioactive
metabolites it contains including phenolic compounds, phytosterols, and
phenylphenalenone type compounds; however, further phytochemical, pharmacological,
and molecular studies are needed to strengthen this claim. Aside from the ethnomedicinal
uses, abaca can also be utilized in the production of cosmetics products, colorants, food,
and fuel and energy. To exploit the bioactive compounds and to manufacture new products
of agricultural, industrial, and medical importance, more research must be performed to

find new ways to use abaca and its underexplored parts and by-products.

CHAPTER 6
GENOMIC INSIGHTS INTO THE BIOSYNTHESIS OF SECONDARY

METABOLITES IN M. TEXTILIS (ABACA) VAR. ABUAB AND
M. BALBISIANA (WILD BANANA) cv DH-PKW

INTRODUCTION

A special feature that higher plant forms exhibit is their metabolic plasticity which
evolves and exploits a range of inherent systems (Ncube & Staden, 2015) to synthesize a
wide variety of organic chemicals called secondary metabolites (Mera, Falconi, &
Cordova, 2019). Secondary metabolites function in deterring herbivory by vertebrates,
insects, and nematodes, protecting plants against pathogenic infection, and attracting
symbionts such as insect and vertebrate pollinators (Gutzeit & Ludwig-Muller, 2014),
which in their absence would result to a long-term impairment in their survivability in
different ecological niches (Irchhaiya, et al., 2015; Ncube & Staden, 2015). This capacity
of plants to produce a wide array of phytochemicals also makes them a tremendous source
of medicinally valued new products which are essential for drug development (Jain,
Khatana, & Vijayvergia, 2019) and a unique source of compounds which can serve as food
additives, colorants, flavors, fragrances, and be used in other agricultural and industrial
applications (Tiwari & Rana, 2015; Rani, Neelima, Mukhopadhyay, Jyothi, & Sulakshana,
2018; Thirumurugan, Cholarajan, Raja, & Vijayakumar. 2018). Given the huge importance

and potential applications of plant secondary metabolites, there remains a large percentage

of known plant species which are yet to be explored for their phytochemical compositions

and pharmacological potentials.

The genus Musa, which comprises the wild and domesticated plantains and bananas
worldwide (Cizkova, et al., 2015), also serves several medicinal applications which reflect
the wide array of secondary metabolites that this group synthesizes. It produces
carotenoids. polyamines, terpenoids, sterols. and phenolic compounds such as flavonoids
which could be attributed to its antioxidant, anticholesteremic, antitumor, anti-ulcerogenic,
anti-inflammatory, and hepatoprotective activities (Hansel, Keller, Rimpler, & Schneider,
1993; Evans, 2009; Lopes, Borges, Cardoso, da Rocha, & Maraschin, 2020; Ayoola-
Oresanya, Sonibare, Gueye, Abberton, & Morlock, 2021). However, two of its member
species—M. textilis Née and M. balbisiana Colla—remain less phytochemically explored
despite their economic values.

M. textilis, commonly known as abaca, is a native plant of the Philippines—the top
abaca producing and exporting nation worldwide (DTI, 2017). It plays a major role in the
global fiber industry as it produces one of the strongest known natural fibers
(Suhelmidawati, 2016) which are utilized as raw material to manufacture various products
like banknotes, boxes, cable insulator, cordage, fabric, fixture, footwear, handicrafts,
hospital textiles, paper, ropes, etc. (Lacuna-Richman, 2002; Del Rio & Gutierrez, 2006;
DOST-PCARRD, 2007; Armecin R. , 2008; Hayase, 2018; Tapado & Palaoag, 2018;
Yassin, Hassan, & Sean, 2018). Aside from these fiber applications, different parts of M.
textilis are also traditionally used to treat wounds (Supiandi, Ege, Julung, Zubaidah, &

Mahanal, 2021; Arquion, Galanida, Villamor, & Aguilar, 2015; Elago, Dando, Pizon,

Galang, & Sia, 2013; Langenberger, Prigge, Martin, Belonias, & Sauerborn, 2009), kidney
disease (Pandiangan, Silalahi, Dapas, & Kandou, 2019), muscle pain (Olowa & Demayo,
2015), diarrhea (Scbastian, ct al., 2013; Olowa, Torres, Aranico, & Demayo, 2012), and
post-partum relapse or fatigue (Naive, Binag, & Alejandro, 2021; Alduhisa & Demayo,
2019; Guevara & Garcia, 2018; Cagayan, et al., 2017).

M. balbisiana, locally referred to as Pacol or Butuhan (De Langhe, Perrier, Donohue,
& Denham, 2015), on the other hand, is a wild banana species that is considered to be one
of the progenitors of today’s commercially cultivated bananas and plantains (Wong, et al.,
2001; Rabara, Sotto, & Salas, 2020). It plays an important role in banana breeding
programs as it provides advantageous characters such as resistance to pests, diseases, and
some abiotic stress factors (Venkataramana, Sampangi-Ramaiah, Ajitha, Khadke, &
Chellam, 2015). It has been used in the production of abaca hybrids resistant to banana
bunchy top virus (BBTV) by crossing the disease-resistant M. balbisiana var. Pacol with
the high fiber quality-producing but disease-susceptible abaca var. Abuab (Parac, Lalusin,
Pangga, & Sta. Cruz, 2020). Aside from its use as food, the plant is also utilized for several
ethnoreligious rites. Different parts of the plant are customarily reported to exhibit various
medicinal properties including antibacterial, anticancer, antidiarrheal, antihypertensive,
anti-inflammatory, hepatoprotective, and hypoglycemic properties (Kumari S. , et al.,
2020; Swargiary, Boro, Roy, & Akram, 2021). The continuous utilization of M. textilis and
M. balbisiana to address these ailments could then be attributed to the active

phytochemicals that they synthesize and contain.


Over the recent years, several genome sequencing technologies have been developed to
provide quality and cost-effective sequence datasets. The availability of these huge
computer data has encouraged the usc of bioinformatics tools that can determine and
analyze genes, their functions and expression, and their roles in cellular metabolism
(Nadarajah, 2018). The advancement in M. textilis and M. balbisiana genomics could
therefore pave the way for the analysis of the biosynthesis of their potential secondary
metabolites. Genomics-based methods are now employed to identify and characterize
secondary metabolites much quicker than the usual analytical and chemical approaches
(Weber & Kim, 2016). This approach also allows non-model plant species to be explored
in terms of the identity of their secondary metabolites-related genes, and their functions

and regulation (Nadarajah, 2018).

In 2019 and 2021, the genomes of M. balbisiana cv DH-PKW (double-haploid Pisang
Klutuk Wulung) (Wang, et al., 2019) and M. textilis var. Abuab (Galvez, et al., 2021) were
reported for the first time, respectively. These serve as a significant tool to maximize gene
discovery especially those which are associated with fiber quality, disease resistance, and
agronomic performance. These previously generated genomic sequences were analyzed in
silico in the current study to primarily identify and describe the genes with putative
functions specifically on their secondary metabolism. Biosynthetic gene clusters, which
refer to group of genes co-localized in the chromosome, are an emerging research area
which continuously gains the interest of scientists after its recent discovery in plants. This
study also provides the first report on the presence of putative BGCs associated with

secondary metabolism in M. textilis var. Abuab and M. balbisiana cv DH-PKW. The results

of this research could provide baseline data which could guide genetic breeding,
subsequent phytochemical biosynthesis cloning and functional verification of key genes in
biosynthetic pathways associated with plant sccondary metabolism, and further studics.
Therefore, this study may help improve the research areas on the molecular mechanisms

associated with the phytochemical compositions of M. fextilis and M. balbisiana.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Genomic Data

The assembled genomic data for M. textilis var. Abuab made available by Galvez et al.
(2021) in the Data Dryad Digital Repository under the DOI 10.5061 /dryad.95x69p8kt were

accessed and downloaded at ttps://datadrvad.org/stashy

are!

Yk6Lslqw7WOts4z103iPlchuiw6KMKBJBy6Oal-JNOO, The assembly has the following

characteristics: genome size = 616 Mbp; final assembly length = 587 Mbp; scalTold NSO =

0.047 Mbp: GC content = 40.23%; and repeat length = 53.6% of the genome. For M.
balbisiana cv DH-PKW (Wang, et al., 2019), it was accessed at the National Center for
Biotechnology Information (NCBI) under the GenBank ID: PYDT00000000.1. Its genome
assembly has the following characteristics: genome size = 554 Mbp; final assembly length
= 430 Mbp; scaffold N50 = 5.05 Mbp; and repeat length = 55.75% of the genome. A
comparison of the predicted gene data generated for the sequenced genomes of M. textilis

var. Abuab and M. balbisiana cv DH-PKW is shown in Table 6.1.


Table 6.1. Gene prediction data for M. textilis var. Abuab (Galvez, et al., 2021) and M.
balbisiana cv DH-PKW (Wang, et al., 2019).

M. textilis var. Abuab M. balbisiana cv DH-PKW

Number of genes 33,277 35,148
‘Average CDS length 1115 1144
Average exon number 3 3
‘Average exon length 228 284
‘Average intron length 843 809

Assignment of Secondary Metabolic Pathway

The KEGG (Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes) platform was used to
systematically analyze the functions of genes predicted in M. textilis and M. balbisiana.
The ASSIGN KO tool available in the KEGG Mapper (hitps:/vww-kevg.ip/kevg/mapper/)
was employed to assign KEGG Ontology (KO) terms to the protein sequence data of M.
textilis and M. balbisiana. Here, the NCBI taxonomy number 4637 which corresponds to
the Musaceae family was used as the genomic information to be searched in the KEGG
GENES database. The ASSIGN KO tool is an interactive interface to the BlasKOALA
server which assigns KO identifiers (i.e., K numbers) to a given set of sequence data for
subsequent analysis with the KEGG Reconstruct tool. The latter was then utilized to link

the K number assignment data to KEGG pathway maps.


Identification of Biosynthetic Gene Clusters (BGCs)

BGCs in M. textilis var. Abuab and M. balbisiana cv DH-PKW genomes were
automatedly identified using the web server version of PlantiSMASH (Plant Secondary
Metabolite Analysis Shell) v. 1.0.0-beta accessed through the following link:

hitp://plantismash.secondary metabolites.org/. The available genomic data for M. textilis

var. Abuab allowed the analysis at the level of sequence scaffolds only, while for M.

balbisiana, it allowed the analysis at the chromosome level.

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

KEGG Annotation

The KEGG database is a bioinformatics platform which systematically analyzes the
biological functions of genes and their products. It also links genomic information with
higher order functional data in the form of biochemical pathways presented as graphical
illustrations (Kanehisa, Sato, & Kawashima, 2021; Kanehisa & Goto, 2000). To gain
additional insights into the biochemical pathways in M. ‘extilis var. Abuab and M.
balbisiana cv DH-PKW, the available protein datasets for these plants were subjected to a
search against the KEGG protein database. The query dataset entries were comprised of

27,609 unigenes for M. textilis and 33,021 unigenes for M. balbisiana which were made

publicly available by previous studies which aligned their predicted gene models by

performing a BLASTX search against databases (Galvez, et al., 2021; Wang, et al., 2019).

In this study, the KEGG analysis resulted to a total of 10,458 (37.88%) and 11,876
(35.96%) unigenes functionally annotated for M. textilis and M. balbisiana, respectively
(Figure 6.1). It reports a higher KEGG annotation percentage for M. textilis var. Abuab
compared to the study of Galvez ct al. (2021) which recorded a 33.72% annotation only.
This could be attributed to the continuous updates not just in the versions of the KEGG
platform, but also in its database entries. For instance, several KEGG pathway maps were
either added in the database, deleted, or merged with other maps after April 14, 2021 when
Galvez et. al. submitted their paper for publication (KEGG, 2022). These consist of eight
new pathway maps added in 2021, including the map for “D-amino acid metabolism”
which merged four previously stand-alone maps (ie., “D-glutamine and D-glutamate
metabolism”, “D-arginine and D-omithine metabolism”, “D-alanine metabolism”, and
“synthesis and degradation of ketone bodies”), and four new maps added in 2022. Among
these, six pathway maps were identified in M. textilis var. Abuab. These are the maps for

“chemical carcinogenesis — receptor activation”, “chemical carcinogenesis — reactive
oxygen species”, “D-amino acid metabolism”, “alcoholic liver disease”, “biosynthesis of
nucleotide sugars”, and “nucleotide metabolism”. The other details on this KEGG pathway

classifications are presented in the next section.


Me, ccxti see 37.38
M babisionr es 35.95

0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50
% KO annotation

Figure 6.1. Percent KEGG annotation of M. textilis var. Abuab and M. balbisiana cv
DH-PKW unigenes

KEGG Pathways Classifications

The KEGG annotated unigenes of M. textilis and M. balbisiana belong to six general
KEGG pathway assignments, namely, (1) metabolism, (2) genetic information processing,
(3) environmental information processing, (4) cellular processes. (5) organismal systems,
and (6) human diseases (Figures 6.2-6.5). These are comprised of a total of 46 biochemical
pathways, which further cover a total of 406 reference pathways for M. textilis (Appendix
B) and 409 reference pathways for M. balbisiana (Appendix C). The latter has unigenes
associated with three other pathways including “monoterpenoid biosynthesis” (PATH:
0902), “biosynthesis of siderophore group nonribosomal peptides” (PATH: 1053), and

“ovarian steroidogenesis” (PATH: 4913).

The number of pathway maps reported for M. textilis var. Abuab and M. bulbisiana ev
DH-PKW are much higher than the pathway maps available for other plant species in the
KEGG database, be it monocot or dicot plants. This group of other plant species includes
another Musa sp., ie, M. acuminata subsp. malaccensis, which has 19 recorded

biochemical pathways comprised of 128 reference pathways only. This could also be

attributed to the continuous updates on KEGG pathway classifications and entries which
led to the inclusion of more pathway maps in this study. In addition, the available pathway
maps for the plant models in the KEGG database exclude the pathways which arc less
likely associated with plant systems such as those that are related to human diseases and
organismal systems. For this study, these pathways are retained in the report for possible

exploration in the future.

Carbohydrate metabotism
Energy metabolism

Lipid metabolism

Nucleotide metabolism

‘Amino acid metabolism

Metabolism of other amino acids
Giycan biosynthesis and metabotism
“Metabolism of cofactors and vitamins
Metabolism of terpenoids and polyketides
Biosynthesis of other secondary metabolites
‘Xenobiotics biodegradation and metabolism
‘Transcription

‘Translation

Folding, sorting and degradation
Replication and repair

Information processing in viruses
‘Membrane transport

‘Signal transduction

‘Signaling molecules and interaction
Transport and catabolism

Cll growth and death

Cellular community - eukaryotes
Cellular community - prokaryotes
Cell motility

Immune system

Endocrine system

Circulatory system

Digestive system

Exeretory system

Nervous system

Sensory system

Development and regeneration
Aging

Environmental adaptation

‘Cancer: overview

Cancer: specific types

Infectious disease: viral

Infectious disease: bacterial
Infectious disease: parasitic

Immune disease

Neurodegenerative disease

Substance dependence
Cardiovascular discase

Endocrine and metabolic disease
Drug resistance: antimicrobial

Drug resistance: antineoplastic

Es

400 600 $00 1000 1200
Number of Unigenes


Metabolism

Genetic
Information
Processing

Environmental
Information
Processing.

Cellular
Processes

Organismal
‘Systems

Human
Diseases

Figure 6.2. KEGG pathway classification for M. textilis var. Abuab presented according
to the number of associated unigenes


Carbohydrate metabotism
[Energy metabolism
Lipid metabotism

‘Nucleotide metabolis
Amino acid metabolism
Metabolism of other amino acids
Ciycanbiesynthesis and metabolism
Metabolism of cofactors and vitamins
“Metabolism of trpenoids and polyketides
Biosynthesis of ther secondary metabolites
enobiotes biodegradation and metabolism
“Transcription
Translation
Folding, sorting and degradation
Replication and repair
Information processing in viruses
“Membrane transport
Signal transduction
Signaling molecules and interaction
Transport and catabolism
Cell growth and death
Cellular community - eukaryotes
‘Cellular community - prokaryotes
Cell motility
Immune system
ndocrine system
Circulatory system
Digestive system
Exeretory system
Nervous system
Sensory system
Development and regeneration
Aging
Environmental adaptation
Cancer: overview
Cancer: specific types
Infectious disease: viral
Infectious disease: bacterial
Infectious disease: parasitic
Immune disease
"Newodegeneraive disease
Substance dependence
Cardiovascular disease
Endocrine and metabolic disease
Drug resistance: antimicrobial
Drug resistance: antineoplastic

Metabolism

Geneti
Information
Processing

Environmental
Information
Processing

Cellular
Processes

Organismal
Systems

Human
Diseases


400. 600-800 1000 1200 1400
Number of Unigenes

Figure 6.3. KEGG pathway classification for M. balbisiana cv DH-PKW presented
according to the number of associated unigenes

Carbohydrate metabolism
Energy metabolism

Lipid metabolism

‘Nucleotide metabolism

‘Amino acid metabolism.

“Metabolism of other amino acids
Gilycan biosynthesis and metabolism
‘Metabolism of cofactors and vitamins
“Metabolism of terpenoids and polyketides
Biosynthesis of other secondary metaboli
‘Xenobiotics biodegradation and metabolism
“Transcription

“Translation

Folding, sorting and degradation
Replication and repair

Information processing in viruses
‘Membrane transport

Signal transduction

Signaling molecules and interaction
‘Transport and catabolism

‘Cell growth and death

(Cellular community - eukaryotes
Cellular community = prokaryotes
Cell motility

Immune system

Endocrine system

Circulatory system

Digestive system

Excretory system

Nervous system

Sensory system

Development and regeneration
‘Aging

Environmental adeptation

Cancer: overview

Cancer: specific types

Infectious disease: viral

Infectious disease: bacterial
Infectious disease parasitic

Immune disease

Neurodegenerative disease
Substance dependence
Cardiovascular disease

Endocrine and metabolic disease
Drug resistance: antimicrobial

Drug resistance: antineoplastic

100 © 150200
Number of KO IDs


Metabolism

Genetic
Information
Processing,

Environmental
Information
Processing,

Cellular
Processes

Organismal
‘Systems

Human
Diseases

Figure 6.4. KEGG pathway classification for M. textilis var. Abuab presented according

to the number of identified unique KO IDs


‘Carbohydrate metabotism
Energy metabolism

Lipid metabotism

Nucleotide metabolism

‘Amino acid metabotism.
‘Metabolism of other amino acids
Glycan biosynthesis and metabotism.
‘Metabolism of cofactors and vitamins
Metabolism of terpenoids and polyketides
Biosynthesis of other secondary
Xenobiotics biodegradation and,
‘Transcription

‘Translation

Folding, sorting and degradation
Replication and repair

Information processing in viruses.
‘Membrane transport

Signal transduction

Signaling molecules and interaction
‘Transport and catabolism

Cell growth and death

Cellular community - eukaryotes
Cellular community - prokaryotes
Cell motility

Immune system

Endocrine system

Circulatory system

Digestive system

Excretory system

[Nervous system

‘Sensory system

Development and regeneration
Aging

Environmental adaptation

Cancer: overview

Cancer: specific types

Infectious disease: viral

Infectious disease: bacterial
Infectious disease: parasitic
Immune disease
[Neurodegencrative disease
Substance dependence
Cardiovascular disease

Endocrine and metabolic disease
Drug resistance: antimicrobial
Drug resistance: antineoplastic

Metabolism

Genetic
Information
Processing

Environmental
Information
Processing

Cellular
Processes

Organismal
‘Systems

Human
Diseases

100 150200250300
Number of KO IDs

Figure 6.5. KEGG pathway classification of M. balbisiana cv DH-PKW presented
according to the number of identified unique KO IDs

Among the 46 biochemical pathways identified in M. textilis and M. halbisiana, 10 are
associated with “metabolism”, and these further cover a total of 102 reference pathways

for M. textilis and 104 reference pathways for M, balbisiana. In both plant specics, seven

biochemical pathways composed of 72 reference pathways (= 70.59% for M. textilis;
69.23% for M. balbisiana) are involved in primary metabolism. These biochemical
pathways are associated with “carbohydrate metabolism”, “energy metabolism”, “lipid
metabolism”, “nucleotide metabolism”, “amino acid metabolism”, “metabolism of other
amino acids”, and “glycan biosynthesis and metabolism”. Two biochemical pathways
comprised of 30 reference pathways for M. textilis (29.41%) and 32 reference pathways
for M. balbisiana (= 30.77%), on the other hand, are involved in secondary metabolism.
These biochemical pathways are involved in the “metabolism of terpenoids and
polyketides”, and “biosynthesis of other secondary metabolites”. The remaining two

biochemical pathways are associated with the “metabolism of cofactors and vitamins”, and

“xenobiotics biodegradation and metabolism”.

M. textilis and M. balbisiana exhibit high metabolic activities. The classification of
unigenes according to their metabolic participation reveals the high number in M. textilis
of unigenes associated with signal transduction (1240 unigenes), carbohydrate metabolism
(908 unigenes), viral infectious diseases (867 unigenes), translation (727 unigenes),
transport and catabolism (657 unigenes), and folding, sorting and degradation (654
unigenes) (Figure 6.2). In M. balbisiana, the unigenes were found to be mostly associated
with signal transduction (1314 unigenes), carbohydrate metabolism (1024 unigenes),

translation (991 unigenes), viral infectious diseases (944 unigenes), overview of cancer

(863 unigenes), and neurodegenerative diseases (836 unigenes) (Figure 6.3). In KEGG,
known disease genes are also linked to KEGG GENES and KO databases. The resulting
discase pathway maps capture and represent the knowledge on perturbed states of the
molecular network systems which contribute to disease formation. The identification in M.
textilis and M. balbisiana of genes assigned to ‘human diseases’ biochemical pathways
does not directly imply that the proteins they encode cause diseases in humans, but rather
these genes, which are playing roles in plant biochemical pathways, are also present in
humans and are involved in disease formation. Examples are the DNA mismatch repair
proteins which are involved in the ‘mismatch repair’ reference pathway under the ‘genetic
information processing’ biochemical pathway in M. textilis and M. balbisiana, but which

are also present in humans and are involved in the formation of different cancer types.

Based on the derived KO IDs, this annotation also reports a high number of enzymes
playing roles in translation (260 unique KO IDs for M. textilis; 293 for M. balbisiana),
folding, sorting, and degradation (220; 250), signal transduction (218; 226), and viral

infectious disease (212; 223) (Figures 6.4-6.5).

The difference in the number of unigenes and the number of KO IDs then imply having
multiple unigenes being associated with a single KO ID. For example, the phosphorylating
glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH or gapA; KO ID: K00134) which is
a tetramer protein involved in different biochemical pathways was found to be associated
with nine unigenes in M. textilis var. Abuab. These are LOCUS_001570-RA (product=
glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase 2, cytosolic), LOCUS_004948-RA

(glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase 2, cytosolic), LOCUS_005899-RA

(glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase 1, cytosolic), LOCUS_009628-RB
(glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase GAPCP1, chloroplastic), LOCUS_010962-
RA (glyccraldchyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase 2, cytosolic), LOCUS_016036-RA
(glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase GAPCP1, chloroplastic), LOCUS_020563-
RA (glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase 2, cytosolic), LOCUS_026588-RA
(glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase 2, cytosolic), LOCUS_028728-RA
(glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase 2, cytosolic). This means that multiple unique
sequences could label the same enzyme, and these sequences could represent a single gene
or its different fragments interacting with one another to form the functional protein (Tian,

etal., 2015).

KEGG Secondary Metabolism Pathway Classifications

As plants with high economic value and various traditional medicinal uses, M. textilis
and M. balbisiana synthesize a wide array of compounds in the form of secondary
metabolites. Here, reference pathways related to the biosynthesis of these phytochemicals

are listed and presented.

In M. textilis, the reported biochemical pathways involved in the metabolism of
terpenoids and polyketides (192 unigenes; 64 KO IDs) (Figures 6.6-6.7; Appendix D) have
a high number of associated unigenes for “terpenoid backbone biosynthesis” (47 unigenes;
24 KO IDs), “zeatin biosynthesis” (38 unigenes; 6 KO IDs), “brassinosteroid biosynthesis”

(31 unigenes; 8 KO IDs), “diterpenoid biosynthesis” (27 unigenes; 5 KO IDs), and

“carotenoid biosynthesis” (24 unigenes; 11 KO IDs). It also reports pathways which are
involved in the biosynthesis of other secondary metabolites (358 unigenes; 59 KO IDs).
These include “phenylpropanoid biosynthesis” (178 unigencs; 14 KO IDs), “flavonoid
biosynthesis” (64 unigenes; 13 KO IDs), “biosynthesis of various plant secondary
metabolites” (58 unigenes; 8 KO IDs), “tropane, piperidine and pyridine alkaloid
biosynthesis” (42 unigenes; 6 KO IDs), and “stilbenoid, diarylheptanoid and gingerol

biosynthesis” (29 unigenes; 6 KO IDs).

In M. balbisiana, on the other hand, the KEGG pathways involved in the metabolism of
terpenoids and polyketides (222 unigenes; 79 KO IDs) (Figures 6.8-6.9; Appendix E) have
a high number of unigenes associated with “terpenoid backbone biosynthesis” (57
unigenes; 28 KO IDs), “carotenoid biosynthesis” (37 unigenes; 17 KO IDs), “zeatin
biosynthesis” (35 unigenes; 6 KO IDs), “brassinosteroid biosynthesis” (28 unigenes; 8 KO
IDs), and “diterpenoid biosynthesis” (25 unigenes; 8 KO IDs). For its involvement in the
biosynthesis of other secondary metabolites (372 unigenes; 63 KO IDs), high unigene
counts were found to be associated with “phenylpropanoid biosynthesis” (178 unigenes:
14 KO IDs), “flavonoid biosynthesis” (73 unigenes; 14 KO IDs), “biosynthesis of various
plant secondary metabolites” (53 unigenes; 8 KO IDs), “tropane, piperidine and pyridine
alkaloid biosynthesis” (42 unigenes; 8 KO IDs), “stilbenoid, diarylheptanoid and gingerol
biosynthesis” (27 unigenes; 6 KO IDs), and “isoquinoline alkaloid biosynthesis” (24

unigenes; 7 KO IDs).

The presence of these unigenes and their products then suggests the active synthesis of

phenylpropanoids, flavonoids, terpenoids, and polyketides in M. textilis and M. balbisiana

Biosynthesis of Other Secondary
Metabolites

Metabolism of Terpenoids and
Polyketides




Shs >
Sal Ox Jo s9qUINN,

NNN 65609111. s2110qr!1 Szepu02>5 nd nouns Jo stso4HUSSOR
[5200 sve) ssoqnussog uroregy
BEBE [£e00 111va) ssonasso19 wsosipong
stsonussong auzeuang
sysqnussng w301Q040N
sxquso1g uonuEL98 pur uDsuEUEy “waSwOON,
ussoig uioswordoas
nusso1g UrIseqouoHy
nuSSIg aE|OUSOON|D

yoqerou 2u1aye-)
sisoqqusorg ploqeype aurpuscd pur auipuadi‘suedosy

w.sso1q uuesooxnuy
4ucso1g youoNeys pue 2u0NE|
souqusso1g prouoxe}

0 :HALVd] Sua Swosue jo ssayussog,
Bi L1szv0“11Va} wonnpestaproues95
BE [£0600 :Hu.val wonnpestop auourd pur suououry
EE (50000 val ssousso1q ues
600 HLLVal SSguSS019 auOUNOY 9S
TERRE [0600 iuval ssoqussorgprosrsousseg
TERRE [00600 :Hval ssoquso1g pours
[EEE [10600 val ssounussongprouodioucy
[60600 :r.va) sts prowsdionn pu pousdiounbsos
EET [00600 Hal ssoquss019 avoqypeg provodiny

s = a bal

Figure 6.6. Classification of unigenes involved in the metabolism of secondary

metabolites in M. textilis var. Abuab


Biosynthesis of Other Secondary

Metabolism of Terpenoids and

Metabolites

Polyketides

4s

3s

sonso1g usor3ypoug
sounso1g suzy
san 01g UO019O40N,
sous unum pu woueURy KWON
500 ‘1LVd] stsns1g uDSwordans

BREE (19200 Lal ssoqnusorg werseqovoyy
BE [99600 ‘HuLval sisoqncsorg arejourseonyy
BB (59600 sHitval sisouss019 we Eag,
BB [2e200 Lal wsyoquiow suiaye
TERRE [09600 val ssouso1a prow spas pu arpuodid ‘suedon,
HERRERE [05600 sLval ssomsso1g prope aunjoutnbos,

HEBER ss Lyall ss-nuo1g yous pur proud mp prourgs
ER (01600 111 v ss9155019 pouwdord vou
TE [ezs00 sunval ssoqnsorg mn sens apnaystou
010 uLval suasuesun yo sio4nsso1g
3200 ‘H.LVd] uonepesdap joruns35
[£0600 Avail wonepessop ouauid pu ousuoury
TERRE [0600 rural ssonsonq une
[18600 :HLval stsoynassorg suowyoy asuy_
[EERE 150600 111 val senso prossoussse
[EEE (90600 saz ssnsorgprousone
EE [10600 ‘HLval stsommssorg prouadiong
EERE [60600 :HiLval] stsop6s01g prousdsawin pur prousdsorinbsag
LT 00600 sia val sseun4ssog auoqy2eg prourding

Sql OW 0 saquiNN,

Figure 6.7. Classification of KO IDs involved in the metabolism of secondary
metabolites in M. textilis var. Abuab

M1

Biosynthesis of Other Secondary

Metabolism of Terpenoids and

Metabolites

Polyketides


1 [10+00 :HLval sts2qnuxsorq ursoiqoron,
BBB [2500 sHxval sisoqussog uonuEUs8 pue wosuENEy uD<uO=N,

WEEE 17500 Huval ssomnusso1q wowoxdons

HERE [19200 HuLval 920x019 umrseqouoyy

(99500 H.LVall iounUKs019 aR oUsoON|F)

s9600 HLLVal soMnussong upea

2£700 HLVal wsHoqeou suAUE

WERE [09500 val 8=>m1055019propeye amputd pur spuds undo,

prowsdiancr
jousdioun pur plouadiounbsas
ET [00500 Hival ssonusso1g suoq0q pousdny
#8 $8 8 © @ & °
=

nus8iur Jo s9quIMN,


Figure 6.8. Classification of unigenes involved in the metabolism of secondary
metabolites in M. balbisiana cv DH-PKW


Biosynthesis of Other Secondary

“Metabolism of Terpenoids and

Metabolites

Polyketides

ERE (665600 :H.1Va somoqerou: Aepuocas ueyd snows jo sisoqnuKsorg

josodur8 poe prouedayi<zep ‘piouaqins
iru

ou dnos8 sioydoxoprs Jo sisoUssoxg,
ssoqnusorg un sens apniySI0d

suo uresue Jo sisoynusort

‘wonepextap joruesa¢)

yepesp auauid pur susuowu |

EERE [60600 sHuval ssomnusso1g pousdioun pur prousdaounbsas
{20600 niLval ss2inusso1g prousdsonoyy
ST [00000 sHval ssoqusong avoqyoeg prouadsay,

SAI OW JO s9quMN,

Figure 6.9. Classification of KO IDs involved in the metabolism of secondary
metabolites in M. balbisiana cv DH-PKW.


Characterization of Putative Secondary Metabolic Pathways

This section of the paper describes the putative pathways for the biosynthesis of
secondary metabolites in M. textilis var. Abuab and M. balbisiana cv DH-PKW. This
discusses eight metabolic pathways arranged according to KEGG list, and gives emphasis
on the participating enzymes, the sequences from the dataset that code for their syntheses,
and the identified metabolites with reported economic potentials. These pathways could be
important in supporting the potential applications of M. textilis and M. balbisiana in the

fields of medicine, agriculture, and other industries which are reported in Study 1.

1. Terpenoid backbone synthesis

Terpenoids, also known as isoprenoids, arc the most structurally diverse class of plant
secondary metabolites. They are comprised of a wide array of molecules that differ
structurally and functionally to support plant growth and development, and to provide plant
defense and other specialized biochemical interactions (Tholl, 2015). Through the
synthesis of monoterpenes, sesquiterpenes, and their derivatives, terpenes are one of the
two biosynthetic groups, together with phenylpropanoids, which compose essential oils—
commodities which are widely used in the cosmetics, food, agricultural, and medical
industries (Sadgrove, Padilla~Gonzalez, & Phumthum, 2022).

The biosynthesis of terpenoids in green plants starts with its precursor, isopenteny!
pyrophosphate (IPP) and dimethylally! pyrophosphate (DMAPP). These two isomeric
metabolites are synthesized by the mevalonic acid (MVA) and methylerythritol phosphate

(MEP) pathways. The former begins with the acetyl-CoA synthesized in the cytoplasm and

is responsible for the formation of triterpenes, most sesquiterpenes, and sterols, while the
latter begins with pyruvate and glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate produced in the plastid and
gives rise to essential oil monoterpenes (Bergman, Davis, & Phillips, 2019). In the
sequence dataset used, the genes involved both in the MVA and MEP pathways were
identified in M. balbisiana (Figure 6.10). In M. textilis, the genes involved in the MVA
pathway were also identified, while some genes in the MEP pathway were not detected
possibly due to structural difference, thus, further inspection is needed.

The MVA pathway begins with two acetyl-CoA molecules catalyzed into acetoacety!
CoA by ACAT (EC: 2.3.1.9; 4 M. textilis or Mt unigenes, 4 M. balbisiana or Mb unigenes),
and then into 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA by HIMGCS (EC: 2.3.3.10; 2 Mt unigenes,
2 Mb unigenes). Mevalonate is synthesized with HMGCR (EC: 1.1.1.34; 4 Mt unigenes, 4
Mb unigenes), which in turn, is catalyzed into mevalonate-SP by MVK (EC: 2.7.1.36; 1
Mt unigene, 2 Mb unigenes), then into mevalonate-SPP by mvaK2 (EC: 2.7.4.2; 1 Mt
unigene, 1 Mb unigene), and into IPP by MVD (EC: 4.1.1.33; 1 Mt unigene, 1 Mb unigene).

The MEP pathway, on the other hand, starts with the conversion of pyruvate and
glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate to 1-deoxy-D-xylulose-5-phosphate by DXS (EC: 2.2.1.7; 7
unigenes), then to 2-C-methyl-D-erythritol-4-phosphate by DXR (EC: 1.1.1.267; 2
unigenes). It then undergoes a series of reactions that produce 2-C-methyl-D-eryhtritol-
2,4-cyclodiphosphate through the actions of ispD (EC: 2.7.7.60; 1 unigene), ispE (EC:
2.7.1.148; 1 unigene), and ispF (EC: 4.6.1.12; 2 unigenes). Next, gepE (EC:
1,17.7.1/1.17.7.3; 1 unigene) aids in the formation of 1-hydroxy-2-methyl-2-buteny-1,4-

diphosphate, which is finally converted to IPP by ispH (EC: 1.17.7.4; | unigene).


Figure 6.10. Schematic diagram of the putative biosynthetic pathway of terpenoid
backbone in M. textilis var. Abuab and M. balbisiana cv DH-PKW.
Enzymes in green color were identified in both plants; red color in M. textilis
only; and yellow color in M. bulbisiana only.


LEGEND
Enzyme No. of Unigenes
Code Symbol Description ‘M.textilisM. balbisiana
a HMGCS hydroxymethylglutaryl-CoA synthase 2 z3
b ACAT, atoB acetyl-CoA C-acetyltransferase 4 1
e HMGCR —__hydroxymethylglutaryl-CoA reductase (NADPH) 4 4
4 MVK, mvaK1 mevalonate kinase 1 7
e mvaK2 phosphomevalonate kinase 1 1
f MVD, mvaD —_ diphosphomevalonate decarboxylase 1 2
g as 1 -deoxy-D-xylulose-5-phosphate synthase 2 1
h dvr 1-deoxy-D-xylulose-5-phosphate reductoisomerase 1 4
ispD 2-C-methyl-D-erythritol 4-phosphate - 1
eytidylyltransferase
ispE 4-diphosphocytidyl-2-C-methyl-D-erythritol : 2
kinase
ispF 2-C-methyl-D-erythritol 2,4-cyclodiphosphate : 1
Lm ep, ispG ) 3 1
synthase
4-hydroxy-3-methy lbut-2-en-I-yl diphosphate - 1
reductase
isopentenyl-diphosphate Delta-isomerase 3 3
famesy! diphosphate synthase 2 1
all-trans-nonaprenyl-diphosphate synthase 1 5
geranylgerany! diphosphate synthase, type IT 1 1
geranylgeranyl diphosphate/geranylgeranyl- 3 5
bacteriochlorophyllide a reductase
v ditrans polycis-polypreny| diphosphate synthase 4 2
w protein farnesyltransferase subunit beta 2 4
x endopeptidase 2 2)
y _RCEI, FACE2 _prenyl protein peptidase z. 2
Zi ICMT,STEI4 _protein-S-isoprenylcysteine O-methy transferase 2 2
aa PCME prenyleysteine alpha-carboxy! methylesterase 2 2
ab,ac_ PCYOX1, PCLY steine oxidase / famesyleysteine lyase 1
ad FLDH. NAD+-dependent farnesol dehydrogenase 1

Figure 6.10. (Continued) Schematic diagram of the putative biosynthetic pathway of
terpenoid backbone in M. textilis var. Abuab and M, balbisiana
cv DH-PKW. Enzymes in green color were identified in both
plants; red color in M. textilis only; and yellow color in M.

balbisiana only.

As mediated by the IDI enzyme (EC: 5.3.3.2; 3 Mt unigenes, 3 Mb unigenes), IPP is

interconverted to DMAPP, an intermediate which also serves as the precursor of zeatin.

IPP is also acted on by FDPS (EC: 2.5.1.1/2.5.1.10; 2 Mt unigenes, 1 Mb unigene) to form.

geranyl-PP, an intermediate in monoterpenoid biosynthesis, and (F,F)-farnesy!-PP, an
intermediate in steroid, sesquiterpenoid, triterpenoid, carotenoid, and N-glycan
biosynthesis. These two resulting metabolites then scrve as intermediates in the
biosynthesis of ubiquinone and other terpenoid-quinones, diterpenoids, carotenoids, and
indole diterpene alkaloids through the involvement of different enzymes including SPS
(EC: 2.5.1.84/2.5.1.85; 1 Mt unigene, 1 Mb unigene), GGPS (EC: 2.5.1.29; 1 Mt unigene,
5 Mb unigenes), and chIP (EC: 1.3.1.83/1.3.1.111; 3 Mt unigenes). In addition, farnesyl-
PP is involved in the synthesis of faresal as mediated by a series of enzymes including
FNTB (EC: 2.5.1.58; 2 Mt unigenes, 2 Mb unigenes), STE24 (EC: 3.4.24.84; 2 Mt
unigenes, 2 Mb unigenes), FACE2 (EC: 3.4.22.-; 2 Mt unigenes; 2 Mb unigenes), IMT
(EC: 2.1.1.100; 2 Mt unigenes, 1 Mb unigene), PCME (EC: 3.1.1.-; 2 Mt unigenes, 2 Mb
unigenes), and PCYOXI/FCLY (EC: 1.8.3.5/1.8.3.6; | Mt unigene, | Mb unigene).
Famesal is further converted to trans-farnesol by FLDH (EC: 1.1.1.354; 1 Mt unigene, 1
Mb unigene), and can further be metabolized back to (E,E)-farnesyl-PP, however, the
enzymes involved in the process were not found in the datasets used. This could probably
be due to some assemblies with incomplete length.

The identification of these genes associated with terpenoid backbone biosynthesis in M.
textilis and M. balbisiana could then support their many traditional medicinal applications.
Terpenes are a diverse group of pharmaceutically important compounds that have been
reported to exhibit antimicrobial, immunomodulatory, anti-inflammatory, and
chemotherapeutic properties (Tripathi, Jadaun, Chandra, & Sangwan, 2016; Abdallah &

Quax, 2017).


In other members of the genus Musa, terpenoid compounds have been detected. These
are present in the aqueous, ethanol, and chloroform extracts of M. paradisiaca fruit peel
(Velumani, 2016), and in the cthanol Icaf extracts of M. paradisiaca and M. acuminata in
which these exhibit antibacterial activities against three strains of methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) (Sivasamugham, Nimalan, & Subramaniam, 2021); while
these are absent in their bract extracts (Falowo, Ejidike, Lajide, & Clayton, 2021).
Terpenoids also respond to early pathogen infection in M. balbisiana. It becomes activated
12 and 48 hours post inoculation (hpi) of Xanthomonas campestris py. musacearum, the
causative agent of banana Xanthomonas wilt disease that threatens the production of
banana in east Africa (Tripathi, Tripathi, Shah, Muiruri, & Katari, 2019).

Interestingly, the overexpression of some terpenoid biosynthetic genes from garden sage
(Salvia officinalis) in the hairy root culture of soybean (Glycine max) can increase root
nodule formation, root fresh weight, and root length suggesting its potential role in the
modulation of rhizobia interaction and nodulation in soybean (Ali, et al., 2021). Further,
the overexpression in white spruce (Picea glauca) of isoprenyl diphosphate synthase
(IDS1) gene, which in this study is represented by famesyl diphosphate synthase, all-trans-
nonaprenyl-diphosphate synthase, and geranylgeranyl diphosphate synthase, can result in
the accumulation in needles of unexpected terpene diversion products. These terpenoid
products exhibit defensive actions against nun moth (Lymantria monachal) larvae, a pest
of conifers in the Eurasian region, suggesting the possible wider function in plant
protection of terpenoids when /DS/ expression is upregulated (Nagel, Berasategui, Paetz,

Gershenzon, & Schmidt, 2014). In addition, the overexpression in Populus sp. of

exogenous HMGSI gene derived from Ginkgo biloba can increase the contents of one
triterpenoid (i.e., lanosterol) and two diterpenoids (i.e., dehydroabietic acid and phytol) in
the transgenic Populus plants (Wu, ct al., 2021).

Based on these reports. the identification of terpenoid genes in M. textilis and M.
balbisiana could therefore serve as basis in the conduct of further research leading to
phenotypic improvement of these plants and the enhanced production of terpenoids for
agricultural, medical, and industrial applications. For instance, this study reports the
formation of famesal and frans-farnesol in M. textilis and M. balbisiana (Figure 5.10).
Famesal is a compound known to be used as a flavoring agent which gives a mint or cool
flavor (National Center for Biotechnology Information, 2022). This, therefore, supports the
potential economic application of abaca as flavor enhancer. Farnesal is also used in dental
treatment to restore teeth with caries. When linked to a polymeric micelle (PM) together
with a pyrophosphate ligand, and once tightly adhered with the tooth enamel, famesal is
quickly released to act as an antibacterial agent to treat and prevent dental caries (Yi, et al.,
2020). These studies then support the economic potential of terpenoid compounds that can

be derived from abaca.

2. Sesquiterpenoid biosynthesis

Sesquiterpenoids (Cis) are plant metabolites characterized by having three isoprene

units. They comprise the largest terpenoid class in plants, and many of them exhibit

bioactivities (Mai, Li, W, Ledesma-Amaro, & Ji, 2021).


Using famesy!-PP as the precursor, four sesquiterpenoids were found to be synthesized

in M textilis and M. balbisiana (Figure 6.11). These are (S,E)-nerolidol, (-)-germacrene D,

and B-caryophyllene and a-humulene which are respectively formed using the enzymes

NES1 (EC: 4.2.3.48; 1 Mt unigene, 1 Mb unigene), GERD (EC: 4.2.3.75; 1 Mt unigene, 1
Mb unigene), and TPS21 (EC: 4.2.3.57/4.2.3.104; 2 Mt unigenes, 4 Mb unigenes).

Triterpenoids (C30), which are made up of six isoprene units and which exhibit anti-

inflammatory, antitumor, antiviral, and insecticidal properties (Hill & Connolly, 2013), can

also be formed using the squalene and (S)-squalene-2,3-epoxide intermediates; however,

no enzymes associated with these conversions to triterpenoids were identified from the

sequence datasets.

esquiterpenoid)
yllene

‘ LEGEND
pa Enzyme No. of Unigenes
5 Code Symbol Deseripti M. balbisiana

@ FDFT! _ farnesyl-diphosphate 7
faresyltransferase
b SQLE 3 4
ERGI
© NESI i 1
d GERD 1 1
e TPS21 _alpha-humulene/beta- 2 4

caryophyllene synthase

Figure 6.11. Schematic diagram of the putative biosynthetic pathway of sesquiterpenoid
in M. textilis var. Abuab and M. balbisiana cv DH-PKW. Enzymes in green
color were identified in both plants.


Nerolidol is a sesquiterpene alcoho! that gives aroma to flowers of various plants. It is
widely used in the cosmetics industry as an ingredient in the production of shampoos and
perfumes. It is also utilized in manufacturing cleansers and detergents, and as a food
flavoring agent (Chan, Tan, Chan, Lee, & Goh, 2016). In addition, nerolidol exhibits
pharmacological and biological activities including antibacterial (Joshi, et al., 2021; Krist,
et al., 2015; Gongalves, et al., 2011), anti-biofilm (Curvelo, et al., 2014; Lee K. , Lee, Kim,
Cho, & Lee, 2014), anti-cancer (Boris, et al., 2011; Ryabchenko, et al., 2008), anti-

inflammatory (Lima, et al., 2012), insecticidal (da Silva, et al., 2020; Chen, et al., 2020),

and anti-parasitic (Camargos, et al., 2014; Mohd-Shukri & Zainal-Abidin, 2011) activities.
The possible production of this compound in abaca could, therefore, support the use of this
plant in traditional medicine (e.g., for wound healing, gastrointestinal problems, muscle
pain), and for cosmetics, food, and industrial applications. Its reported insecticidal activity
could also be explored for the development of abaca genotypes with enhanced pest
resistance, and which can be utilized in the production of bioinsecticides. As shown in
Figure 6.11, (3S,6E)-nerolidol synthase is responsible for the synthesis of nerolidol from
faresyl-PP. In Plectranthus amboinicus, a new terpene synthase was functionally
characterized recently (Ashaari, et al., 2020). It was classified as a linalool/nerolidol
synthase as it exclusively converts geranyl-PP and faresyl-PP to the monoterpene linalool
and sesquiterpene nerolidol. Additionally, a terpene synthase gene (ie, CbTPS7) from
Cinnamomum burmanii leaf essential oil was recently classified (Ma, et al., 2022).
Phylogenetic analysis revealed that it belongs to the TPS-g clade, and has a

linalool/nerolidol synthase action.

Germacrene D is another sesquiterpenoid that is often reported to function against
herbivory (Noge & Becerra, 2009) and that offers economic benefits to humans. As a
volatile compound, it gives a *swect, herbal, and floral’ scent in feijioa (Acca sellowiana)
essential oil, suggesting its promising application in the juicing industry (Peng, Bishop, &
Quek, 2019). Germacrene D is also abundant in the essential oil of Teucrium scordium
subsp. scordioides where it contributes to its antifungal and anticancer properties (Piras, et
al., 2021). Salvia leucantha essential oil, which also contains germacrene D, can also be a
potential source of bioactive phytochemicals for treatment of Alzheimer’s disease as it
inhibits butyrylcholinesterase (BuChE), an enzyme which, when inhibited, causes
cognitive improvements in patients suffering from neurodegenerative disease (Villalta, et
al., 2021). In addition, germacrene D from the essential oil of Siparuna macrotepala
exhibits an interesting radical scavenging activity suggesting its antioxidant property
(Noriega, et al., 2019). However, the high composition of this compound in essentials oils,
like in the case of Artemesia vulgaris, can be toxic (Judzentiené & Biidiené, 2021); but this
does not necessarily indicate the total toxicity of germacrene D as it may also suggest its
antitumor potential (Balinado & Chan, 2019). The possible formation of this compound in
abaca and its associated antifungal and antioxidant activities could then support the
traditional use of abaca in treating wounds and other medical ailments.
B-Caryophyllene and a-humulene, on the other hand, are humulene-type
sesquiterpenoids which were previously reported as constituents of the banana corm
(Ndiege, Budenberg, Lwande, & Hassanalia, 1991). B-Caryophyllene, specifically, is a

plant-derived phytochemical which serves as one of the major constituents of essential oils

derived fram food and spice plants. It is applied as a food additive and in cosmetics with
the approval from the Food and Drug Administration (Francomano, et al., 2019),
suggesting that it could furthcr add to or improve the applications of abaca in the food and
cosmetics industries. Given its safety for human use, its effects on chronic and binge-
induced liver injury were investigated using mice as model. Results suggest the role of B-
caryophyllene in attenuating liver inflammation and metabolic dysregulation, thus
providing protection against alcoholic steatohepatitis (Varga, et al., 2018). By down-
regulating the expression of interleukins and tumor necrosis factor-c, and by suppressing
the MAPK signaling pathway, B-caryophyllene can also help in treating LPS-induced acute
lung injury (Zhang Y. , Zhang, Wang, & Qian, 2021). In addition, this sesquiterpenoid can
suppress NF-xB via the PI3K/AKT signaling pathway (Ramachandhiran,
Sankaranarayanan, Murali, Babukumar, & Vinothkumar, 2022). This can cause cancer
cells to reduce cell proliferation, undergo apoptosis, and lose its metastatic ability, then
suggesting its potential as an anticancer or antitumor agent. B-Caryophyllene also exhibits
inhibitory actions against different microorganisms including Bacillus cereus (Moo, et al.,
2020), S. aureus (Dahham, et al., 2015), and Trichophyton rubrum (Sobrinho, et al., 2020).
It is also effective in treating cutaneous wounds in female mice by improving re-
epithelialization suggesting its potential role in wound healing (Koyama, et al., 2019). This
compound could then reflect the reported wound healing potential of abaca both for
humans and animals.

Interestingly, B-caryophyllene also functions as a signaling cue which can induce

resistance, via jasmonic acid signaling, in the neighboring plants of transformed poplar or

Arabidopsis plants previously exposed to Pseudomonas syringae (Frank, et al., 2021). In
addition, the expression of B-caryophyllene synthase gene in transgenic sweet orange can
allow the plant to constitutively emit B-caryophyllene which, in tum, repels Diaphorina
citri, the insect vector of the pathogenic bacteria causing Huanglongbing disease in citrus
plants (Alquézar, et al., 2021). These studies, therefore, can be used in crop management
as basis in improving plant immunity against pathogens and insect pests.
Similar with B-caryophyllene, a-humulene also exhibits a variety of applications aside

from its fragrance use. The a-humulene obtained from Centrolobium paraense is effective

ing S. aureus and Enterococcus faecalis (Velasquez, et al., 2019). It also
demonstrates antibacterial and antibiofilm activities against Bacteroides fragilis, a
causative agent of inflammatory bowel disease (Jang, Rhee, & Eom, 2020). In addition, a-
humulene shows a promise in treating alcohol-induced gastritis as it inhibits the release of
histamine in mast cells, incteases the production levels of mucus-stabilizing factors,
suppresses the pro-inflammatory responses, and improves mucus production (Yeo, Hwang,
Song, & Lee, 2021). These, therefore, suggest the potential role of a-humulene in the
efficacy of abaca for the traditional treatment of gastrointestinal problems.

In addition, a-humulene has an anti-inflammatory effect. In an experimental model of
airways allergic inflammation, the administration of this compound reduces the
recruitment of eosinophils to the bronchoalveolar lavage fluid, reduces mucus production,
and decreases interleukin and leukotriene levels. This then supports the potential
application of a-humulene in treating asthma, and other inflammatory and allergic ailments

(Rogerio, Andrade, Leite, & Calixto, 2009).


3. Brassinosteroid biosynthesis

Brassinostcroids arc phytohormoncs which arc important in plant growth and
development. It plays a role in vascular tissue differentiation, germination, root and shoot
development, fertility, flowering, and in plant response to environmental stresses (Rehman,
et al., 2021).

Brassinosteroids are synthesized using the phytosterol campesterol, one of the products
of steroid biosynthesis. As shown in Figure 6.12, several metabolites are produced by this
pathway. Some of these are campestanol, cathasterone, teasterone, typhasterol, and
castasterone. The production of these metabolites involves the action of seven identified
enzymes, namely, CYP90A 1 (EC: 1.14.-.-; | Mt unigene, 2 Mb unigenes), CYP90BI (EC:
1.14.13.-; 8 Mt unigenes, 4 Mb unigenes), CYP90C1 (EC: 1.14.14.147; 4 Mt unigenes, |
Mb unigene), DET2 (EC: 1.3.1.22; 1 Mt unigene), CYP85A1 (EC: 1.14.-.-; 3 Mt unigenes,
4 Mb unigenes), CYP92A6 (EC: ?; 8 Mt unigenes, 5 Mb unigenes), and CYP734A1 (EC:

1.14.-.-; 4 Mt unigenes, 6 Mb unigenes).


“Kuo sipxar JW

‘Ul JOJOO par ‘syuejd yIOq
UL payuap! 1am JO[09
uae ut sowAzugq “Md
Hd A9 puvisiqiog
Pure qenqy “zea syj1xa
W41 prossisourssesq

Jo Kemmped

onewpucsorg aaneind

aup Jo urexderp oneurayog

“T1'9 aunty

9 t [aossauddns: ISVE “TWPEld AD 7

s 8 ase{Xxoupay-eydyez jossyset 9VTAAD J

+ G IXOSUE TVSRIAD 2

: : 2 ziaa =z

c4 1 Ly Ajnureyqns 06 41 dd “1V06dAD es]

$ t astu28 sxoououlz 200 10619 “CLOW 19064K9

+ a FING “1806449 5
Dae rf Toquks or)

sou95T01 70 -ON, saa

aNaoaT



In addition to their significant physiological functions in plants, brassinosteroids also
possess biological activities which can be exploited for various applications (Kohli, et al.,

2020).

Campestanol. for instance, is a phytostanol that is usually found in vegetables. grains.
and fruits. It is one of the most abundant phytostanols in the human diet, which at 2

grams/day can reduce LDL cholesterol level by 8-10% (Gylling & Simonen, 2015).

Cathasterone. on the other hand. is a brassinosteroid that was first identified in
Catharanthus roseus (Fujioka, et al., 1995). In a recent study that tested brassinosteroid
compounds for its activity against LNCaP and DU-145 prostate cancer cell lines,
cathasterone was reported to be the most active brassinosteroid after its effects on cell
viability, cell cycle, apoptosis, nuclear receptor expression, and its effective inhibition of
cell spheres integrity were observed (Huskova, et al., 2020). This then suggests the

potential of this compound in cancer research and treatment.

Teasterone is another phytosteroid which can serve as a precursor in the biosynthesis of
typhasterol; however, this reaction is not represented in Figure 6.12 as the enzyme that
mediates this conversion was not identified in the sequence datasct for M. textilis var.

Abuab and M. balbisiana cv DH-PKW.

Typhasterol, together with castasterone, are brassinosteroids with wide distribution
across specialized plant structures like roots, stems, leaves, flowers, pollens, and seeds
(Kour, et al., 2021). In microalgae subjected to salt and low temperature stresses, a rapid

increase in endogenous brassinosteroid content, which includes typhasterol, can be


observed (Stirk, et al., 2018). The same response to increased salinity also occurs in kale
(Brassica oleracea var. acephala) and white cabbage (B. oleracea var. capitata), where
their tolerance is in positive correlation with typhasterol levels (Pavlovic, et al., 2019).
These studies then suggest the role of typhasterol in mediating plant responses to abiotic
stresses. Similarly, castasterone plays this role. Its concentration can enhance the formation
of shoot biomass in B. napus seedlings when exposed to increasing boron concentrations
(Eggert & von Wiren, 2017). It can also assist the accumulation of polyphenols such as
caffeic acid, catcchin, chlorogenic acid, and cllagic acid in B. juncea to mediate its
tolerance towards copper toxicity (Yadav, Kaur, Kohli, Sirhindi, & Bhardwaj, 2016).
Further, the overexpression of CYP85A/ from spinach (Spinacia oleracea) in transgenic
tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum) can cause castasterone to significantly accumulate, and the
antioxidant production it entails to increase. This can improve the resistance of the plant
against Phytophthora nicotianae, the causative agent of the devastating blank shank
disease in tobacco (Duan & Song, 2019). It has to be noted that in monocots which include
Musa spp., the end product of brassinosteroid biosynthesis does not seem to be
brassinolide, but castasterone instead (Corvalén & Choe, 2017; Kim, Fujioka, Takatsuto,

Tsujimoto, & Choe, 2008).


4. Phenylpropanoid biosynthesis

Phenylpropanoids are a diverse group of simple organic compounds in plants which are
characterized by having an aromatic ring and a three-carbon propene tail.

In M. textilis and M. balbisiana, 358 and 372 unigenes were identified to respectively
encode 59 and 63 enzymes associated with phenylpropanoid biosynthesis. The
phenylpropanoid biosynthetic pathway in plants starts with phenylalanine or tyrosine
(Zhang & Stephanopoulos, 2016), In this study, it begins with phenylalanine which
becomes converted to cinnamic acid through the action of PAL (EC: 4.3.1.24; 10 Mt
unigenes, 8 Mb unigenes), and then to p-coumaroyl CoA with 4CL (EC: 6.2.1.12; 17 Mt
unigenes, 13 Mb unigenes) and CYP73A (EC: 1.14.14.91; 8 Mt unigenes, 7 Mb unigenes)
enzymes (Figure 6.13).

Within this pathway, several simple phenylpropanoids, a.k.a. cinnamic acid derivatives,
are produced through the actions of different enzymes including 4CL, CYP73A, HCT (EC:
2.3.1.133; 10 Mt unigenes, 12 Mb unigenes), CYP98A (EC: 1.14.14.96; 4 Mt unigenes, 1
Mb unigene), CSE (EC: 3.1.1.-; 5 Mt unigenes and 6 MB unigenes), and COMT (EC:
2.1.1.68/2.1.1.4; 13 Mt unigenes, 9 Mb unigenes). These include caffeic acid, ferulic acid,
caffeoylquinic acid (or chlorogenic acid), and sinapic acid which are compounds known

for their pharmacological activities.


-syueid yoq, t z ‘Davuadosp app apyspleranyuos r
U] palguap! 219M 10]09 s ’ 4
oar ut sowkzZug “Md 6 at i
“HG 19 Dunrsigiog ‘ ‘ “
pur gengy “ea s1ynxay za oO sesaystny SoumPUUDNOIPSY-C) Ie h a
Wut proudordixuayd — gy, , memeet crit ag
Jo Aemyred 1 + aseuaSoup yap oyooye-|Aweuul> avo y
onatpucsoig aaneind L 8 oewus8Aoououy smumeue-sin, —YELIAD
‘dup Jo uresZeip oneurayos s te ‘seionpos yor-| ou wo 2
€1 oo--21esrwnod-p or q
“E19 2anay 8g ysuayd Wd 8

DUDISHAIOg TW = woquis 905

‘souasruy] JO “ON
ania

-— ©



Cinnamic acid derivatives generally exhibit antioxidant, anticancer, antibacterial, and
antidiabetic properties, among others (Sova, 2012; Ruwizhi & Aderibigde, 2020). Ferulic
acid, in particular, also has a protective action for the skin, and has the capacity to
accelerate wound healing; hence, it is utilized in the production of skin care products as a
photoprotective, anti-aging, and brightening agent (Zdufiska, Dana, Kolodziejczak, &
Rotsztejn, 2018). Similarly, caffeic acid is known to increase the production of collagen
and prevent premature aging; and through its antimicrobial activity, is also used in treating
skin diseases (Magnani, Isaac, Corrca, & Salgado, 2014). Sinapic acid also shows
therapeutic and cosmetic applications through its photoprotective property that is essential
in the treatment of skin aging (Jeon, Sung, Kim, Jeong, & Lee, 2018). With its
antimicrobial activity, chlorogenic acid, on the other hand, can be utilized in food industries
for food product preservation, food composition modification, and as prebiotics (Santana-
Galvez, Cisneros-Zevallos, & Jacobo-Velasquez, 2017). Furthermore, ferulic acid and
caffeic acid have the potentials to be used as a natural insecticide (Joshi, et al., 2014; Patzke
& Schieber, 2018; Wang, et al., 2022), while chlorogenic acid and sinapic acid can be used
as fungicides (Martinez, et al., 2017; Kulik, et al., 2017). These applications of
phenylpropanoids then further widen the economic potentials of M. textilis which was also
Teported to be utilized in the food, cosmetic, and agricultural industries on top of its

medicinal applications.

Several lignin molecules can also be derived from p-coumaroyl-CoA after its
conversion to either p-coumaroyl shikimic acid or p-coumaroyl quinic acid through the

action of HCT, and to caffeoyl shikimic acid or caffeoyl quinic acid, respectively, through


the action of CYP98A. Both the resulting metabolites are then converted by HCT to
caffeoyl-CoA; but caffeoyl shikimic acid may also be converted to caffeoyl-CoA via a
caffeic acid intermediate with the aid of CSE and 4CL enzymes. Lignin molecules can then
be derived from these intermediates through the action of several enzymes including 4CL,
CCR (EC: 1.2.1.4; 7 Mt unigenes, 5 Mb unigenes), CAD (EC: 1.1.1.195; 4 Mt unigenes,
1 Mb unigene), F1.11.1.7 (EC: 1.11.1.7; 92 Mt unigenes, 106 Mb unigenes), COMT,
E2.1.1.104 (EC: 2.1.1.104; 4 Mt unigenes, 5 Mb unigenes), and REF (EC: 1.2.1.68; 2 Mt
unigencs, 3 Mb unigencs). These lignin molecules are comprised of p-hydroxypheny!

lignin, guaiacyl lignin, 5-hydroxy-guaiacyl lignin, and syringil lignin.

Lignin is an important player in the fiber and paper industry where M. fextilis is known
for. It forms the middle lamella which binds together the fibers making them strong and
rigid (Abdul Khalil, Siti Alwani, & Omar, 2006). In support to the findings of this study,
guaiacyl and syringyl lignin units were also reported to be present in abaca fractions as
identified using nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy (del Rio, et al., 2016). In
addition to this structural role within plant systems, lignin plays important applications in
the human health primarily due to its antioxidant capacity (Vinardell & Mitjans, 2017).
Abaca leaf fibers contain high lignin and p-hydroxycinnamic acids such as ferulic and p-
coumaric acids (Del Rio & Gutierrez, 2006). The ferulic acid subunits, together with the
guaiacol and 4-vinylguaiacol that can be derived from its synthesis, interestingly contribute

to the antioxidant property of lignin (Azadfar, Gao, Bule, & Chen. 2015).


5. Diarylheptanoid biosynthesis: Curcumin

Diarylheptanoids are a small group of phenolic compounds which are made up of two
aromatic rings linked by a seven-carbon chain (Ganapathy, Preethi, Moses, &
Anandharamakrishnan, 2019). Its synthesis extends from the phenypropanoid biosynthetic
pathway which was previously discussed. Here, p-coumaroyl-CoA and feruloyl-CoA can
zach be acted on by a series of enzymes including DCS (EC: 2.3.1.218; 1 Mt unigene, 1
Mb unigene) and CURS1_2 (EC: 2.3.1.217; 2 Mt unigenes, 1 Mb unigene) to produce

curcumin, a diarylheptanoid molecule (Figure 6.14).

LEGEND.
= No. of Unigenes

Code Symbol M.textilisM. balbisiana
a PAL 10 8
b 4cl 7 B
e CYP73A _trans-cinnamate 4-monooxygenase 8 7
d pes phenylpropanoylacetyl-CoA synthase 1 1
e CURSI_2 curcumin synthase 2 1
f HCT shikimate O-hydroxycinnamoyltransferase 10 12
g — CYP98A,C3'H_—5-0-(4-coumaroyl)-D-quinate 3'-monooxyger 4 1
h E2.1.1.104 __ caffeoyl-CoA O-methyltransferase 4 5

Figure 6.14, Schematic diagram of the putative biosynthetic pathway of curcumin in M.
textilis var. Abuab and M. balbisiana cv DH-PKW. Enzymes in green color
were identified in both plants.



Curcumin is a known active compound in members of the Curcuma genus. It has drawn
attention due to its various biological and pharmacological activities. It exhibits anticancer
potential as it suppresses cell proliferation and facilitates cell death in glioblastoma (Wong,
Kamarudin, & Naidu, 2021), ovarian cancer cells (Sun & Fang, 2021), breast cancer cells
(Liu & Ho, 2018), bladder cancer cells (Zhang, et al., 2018), and colorectal cancer cells
(Sun, Liang, & Liu, 2022). It also gives antioxidant and anti-inflammatory benefits
(Hewlings & Kalman, 2017). These properties, together with its reported antiviral,
anticoagulant, and cytoprotective properties, then suggest its usc as potential treatment
against COVID-19 infection (Rattis, Ramos, & Celes, 2021). In addition to this
pharmacological importance, curcumin also plays a role in food and cosmetic industry by
serving as a source of natural pigment (Nandiyanto, et al., 2017). The putative presence of
curcumin synthase in M. textilis and M. balbisiana is reported for the first time in this

study; therefore, further investigation on this is needed.

6. Flavonoid biosynthesis

Flavonoids are phenolic compounds ubiquitously found in plants that can contribute to
their characteristic color, flavor, and fragrance, and to their responses to environmental
stimuli, Structurally, flavonoid molecules are made up of the 15-carbon skeleton in C6-C3-
C6 arrangement, in which two benzene rings are joined by a three-carbon pyran ring (Dias,
Pinto, & Silva, 2021). These compounds are synthesized in the cytoplasm of the cell, and

may be found accumulating and functioning in the same plant organ, but it is also possible


that it undergoes long-distance transport to other plant organs, or is secreted to the
environment to mediate in various plant physiological processes (Buer, Muday, &
Djordjevic, 2007).

This study reports the flavonoid pathway in M. fextilis and M. balbisiana (Figure 6.15)
which begins with the synthesis of different chalcone molecules from cinnamoyl-CoA or
p-coumaroyl-CoA catalyzed by CHS (FC: 2.3.1.74; 16 Mt unigenes; 17 Mb unigenes), and
then isomerized to pinocembrin, liquiritigenin, or naringenin by E5.5.1.6 (EC: 5.5.1.6; 2
Mt unigenes, 2 Mb unigencs). Liquiritigenin and naringenin may be reduced to butin and
eriodictyol, respectively, with the latter further reduced to dihydrotricetin, as mediated by
the enzymes CYP75B1 (EC: 1.14.14.82; 1 Mt unigene, 1 Mb unigene) and CYP75A (EC:
1.14,14.81; 9 Mt unigenes, 14 Mb unigenes). Naringenin and eriodictyol, through the
action of DFR (EC: 1.1.1.219/1.1.1.234; 2 Mt unigenes, 4 Mb unigenes), are also converted
to apiforol and luteoforol, correspondingly. Pinobaskin, garbanzol, dihydrofisetin,
dihydrokaempferol, dihydroquercetin, and dihydromyricetin then respectively result from
the conversion of pinocembrin, liquiritigenin, butin, naringenin, eriodictyol, and
dihydrotricetin caused by F3H (EC: 1.14.11.9; 2 Mt unigenes, 2 Mb unigenes). These
resulting metabolites, except for pinobaskin, are metabolized to 5-deoxyleucopelargonidin,
(+)-afzelechin, leucopelargonidin, leucocyanidin, and leucodelphinidin with the aid of
DFR, respectively, with the last three mentioned metabolites further converted to
pelargonidin, leucocyanidin and delphinidin by ANS (EC: 1.14.20.4; 1 Mt unigene, 1 Mb
unigene), and then to (-)-epiafzelchin, (-)-epicatechin (via a cyanidin intermediate), and (-

)-epigallocatechin by ANR (EC: 1.3.1.7; 1 Mt unigene, | Mb unigene).

°
a

“Ayuo puprsiq}ng Wy Ul 10[09 Mo}|a{ ‘siue|d tog ur paynuept aim Jojoo usar ul SoWAZUG “M\Yd-HA
AD DuDISIgiog W pue qenqy “eA sijuxat JW Ul plouoaey jo Aemuped oneyucsoig oaneind ayy Jo wesBerp sneWIaYDg = *S["9 aun.

RD wad + 2 END 4 a emnomon
1 !
| -
meus «—yg7—) tompome Gg) —

+ wyoants
7 apa

import) ee] omy ro


|
ic
ns

ae —@ J) |
a

ps prepay «>
mere agmwtapg «ag MaMeNE! —GH® postmen we aad

oo meted a eT a(n mtn ti ‘vomnnosd
wows) SET tewenina «a |

among «j= emostumbgo 13

veto) mong GD wramroms AG MEN, Dahan



“A[Uo pupisiqjpg
W Ut 10J09 MoTJaX ‘sued yVOq UL payNuap! arom JOjoo useI3 UT seWAZUA “M\Yd-HC A0 DuDISIG]0q
WW pure qenqy “sea syiixar py ul plouoaey jo Aemyjed onayyucsoig aaneind ay) Jo wesdeIp oNewsYyog (panuyuod) *st"9 aan3iq

7 > ‘SouIaNpH UIP
+ aso] SxOupAU,S4¢ PI

WT
VSLAAD
UNV

sNV
TaSLAAD

H€9 “‘V86dA9
OH
VELAAD

‘ouorsgmg—SIBXaT
W We
90380) J0°ON

loquiss pop,

‘Na9aT


In addition. dihydrokaempferol, dihydroquercetin, and dihydromyricetin are converted
to flavonols kaempferol, quercetin, and myricetin, respectively, with the aid of the FLS
enzyme (EC: 1.14.20.6; 4 Mt unigenes, 5 Mb unigenes). The identification of a unigene
that encodes for LAR (EC: 1.10.3.1; 1 Mb unigene) in M. balbisiana then reveals the
further conversion of leucopelargonidin and leucocyanidin to 5-deoxyleucocyanidin and
(+)-catechin, correspondingly, in this plant.

Flavonoids are widely distributed in plants. In members of the genus Musa, several
studies have already reported the detection of these compounds and their biological
activities. The leaves of M. acuminata, for example, are rich in kaempferol-3-O-rutinoside
and quercetin-3-O-rutinoside (rutin) which are compounds with high antioxidant, anti-
inflammatory, and antidiabetic actions (Oresanya, et al., 2020). The flavonoids from its
peel, on the other hand, have promising free radical scavenging activity (Singhal & Ratra,
2013). Meanwhile, the unripe pulp of M. sapientum var. paradisiaca contains
leucocyanidin and quercetin, in which the former has the capacity to protect the gastric
mucosa trom erosions (Lewis, Field, & Shaw, 1999). The unripe fruits of M. paradisiaca
also exhibit hypolipidemic activity by contributing to a higher rate of cholesterol
degradation than its synthesis (Vijayakumar, Presannakumar, & Vijayalakshmi, 2009). Its
peel specifically contains potential antibacterial and antifungal agents in the form of rutin,
myricetin, naringenin, ellagic acid, and gallic acid (Behiry, et al., 2019). In M. balbisiana,
its corm extract that is rich in flavonoids also exhibits strong free radical scavenging
activity (Daimari & Swargiary, 2020). Its leaves, on the other hand, has the potential to

become a cheap and new source of rutin, a compound commercially used for its antioxidant


and anti-inflammatory effects (Yingyuen, Sukrong, & Phisalaphong, 2020). Further, the
fruit pulp powder from M. balbisiana can attenuate cardiac hypertrophy in rats by also
providing antioxidant and anti-inflammatory benefits (Kumari S. , et al., 2020). These
studies, therefore, could also reflect the pharmacological potential of the different
flavonoid compounds (e.g., naringenin, kaempferol, quercetin, myricetin, leucocyanidin)
that can be produced in M, textilis and M. halhisiana, and its importance in contributing to

the traditional medicinal values of these plants.

7. Tyramine and dopamine biosynthesis

This pathway describes a small portion of the larger isoquinoline alkaloid biosynthesis
pathway in KEGG. This shows the conversion of L-tyrosine to either tyramine or dopamine
through the action of DDC (EC: 4.1.1.28/4.1.1.105; 3 Mt unigenes, 2 Mb unigenes) (Figure
6.16). Here, the synthesis of dopamine involves an L-Dopa intermediate catalyzed by

E.10.3.1 (EC: 1.10.3.1; 2 Mt unigenes, 7 Mb unigenes).

Tyramine and dopamine are biogenic amines produced by plants, animals, and
microorganisms. They play vital roles in plant responses to stress, and in plant growth and
development. Together with their derivatives, these compounds contribute to the strength
of plant cell walls. They also mediate stress responses in plants similar to what was
observed in Japanese radish sprouts (Raphanus sativus), where tyramine and dopamine
content respectively showed 50% and 100% increase when the plant was exposed to

herbicide stress (Plonka, Barchanska, Kokoszka, & Krzyzanowska, 2022). When supplied


exogenously, dopamine can alleviate salt-induced stress in Malus hupehensis where it can
provide antioxidant defense and regulated ion homeostasis (Li, et al., 2014). In fruit pulps
of red banana (M. sapientum var. baracoa) and yellow banana (M. acuminata), dopamine
is at high concentration (Kulma & Szopa, 2007). The abundance of dopamine in these
‘Musa spp. then argues for its active role in their physiological processes. In humans,
dopamine agonists are used in the treatment of Parkinson’s disease, a condition

characterized by having low dopamine levels (Konta & Frank, 2008).

> Tyramine

L-Tyrosine =
—> L-Dopa —@-—» Dopamine
LEGEND
_ No. of Unigenes
Code Symbol M.texilis _M. balbisiana
a DDC, THC ‘aromatic-L-amino-aeid/L-tryptophan A

decarboxylase
b E1103.1 polyphenol oxidase 2

Figure 6.16. Schematic diagram of the putative biosynthetic pathway of tyramine and
dopamine in M. textilis var. Abuab and M. halhisiana cv DH-PKW.
Enzymes in green color were identified in both plants.

8. Betaxanthin biosynthesis

Betaxanthins are one of the numerous natural pigments produced by plants. It is a
betalain compound that is responsible for giving some plant structures the yellow to orange
color, making it different from betacyanins, another betalain compound which gives red to

violet coloration (Gandia-Herrero, Escribano, & Garcia-Carmona, 2016).


The betaxanthin biosynthesis (Figure 6.17) starts with dopamine that is converted by
DOPA (EC: 1.13.11.-; 4 Mt unigenes, 3 Mb unigenes) to 4,5-seco-dopa. This is then
spontaneously broken down to betalamic acid via the removal of a water molecule, and this
betalamic acid spontaneously condenses with dopamine to produce water and miraxanthin
V, a betaxanthin.

Due to the presence of phenolic hydroxy! groups, dopamine-betaxanthins exhibit free
radical scavenging and antioxidant activities. They are plant pigments which in the case of
miraxanthin V was first described in Mirabilis jalapa (Cabanes, Gandia-Herrero,
Escribano, Garcia-Carmona, & Jimenez-Atienzar, 2014). It is also the dominant pigment
in the inflorescences of yellow Portulaca oleracea, Celosia argentea, and Bougainvillea
where it aids in the attraction of insect pollinators through the formation of flower
fluorescence patterns (Nizinski, et al., 2017; Zhang, et al., 2022); however, the potential
production of miraxanthin V in M. textilis and M. balbisiana needs to be confirmed as
betaxanthins are commonly detected in members of the Caryophyllales order (Gandia-
Herrero, Escribano, & Garcia-Carmona, 2016). If these plants are found and proven to
synthesize betaxanthins, this may then potentially add to their industrial applications by

serving as a new source of natural colorants.


Betalamic

| 7
L-Tyrosine —@-» L-Dopa —@-» Dopamine —*—» Miraxanthin V
LEGEND
Enzyme No. of Unigenes
Code Symbol M.textilis_M. balbisiana
@ E1.103.1 polyphenol oxidase 2 7
¢ __DOPA _4.5-DOPA dioxygenase extradiol 4 3

Figure 6.17. Schematic diagram of the putative biosynthetic pathway of betalain in M.
textilis var. Abuab and M. balbisiana cv DH-PKW. Enzymes in green color
were identified in both plants.

Association of Secondary Metabolites Potentially Produced by M. textilis with Its
Reported Economie Uses

The elucidation of the biosynthetic pathways for secondary metabolites using the
genomic data for M. textilis in particular has revealed various biologically active
compounds that it potentially synthesizes. A summary of some of these identified
secondary metabolites, their _bioactivities based on PubChem entries
‘hups://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gow/), related books (Rimpler, 1999; Lullman, Mohr, Hein,
& Bieger, 2005), and other available literature, and the economic uses of abaca (see Study

1) which are potentially associated with these compounds are presented in Table 6.2.


osm
TesmynousSe 40} uononposd jepionoasuy Tepronsasuy
sionpoid
ameo s1ey pue dnawusoD Ut yua!pasBU] qusuodwos sourses4
TSOUETUS TOAE quate TuLOAe
‘Sjonpold oheuisoo Ul juaIpassuy ‘SonOWSOD

pue ured Kpog/a}asnut 104 jeuroipayy Aorewureyul-nuy
wa]qoud [eUnsayuONsee

Pue Suyjeay punom 403 [eUIs1PaW) leuajoeqnuy algnios Anuauis TOPHOAN.
sjonposd
‘aye stey pue onawISOD UI jUaIpayBUy —— UAVS ,[LIOY UR “|Equdy IAMS,
PoyLTeIP
pue Buyjeay punom Joy [europa queprxonue ‘eSurynuy atqnjosuy -suai9eU9
TOUByUS JOACL qusde BUWOAe|

wWdiqord jeunsaMONSET
pue Buypeay punom 03 [eUIo1payAl

uayoequuy

ued

arsadjeuy atqnjosuy up| <ydoxre5 +
1503 Tas

ured 9josnu pue
wajqoid feunsaiuionsed 404 [europa Aoveumeyul-nuy
THa|qord [eunsaTuTONNSET

pue Bureay punom 105 | leuareqnuy
‘sronpord
‘geo s1ey pue snauisod ut juarpasduy qusuodwios souesBe14
FSDUEYUD JOAE| J ywade TULOAe aignjos auajnuinyy-0 plouadzaunbsag
FOOUEYUD IOAR qwode FUvOAe Biqnjosuy pesoure ‘Bu0qysEg prousdiay
VOVaV 40 aSA SINONOD ‘ASN DINONODT WaLVA aLITOavian nous

GALVIQOSSY ATIVILNALOd YO ALIALLIVOIG NMONMNIALITIGNIOS __AYVGNODAS

-spumoduios asaip yim paretoosse Ayfenuaiod (1 Apnag 99s) s1/17x91 Jy Jo Sasn o1WOUOD>
up pue “soniAanovoig uMOUy stoWp ‘oWIOUDs s1/HxA! JY YIM Powioosse sayloquiour Arepuosas aif Jo alos Jo AewUMS Y “Z"9 GEL


TSOUEYUD TOARE quae SuLOAe 4

7ueIO} 09 [BATTEN qwade Bu1I0}09

ured ajosnui pue

wioiqord feunsayuronsed 105 jeuripay —_—UepIKoNUE ‘iorEMEYUI-HUY —_arqntos ApYBS urwinoing, prouedaypdreiq
3s
Tesnynousde 105 uononpord yepiovung leproidung
Sanpord ayes Uys Ur yuarpasTuy BANDaVOITOIONE
FSOUETUD JOA qwode TUpOAR
Fuyjeay pundw 30} [PUIDIPS TWepRonUe
wep
wolqoud jeunsaquionsed 103 jeuripayy —_‘Azorewueyut- pioe aidems
35m
JesnynouBe 10 uonronpoud jepronoasu lepronsesuy
Sronpord Sued Uys UT warpaTTuy BANoaIOMOOUd
FSUYUS TOAR qwoHe TUOAe] |
SnBORE|ONS
ysajut-onse8 Joy peuIsIpa = “Aoyewueyul-Ue JURpIXONUY aqqnjos pise oynsay

TeUTIUEADSSUT pUe
eayreip “Buijeay punom Jo} [eUl>IpaW aueprxonue ‘e1qo191

pre oyeuinos,

35h
dung

junjeay pundm 104 Te reiqox1muy pioe a1ua8ou014)
3st
JeinynouiBe 105 uonanposd jepronsasuy Tepronsasuy
‘Sionpoud aseo Ulys Ui WweIpaisay
jayjeay PunOM 10} [eUTOIPI qweprxonur ‘JeiqosoWAUY aiqnios AiBuisedg ——_proe o1@3ye plouedoid|4uayg
Vovav 40 asf DINONODE ‘ASN OINONODA WaLVM auITOaVian anowd
GALVIQOSSV ATIVILNSLOd YO ALIALLOVOIA NMONN NI ALITIGAIOS _AUVGNODTS

(P.mod) "79 AGEL


TUeIO[OD [eINIEN,

quate TuilojoD ‘aaqnjOS A UpUeXEITA, UNpUEXeiog,

Syonpoud areo Uys Ul quaIpaiTu]

qwerTowa

TUeIO[OO [eIMIEN

TWH BUUO|OD

Tonerayrjoid We] qoiqHy SoSCATOUT

Suyjeay punom 403 jeUrOIPIA, ‘AoweuUreyUI-yUE IUEpIXonUY —_ajqnjos AjBuLedg unaoiand,
Sonpord aie Uys Ur waIpaiTuy qworT Ow
SOUP UD JOEL TwaHe FuNOAE
wWayqord jeunsaiuionses
pue Zusjeay punom 103 (eulo1paW 1 ‘JeiqoxtwUY aiqnjosuy uus8ueN
‘Sanpowd are Uys UF Wr
Buyjesy PunOm 105 [PUISIPSAL TaepRRONUE yeIqoIsTUTUY
wiaiqord peunsaruronsed 405 /euIoIpaW Uy aqnjos nach,
wo|qoud jeunsayuionsed 40} jeuIopayy —_wlo4y esoONU 91NISEB sJoaIOIg —_-apqnyos Aqny urpiuegsoonoy
sranpoid are urys ur jusipaduy qwomoury
Wa|qoid [BURSA
pue wed Apoqyajasnus 104 jeuroipay, —_—_Avoyewueyut-nue “jueprKonuy aiqnjosuy Jouydwoeyy prouonel4
VOVAaV 40 ASN SINONODE ‘USN DIWONOOA WaLVM FL 10avia anoud
GALVIOOSSV ATIVILNSLOd YO ALIAILOVOIG NMONM NIALITIGN TOS AYVGNODaS
P.mo0y) 79 71GEL


The efficacy of abaca as a medicinal plant could be attributed to the different biological
activities exhibited by its reported secondary metabolites. The antimicrobial, anti-
inflammatory, and/or antioxidant activities of germacrene-D, nerolidol, coumaric acid,
ferulic acid, sinapic acid, curcumin, kaempferol, myricetin, naringenin, and quercetin could
explain the effective use of abaca in treating wounds and/or gastrointestinal problems such
as diarrhea, The analgesic, antioxidant, and/or anti-inflammatory properties of P-
caryophyllene, nerolidol, and curcumin, on the other hand, could aid in easing muscle,

body, and head pains which arc ailments also traditionally addressed by abaca.

Also, some of the identified secondary metabolites in abaca possess emollient property
which is important in the production of skin conditioning or softening products. These
compounds include the flavonoids kacmpferol, myricctin, naringenin, and querectin.Some
of the identified secondary metabolites also have reported roles as flavoring agents
eflecting the use of abaca as flavor enhancer. These are farnesal, a-humulene, p-
caryophyllene, nerolidol, ferulic acid, sinapic acid, curcumin, and naringenin. In addition,
compounds known as fragrance components like a-humulene, germacrene-D, and
nerolidol could support and widen the application of abaca in the cosmetic and hair care
industries. Further, the identification of secondary metabolites which are applied as
coloring agents could also broaden the utilization of abaca as source of natural colorants,

These identified compounds include curcumin, quercetin, and miraxanthin V.

Among these listed compounds, many are slightly soluble to soluble in water. This is
important to note since the common solvent used to traditionally prepare abaca for

medicinal utilization is water. The practice of decoction and infusion, therefore, is


appropriate to allow the extraction of these polar secondary metabolites. The insolubility
of some biologically active compounds, on the other hand, does not automatically debunk
the efficacy of abaca in treating various medical ailments. Local cultures also prepare abaca

by crushing and pounding, and these may also contain the non-polar ones.

Ferulic acid, in particular, also has a protective action for the skin, and has the capacity
to accelerate wound healing; hence, it is utilized in the production of skin care products as
a photoprotective, anti-aging, and brightening agent (Zduiska, Dana, Kolodziejezak, &
Rotsztejn, 2018). Similarly, caffeic acid is known to increase the production of collagen
and prevent premature aging; and through its antimicrobial activity, is also used in treating
skin diseases (Magnani, Isaac, Correa, & Salgado, 2014). Sinapic acid also shows
therapcutic and cosmetic applications through its photoprotective property that is esscntial
in the treatment of skin aging (Jeon, Sung, Kim, Jeong, & Lee, 2018). With its
antimicrobial activity, chlorogenic acid, on the other hand, can be utilized in food industries
for food product preservation, food composition modification, and as prebiotics (Santana-
Galvez, Cisneros-Zevallos, & Jacobo-Velasquez, 2017). Furthermore, ferulic acid and
caffeic acid have the potentials to be used as a natural insecticide (Joshi, et al., 2014; Patzke
& Schieber, 2018; Wang, et al., 2022), while chlorogenic acid and sinapic acid can be used
as fungicides (Martinez, et al., 2017; Kulik, et al., 2017). These applications of
phenylpropanoids then further widen the economic potentials of M, textilis which was also
Teported to be utilized in the food, cosmetic, and agricultural industries on top of its

medicinal applications.


Identification of Putative Biosynthetic Gene Clusters (BGCs)

Plants, fungi, and microorganisms are known producers of a diverse array of specialized
metabolites, each exhibiting an essential ecological role. In bacteria and fungi, the genes
responsible for the synthesis of these compounds often occur in clusters called biosynthetic
gene clusters (BGCs) for a coordinated expression (Bharadwaj, Kumar, Sharma, &
Sathishkumar, 2021), Due to technological advancements which made plant genomic
sequencing more feasible, the recent decade has revealed a growing number of information
indicating the presence of these BGCs in plants as well. This means that there are genes
involved in specific plant biosynthetic pathways that are found co-localized in their

genomes (Polturak & Osbourn, 2021).

A classic example of BGC in prokaryotes is the /ac operon that is made up of co-
localized genes which encode multiple proteins responsible for the uptake and metabolism
of lactose. In fungi and plants, BGCs are similar in terms of architecture and evolutionary
aspects. They differ in that BGCs in fungi can be transferred among individuals via
horizontal gene transfer, similar with prokaryotes, and that BGCs associated with primary
metabolism are less explored in plants. In addition, fungal BGCs are associated with
pathway-specific transcriptional regulators and transporters, while only a few plant BGCs
are known to possess these features. Further, BGCs of filamentous fungi, unlike in plants,
commonly have multigene clusters involved in a single pathway, two BGCs co-occurring
on a single chromosome, and intertwined BGCs synthesizing different compounds

(Bharadwaj, Kumar, Sharma, & Sathishkumar, 2021).


The discovery and analysis of BGCs in plants require genome mining. One of the most
commonly used tools for this methodology is plantiSMASH. It is a mining algorithm
designed for plants that can efficiently identify genomic loci that encode multiple
(sub)families of specialized metabolic enzymes (Kautsar, Suarez Duran, Blin, Osbourn, &

Medema, 2017).

Four putative BGCs associated with the biosynthesis of secondary metabolites such as
polyketides, lignan, and terpenes were identified in M, textilis var. Abuab (Table 6.3;
Figures 6.18-6.21). In M. balbisiana, on the other hand, 16 putative BGCs which are likely
to synthesize alkaloids, polyketides, terpenes, and lignans were identified (Table 6.4;

Figures 6.27-6.37).

The sizes of the identified BGCs range from 24.16 to 335.46 kb. These values reflect
the greater variation in cluster size in plants (i.e., 35-270 kb) than the average sizes of
clusters experimentally characterized in bacteria (2724 kb) and fungi (32+22 kb) (Chavali
& Rhee, 2018). The size of these plant BGCs, however, makes cloning more challenging.
Nevertheless, various strategies (e.g, sequence-independent, direct cloning, and
multiplexed cloning methods) have been investigated to clone intact large-size BGCs for
its possible application in the discovery of pharmaceutically important natural products

(Lin, Nielsen, & Liu, 2020).


EEE

[ PaIxo JWOD
£ *NTWWAST HS TeYD ‘OWA HS TY _SB'9T__—_STETE TLpS___ APNAAKIOd _S6SSPIONeS ——_p J0ISRID.
€ ‘> wuds auadiay “uds suadiay —_L¢'6£ Leoly 0991 auadiol — B6LPPIOMBS ——_€ 31ST
7 ysueny Ayo
€ “NAS HS TeYD ‘D WASH TeYD S767. $9069 6186€ —- APHOXATOd —_LOEPIQFEOS ZaarsnfD
usdio],
€ LINO ‘D Wuks-ouadiay quoBuiq —L7'S6 ——LLECZT_—ONLTI _—-URUBIT.—_OgPIOYIHOS Laaisni
saaisn1d SNIVIOG FAO (a) OL WOwd 3dAL aaoowa waLSNTD
Had azis

pa 1S 1 Ee

“gengy “ea syuxar Fy UI SOO ann —*¢°9 AGEL,


a be d ef g hi j k
~ «—4 eee 4 ae) ==
LEGEND
Code__Laeus Tag From Srand Category Domains
. RACS_0 123802 + Other genes wa
b FDO 141s 5 Other genes a
© EXPALI «133078 s Other genes a
HE sme 9sn tans Methyliransferase oMT (E=1.3e-28)
€ LOL] 146887152216 + Other ge Wa
fim LTOLL1 — 15222413722 + Other genes va
Gey NAC? = I7913, NTIS Other genes na
h DIRIL_O 176298182207 + Other genes va
Goi: —stsassstsszg0 + Dirigent enzymes Dirigent (E>S.3¢-09)
LECRKS_7 199986 200201 + Other genes a
Be 206839213152 + “Terpene synthase Teypene_synth_C(E=1.1e-24)

Figure 6.18. Putative biosynthetic gene cluster in M. textilis var. Abuab genome: Cluster
1 — Scaffold30 — Lignan-Terpene (Location: 127103-222377 nt).

Biosynthetic gene categori

terpene synthase. Elements
biosynthetic enzymes and which are also co-located in the genome.

: methyltransferase, dirigent enzyme, and
gray color represent genes which encode non-

a b q de f
> a)
LEGEND,
Code Locus Tag From To Strand Category Domains
@ om 1K2029 39907 42027 + Other genes wa
Bo RPS 4 = 441d S183 , Other genes
= om 46388 49648 + Methyitransferase
cuss 6124761456 + Ketosynthase
pest 61531 62496 + Ketosymthase
PUBS 26 __69010_ 70745 Other genes wa

Figure 6.19. Putative biosynthetic gene cluster in M. textilis var. Abuab genome: Cluster
2—Scaffold301 — Polyketide (Location: 39819-69065 nt). Biosynthetic gene
categories: methyltransferase, and ketosynthase. Elements in gray color
represent genes which encode non-biosynthetic enzymes and which are also
co-located in the genome.


a b © a e
(GS 4 zal
LEGEND
Code Locus Tag From To Strand Category Domains
TPSI0_I 73168182 a Terpene synthase Texpene_synth_C (E=45e-48)
TPS10-0 a2 15326 Terpene synthase Teapene synth (E=2.26-24)
EN LOCUS 019422 19500 19946 + Other genes Wa
ssy 2539 28700 Terpene synthase e_symth_€ (E=4.7e-06)
ATESY.0 307835597 Tespene synthase nth C (EI 76-08)

Figure 6.20. Putative biosynthetic gene cluster in M. fextilis var. Abuab genome: Cluster
3 — Scaffold4798 — Terpene (Location: 1660-41027 nt). Biosynthetic gene
category: terpene synthase. Element in gray color represents a gene which
encodes non-biosynthetic enzyme and which is also co-located in the

genome.
a b de f
Et BD ssa a BD
LEGEND
Code Toeus Tag From To igo
a ETRI_O 308 TTS 1
ms 1069711305 + Oxidoredvetse —_- GMC_oxred_N (E-9.7e-05)
. 2927500_2 133118843 3 Other genes
me curse_ 2582126723 + Ketosynhase
CURS3-0 26812 27099 + Ketosynthase
Fo 1ocus 070920 30sso_ 35357 ther genes

Figure 6.21. Putative biosynthetic gene cluster in M. textilis var. Abuab genome: Cluster
4 —Scaffold5595 — Polyketide (Location: 5471-32325 nt). Biosynthetic gene
categories: oxidoreductase and ketosynthase. Elements in gray color
represent genes which encode non-biosynthetic enzymes and which are also
co-located in the genome.


7 LDddn ‘O wuss susdiay
“puts ouadiay,

suadiay,

Ay aC V-L61L10ND

€ ‘1 Supuiq dvN 60°89 609TPHL _—DISHLEL —-2PLTBYODRS —:91 uosowOyD EL A2ISMID,
- ost SPHOAAO ——-L61L 10ND

€ *TLOdGN ‘J WAS HS TY SOP __—P9SO9BZ_G166I8Z_-APLEYDDVS —:01 wosowosy ZI 39ISMID,
Osa D yuks ouadiay” 1961LLOWD-

s “puts ouadia], QySEE BO0099IZE 9PSOEIE —PUdIaL —:gautosowory LL JOIST)
_ Ospt V'961L10WD

€ “Li ysuenpApow TA G_——S'SE_—EILLBSEL _OPZZSSEL__—PLOIENIV. —‘ auiosowory —_OL 2@ISNID,
~__ aseroultdy 1'961L10WD.

€ ‘J qwAs"Hs TeyD “BuIpUIg-dWV__86°Sh__—BEEISHh —_9S6SOH_—APHAAAIOd —:gamosowoyD ——_—6 F2ISNID
Ospa DT wwuxs susdioy, Vp61L10WO

? “yqucs"ouadiay ISZsI_ €7966P9 BOIL PED. auadiey, :L eulosouorYD g zasntD,
7 1DddN wuss suadiay auadia], V'p61L10WD

s “wpuds “guodia], LSbbl  EvSOrrL ——SLOS6ZI_—-APEBYDORS +1 auosowlosy> L2a1sn1D
Tp6lLl0WD

€ quesuig “Surpurq-dNV_ Oe __ElphOZ_—_—_—BSZOLZ ueusr] :L aWosoWory 9 x21sn1D,
@ 1o9dan SPHEAIOd —E61L 10ND

£ ‘osesoundy ‘D wAS NS TEU) ——6L'ER_—PRESEREE —9OSIIBEE -APLTEYDIEG —:g auIosoMOIy —_—S JOIST,
vOYsS ype ProrexTV VE61L10ND

+ SueSysiq ‘prxo auyure nO, 1919 €LLL066 _9910P86_——-UeUIT —:g auosowory fp J0ISMID
Osha 'N WAS HS TEND VE61L10WO.

% ‘oO wAs” ns yeyD 9S% _LTLOBIL —_—ILIBEIL —_@PHExAIOd _:9 auiosowosyD Es91sN1D
‘apLeyoors UL6ILIOWD

iG LINO ‘Z Jsuen sooaiy wesuiq —8Z'ZS_—BZSENSET_ISZISB6Z__—-URUIT— ep ewosoWoIY ZsaIsMID
T JSueH S021 PLOT 1061 10ND

£ ‘1A 0g “Bupurq-d WV 68'SL _OB8LED9 2661965 __-2PLBYDDRS _:¢ awosowosyD L32isnq

suaisa1> SNIVINOd FUOD » OL woud AdAL quoo7a =~ AaISN1D

LIH-d9 azis
M\d-HG 49 Puvssiging WW UISIO eanend — “9 GEL.


Ost ZD_HOYS ype

“NUS ns yeyD

‘Qyuds“ns fey
‘T_1 wenoutury “L61L10WO
$ ‘1 ysuen|Qeoy IVShl  GZBIOIEL IZLES6ZL_—_ PHEAAIOd 01 wosowory I FOISNID.
ESTE
queBiiq ‘prxo” suture ng PIOTeAIV VL6ILIOND
Y ‘Z| _wenoumy QO'EZI —BPOSPOO! 1661266 -UeUBIT —:| awosowiosy ST >ISMID
aSeuasAXOdT | V-L61L10ND
€ ‘asexoundy ‘Q qAs ns eYD ——7B'89_—LTL1096__—OIEZES6 _—APHAAA|Od ‘91 Swosoworyy _ I OISTID
SuaIsaTD SNIVWOG GOD cw» OL woud adAL quooga = uaLSNTD
LIH-d9 azis
(p.mod) — °S'9 IAL


a b c d e f 8 h i k
ee ee ee Lora)

LEGEND

Code Trocus Tag From To Strand Caegon Domaine

Te Cao MooNOTI9O —S9aIIT THRE = Other pene mt

[I caso miosiosooo —sosorss 5977839 + Giyoosyranserase Oana

© CAD60_Mb0HO8OIO  S9TOME 5986397 Other genes wa

CAD 60_MbOHO8020 S98RGGT —SODGDBI Other penes ma
CcaDs0_Mb03108030 5998532 5999005 tee Spengly pet 1 (E3165)

[BEI cxvso_mioiososo —soorrss oasis = PiterSpengle” Bet v_1(E=1fe-15)

Ree eS ae Bet v_1(E=1.1e-13)

He CD60_MbUHOH060 —GOLOBIO. GOTTA Other genes na

7 CAD6O_MBORIEOT ——GOISE72 601679 Other genes nia

jf CsD60_MPnHORORD — 6023337 6024207 + Other penes a
CAD60-Mba0s090__6an66s8_ 6030718 CoActgase __ AMP-inding(=2 4-83)

Figure 6.22. Putative biosynthetic gene cluster in M. balbisiana cv DH-PKW genome:
Cluster 1 — Chromosome 3 — Saccharide-Alkaloid (Location: 4580824—-
4605663 nt). Biosynthetic gene categories: glycosyltransferase, Pictet-
Spengler enzyme (Bet v1), and CoA-ligase. Elements in gray color represent
genes which encode non-biosynthetic enzymes and which are also co-
located in the genome.

a bed e f 8 h i i
€-@+4 ss Sess = d
LEGEND
Cove Tocus Tag From To Strand Category Domains
a7 CAD60_MbOIO3070 29851305 29RS2MT Other genes wa
b CAD6O_MbOsDI080 29854150 29855360 - ‘thee genes a
© CAD60_MbOI23090 29856521 20RS6RIG Other genes a
HEWES CaDs0_Mb0103100 20858044 29859138 = Methylansferase OMT (E=1.5e-27)
@ — CADGO_MbO43TI0 29864640 29865155 = ‘Other genes va
F__CAD60_Mbo4123120 29865839 29875908 + Other genes a
TEBE CAD 60 Mv01a3130 29876193 29878461 Glycosytranserase Glycos_transf 2 (E=1.4e-37)
hh C4D60_MbO423140 29881035 29RK9029 Other genes ‘a
i CAD60_MbO423150 29889589 29890858 Other genes a

HEBIB_c4060_mb04123160_ 29896199 _ 20896735,

Figure 6.23. Putative biosynthetic gene cluster in M. balbisiana cv DH-PKW genome:
Cluster 2 - Chromosome 4 — Lignan-Saccharide (Location: 29851251-
29903528 nt). Biosynthetic gene categories: _methyltransferase,
glycosyltransferase. and dirigent enzyme. Elements in gray color represent
genes which encode non-biosynthetic enzymes and which are also co-
located in the genome.

Dirigent enzymes Dirigent (E=2e-41



a b © d
se > ha we
LEGEND,
Code Tocos Tag From To Category Domains
ao CaDo0_MbOsw90R0 7137832 7142497 +Other genes rm
MBE C1060 Mb06109030 7143653 7146471 + Cytochrome 450 p50 (E=8.2e-61)
E— CADGO_Mb6.09040 71475K6 7150494. +Other genes va
CANS _MbOGO00S0 7152987715197 +Other genes a
© C4D60_Mb06%09060 7160313 7163908 +Other genes va
TCAD 60_MbO6109070 7164676 7167898 = —=—_—Other genes va
. ¥ ‘ synt_C (E-2.8e-67)
CAD60_MbO6109080 7168465 7169482 = ——_Ketosymthase ey
caD60_Mb06109090 7170288 —TITI10. = Ketosymthase
CAD60_Mb0609100. 7172011 7172283. = —_Ketosymthase
a osynthase _Chal_sti_synt_C(E
C4D60_MbO6IOBI10 7172301717310 = ——_—Ketosymthase EUS SME C
ee stosynthase Cha st_synt_C (E=733-71),
C4D60_Mb06t00120. 7173912717493 Ketosyntase Chal Smt Ce
C4D60_Mb06109130_7175060_7175245 Ketosynthase__Chal_sti_synt_N (E=7.4e-22)

Figure 6.24, Putative biosynthetic gene cluster in M. balbisiana cv DH-PKW genome:
Cluster 3 — Chromosome 6 — Polyketide (Location: 7138171-7180727 ni).
Biosynthetic gene categories: ketosynthase, and cytochrome 450. Elements
in gray color represent genes which encode non-biosynthetic enzymes and
which are also co-located in the genome.

a bede

@ (4H
LEGEND.
Code Toews Tag Trom To Strand Category Domains
ia CaD60_MbOGtI760 9843656 9BISOGT + Diher genes va
CAD60_MbO6UI2770 —9BABSE4 9849150 = —_—Dirgent enzymes. —_—_—Drgent (E-2.1e-33)
GSE CAD60_Mb06tI27#0 9849553. 9850215 Dirigent enzymes —_Dirigent(E=S.76-37)

C4D60_Mb06112790 9851201. 98SHIBD + Other genes va

& —C4D60_MdO6tI2800 9854509 9855030 Other genes na
FE Cap60_mtbo6t2810 9864056 9874320 + Copper amine oxidase Cu_amine_oxid (E=1 4e-94)
2 4
h i
pss :

(C4D60_MbO6tI2R20 9875462 9877750 Other genes
(CAD6O_MbO6tI2830 9880400 9883070 Other genes
(CAD6O_MbO6tI2840 9898857 9809355 Oxidoreductase
[CAD6O_ Mbt 9907917, Other genes

0__ 99067:

Figure 6.25. Putative biosynthetic gene cluster in M. balbisiana cv DH-PKW genome:
Cluster 4 — Chromosome 6 — Lignan-Alkaloid (Location: 9840166-9907773
nt). Biosynthetic genc categories: dirigent cnzyme, copper amine oxidase,
and oxidoreductase. Elements in gray color represent genes which encode
non-biosynthetic enzymes and which are also co-located in the genome.

tepory
Other genes

ti D MBQGORTIO 33817505 53818554
GEBEE CaDso-Mosisi20 33821504 33826704

Bi Giocerbnccasian Suess 0098 See pane
Ge) Ciba MMecsia) EK702 338000 one
HERR CsDs0-Mbosw81c0 33860608 33862035 + «== Glycosyltunsfewe—--UDPGT.2 (E21
T CADSMMIGOSITO H60659 33861000” pa fs
Mim CADot-MMeceie) Sa4sicod 33471209 | cer genes 2
T= Capo Meosasi90 38069 GH” ona =
Specpmocamn sosime soars. nee a
TEBE Ciso-MooosotoSsHR3sB4 3uessi7e Epunerese Epimerase (26.7610
fi cacveryocaazay Soeest aouasce eee i
mm CaDel"Mboson230 S387 SBR ter eres ™
i _Clbat-Mioeceaad_SH52040 SIA) + Paes uM

Figure 6.26. Putative biosynthetic gene cluster in M. balbisiana cv DH-PKW genome:
Cluster 5 - Chromosome 6 — Saccharide-Polyketide (Location: 33811596-
33895384 nt). _ Biosyntheti gene categories: —_ketosynthase,
glycosyltransferase, and epimerase. Elements in gray color represent genes
which encode non-biosynthetic enzymes and which are also co-located in

the genome.
a b e d e f og
DA Ge @ »
Code Taras Tag ia Gitar Domains
Gey CaDed MTNA] —66i8T TBE Oter genes 7
Be cabeo-MborONNED 27898628129 Other genes a
Ee C4D60_Mb07100410 275483276498 - CoA-ligase AMP-binding (E=2.9e-21)
Capo MBOTOOND F613 CoAligse —_AMP-hining(E=2 5636)
CAA MBOTOOR) 282989 DSIRE Other genes ma
EERE €4D60_mb07100440 288616 289188 - Dirigent enzymes Dirigent (E=1.3e-17)
B CADo0-NIbOTODESD—200KSt 20008 Other genes, i
h_Cabso-Monoosso_293256 296138 One genes va

Figure 6.27. Putative biosynthetic gene cluster in M. balbisiana cv DH-PKW genome:
Cluster 6 — Chromosome 7 — Lignan (Location: 270258-294413 ni).
Biosynthetic gene categories: CoA-ligase, and dirigent enzymes. Elements
in gray color represent genes which encode non-biosynthetic enzymes and
which are also co-located in the genome.


ab e de fg h ikl m no pq rostuy
| a a4 » » ee)
LEGEND
‘Code Locus Tag From To Strand Category Domaine
&y CiD60_ MbO7I01780 1290798 1302664 + Other genes wa
C4D60_MbO7101790 1306321 1307068 + ‘Terpene synthase Terpene_synth (E=4,3e-26)
C4D60_MbO7101800 1317835 1320398 - ‘Terpene synthase DSpace Meaney
s a 7iSS Terpene synth (E=3.1e-51)
(C4D60_MbOTIOISIO. 1328437 1325881 = ——Texpone symthase——_‘Terpene_synth_C (E=6.4e-24)
C4D60_MBO7I1S20 1325964 1326537 = —Texpone symthase_——‘Terpenc_symth_C(E~1.5e-39)
C4D60_MDO7IO1830 1338175 1338552 + ——_Texpene symthase Terpene_ synth (E=7.6¢-25)
4 Terpene_synth_C (E=6.6-70),
CaDen_MoTOIEO 1338S MOST + Teenegtiae THREES C (Efe 7),
Terpene_synth_C (E=4.2e-84)
C4D60_MbONOL8S0 1352689 1356061 + ~—Terpene synthase fase
Teapene.synth_C (E=2.9e-84),
C4D60_MbO7I01860 1369314 1371404 + Terpene synthase “Terpene syn (E-2,4e-51)
C4D60_MbO7I01870 1372038 1373188 + Other genes a
CAD60_MBOTIONSEO 1373248 1373617, + Other genes va
CAD60_MBO7O1R00 1375538 137706 + —_—Giycosylranserase UDPGT 2 (F=2.2e-64)
(C4060_MBO7101900 1380077 1381160. = Other genes a
C4D60_MBOTIIIIO 1386939 1391509 = Other genes a
(C4D60_MBONIIN20 1391161 1396649 + Giyeosylransferase UDPGT_2 (E-3:9-09)
(C4D60_MbO7I01930 1398531 1399985 + Other genes a
C$D60_MBO7IOII4 1400958 1404032 = Other genes va
C4D60_MBONIOINSO 1409269418777 + ther genes na
‘C4D60_MBOTII960 1421873 1423787 + Other genes a
(C4D60_MBO7101970 1428584 1430197 = ——_—Gycosytransferase UDPGT.2 (E=1.5e-79)
CD60 MBONIOI98O 143450135348 + Other genes wa
Vi C4060 Mv0701990__1436907_1443961__ + Orher genes wa

Figure 6.28. Putative biosynthetic gene cluster in M. balbisiana cv DH-PKW genome:
Cluster 7 — Chromosome 7 — Saccharide-Terpene (Location: 1295975-
1440543 nt). Biosynthetic gene categories: terpene synthase, and
glycosyltransferase. Elements in gray color represent genes which encode
non-biosynthetic enzymes and which are also co-located in the genome.

abcde fo g h i i k 1 m
(ee A » D> Ed
LEGEND.
Code Tacs Tag Trom To Strand Category Domains
a CiDSO_MbOTIOSDD —GMBEIT—GhIB6T Other genes wa
b CAD GO_MBOTIO8090— 6351911 6352762 + Other genes a
© CADGO_MBO7IOS100 6355591 6350473. + Other genes a
2 CADGO_MBOTIOBIIO 6361561 6362193. + Other genes a
CAD6O_MBOTIORI20 6363301 6369358 = Cytochrome 450 450 (E=9.2e-54)
erpene sythase Terre syn C (E"1 9-06),
CAD6O_MBOTIOSI30 6381299 6382488 = Tepe synthase THMENEsmMh-C (F196
CAD60_MBO7O8140 6387910 6388484 —Terpene synthase Terpene_symth_C (E=1.Se-11)
soobtoeis 50 ¢ ),
CADSO_MBOTIORISO 6393357 6410102. = Cytochrome 450 pe OE TSE ES
{| CADGO_MDO7OBI60 6810228. G4L06I1 Other genes a
C4D60_MBO7108170 6420473 6427130 ~—Terpene synthase Terpene_symth_C (E=6.8e-84)
(CAD60_MDOTIOBIRD 6452475 6453448 «+ ~—=—Texpene symthase__Terpene_synh_C (EI 3¢-25)
. : Terpene_synth_C (E=2.2e-),
C4D60_MBOTIUSI90 6478566 6483430 Terpee synthase ne
m___C4D60 Mbo7I08200_6494446 _6199786 + Other genes wa

Figure 6.29. Putative biosynthetic gene cluster in M. balbisiana cv DH-PKW genome:
Cluster 8 - Chromosome 7 ~ Terpene (Location: 6347108-6499623 nt).
Biosynthetic gene categori cytochrome 450, and terpene synthase.
Elements in gray color represent genes which encode non-biosynthetic
enzymes and which are also co-located in the genome.

abc de
em i

Code Tocus Tag From To Strand Domains
a Cabo MbooaTTO —aa10382 —an10776 = Other nes
bess CAD60_MbOOIO6I80 4410817 4411056. + Other genes

BEM cioeonnorosivo aanize ust CoAstigase ——_AMP-binding (E=8.3e-71)

CaD60_Mb09106200 4418220 4419794 = —Ketosymthase Chul st_synt_C (E=1.6e-10)

© CADO_MbOROG2I0 4421471 4423730 + Other genes va
fF CADs0_Mbom(06220 4427602 -4DRSTE + Other genes na
= CADGO_MUamOSD30 4930038 44R0792 + Other gen va
hCADso_MbomIOs240 4433607 4453027 + Other genes va
§  CHD60_Mbow06250 4434052443629 Other genes va
f CAD 60_MbOROS260 443658 4441828 + Other genes na
Kk CaDso_Mbom06280 4443685 4444200 + Other genes va

EEE C4160 Mbom06270 4444501 4446768 - Fpimerase Fpimerase (F=2.8¢-10)
HL _CADs0 Mbom06290__44s0467_SI3IS___+ ‘mer genes va

Figure 6.30. Putative biosynthetic gene cluster in M. balbisiana cv DH-PKW genome:
Cluster 9 - Chromosome 9 — Polyketide (Location: 4405956—4451938 nt).
Biosynthetic gene categories: CoA-ligase, ketosynthase, and epimerase.
Elements in gray color represent genes which encode non-biosynthetic
enzymes and which are also co-located in the genome.

a b 8 h
SCE ENnS » tameamemaas reset)
LEGEND
Code Tawue Tag from To Sirand Category Domaine
@ 7 CADG0_MbOIGGRO 13545083 ISESHOIO ‘Other genes va
b  CHD60_MbONIG590 13559221 13559586 = Other genes va
 — C4D60_MbOI6TOO 13561594 13563370 = Other genes va
4 CAD60_MbOOTIG7IO. 13562901 13867872 + Other genes va
HERE CAD60_Mbooi6720 13564915 13569889 = Cytochrome 450 ps0 (E=4.2e-47)

. WE ss, Methyltransf_11
‘C4D60_Mb09116730. 13870291 13571590 Methyltranst pena

C4D60_MbO9UI6740 13574582 13575088 Picte-Spengler enzyme (Bet VI) Bet y_1 (E=0.00014)
$460 MB09U16750_13579997 13589390 Other genes a

Figure 6.31. Putative biosynthetic gene cluster in M. balbisiana cv DH-PKW genom
Cluster 10 - Chromosome 9 — Alkaloid (Location: 13552240-13587763 nt).
Biosynthetic gene categories: cytochrome 450, methyltransferase, and
Pictet-Spengler enzyme (Bet v1). Elements in gray color represent genes
which encode non-biosynthetic enzymes and which are also co-located in
the genome.

a be d
a at 4 2 Hime

w

LEGEND.

Code Locus Tag From To ‘Category Domains
‘CaD60_Mb0920820 31859845 31871373 Gitochrome 450 ASD (E=2.9e-63)
CaD60_Mb0920830 31976834 31979344 Terpene synthase Terpene_synth (E=1.9e-16)

‘C4D60_Mb09120840 31982369 31983233 ‘Terpene synthase Terpene_synth_C (E=1.9e-23)
CaD60_Mbo920850 32014186 32015051 Terpene synthase Terpene_synth_C (E=4,7e-25)
C4D60_Mb0920860 32066032 32072049 ther genes la
‘C4D60_Mb0920870 32073169 32074508 Other genes a
C4D60_MbOS20880 32135065 32136709 Cytochrome 450 p50 (E=1.Se-98)

C4D60_Mb072ON90 32141400 32142272 ‘Other genes Wa
C4D60_Mb0%20900 32142767 32143126 Other genes la
CAD60_MbO%20910 32143806 32153287 Other genes na
(C4D60_Mb0920920 32153352 32160267 ther genes na
(C460 Mb0920930_32165035_32171220 Other genes wa

Figure 6.32. Putative biosynthetic gene cluster in M. balbisiana cv DH-PKW genome:
Cluster 11 - Chromosome 9 - Terpene (Location: 31830546-32166008 nt).
Biosynthetic gene categories: cytochrome 450, and terpene synthase.
Elements in gray color represent genes which encode non-biosynthetic
enzymes and which are also co-located in the genome.



bie
a d e f g h
a (oa a 2
LEGEND
Code Tovus Tag From To Strand Catego Domaine
WER CiD60_biow3020 e256" —DRR8196 ——- Cytochrome 430 PASO (E=3.50-78)
Be CADGO_MbIO03030 2837436 2837830 Other genes va
© C4D60_MblOw3040 2837506 2837811 + Other genes na
We CHDG0_Mbiow30s0 2837920 281 Other genes va
 _CADG0_Mbi0W03060 2840025 2812035 Other genes va
GEREN C4060_Mb10003070 2844835 2846373 - Ketosynthase mnt_C (E=1.9¢-08)
GEE CéD60_MMbi0103080 2847728 2849227 —Gycosyliransferase—-UDPGT2(E=1 8-92)
TE cs60 mb10103090_2853376_2854845_+_Glycosylransferase_UDPGT 2 (E=4.4e-94)

Figure 6.33. Putative biosynthetic gene cluster in M. balbisiana ev DH-PKW genome:

Cluster 12 - Chromosome 10 - Saccharide-Polyketide (Location: 2819919-
2860564 nt). Biosynthetic gene categories: cytochrome 450, ketosynthase,
and glycosyltransferase. Elements in gray color represent genes which
encode non-biosynthetic enzymes and which are also co-located in the

genome.

RE 4160_Mbi0109600 7404767 7412078 - Oxidoreductase NAD_binding_1 (E=4,7e-28)
GRE c4160_Mb10109630 7428546 7431814 - Glycosyltransferase UDPGT_2 (E=7.Se-87)

Figure 6.34. Putative biosynthetic gene cluster in M. balbisiana cv DH-PKW genome:

Cluster 13 - Chromosome 10 - Saccharide-Terpene (Location: 7374516-
7442609 nt). Biosynthetic gene categories: terpene synthase,
oxidoreductase, and glycosyltransferase. Elements in gray color represent
genes which encode non-biosynthetic enzymes and which are also co-
located in the genome.


a b c d © f g brie yg k
> = = a a
LEGEND.
Code Tocus Tag From: rn Category Dom
EEE Cibs0_Mibio13070 9s Tae Tipoxygenase Lipoxygenase (E=4
Be CADGOLMbIOLI2680 9545848 9547785 Other genes wa
© CADKOLMbIOLI2690 9549762 9556269 = Other genes va
@ CAD6O_MbIOLI2700 9560788 9561201 + Other genes va
GEER CADeo_Molou2710 9565768 9s72175. Epimerase Epimerase (£8 46-34)
f | CAD60MBIOU12720 9575439 sR ther genes va
& —CADGO_MbIOKI2730. 9585086 9585817 = Other genes ne
fh CD60_MbLOeI2740 9586982 9587807 + Other genes a
i CAD60_MbI0K12750 9587991 9590003 + Other genes a
GEE C4D60_Mb10012760 9592732 9593705 + Ketosynthase Chal_sti_synt_C (E=1.7e~08)
C4060. Mib10t12770_9595358__ 902714 Other genes ni

Figure 6.35. Putative biosynthetic gene cluster in M. balbisiana cv DH-PKW genome:
Cluster 14 — Chromosome 10 — Polyketide (Location: 9532310-9601127
nt). Biosynthetic gene categories: lipoxygenase. epimerase, and
ketosynthase. Elements in gray color represent genes which encode non-
biosynthetic enzymes and which are also co-located in the genome.

abecdefgh i j ok 1lomaoqgr s tavw
=> 1) Gla sores ==) + =»
u
Ga Sioat 1 esr Domai
By Cibo MbIOISTaD 9202 SSTRST hier me
C4D60_Mb10t13190 9932150 9933841 + BAHD acyltransferase ‘Transferase (E=1.8e-97)
© CADADLMION32O0 9936849939171 Other gens oe
@ —Cibeo_Mbloiszi0 9940s gosizae + Other prs ma
Se caneorMbimniszn — ooasoisoasaoa anes eS
HEME Gibso Mbi01s230 Spisi2—Sousi67 + Amimorasferse——_Aminotran 12 (E=3 0-09)
Bee CHDG0 MblOU3240 SbaRI89 9ONRGSE + Other goer ie
Hh  Cabeo_Mblous2s0 osszsse essai + Oaher genes ma
FH CAbeo_Mbiensz60 9953090 9968360 Copper amie oxidise Cu_amine_ond (E2186)
J Cabeo_Meiousz 997979 spas t Oter sacs om
Te Cabed-MbIOU32A0 9983703 SoBe Other genes vm
1 C4D60_MbI0tI3300 9988021 9980388 + Other genes a
Tm) CADGO_MbIONI3290 9989013 5885088 Seeger ™
GEE c4D60_Mb10113310 9999261 9999830 + Dirigent enzymes Dirigent (E=1.9e-33)
HERE 460_Mb10113320 10004288 10004854 + Dirigent enzymes Dirigent (E~1.9e-34)
Cade0-MION13330 10008978 10006028 Other genes ce
BBW Cédso Mbiou3340 10006362 10006934 + ~—inigemtenzymes——_—irigen (En. 2631)
C4DeO_MbIOL380 10011893 10013078 ter genes *
GREE C4D60_Mb10113360 10020880 10021146 + Dirigent enzymes Dirigent (E=9.7e-31)
tes CAbed_MblOU3370 1029098 10m29s06 com ene *
TERE C4D60_mb10113380 10033494 10034889 + Dirigent (E=4.1e~2
Ye CHbgO_MBIOI3350 10038169 TO038B88 + ve
BCA et MbNOUSA00 TOOTS 10080 2

Figure 6.36. Putative biosynthetic gene cluster in M. balbisiana ev DH-PKW genome:
Cluster 15 — Chromosome 10 - Lignan-Alkaloid (Location: 9921991-
10045048 nt). Biosynthetic gene categories: acyltransferase,
aminotransferase, copper amine oxidase, and dirigent enzymes. Elements in
gray color represent genes which encode non-biosynthetic enzymes and
which are also co-located in the genome.



fa
ef g hi j mo p q rstuy x cy *
=O a oe (am as
Torus Tag. ‘om To Strand Domains
@] CAD60_Mb10117470 12987700 + wa
$b CéDs0_Mibi0117480 12960038 : Other genes va
[EA cavso_mioioursso 12962008 296352 + Ketosynthase nue Oeil
2 a 5 Chal_sti_symt_N (E=4.9-121)
_CADG0_Mb10117500 12967909 12968109 - Other genes va
CAD60_MbIOLN7S10 12972679 12978798 + Other genes va
fF C4D60_MbION7S20 12973901 12978791 = Other genes a
 —CAD60_Mbi0t17530 12982753. 12983210 + Other genes wa
fh CéDso_Mbton7S40 12987175. 1298R78S Other genes va
ee aes ctosynthase Chast. synt.C (E=2.l6-73)
FI crv0_storoursso 12sso16s 12990603 Ketosynth Gorn cae
G) CAD60_Mb1ONI7S60 12992712. 12996227 + Other genes w
ke CAD60_Mbi0117570 12996156 12996084. Other genes a
1 C4D60_MbIOUI7S80 12996578 12907003. + Other genes na
im C4D60_MbIOUI7590 12997449 12909809 + Other genes na
® CéD60_MbIOL17600 13000339 13000949 + Other zenes wa
© CADSO_MbLOLT610 13001828. 13002651 = Other genes va
PBI rvs0 mioroars20 3004868 sorosar + “Othe losymtbete  pcsytranst 1 (E=Ae6)
GH CéDS0_MbLON7630 13011748 13019723 ther genes wa
F CADGO_MBION7640 13034632 13036671 + Other genes a
$  C4D60_MbIOKI7680 13037389 13040998 + Other genes wa
1 C4D60_MbLOUI7660 13081095 13081313 + Other genes wa
4 CAD60_MbIOLIT670 13081846 1308075. + Other genes a
HEBRI C4D60_Mbtoti7680 13044301 13045908 = Cytochrome 450 p50 (E=1.26-60)
Wo CD60 MDIOLI7690. 13085195 1306089 + Other genes wa
X_ CAD60_MbIOLI7700 13064803 13067304 - Other genes a
| —— eA ee cr rt
C4060 MBION7720 13087399 13093846 —=——Aminotransferase——_Aminotran_1_2 (E=3.3¢-53)
# C460 Mb10u17730_ 13097544 13099003 + Oiher genes ‘la

Figure 6.37. Putative biosynthetic gene cluster in M. balbisiana ev DH-PKW genome:
Cluster 16 - Chromosome 10 - Polyketide (Location: 12953721-13101829

nt). Biosynthetic gene categories:

ketosynthase, cytochrome 450,

oxidoreductase, aminotransferase, and (other) biosynthetic genes. Elements
in gray color represent genes which encode non-biosynthetic enzymes and
which are also co-located in the genome.

In general, the putative terpene BGCs are characterized by the occurrence of terpene

synthase, N-terminal domain (Terpene_synth), phenyltransferase (Phenyltrans), squalene-

hopene cyclase (SQHop_cyclase), or progesterone 5-reductase/iridoid synthase (PRISE)

enzymes. The putative BGCs for lignan and polyketide synthesis, on the other hand, are

associated with dirigent enzymes which contain a number of proteins which are induced in

response of plants to disease. The putative alkaloid biosynthetic cluster have the major
birch pollen allergen (Bet v1), copper amine oxidase (Cu_amine_oxid), or strictosidine

synthase (Str_synth) enzymes. Aside from the biosynthetic genes, non-biosynthctic genes

are also found within these clusters.

Two types of BGCs are common between M. fextilis var. Abuab and M. balbisiana cv

DH-PKW. These arc involved in the biosynthesis of terpenes and polykctides.

1. Terpene biosynthetic gene cluster

One BGC (Cluster 3) and two BGCs (Clusters 8 and 11) linked to terpene
biosynthesis were identified in M. textilis var. Abuab and M. balbisiana cv DH-
PKW, respectively. These BGCs share two common core domains: terpene
synthase, N-terminal domain (Terpene_synth) and terpene synthase, C-terminal

domain (Terpene_synth_C).

Terpene synthases (TPS) are considered as the committed key enzyme in the
terpenoid biosynthetic pathway. Depending on the chain length specificity of each
TPS, it leads to the formation of monoterpenes (Cio), sesquiterpenes (Cis),

diterpenes (C20), or triterpenes (C30) (Kwon, Mora-Pale, Lee, & Dordick, 2012).

Although these identified BGCs share common core domains, they differ, on the
other hand, in terms of cluster size and the presence of other core domains (e.g.,
cytochrome p450) and other non-biosynthetic genes. The co-localization of these

genes in the same scaffold or chromosome could suggest the coordinated

expression of these genes in the production of terpenes in M. fextilis and M.
balbisiana, while the differences among these BGCs could suggest the diversity of

terpenoid compounds that they can synthesize.

. Polyketide biosynthetic gene cluster

For clusters associated with polyketide synthesis, two BGCs (i.e., Clusters 2 and
4) and four BGCs (Clusters 3, 9, 14, and 16) were identified in M. textilis var. Abuab
and M. balbisiana cv DH-PKW, respectively. These were found to share a common
core domain that is chalcone and stilbene synthase, C-terminal domain

(Chal_sti_synt_C).

Chalcone and stilbene synthase, C-terminal domain, is a domain of chalcone
synthase, the enzyme that is responsible for the first committed step in the
biosynthesis of plant flavonoids (Weng & Noel, 2012). Some of the known aromatic
polyketides are actually derivatives of flavonoids (Kufs, ct al., 2020). This enzyme
catalyzes the synthesis of naringenin chalcone scaffold from where various

flavonoids can be derived.

Other biosynthetic genes associated with each polyketide BGC were also
identified. These can be one or a combination of the following enzymes that these
genes encode for: cytochrome 450, ligase, epimerase, lipoxygenase,

acetyltransferase, oxidoreductase, and methyltransferase.


The finding that BGCs for polyketide biosynthesis are putatively present in M.
textilis and M. balbisiana, and that these clusters differ in cluster size and gene
compositions, then also implics the coordinated expression of their associated gencs

for the synthesis of a wide array of flavonoids and polyketides.

CONCLUSION

M. textilis and M. balbisiana are two plants with traditional medicinal value, and which
are known for their economic roles. The results of this study show that the sequence
datasets for M. textilis var. Abuab and M. balbisiana cv DH-PKW contain putative genes
which are involved in the biosynthesis of various secondary metabolites such as terpenes
and phenolic compounds which can later be exploited for agricultural, industrial, and
pharmacological applications. Most of these phytochemicals are first reported in M. textilis

and M. balbisiana, however, further investigation on this is necessary for confirmation.

In addition, this study also reports the presence of putative BGCs related to terpenes and
polyketides in the genomes of these two plants. ‘This suggests the co-localization and
coordinated expression of these genes in M. fextilis and M. balbisiana for the synthesis of

different terpenes and polyketides.

The candidate genes that can be derived from this study may then be used in the genetic
improvement of desirable characteristics in M. textilis and M. balbisiana including traits

that will stimulate the accumulation of bioactive compounds in its tissues. This can also

lead to the exploitation and application of these desirable compounds for agricultural,
industrial, and medical applications then reflecting the reported economic potentials of M.

textilis.

CHAPTER 7
TRANSCRIPTOMIC ANALYSIS REVEALS THE BIOSYNTHESIS OF
SECONDARY METABOLITES IN THE PSEUDOSTEMS

OF SELECTED MUSA TEXTILIS NEE (ABACA)
GENOTYPES WITH HIGH FIBER QUALITY

INTRODUCTION

Due to the continuous advancement in sequencing technologies during the last decade
which provide fast, reliable, and cost-effective approaches (Devi, et al., 2016), there is an
exponential increase in the available genomic and transcriptomic information that allow
the better understanding of the various molecular and biochemical phenomena in living
organisms (Tripathi, Jadaun, Chandra, & Sangwan, 2016). Among these, transcriptome
sequencing has been one of the most commonly used tools by researchers (Xu, et al., 2019).
Transcriptomic analysis allows the understanding of the relationship between the genome
of an organism and its phenotype. It gives a clearer view of the expression of genes in a
tissue under a particular physiological condition which genome analysis alone fails to
provide (Backiyarani, Uma, Saraswathi, & Chandrasckar, 2014). In many plants,
transcriptome research has been conducted and has made significant contributions in
mining key genes and pathways including those which are associated with the synthesis of

various plant secondary metabolites.

Plants have approximately 20,000 to 60,000 genes, 15 to 25% of which are associated

with biochemical pathways that lead to secondary metabolites production (Tripathi,

Jadaun, Chandra, & Sangwan, 2016). Plant secondary metabolites, also known as
phytochemicals, are small, organic, structurally diverse compounds which are specific only
to some taxonomic groups (Wang, ct al., 2017). These are pivotal to the evolutionary
success of a plant species or group as they provide selective advantages in environmental
adaptation and physiological development (Hamberger & Bak, 2014). For instance, as an
adaptive response to nitrogen stress, 1,034-2,521 differentially expressed genes (DEGs)
out of 40,724-41,868 total genes were identified in Zea mays (Singh, et al., 2022). About
3.7-5.2% of the 41,174 genes of two Brassica rapa inbred lines, on the other hand, were
differentially expressed under heat stress (Dong, et al., 2015). Aside from mediating
biological interactions (Ikram, Zhan, Pan, King, & Simonsen, 2015), plants secondary
metabolites also exhibit promising properties which can be useful in drug development, as
bioenergy source, in flavor and color enhancement, and many more (Tohge, Yonekura-

Sakakibara, Nida, Watanabe-Takahashi, & Saito, 2007).

Several studies during the previous years have revealed the efficiency of transcriptomic
analysis in understanding secondary metabolism especially in non-model plants including
medicinal plants. For example, based on transcriptome results, the differences in essential
oil content and leaf phenotypes of the two varieties of Cinnamomum longepaniculatum
could be related to the significant differences in their pathways involving the synthesis of
terpenoids and phenylpropanoids (Zhao, et al., 2022). In Norway spruce, on the other hand,
Phenolic pathways were found to be activated as a hypersensitive response to needle
bladder rust infection (Trujillo-Moya, et al., 2020). A transcript level analysis in

Eucalyptus globulus also revealed the differences in transcript abundance across plant parts

of p-hydroxycinnamoy! transferase (HCT) and chalcone synthase (CHS) which are key
genes that influence wood quality and flavonoid biosynthesis. It was found that there was
an accumulation of Eg/HCT! and EgiHCT? transcripts in stems, but only to a lesser extent
in leaves; while there were high EgiCHS3 and EgiCHS¢ transcript levels in roots, shoots,
and leaves, but low levels in the stem (Shinya, Hayashi, Onogi, & Kawaoka, 2014). In
addition, a transcriptional study involving the mature seed embryos of Moringa oleifera
has revealed 416 upregulated genes which encode for 11 enzymes associated with
phenylpropanoid and flavonoid biosynthesis, and 63 genes which encode eight enzymes
related to the alkaloid pathway (Panes & Discar, 2021). Furthermore, looking into the
transcriptome of the medicinal plant Lithocarpus polystachus, 44 candidate genes related
to flavonoid synthesis were identified to be downregulated as leaves mature. This finding
then indicates that the young leaf of this plant is more ideal for medicinal use (Li, et al.,

2021).

Some other non-model plants which have been investigated using transcriptome data
are members of the genus Musa. This group, which is comprised of the wild and
domesticated plantains and bananas worldwide (Ci2kova, et al., 2015), is known to contain
a wide array of secondary metabolites mediating various biological processes. In a study
which investigated the purple peel formation in M. itinerans using purple and green peels
transcriptome, anthocyanin biosynthesis-related and transcription-factor genes were found
to be differentially expressed suggesting the role of anthocyanins in the observed color
difference (Deng, et al., 2019). In M. acuminata cv. Williams inoculated with rhizobacteria,

on the other hand, several differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were noted including

those which are involved in plant defense (Gamez, et al., 2019). Biotic stress response
genes were also identified in the leaf transcriptome of M. acuminata infected with the
fungal pathogen Mycosphaerella musicola which is known to causc the Sigatoka Icaf spot
disease (Passos, et al., 2013). Additionally, analyzing the leaf transcriptome of M.
acuminata exposed to salt stress has led to the identification of 3,378 DEGs. Some of these
DEGs were involved in phenylpropanoid biosynthesis indicating its contribution in
promoting the growth of banana under salt treatments (Wei, Liu, Liu, & Wei, 2022). Aside
from these given examples, there are other members of the genus Musa with scant or little
information on secondary metabolic processes. These include M. textilis (commonly

known as abaca) which is extensively used for its role in the fiber industry.

In 2022, the analysis of the transcriptomes obtained from the pseudostems, which are
known commercially as the source of high-quality abaca fibers, has paved the way to the
identification of differentially expressed (DE) transcripts associated with the high fiber
quality of five local M. textilis genotypes (Ereful, Lalusin, & Laurena, 2022). This resulted
from the use of various differential expression models including pairwise differential
expression (PDE) and non-differential expression (NDE). PDE is a method which
identifies DEGs between two experimental conditions, which in this case, the high fiber
quality of an M. textilis genotype versus the low fiber quality of another Musa species, i.¢.,
M. balbisiana var. Pacol. NDE, on the other hand, is a method which allows the
identification of commonly significantly expressed genes (DEGs) among subjects sharing
the same characteristics, which in this study, refers to the high fiber quality trait that is

shared among the five M. textilis genotypes. The analyses resulted in the identification of

upregulated transcripts associated with lignin, glucan and cytoskeleton biosynthesis

(Ereful, Lalusin, & Laurena, 2022).

In the current study, these previously generated transcriptomic datasets were analyzed
using the KEGG-derived pathways reported in Study 1 to determine the differentially
expressed transcripts in M. textilis which are associated with secondary metabolism. This
rescarch docs not only provide data for further secondary metabolites studics in abaca, but
it also lays a foundation for the development of varieties of M. fextilis ideal for use in non-
fiber industries such as medical, agricultural, and industrial fields. Further, the findings of
this study may support the reported use of M. fextilis pseudostem as a traditional medicinal
plant material; hence, this may serve as basis in the conduct of related pharmacological

studies in the future.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Transcriptomic Data

The transcriptomic data used in this study were generously provided by Dr. Nelzo C.
Ereful who worked on the differential expression (DF) of fiber quality genes in M. textilis
(Ereful, Lalusin, & Laurena, 2022). In brief, the study made use of five M. textilis
genotypes comprised of three local M. textilis varictics, namely, Abuab, Inosa, and
Tangongon, and two hybrids of M. textilis var. Abuab x M. balbisiana var. Pacol, namely,

BC? (a.k.a. Bandala) and BC3. The two abaca hybrids were developed through


backcrossing shown in Figure 7.1. All the plant genotypes were grown at the Feeds and

Industrial Crop Section (FICS) collection site at the Institute of Plant Breeding, University
of the Philippines Los Bafios, Laguna (14°09009.7” N, 121°15039.2” E). RNA-scq using
Illumina Novasegq 6000, Paired-End was performed using the samples obtained on June 22,
2021 (10 to 11 AM) from the innermost whorls of the midparts of the pseudostems of 3-
month-old suckers of each M. textilis genotype. The resulting datasets were then subjected

to DE analysis.

_~) ==
Gm (|
as (|)
Cease) «Le
Ce)

Figure 7.1. Schematic diagram showing the generation of M. textilis backcrosses
(adopted from Ereful, Lalusin, & Laurena, 2022). The and 3 symbols
indicate the female and male genotypes participating in each cross. The %
identity for BC2 and BC3 is shown in parentheses.

The current study specifically utilized the available datasets from the pairwise

differential expression (PDE) and non-differential expression (NDE) analyses.

Identification of DE Transcripts Associated with Secondary Metabolites Biosynthesis
in M. textilis
The PDE analysis was previously carried out to determine the DEGs in each M. textilis
genotype of high fiber quality when compared with M. balbisiana var. Pacol of low fiber
quality (Ereful, Lalusin, & Laurena, 2022). The datasets derived from this analysis were
further analyzed in the current study using the KEGG-derived pathways (see Study 1) to
identify the DE transcripts related to the biosynthesis of secondary metabolites in each of

the five M. textilis genotypes.

The results of the non-DE (NDE) analysis, which treated all the M. textilis genotypes as
one group excluding M. balbisiana var. Pacol in the analysis, were used to identify the
secondary metabolites transcripts that are commonly and significantly expressed within the

tested high fiber quality group.

Protein-Protein Interaction (PPI) of DE Transcripts Associated with Secondary
Metabolites Biosynthesis

The interactions among the candidate genes related to secondary metabolites
biosynthesis and high fiber quality in M. fextilis genotypes were determined by assigning
the identified DEGs to PPI network of Arabidopsis thaliana in STRING database
(Szklarczyk, et al., 2017). The 100 first neighbors of the mapped proteins (labelled using
Protein identifiers or IDs) were selected to predict the PPI. Only the interactions with
combined score of > 0.4 were chosen for the network construction (Maritim, Seth, Parmar,

& Sharma, 2021). This value represents a good estimate of STRING’s confidence on the

biological significance of the proposed protein-protein associations given all the available
evidences (ie. textmining. neighborhood, experiments, gene fusion, databases, co-
occurrence, and co-expression) to establish these connections. To visualize the resulting

PPI network, Cytoscape v3.9.1 was used (Shannon, et al., 2003).

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

DE Transcripts Associated with Secondary Metabolites Biosynthesis in M. textilis

1. Pairwise Differential Expression

The results of the PDE analysis were utilized to identify the candidate genes for the
biosynthesis of secondary metabolites in each high fiber quality abaca genotype when

paired with the low fiber quality M. balbisiana var. Pacol.

Based on the list of the participating enzymes in KEGG pathways related to secondary
metabolism, DEGs for the biosynthesis of terpenoid backbone, sesquiterpenoids,
phenylpropanoids, curcumin, and flavonoids were recorded across genotypes (Table 7.1).
Among the recorded DEGs, 66 DEGs were assigned to secondary metabolites biosynthesis
in Abuab, 65 DEGs in BC2, 57 DEGs in BC3, 70 DEGs in Inosa, and 68 DEGs in
Tangongon. Majority of the identified DEGs across these genotypes were involved in
phenylpropanoid biosynthesis—the pathway that forms various phenolic compounds
including the monolignols from where the lignin molecules which contribute to high fiber
quality are derived (del Rio, et al., 2020)—but only Abuab had more upregulated related

genes than otherwise.


89 SE OF on cs 8 us we ST $9 sr 99 OC

plouoaely
‘SIsoupus
fe 72 1 I 1 0 I 1 0 z z 0 I o ot (urunomd)
prouesdayjAreiq,
SysaHPUASOIG
prouedoidyduayg
SiSaUASOIG
plouadiayinbsag
SsaUASOIG
6 9 € e Lit 9 e e] 2 9 1] 8 Z 9 | guoqyoeq prousdsay
mol ud wn oL ud yn wo, ud aN OL Ud AN WoL Ad YN AVMHLYd ISIN
woduosue |, sou Og a qenqy

adA.LONAD VOVEV

cla Lz 4 os ve OL or vz 8l ey 9€ ZL SB i) a 4

z I I I I 0 z I I T if 0 z I I

-paejndosumop “yq :pareindoidn “y/) “sisKpeue |dd wo paseq sadAyousd
SHUXAL YW aniy ay) Ut sISsyPUXsoIg soyloquIoU {repuodas YIM PareIoosse sOqC Jo uorMaUNstp <emmped pue uoNEINBoY “TL AGEL


Abuab is the recommended M. rextilis variety by the National Sced Industry Council for
planting in Luzon, especially in the Bicol region (PhilFIDA website, 2017). For the study,
all the plants were grown in Laguna, Luzon; therefore, it was expected that the fiber quality
of Abuab would be almost at its optimum. Inosa and Tangongon, on the other hand, are
recommended for the Visayas and Mindanao regions, correspondingly (PhilFIDA website,
2017); while BC2 and BCs, which are specifically hybrids of abaca and M. balbisiana var.
Pacol, are backcross genotypes that still possess genes from the low fiber quality Pacol
(Ereful, Lalusin, & Laurena, 2022). The downregulation of a higher number of
phenylpropanoid genes in Inosa and Tangongon could have therefore been affected by the
unmatched environment where they were planted for RNA extraction; while it could be

due to gene composition in BC2 and BC3as they are hosts to another genome (i.e., Pacol).

At least three upregulated DEGs which are involved in the production of terpenoid
backbone and flavonoids were identified each in Abuab, BC3, and Tangongon. The BC3
genotype was reported to be 93.75% Abuab in identity; hence, the aforementioned
observation could be due to this similarity. For the terpenoid backbone biosynthesis, all
these three genotypes had the upregulated genes for hydroxymethylglutaryl-CoA synthase
(LOCUS _016809-RA) and mevalonate kinase (LOCUS_023199-RA) (Table 7.2) which
are both key enzymes in the mevalonic acid (MVA) pathway for isoprenoid synthesis (Cho
et al., 2022; Liao et al., 2014). Also, two DEGs involved in flavonoid formation, namely,
chalcone--flavonone isomerase (LOCUS_017753-RA) and flavonol synthase/flavanone 3-

hydroxylase (LOCUS_013840-RA) were commonly upregulated in these three genotypes.


Vu-801100 SN9071 1 9seAj-etuowue auruEjeAuayd

Vu¥-996700_SNDOT
V¥-F1L800 SNOT

V¥-6L0800_SND01 sisaypudsorq

asek|-eiuowue aujueyeAuayd —_plouedoidj£uayg

¥ [aseunuds jopiior9u-(a9°S6) stsaupugsorg

Wu¥-£0L£00 S901 aseuadAxoouous auajenbs plouadiaynbsog
VU-66EE10 SNOT ‘asehj auraisko|Asourey
WUrIS9SOO SNOT _asesaysuEN|Aipaus-O auIaisKo|Auaidos)-g-ulaioud aalyeind
W¥-1891Z0 SNOT Biaq quNgns asesaysueN|ASoUNE UIDI0Id
V¥-+00000 SNOT dnse|dorojys “aseyuds areydsoydoskd (Auera8|Aue1a8
v¥-699900 SNI01 | aseyjuds ayeydsoydoshd |Asousey

W¥-8S91Z0_SQDOT

Vvu-901Z£0 SND01 ‘aseyucs areydsoydip [4-|-ua-7-inqyAyaus-¢-KxospAY-p

ansedoI0] yo

Ve-HISb10 S901 ‘aseraurostojonpas ayeydsoyd-¢ asojnyAx-q-Ax0ap-|
VU-SSIEOO SNIOT _aIseIdoso]yo “| aseypuds aeydsoyd-¢-asojn]&x-q-Axoap-|
x ‘ase]Axoqresap ajeuopesuroydsoudp

Dseuy aTeUOjEAawoYydsoyd

‘aSBuLy IBUOTBASUI

VU-SP61Z0 SNDOT Z dtJosorgo ‘asesaysues|Ajaoe YO:

Vvu-6L9020 $2901 sisayjuxsoiq

Vu-608910 SNOT ‘aseIUAS YOo-|ArEIn|S|AyPaWAXOIpAY — aUOgYoeG plousdia|

SL Oa Om av
NOISSTUdXa

) LdTAOSNVALL NaS AYMHLVd

‘Da ‘Od ‘av ‘qenqy) sadijouad

poyejndorumop : my ‘payejnSaudn : my “pueda; 4070p
“Jooed “FA DuDISIgIDg J WIM sisKyeue FC UO paseq (ny ‘uoSuoSue |, ‘uy ‘esouy
1 W PAy dup Ul souad ayJoquiaus Arepuooss passaidxa A]jenuasayyip Apueoyiusig “7-2 GUL



V¥-060100_SN301

19 aseusToIpayap joyooye |AureuU

Vu-P0L620 $0301

aseuadoupdyap joyooye-|ureuur>

W4-950b00 SNOT
Wu-0£9S00 SND01

aseue8 Axoouourp ayeureuuro-suen

W¥-161SZ0_ SNOT

Vu-190S00_SN307

V¥ELII10 SNIOT

STINS 291N-2se1onpax yoo-|Koureun}>

vurcr9s $nN301
VU¥-6L6L20 SNOT
Vu¥-6L7100 SNOT
Vu-946000_SN3071
vu-€21810 $N907
Wu-s0ss00 SNIOT

[ aseronpar yoo-1oureuun>

‘Vu-880h00 SNOT

§ Sy 250A Yoo-a1ezBUIMOD-p aaneind

Vu-L001Z0_ SNDOT

£25884] YOo-arereunoD-p aaneind

Wu-rS0r20 SN301

7 a8e1) YOQ-sreIeUINOS-p aanveInd

V¥-67SH10 SNOT

Layu-28ea1] YOO--aeseUINOD-p

V¥L16S10 S301

9 Sy-2SeB! YOD--a1esEUINOD-p

‘Vu-168800 SNOT
‘Vu¥-6L7800 SNDOT

$ 24U1-98e81] Yoo--areseUINOd-p

V¥-60Z1£0 SN901

3SWB1] YOD~aIBICUINOD-p

‘Vu-rsolz0_ SND071

V¥-7HIIZO SNDOT

[ 29H1-9Se81] YOD--a1eIeUINOD-F  (p, juo.>) sisoyUcSOIG

{aseh|-eluounuTe suluRe|Auayd —_—_prouedosd|Auoyg

BL O08 Od 4V_ GiLdRIOSNVYL
NOISSIdXa

aNq5 AVYMHLVd

(p,mo0Q)

“TL AGEL


Vu-E18h10 SNOT (09 aseprxoied
‘WU-L84970 SNOT ‘LS asepixoied
V¥6ISTIO S901 $5 asepmKored
W¥-818820 SNDOT ZS aseprcored

Vu-brL100 SND07 ZS asepixoied
vu-9 ) SNOT 1g aseprxorad
‘WUS$1p70 SAIOT 1s asepixoiad
W¥-0£0620 SNDOT ‘Ly asepixoied
VU-LPSS10 $NIO1 6€ aseprxoiad
V¥-686810 SN901

VuTEEIZO_SNDO1 6€ asepixored
vu-zezezo SNIOT Sz asepxored
Wu-18PhZ0_SNDOT Tz aseprxoiad
Vvu-o! ) SNOT ZI aseprxorad

$1 asepixoiad
ZI aseprrouad
U1 aseprxoued
Vu-0SrL00 SND01 ¢ asepixoiad
a¥-LLZ1Z0 SNDO1
Vursssl10 $901 ‘5 asepixoed
Vu-861»20 SN301
W¥-6£SS20_ SNOT pasepixoind (p,pwo.>) sisaipuxsoiq
Z Wu-9E1b20 SNOT Gaseusdouphyap joyooye jAweuuys eaneind —_—_—plouedoad|Auaya
el Od Od av GI LdIMOSNVaL ‘aNaD AVMHLVd

NOISSAUdXa

(Pwo) “TL AGEL

&

Vu-S£8610 SNOT

Vu-0P8E10 SNOT

‘ase Axouphy-¢ SuOUBABY/aSepUAS [OUOAEY,

V¥-9P11Z0 SNOT

‘aseues AXoIp-¢ orese In| SOxO-7 ulUSTULeU

V¥-101Z10 SAIOT

¢ aSei9UIOS| SuOUOABY--ouOD]BYO BANEINd

VU-ESLLIO_ SNOT

‘ASBIDUIOS! BUOUOABY|--U0SEYD

VU-£EP900 SNOT stsamucso1q
Vu¥-8SEP10 SAD0T Zaseypuds auoreys prouoneyy
‘Vu-L09L20 SNOT € aseyucs ujumoind sisa1pucsoiq
Vu-6r0L10 SNOT Z aseyrucs ujunoin> (urwnosns)
VU-SPEOIO SNOT ‘aseipuXs yor- [A120 KouedoadyAuayd plourday req
V¥-166010 SADOT
VUu-L9b020 SNOT aspsaysuen|Auaul-O YOO-[hoayes
VurL0z£0 SNOT
VULLILIO SNOT aseajsuen|Aupaul-O-¢ pise I1aye9
VU-SZIIZO_ SNOT
Vu-008b20 SNOT
vu-29S1Z0_ SNOT
VuU-9PSpl0 SNOT aseuaysa ayeunytys|Aoayes
asesaysuen|AoweUUloXxospAy-C syeWIyLYS.
V¥-871S10 SAIOT
Vu-£rL100 S907 dd asepixoied
N aseprcorad
VU-LLELZO SNDOT ZL asepixoied (p_uo) sisaypuksorq
‘Vu-9S1L00 SNOT $9 aseprxoiad Prouedoud|Auayd
SL a Od av GI LariOSNVEL aNGD AVMHLVd

NOISSAUdXa

mor) "TLAAL

g
&

VU-9ELPZO SNOT 7 aSe|AKOIPAY-,5',¢ PIOUOARL
Vu-6£8920 SNOT
Vu-0rE7ZO SNDO1 [ ase]Axoupy-,s',¢ plouoney

V¥-9r1LZ0 SNDOT (@urwasoj-[0-¢-weaey-(Sz)) eseionpas uipruekooyue
V-S6rL10 SNOT ‘SSPUBTAKOOUOU-¢ PIOUOAEL
‘Vu-6S5600 SNOT ‘aseIONpal-p [OUOAROIPAYIP aAneind
Vu-0ZETI0 SNIOT (p,1u0.) sisaypucsorq
VU-LL98Z0 SNDOT1 astjonpal-p [OUOAROUpAYIP plouoae[ 4s
JL Oa Oa av GN LdRIOSNVAL ‘aNaD AVMHLVd

NOISSIYdXa

eee SSeS

(pmoy) — “TLAWL


Chalcone--flavonone isomerase is a plant enzyme that presents a key role during
flavonoid metabolism as its action on naringenin chalcone leads to the formation of
naringenin, an intermediate which defines a crucial branch point for the formation of
several classes of flavonoids including anthocyanins, flavanones, and flavonols (Kang et
al., 2014). Flavonol synthase, on the other hand, is a key enzyme for the production from
dihydroflavonols of flavonols, a large flavonoid subclass that serves various plant
physiological functions such as UV protection, control of auxin transport, and flower
coloration together with anthocyanins (Schilbert, et al., 2021). This reported enzyme also
displays a flavanone 3B-hydroxylase activity which causes the hydroxylation of flavanones

to form dihydroflavonols (Sun, He, & Kong, 2019).

Only Abuab and BC3 had an upregulated gene for sesquiterpenoid biosynthesis (i.e,
squalene monooxygenase, LOCUS_003703-RA), and only Abuab and Tangongon had an
upregulated gene for curcumin formation (i.e., curcumin synthase 2, LOCUS_017049-

RA).

Squalene monooxygenase, a.k.a. squalene epoxidase, is a rate-limiting enzyme in the
formation of sesquiterpenoids and triterpenoids (Manzoor, et al., 2021). The non-
observation of this upregulation in BC2, despite being 87.5% Abuab in identity, could
support the previous speculation that this genotype is highly heterozygous (Ereful, Lalusin,
& Laurena, 2022). This means that the regulation of the expression of Abuab- and Pacol-
specific alleles is largely affected by the interactions between these two co-residing

genomes plus the influence of the environment. This heterozygosity could also indicate the

transcriptional versatility of BC2 giving it the ability to grow in and adapt to different

Philippine regions.

Curcumin synthase 2, on the other hand, is one of the multiple curcumin synthases that
is involved in the downstream section of the biosynthetic pathway for curcumin, a
biologically and pharmacologically important compound in Curcuma longa or turmeric,
and in closely related members of the genus (Ayer, et al., 2020). The gene for this enzyme
has also been previously identified in the genomes of M. acuminata and M. balbisiana
(Pothiraj, Ravikumar, Suthanthiram, Subbaraya, & Krishnamurthy, 2021). The putative
formation of curcumin in M. textilis is first reported in this study; therefore, further
investigation on this is needed. If curcumin cannot be detected in abaca, then the
upregulation of the identified curcumin synthase gene may be involved in other
biosynthetic pathways. From the transcriptome datasets of all the M. textilis genotypes
under study, two DEGs were commonly upregulated among them (Table 7.2). These were
hydroxymethylglutaryl-CoA synthase (LOCUS_016809-RA) and 4-coumarate--CoA
ligase-like 7 (LOCUS_011529-RA). As mentioned previously, the former acts as a key
enzyme in the MVA pathway for isoprenoid synthesis (Liao, et al., 2014). The latter, on
the other hand, is one of the several forms of 4-coumarate--CoA ligase which is a rate-
limiting enzyme in the metabolism of phenylpropanoids which include flavonoids and
lignin (Chen, et al., 2019).

Seven DE transcripts were also recorded to be significantly upregulated only in the
Abuab variety. These were acetyl-CoA acetyltransferase (LOCUS_021945-RA) and

diphosphomevalonate decarboxylase (LOCUS_014179-RA) involved in  terpenoid

biosynthesis; trans-cinnamate 4-monooxygenase (LOCUS_005630-RA), cinnamy! alcohol
dehydrogenase 9 (LOCUS_024136-RA), and shikimate O-hydroxycinnamoyltransferase
(LOCUS_029196-RA) related to phenylpropanoid biosynthesis; and flavonoid 3'-
monooxygenase (LOCUS_017495-RA) and anthocyanidin reductase (LOCUS_027146-
RA) involved in flavonoid synthesis.

Several upregulated DE transcripts were also shared between Abuab and its close
genotype, BCs. These were hydroxymethylglutaryl-CoA synthase (LOCUS_016809-RA),
mevalonate kinase (LOCUS_023199-RA), squalene monooxygenase (LOCUS_003703-
RA), phenylalanine ammonia-lyase 3 (LOCUS_021642-RA), 4--coumarate--CoA ligase-
like 5 (LOCUS_008279-RA), 4-coumarate--CoA ligase-like 7 (LOCUS_011529-RA),
cinnamoyl-CoA reductase 1 (LOCUS_027979-RA, LOCUS_018643-RA), cinnamoyl-
CoA reductase-like SNL6 (LOCUS_011173-RA, LOCUS_005061-RA, LOCUS_022392-
RA), peroxidase 5 (LOCUS_011855-RA), peroxidase 39 (LOCUS_021332-RA),
peroxidase 47 (LOCUS_029030-RA), peroxidase 51 (LOCUS_024155-RA), peroxidase
P7 (LOCUS_001743-RA), chalcone--flavonone isomerase (LOCUS_017753-RA), and
flavonol synthase/flavanone 3-hydroxylase (LOCUS_013840-RA) which they also shared
with the other M. textilis genotypes. Four DE transcripts, on the other hand, were uniquely
upregulated in these two genotypes only. These were protein farnesyltransferase subunit
beta (LOCUS_021687-RA), 4-coumaratc--CoA ligase 2 (LOCUS_024054-RA),
cinnamoyl-CoA reductase 1 (LOCUS_001279-RA), and peroxidase 65 (LOCUS_007156-

RA).


2. Non-Differential Expression

Across the five M. textilis genotypes, 172 transcript IDs which encode for 36 secondary
metabolites genes based on the KEGG pathways for the biosynthesis of three important
secondary metabolite groups were identified as significantly differentially upregulated
(Tables 7.3-7.4). These were comprised of 18 upregulated genes (i-e., 58.06% of the total
identified genes in the Abuab genome) associated with terpenoid backbone/
sesquiterpenoid biosynthesis, 10 genes (83.33%) related to phenylpropanoids synthesis,

and eight genes (80.00%) responsible for the production of flavonoids.

Table 7.3. Number of commonly upregulated secondary metabolite genes and their
proportion (%) in the total number of identified secondary metabolite genes.

NO. OF NO. OF
IDENTIFIED UPREGULATED
PATHWAY CATEGORY GENES* GENES** %
Terpenoid backbone/sesquiterpenoid
biosynthesis aD uu ei
Phenylpropanoid biosynthesis 12 10 83.33
Flavonoid biosynthesis 10 8 80.00

* Based on the results of Study 2 using the genome of M. rexiilis var. Abuab
“** Based on the results of NDF. analysis using the pseudostem transcriptomes of five M. rextilis genotypes

£ €Thd
i IT¥d sisaypuxsorq
9 OUT oUTUeTE|Auayd Wd piouedoidyéuayq
9 aseypuAs ousinumy-o Tesdl
Z aseuad kxoouour auajenbs 7dOS
Zz ‘ase2is9[Auyaur |AUOqres-eydye oulaisAopAuasdost ANd
r ‘2seA] SULSISKO]ASOUIR ATL
1 aselajsuen[AyaUl-O autaisAopAurasdost-g-utayord VFIFLS
[4 B}aq }UNQns asesajsuen|Asourey uls}01d izes
€ aseionpar ayeydsoydip |Aueso3|Aueiod __OLFFLOTIV
T asewpuds aeydsoydordd |uer98)Aueiod 7sd99
Zz T aseynuks ayeydsoydoadd |<sourey 1Sdet
I J] eseJawiosi-2y]aq] aeydsoydip-|Auayuadost @ddl
Z ] aseiawiosi-ei9q a1eydsoudip-[Auaiuadost Iddl 6
aseyUAS
z ayeydsoudip [Aua-z-ing]Aupaul-¢-AXOIpAY-p SGH 8
SSBIOUIOSTOINpAT
1 areydsoyd-¢-asoinjéx-q-Axoap: axa L
r aseqquds ajeydsoyd-c-as0|n|xx-q-Axoop: IVT) 9
I ase]Axoqsesap ayeuojeasuoydsoydip: IGAW S
I aseupy ayeuojeasuioydsoyd —— O/61EDILV.
€ aseuly ayeUO[eAaUE XW € stsayudsorq
€ ‘asesaysuesy[Alaoe-J YWoD-|Aja0e oaneynd ZLVOF z plouadiayinbsas
Zz asequks yoo-[Arein|3|AqraurAxorpAy, SOWH T /euogyoeq plouadia,
GI LardOSNVUL aAVN GNIS ai asvaviva XAODALVO
40 ‘ON ONRILS AVMHLVd

“sisAjeue AGN Uo paseg sonouea eoege ayy Suoure saudd aytfoqnioul Arepuodes parenBaidn <juounuiog,

“PL GEL


i Gl asepixored — O90FEDZLV.

U Li eseprxored —OzrZZO7LV.

[4 S| aseprxorad OST8IDZLV

1 Zl esepxoid — S69IZDILV

9 $ asepixosed OSSFIDILY

€ ‘p aseprxorad read ‘74

[a aaneind “6 aseussospAyap joyooye [Aweuuls 6qVv2

1 aaneind ‘9 aseuaSospAyap joyooye [AureuuIo 9avD

Z aateind | aseuadorpAyap joyooye [Atweuurs Da¥vD

Z aaneind ‘aseuadorpAyap [oyooye [Aureuui> POPOL z

9 aseuedAxoouoUl-p ayeureUUID-sueN) Ht [a4

3 "INS H11-aseionpar yoo-|Aoureuts INS

I Zasejonpal Yo)-|Aoweuuto Ozgoss rin

6 | asejonpar yoo-|Aoureuu1o PX Iz

I j-aseBl] YOo--a}ereuN0s-p STO

I pasedy YOQ-aereumos-p —_O91S0OF.LY

i rasedyy yoD-aereunos-p 01061 FLY.

z -asedy] YO—a1ereunos-p 17T2d0

€ py ay-asedy YoQ-ayereumos-p —_ OOSOCOLLV

z SSOOV

€ oaneind “¢ aseay] yo)--ayereuUmoo-p €710¢

3 J aseBt] YoOD--arereumod-f TOF (p, 1402) sisayucsoiq

€ | ase] Yoo--arereumoo-p (Tot 0z Prouedosd]Auoyd
GI LdOSNVUL GIAVN ANGD ar asvaviva AYODALVD

40 ‘ON ONDILS

(@,109)

“OL AGEL


T aseusd AXoIp-¢ ayeIE\N[soxo- UlUSsULTEU Het Te
T € aser9UIOS} aUOUOARY-auODTEyD MHD
T ‘DSEIDUIOS! SUOUOARY-SUODTEYD SLL 0c
€ 7 aseyjuhs auo3|e49 Fddd 6% sisaipudsorg prouoaely
I [ esesaysuentAmpew-O yoo-1hoayes IL LWOV0DD
Zz aseiaysuen|Ampaw-C WoO-1Koayyes INVODD 8
z aseraysuen|Ayoul-O-¢ PIB NAYES OESLLOLLV [rd
y BBIOISS STEUITIYS|AODJED 71d OST 9%
€ ‘aswiaysuen] AoureuursAxoipAy-CO ayeUITyTYS LOH Sz
v Ld asepixoisd ——OL90ED1.LV
I Nosepxored 06861 9S1V
L gg aseprxored —— OFSSOSLY
z sgesepxord —— Q00LFOSIV
L 49 aseprxorod t94Td
z gg aseprxord — OFIFIDSIV
€ Zs aseprxored 75x
z Ig esepixorod ——OFSLEOKLV
1 Lyasepxord — OCFEEDKLV
I Op aseprxored —— O9LIEDKLY.
I Zp aseprxored PIXU
€ oe aseprxord — O6ZIIOFLV.
I SZ asepixored O8F IFOTLV (p.moD) sisouucsoiq
1 Iz aseprxosed OEILEDZLY Prourdosd)Auayd
il LATAOSNVUL AVN NAD di asvaviva AYODALVI
40 ‘ON ONDILS

(p,1u0D)

“PL GEL


I ‘asvjonpar urptueAdoyjUBOINA| YT 9f
£ Zase[AxompAy-,¢*.¢ plouoneyy CHISEL
£ 1 ase AxoupAy-.¢*,¢ PlouoARyy IHS Ed se
[a ‘asejonpor -ADOYIUE NVE ve
L asejonpal-p JOUOARTFOIpAYIP: wid £€ (p.mop)
¢ ‘ase[AxoupAy-¢ suoueaey/aseynucs [oUOAeY STI Ze sisampudsorg plouoaey.t
GT LaRHOSNVUL GINVN ANGD arasvavivd “ON AYODALV
40 "ON DNRLLS
SSNS

Pwo) “PL ageL


The identification of these upregulated genes then suggests the synthesis of terpenoids,
phenylpropanoids (especially lignin), and flavonoids in the pseudostem of the five high
fiber quality M. rextilis genotypes. This, however, does not automatically indicate that these
compounds also accumulate and confer benefits in the pseudostem. Some secondary
metabolites may be synthesized by a plant cell and be stored in the same plant organ, but
there are some which may also be excreted and be accumulated in or give effects to another
organ that require long-distance transport (Brodelius, 1990). For example, the pyridine
alkaloid nicotine of Nicotania tabacum is synthesized in the roots. It is then translocated
into the leaves where it acts as a chemical defense against herbivores (Shitan, Hayashida,
& Yazaki, 2015). Flavonoids, on the other hand, are known to accumulate and function in
its synthesizing cells; although its organ-to-organ movement and secretion to the

environment are also reported (Buer, Muday, & Djordjevic, 2007).

a. Terpenoid backbone/sesquiterpenoid biosynthesis

Terpenoid, a.k.a. isoprenoid, is a plant secondary metabolite group that is known for
its diverse structure and physiological function, and for its pharmaceutical applications.
In this study, the genes for the biosynthesis of terpenoid backbone in M. textilis

including HMGS, AC,

, MK, AT1G31910, MVD1, CLAI, DXR, HDS, isopentenyl-
diphosphate Delta-isomerase (IPP1, IPP2) FPSI, GGPS2, ATIG74470, ERAI,
STE14A, FCLY, and PCME were found to be upregulated. In addition to these DEGs,

two were specifically involved in the further metabolism of isoprenoid to

sesquiterpenoids. These were SOP2 and TPS21. The significantly higher expression of
these genes then suggests the active production of precursor molecules for the different
classes of terpenoids in the pseudostems of high fiber quality M. rextilis genotypes.

In the terpenoid biosynthetic pathway, prenylsynthases (PSs) (e.g., FPS/, GGPS2)
catalyze the production of terpene biosynthesis precursors. PSs are also the principal
enzymes involved in the synthesis of primary metabolites such as carotenoids,
chlorophylls, and hormones (Zhan, Qian, & Mao, 2022). On the other hand, the action
of the terpene synthases (TPS), which are considered to be the committed key enzyme
in the pathway, depends on their chain length specificity which then results in the
formation of monoterpenes (C1u), sesquiterpenes (C15), diterpenes (C20), or triterpenes
(Cao) (Kwon, Mora-Pale, Lee, & Dordick, 2012). The a-humulene synthase (7PS2/)
identified in this study is a TPS associated with the conversion of geranyl diphosphates
to a-humulene, a sesquiterpenoid known for various pharmacological activities (de
Lacerda Leite, et al., 2021). The upregulation in M. textilis var. Abuab of genes that
encode terpene synthases could then reflect the coordinated expression of these genes.
This could be attributed to their co-localization in the chromosome which putatively
forms the reported terpene biosynthetic gene cluster (BGC) in Chapter 5. Included also
in the identified upregulated genes in this study is HMGS, an important rate-limiting
factor in the terpenoid pathway.

Using the transcriptomics approach, genes related to terpenoid metabolism in
several medicinal plants have also been identified (Tripathi, Jadaun, Chandra, &

Sangwan, 2016). Some of these are the genes associated with the biosynthesis of

withanolides in Withania somnifera (Gupta, ct al., 2013), saikosaponins in Blupleurum
chinense (Sui, et al., 2011), ginsenosides in Panax ginseng (Chen, et al., 2011),
tanshione in Salvia miltiorrhiza (Yang, Ding, Lin, Cheng, & Kong, 2013), and taxol in
Taxus cuspidata (Wu, et al., 2011).

In rice, the overexpression of a TPS gene (i.e., OsTPS19) can increase the synthesis
of the monoterpene (S)-limonene which, in turn, can enhance the resistance of rice
plants against Magnaporthe oryzae, the fungal species responsible for the rice blast
disease (Chen, et al., 2018). In transgenic Populus, the overexpression of an HMGS
gene from Ginkgo biloba can result in higher yields of the triterpenoid lanosterol, and
diterpenoids dehydroabietic acid and phytol (Wu, et al., 2021). In cotton, the
upregulation of multiple 7PS genes can increase the production of insect-induced
linalool-containing volatile terpenes which are necessary against further herbivory
(Huang, et al., 2017).

The identification of these upregulated genes in M. textilis pseudostem, therefore,
could also indicate the important role of the synthesized terpenes in supporting its
growth and development and providing protection against biotic stresses. Although
there are reports suggesting the long-distance transport of terpenes in plants (Huang &
Osbourn, 2019; Duan, Bonn, & Kreuzwieser, 2020), the detection of these compounds
in the extracts of M. acuminata pscudostem (Onyema, Ofor, Okudo, & Ogbuagu, 2016)
could indicate its storage in the same organ, and could suggest the same in M. textilis.

Given the aforesaid assumption and the established knowledge on the anti-infectious

and anti-inflammatory properties of terpenes (Khosla & Keasling, 2003; Prakash,

2017), these could then justify the efficacy of using the pscudostem of M. textilis as a
traditional medicinal preparation in the Philippines for the treatment of gastrointestinal
problems, and external injuries such as wounds and cuts (DOH-PITAIIC, UP Manila,
& UP Mindanao, 2000[a]; DOH-PITAHC, UP-Manila, & UP-Mindanao, 2000(b};
DOH-PITAHC, UP Manila, & UP Mindanao, 2000[c]; DOH-PITAHC, UP Manila, &
UP Mindanao, 2000{d]; Langenberger, Prigge, Martin, Belonias, & Sauerbom, 2009;
Elago, Dando, Pizon, Galang, & Sia, 2013; Celeste, Condino, Dadang, & Amoroso,
2020). Despite its low solubility in water, which is the usual solvent used in the
medicinal preparation of M. textilis, terpenes have been detected in water extracts of
other Musa species such as M. acuminata and M. balbisiana. These compounds provide
an antibacterial action against pathogenic microorganisms including Bacillus subtilis,
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Shigella dysenteriae, Staphylococcus aureus, and Vibrio
cholerae (Asuquo & Udobi, 2016; Onyema, Ofor, Okudo, & Ogbuagu, 2016), further
supporting the medicinal efficacy of M. textilis in treating pathogen-associated

ailments.

Phenylpropanoid biosynthesis

Phenylpropanoids are comprised of simple organic compounds in plants which
structurally have an aromatic ring and a three-carbon propene tail, and which are
formed via the shikimic acid pathway. The shikimic acid pathway has received

considerable attention as it participates in the production of phytochemicals such as

flavonoids, lignin, tannins, and other phenolic compounds (Vogt, 2010). These
compounds act as plant antioxidants, attractants, screens against ultraviolet radiation,
signaling molecules, structural compounds, and defense response chemicals (Lin, et al.,
2016).

The pathway for the biosynthesis of phenylpropanoids in M. fextilis has been
elucidated in this study. It identified a significantly higher expression of associated
genes including phenylalanine ammonia lyase (PAL, PALI, PAL3), 4-coumarate—
CoA ligase (4CLI, 4CL2, 4CL3, ACOSS, ATIG20500, OPCLI, AT4G19010,
AT4G05160, 4CL8), cinnamoyl-CoA reductase (IRX4, Atlg80820, SNL6), C4H,
cinnamyl alcohol dehydrogenase (ATCAD4, CADG, CAD6, CAD9), peroxidase
(PER4, ATIGI4550, ATIG71695, AT2G18150, AT2G22420, AT2G34060,
AT2G37130, AT2G41480, AT4G11290, PRXRI, AT4G31760, AT4G33420,
AT4G37530, PRX52, ATSG14130, PER64, AT5G47000, AT5G58400, ATSG19890,
AT1G30870), HCT, LysoPL2, ATIG77530, and caffeoyl-CoA O-methyltransferase
(CCOAMT, CCoAOMTI).

PAL is the first key enzyme and the central enzyme in the shikimic acid pathway
(Zhang & Liu, 2015). Its expression is responsible for the elimination of ammonia from
phenylalanine which leads to the formation of frans-cinnamic acid, a precursor of
flavonoids, coumarins, lignin, and other phenolic acids (Davidson, 2010; Feduraev, ct
al., 2021). Several 4-coumarate—CoA ligase genes were also identified in this study.
Its enzyme is critical in the phenylpropanoid biosynthetic pathway as it catalyzes the

formation of the CoA thioesters of caffeic acid, ferulic acid, p-coumarate, and sinapic

acid from which various plant secondary metabolites can then be derived (Xiong, et al.,
2017; Cao, et al., 2020). In addition, the identified cinnamoyl-CoA reductase (CCR)
and cinnamyl alcohol dehydrogenase (CAD) genes encode for the enzymes which act
on the committed steps of the monolignol, lignan, and lignin biosynthetic pathways
(Vogt, 2010; Saathoff, Sarath, Chow, Dien, & Tobias, 2011; Smith, et al., 2017; Liu,
et al., 2021). Another identified enzyme is the caffeoylshikimate esterase that is central
to the biosynthesis of lignin (Saleme, et al., 2017). Several peroxidase isozymes were
also identified in this study, and are involved in the oxidation of monolignols—the last
step in the biosynthesis of lignin (Fernandez-Pérez, Pomar, Pedrefio, & Novo-Uzal,
2015).

The identification of the upregulated phenylpropanoid-associated genes in this study
could therefore explain the high fiber quality trait in M. extilis, a trait that is influenced
by the production and accumulation of lignin molecules on top of other structural
compounds (e.g., cellulose, hemicellulose) (Moreno & Protacio, 2012). In addition to
this structural role within plant systems. lignin plays important applications in the
human health primarily due to its antioxidant capacity (Vinardell & Mitjans, 2017).
Abaca leaf fibers contain high lignin and p-hydroxycinnamic acids such as ferulic and
p-coumaric acids (Del Rio & Gutierrez, 2006). The ferulic acid subunits, together with
the guaiacol and 4-vinylguaiacol that can be derived from its synthesis, interestingly
contribute to the antioxidant property of lignin (Azadfar, Gao, Bule, & Chen, 2015).

In other medicinal plants, the phenylpropanoid biosynthetic pathway has also been

elucidated using the transcriptomics approach. Transcriptome sequencing has

confirmed at the genetic level the phytochemically known capacity of Ocimum specics
to produce phenylpropanoids (Rastogi, et al., 2014). Candidate genes involved in this
pathway have also been identified in the transcriptomes of Lantana camara (Shah, et
al., 2020), Ampelopsis grossendentata (Li, et al., 2020), Toona sinensis (Sui, Qu, Yang,

Zhang, & Ji, 2019), and Salvia miltiorrhiza (Song, et al., 2017).

Flavonoid biosynthesis

Flavonoids are phenolic compounds derived from phenylpropanoids that give plants
their characteristic color, flavor, and fragrance. It is also comprised of compounds that
can protect plants from UV light stress and microbial attack, and can mediate
allelopathic interactions (Weston & Mathesius, 2013).

In the current study, the significantly higher expression of the following genes
related to flavonoid biosynthesis was recorded: RPP4, chalcone-flavonone isomerase
(TTS, CHIL), F3H, FLS1, DFR, BAN, flavonoid 3',5'-hydroxylase (F3'S'H1, F3'5'H2),
and LAR.

Chalcone synthase (a.k.a. CHS) is responsible for the first committed step in the
biosynthesis of plant flavonoids. It synthesizes the naringenin chalcone scaffold which
serves as the precursor of various flavonoids (Weng & Noel, 2012). ‘The second
committed enzyme in the pathway is chalcone-flavonone isomerase, a.k.a. chalcone
isomerase, which catalyzes the isomerization to naringenin of naringenin chalcone

(Morita, et al., 2014; Jang, et al., 2015). Some other identified key genes are F3H and

FLS! which are involved in the conversion of naringenin to dihydrokacmpferol (DHK)
(Pandey, et al.. 2016). Another tailoring enzyme in the pathway is dihydroflavonol-4-
reductase (DFR). It reduces dihydroflavonols to leucoanthocyanidins necessary for the
formation of anthocyanins and the accumulation of proanthocyanidins (Li, et al., 2017).
The genes for anthocyanidin reductase (a.k.a. ANR) and leucoanthocyanidin reductase
(LAR), which are enzymes playing a role in the biosynthesis of the monomeric units
of proantocyanidins (e.g., catechin and epicatechin), are also upregulated (Kim, et al.,
2014).

The detection of transcripts encoding these commonly upregulated enzymes could
reflect the coordinated expression of their associated genes in M. textilis var. Abuab.
As presented in Chapter 5, the genes that encode chalcone synthase and some tailoring
enzymes such as methyltransferase and the oxidoreductase are co-localized forming
putative BGCs responsible for the synthesis of flavonoid-derived polyketides. The
identification of these commonly upregulated transcripts also indicates the rich
production of flavonoids in the pseudostem of the five M. textilis genotypes under
study. These compounds may be accumulating and functioning in the pseudostem but
it is also possible that it undergoes long-distance transport to other plant organs, or is
secreted to the environment to mediate in various plant physiological processes (Buer,
Muday, & Djordjevic, 2007).

Aside from these plant functions, flavonoids also benefit humans as it generally
Possesses antioxidant, anticancer, anti-inflammatory, and antiviral properties among

others (Ullah, et al., 2020). These bioactivities, together with the polar nature especially

of flavonoid glycosides that make water one of its good extraction solvents, could then
support the reported use of M. fextilis pseudostem and its water extract in traditionally
addressing wound injury and infection (DOH-PITAHC, UP Manila, & UP Mindanao,
2000[a]; DOH-PITAHC, UP-Manila, & UP-Mindanao, 2000[b]; DOH-PITAHC, UP
Manila, & UP Mindanao, 2000[{c]; DOH-PITAHC, UP Manila, & UP Mindanao,
2000[d}; Langenberger, Prigge, Martin, Belonias, & Sauerborn, 2009; Elago, Dando,
Pizon, Galang, & Sia, 2013; Arquion, Galanida, Villamor, & Aguilar, 2015; Celeste,
Condino, Dadang, & Amoroso, 2020; Pucot & Demayo, 2021[b]), fatigue and muscle
pain (Olowa & Demayo, 2015; Alduhisa & Demayo, 2019), and gastrointestinal
problems (DOH-PITAHC, DENR-PAWB, Samar Island Natural Park Office, UP
Tacloban, University of Eastern Philippines, UP Manila, 2012; Olowa, Torres,
Aranico, & Demayo, 2012; Sebastian, et al., 2013; Cordero, Meve, & Alejandro, 2022).

For other Musa spp., several flavonoid compounds which exhibit various
pharmacological activities have been identified. Kaempferol, for instance, a
biologically active polyphenol, is highly expressed in Musa spp. (Pandey, et al., 2016;
Busche, Acatay, Martens, Weisshaar, & Stracke, 2021). The leucocyanidin from an
unripe M. sapientum var. paradisiaca pulp, on the other hand, can give protection
against aspirin-induced erosions in the gastric mucosa (Lewis, Fields, Shaw, & G,
1999). ‘The flavonoids rutin and kacmpferol-3-O-rutinoside in M. acuminata cthyl
acetate leaf extract, in addition, has anti-inflammatory, anticholinesterase, antioxidant,
and antidiabetic activities (Oresnaya, et al., 2020). Flavonoids expressed as quercetin

equivalents in M. acuminata fruit extract also exhibit free radical scavenging activity

(Frederick & Mani, 2016). Further, 3-methacrylate and 3-(furan-2yl) acrylate flavonols
from the ethyl acetate extract of M. paradisiaca can inhibit the growth of S. aureus and
Escherichia coli (Rita, Asih, Swantara, & Damayanti, 2021). Interestingly, the
pseudostem extract of M. paradisiaca, which contains flavonoids, together with
terpenoids, alkaloids, saponins, and tannins, can be formulated into an ointment to
promote wound healing (Weremfo, Pappoe, & Adinortey, 2011). This, therefore, also
implies the potential of using M. textilis extracts, which are usually discarded when
abaca pseudostems are processed to obtain the fiber, in the production of a topical
wound dressing like ointments.

By means of transcriptome profiling, flavonoid-related genes have also been
identified in other known medicinal plants. Examples of these plants include
Dendrobium officinale (Yuan, et al., 2022), Dracaena cochinchinensis (Sun, Song,
Zhang, & Zhang, 2021), Zanthoxylum bungeanum (Li, Ruan, Fei, Yan, & Tang, 2021),
Ziziphora bungeana (He, et al., 2020), Dendrobium catenatum (Lei, et al., 2018), and
Scutellaria baicalensis (Liu, et al., 2015).

The overexpression of genes associated with flavonoid synthesis can offer a wide
range of economic applications especially in the medical and agricultural fields. These
can also be applied in M. textilis plants to maximize their potential of producing
biologically active flavonoid compounds.

In hairy root culture of Glycyrrhiza uralensis, a Chinese medicinal plant used to
address tumor, inflammation, viral diseases, and liver problems, the overexpression of

CHS gene can increase the accumulation of different flavonoids including isoliquiritin,

liquiritigenin, and isoliquiritigenin (Yin, ct al., 2019). The higher production of the
pharmacologically important flavonoid apigenin in Astragalus trigonus cell culture can
also be achieved by transforming the culture using the petunia chalcone isomerase A
gene, and with yeast extract as elicitor (Elarabi, Abdelhadi, Sief-Eldein, Ismail, &
Abdallah, 2021).

In transgenic tobacco plants, the overexpression of a CHS gene can give a higher
tolerance to drought stress and a lower concentration of malondialdehyde, an oxidative
stress product (Hu, et al., 2019), The introduction of wheat DFR into wild-type
Arabidopsis, on the other hand, can significantly improve the accumulation of
anthocyanins in transgenic plants especially under anthocyanin-inducing conditions
such as low temperature, UV-B illumination, and high sugar and salt environments

(Shin, et al., 2016).

Protein-Protein Interaction Network

A PPI network is an assembly of all the known and predicted physical and functional
associations among cellular proteins of a particular organism. This network, which offers
a genome-wide functional connectivity, serves as scaffolds for further data integration,
visualization, and molecular discovery (Szklarezyk, ct al., 2017). Using the STRING
database, interaction evidences from a number of sources are collected and scored, and the
resulting ‘combined scores’ are then used as the final measure to build the network

(Szklarezyk, et al., 2021). PPI networks have widely been applied in biomedical studies to

understand the pathobiology of discases, and in plant physiology for crop improvement
(Zainal-Abidin, Afiqah-Aleng, Abdullah-Zawawi, Harun, & Mohamed-Hussein, 2022).

Using the identified upregulated DEGs associated with the biosynthesis of secondary
metabolites in the five M. rextilis genotypes, together with the identified upregulated DEGs
associated with glucan and cytoskeleton biosynthesis (Appendix F) which influence fiber
quality (Ereful, Lalusin, & Laurena, 2022), the STRING database analysis against the PPI
network of A. thaliana revealed mapping a total of 81 DEGs. The 100 first neighbors of
the mapped IDs were added to predict the PPI. This resulted in a PPI network (Figure 7.2)
with 181 protein nodes and 2147 edges (or interactions) based on a combined score of at
east 0.4. Among these 2147 edges, 635 had a high combined score of at least 0.9
suggesting a very good support for these interactions (Appendix G).

The resulting PPI network from this study shows the interactions among the proteins
involved in the biosynthesis of terpenes, phenylpropanoid, flavonoids, glucan, and
cytoskeleton. Here, the mapped DEGs associated with these compounds are represented as
green, yellow, pink, blue, and purple nodes, correspondingly; while the 100 first neighbors
interacting with these mapped IDs are represented as gray nodes. As shown, numerous
interactions exist among the nodes associated with the formation of terpenes,
phenylpropanoids, and flavonoids. For glucan- and cytoskeleton-associated nodes, the
lesser number of interactions could be attributed to the few numbers of identified related

DEGs which were included in building the network.

3g

“saBpa Jo saul] Sundauuod-apou sv payuasaidas are suoNsBID UT ay} a[LYM (uId}o1d FupLogysiou *( >) ‘uo}994so149
<@ ‘ueonjF *- ‘prouoary ‘> ‘prouedosdAuayd *@)‘auadiay “@) sopou yromjou se payuasaid axe surojoad Sunoesaqut yf,
“sypuxar Jy ut Aygenb s9qy pur wstoqrjeur Arepuodas YIM payeloosse souas payeindadn Ajperuasaysip ay) UO YOMIDU Idd “Z"L PANSY,

® )
See



The nodes with the highest degrees of interaction in the resulting PPI network were also
identified (Table 7.5). Among these, 11 are involved in terpenoid biosynthesis (i.e., HMGS,
PSY, ACAT2, ATSG47720, IPI, IPP2, CLAI FPSI, FPS2, HMGI, and MK), five in
phenylpropanoid biosynthesis (ie., OMT, CADG, ELI3-2, CYP84A1, and ALDH2C4),
and one in flavonoid biosynthesis (i.e., C4H). This then implies their positive roles in the

transcriptional regulation of secondary metabolism and fiber quality traits in M. textilis.

Table 7.5. Nodes with the highest degrees of interaction in the predicted PPI network

NODE
NODE PROTEIN NAME PATHWAY DEGREE

OMTI caffeic acid 3-o-methyltransferase___ Phenylpropanoid 61

HMGS___hydroxymethylglutary!-CoA synthase Terpenoid 59

PSY phytoene synthase Terpenoid 59

CADG cinnamyl alcohol dehydrogenase Phenylpropanoid 56

ELB-2 cinnamyl alcohol dehydrogenase 8 __ Phenylpropanoid 56

ACAT2 acetyl-CoA C-acetyltransferase Terpenoid 52

CYP84A1 ferulic acid 5-hydroxylase 1 Phenylpropanoid 52

ATSG47720 acetyl-CoA acetyltransferase Terpenoid 50

TPPI isopentenyl-diphosphate Delta- Terpenoid 50
isomerase |

IPP2 isopenteny|-diphosphate Delta- Terpenoid 49
isomerase II

CLA 1-deoxy-D-xylulose-5-phosphate Terpenoid 48

synthase

C4H trans-cinnamate 4-monooxygenase Flavonoid 47

FPST farnesyl pyrophosphate synthase 1 Terpenoid 47

FPS2 famesyl pyrophosphate synthase 2 Terpenoid a7

HMGI __ 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme Terpenoid 46
A reductase |

ALDH2C4 aldehyde dehydrogenase family 2 Phenylpropanoid 45
member C4;

MK mevalonate kinase Terpenoid 45


To visualize the connections among the metabolic pathways under consideration in the
PPI network, the proteins from different groups which showed physical interactions were
selected and were utilized in building a PPI subnetwork (Figure 7.3). Here, the proteins
associated with the synthesis of terpenes, phenylpropanoids, flavonoids, glucan, and

cytoskeleton are represented as green, yellow, pink, blue, and purple nodes.

Figure 7.3, PPI subnetwork for the key genes involved in the crosstalk among pathways
associated with the biosynthesis of terpenes ((), phenylpropanoids (),
flavonoids (_»), glucan (), and cytoskeleton (@).


The crosstalk between terpene and phenylpropanoid/flavonoid biosynthetic pathways is
mediated by the terpene-associated genes CLA/, ACAT2, HMGS, MK, and AT1G31910
interacting with the phenylpropanoid/flavonoid-associated genes C4H, FLSI, DFR, F3H,
ACOSS, HCT,4CLI, 4CL2, At]g80820, IRX4, and AT4G19010., The connection between
the phenylpropanoid/flavonoid and glucan biosynthetic pathways, on the other hand, is
mediated by the interaction between the phenylpropanoid/flavonoid-associated genes
CCoAOMTI, C4H, PAL, 4CLI, 4CL2, HCT, and At!g80820 with the glucan-associated
genes RX? and CEVI. Further, a crosstalk exists between glucan and cytoskeleton
biosynthetic pathways as the cytoskeleton-associated gene FRA / interacts with the glucan-
associated genes CSII, CEVI, and IRX1. Mcanwhile, the cytoskeleton biosynthetic
pathway does not show a crosstalk with terpene and phenylpropanoid/flavonoid
biosynthetic pathways, and the same was noted between glucan and terpene biosynthetic
pathways. These findings, however, do not conclusively indicate that there are no
connections between these metabolic pathways as some other related genes which were
neither differentially upregulated nor identified, and the actions of other proteins such as

transcription factors may be playing roles in the possible crosstalk.

CONCLUSION

Transcriptome analysis of the five genotypes of high fiber quality M. textilis, namely,
Abuab, BC2, BCs, Inosa, and Tangongon enriches the functionally important genomic
Tesources in abaca. The identification of numerous differentially expressed transcripts

associated with the biosynthesis of various secondary metabolites provides a dynamic

transcriptomic overview that may be reflected in M. textilis plants at the phenotypic level.
Key genes which are mostly involved the production of terpenes, phenylpropanoids, and
flavonoids, and the interactions among their associated proteins and with fiber quality
proteins were identified suggesting a crosstalk between secondary metabolism and fiber

production in M. textilis.

The identification of these secondary metabolites also suggests the important attribution
of these compounds in the less explored medicinal property of M. textilis. The production
of these secondary metabolites can support the efficacy of M. fextilis in its reported
traditional use in the treatment of wounds, gastrointestinal problems, fatigue, and muscle
pain. It also associates with the potential applications of this plant in the agricultural and
industrial fields as these secondary metabolites can be a source of natural colorants,

ingredients for cosmetic products, and insecticidal and herbicidal chemicals, among others.

Since this study was limited to performing in silico identification of differentially
expressed transcripts associated with the biosynthesis of secondary metabolites in M.

textilis pseudostems only, the conduct of further related researches is therefore suggested.

Analysis of abaca transcriptomes which are influenced by plant organ, developmental
stage, or other physiological and environmental conditions may be cartied out to
understand further the important roles of secondary products in abaca. Studies involving
the isolation, characterization, and structure elucidation of these secondary metabolites,
and investigating their bioactivities may also be conducted to establish the medicinal

Property of this plant. Furthermore, the candidate genes that can be derived from these


ics in M. textilis

studies may be used for the genetic improvement of desirable characteri

including traits that will confer resistance to various biotic and abiotic stress factors.

CHAPTER 8

SUMMARY, CONCL

IONS, AND RECOMMENDATIONS

SUMMARY

This dissertation titled “Jn Silico Identification and Analysis of Genes Associated with
the Biosynthesis of Secondary Metabolites and Other Economically Important Products in
‘Abaca (Musa textilis Née) and Wild Banana (Musa balbisiana Colla)” which is composed
of three studies was conducted to review the medicinal and other non-fiber economic uses
of M. textilis, and analyze the available genomes and transcriptomes of M. textilis and M.
balbisiana in silico to identify genes associated with their production of secondary

metabolites.

The first study, “More Than Just a Fiber: A Mini-Review on the Ethnomedicinal and
Other Non-Fiber Applications of Abaca (Musa textilis Née)”, primarily aimed to identify
the traditional practices of using abaca as a medicinal plant, describe the known
phytochemicals of abaca and their economic potentials, and determine the other non-fiber
applications and potentials of abaca. Results showed that the different parts of the abaca
plant, especially the pseudostem and its sap, are utilized to address various medical
conditions such as wound, relapse, fatigue, muscle pain, and gastrointestinal problems.
Several phytochemicals were also reported in abaca such as phenolic compounds,

phytosterols, phenylphenalenone type compounds, and cyanogenic glycosides. These


compounds exhibit antioxidant, antimicrobial, and anti-inflammatory activities which
could support the efficacy of abaca in the treatment of the aforementioned ailments. In
addition, abaca has the potential to be used in other non-fiber industries. The abaca seed
and seed oil can be applied as ingredients in food, cosmetic, and industrial products. The
wastes produced during the abaca fiber processing can also serve as source of other
economically valuable products such as fuel, solar cells, natural dye, food wrapper, and
many more. Further, the abaca plant creates significant agri-ecological contributions as it
assists in the improvement of biodiversity conditions by serving as an intercrop, improves
the water holding capacity of the soil to prevent soil erosion, landslides, and floods,
addresses problems with scdimentation in coastal arcas, and scrves as source of

biodegradable material.

The second study, “Genomic Insights into the Biosynthesis of Secondary Metabolites
in M. textilis (Abaca) var. Abuab and M. balbisiana (Wild Banana) cv DH-PKW”, was
carried out to describe in the context of metabolic pathways the genes with putative
functions on secondary metabolism, and identify the gene clusters which are putatively
involved in specific plant secondary metabolic pathways in M. textilis var. Abuab and M.
balbisiana cv DH-PKW. The KEGG analysis results revealed a total of 10,458 (37.88%)
and 11,876 (35.96%) unigenes functionally annotated for M. textilis and M. balbisiana,
respectively. These belonged to six general KEGG pathway assignments which covered a
total of 46 biochemical pathways which, in turn, further described a total of 406 reference
pathways for M. textilis and 409 reference pathways for M. balbisiana. Among these,

Putative genes which are participatory in the biosynthesis of secondary metabolites

including terpenoid backbone, sesquiterpenoid, brassinosteroid, phenylpropanoid,
flavonoid, diarylheptanoid, tyramine and dopamine, and betaxanthin were identified. Some
of these compounds have known biological activities and applications in various industries
such as in the cosmetics, food, and agricultural industries. These then support the medicinal
efficacy of M. textilis, and its wide potential to be used in these industries. Additionally,
the presence of putative biosynthetic gene clusters in the genomes of these two Musa plants
was reported. In M, textilis var. Abuab, nine putative BGCs which are likely involved in
the synthesis of saccharides, polyketides, lignans, and terpenes were identified. In M.
balbisiana, 33 putative BGCs were identified, and are associated with the production of

alkaloids, saccharides, polyketides, terpenes, and lignans.

The third study, “Transcriptomic Analysis Reveals the Biosynthesis of Secondary
Metabolites in the Pseudostems of Selected Musa textilis Née (Abaca) Genotypes with
High Fiber Quality”, was performed to identify the differentially expressed transcripts
associated with secondary metabolites biosynthesis in five high fiber quality M. textilis
genotypes (i.e., Abuab, BC2, BCs, Inosa, and Tangongon), and describe the protein-protein
interactions among the candidate genes related to their secondary metabolites biosynthesis
and high fiber quality. Using the available pairwise differential expression model results,
differentially expressed genes (DEGs) for the biosynthesis of terpenoid backbone,
phenylpropanoids, curcumin, and flavonoids were recorded. Here, 66 related DEGs were
identified in Abuab, 65 DEGs in BC2, 57 DEGs in BCs, 70 DEGs in Inosa, and 68 DEGs
in Tangongon. The non-differential expression analysis results, on the other hand, revealed

172 significantly differentially upregulated transcript IDs across the five abaca genotypes

which encode for 36 secondary metabolites genes. These were comprised of 18, 10, and
eight upregulated genes associated with biosynthesis of _ terpenoid
backbone/sesquiterpenoid, phenylpropanoids, and flavonoids, respectively, some of which
are biologically active compounds that can support the use of abaca as a medicinal plant.
Together with the identified upregulated DEGs associated with glucan and cytoskeleton
biosynthesis which influence the fiber quality of abaca, a total of 81 DEGs was mapped
using the STRING database analysis against the protein-protein interaction (PPI) network
of A. thaliana, The final PPI network has 181 protein nodes and 2147 edges showing the
interactions among the proteins involved in the biosynthesis of terpenes, phenylpropanoid,

flavonoids, glucan, and cytoskeleton.

CONCLUSIONS

Based on the summary and findings of this study, the following conclusions were

derived:

Abaca offers a wide range of economic uses which are beyond its applications in the
fiber industry. Abaca serves as a traditional medicinal plant specifically for the treatment
of wounds, relapse, fatigue, and gastrointestinal problems. Its efficacy in addressing these
ailments could then be attributed to the presence of secondary bioactive metabolites.
Phenolic compounds which are generally known antioxidants could support the use of
abaca in the treatment of different ailments. The antioxidant and anti-inflammatory

properties of phytosterols, on the other hand, could play a role in the medicinal use of abaca

for wound healing, muscle pain, and gastrointestinal problems. Further,
phenylphenalenone type compounds which exhibit antimicrobial properties could mediate
the use of abaca for wound healing and in the treatment of gastrointestinal problems such
as diarrhea. Aside from the ethnomedicinal uses, abaca has other non-fiber applications. It
can be used in the production of food, cosmetic, fuel, and other agricultural and industrial

products by using its seed, seed oil, and fiber processing wastes.

Genomic analysis of M. textilis var. Abuab and M. balbisiana cv DH-PKW reveals that
these two Musa plants contain putative genes which are involved in the biosynthesis of
various secondary metabolites such as terpenes and phenolic compounds. Most of these
phytochemicals are reported for the first time in M. textilis and M. balbisiana, and can later
be exploited for agricultural, industrial, and pharmacological applications. In addition,
these two plants contain several putative biosynthetic gene clusters. This suggests the co-
localization in the genome of genes associated with the biosynthesis of secondary

metabolites (i.e., terpene, polyketide, lignan) for a coordinated expression.

Furthermore, the transcriptome analysis of the five genotypes of high fiber quality M.
textilis, namely, Abuab, BC2, BC3, Inosa, and Tangongon, has identified the upregulation
of key genes which are mostly involved in the production of terpenes, phenylpropanoids,
and flavonoids. This implies that these secondary metabolites play a huge physiological
tole in the pseudostem of abaca especially in giving protection against biotic and abiotic
stresses. These also support the non-fiber economic uses and potentials of M. fextilis,
especially the reported utilization of its pseudostem in addressing wounds and relapse, and

its reported potentials in the medical, agricultural, and industrial fields. The proteins

involved in the biosynthesis of these secondary metabolites also show physical interactions
with each other and with those proteins involved in the biosynthesis of glucan and

cytoskeleton which are attributed to high fiber quality in abaca.

RECOMMENDATIONS

Based on the results of this research, the following recommendations can be considered

for future studies.

The available reports which indicate the traditional knowledge and practices of using
abaca as a medicinal plant are mostly from groups living in the Visayas and Mindanao
regions. This, therefore, calls for studies which will investigate the ethnomedicinal
importance of abaca in the Luzon area. In addition, to strengthen the claim about the first-
time report in this study of secondary metabolites in M. textilis and M. balbisiana based on
genomic analysis, further phytochemical and molecular studies at gene, protein, and
metabolic levels are needed to be performed. Together with other transcriptomic and
metabolomic analyses, these studies may then help in the exploitation of the secondary
products in M. textilis and M. balbisiana. The analysis of other abaca transcriptomes may
be carried out to understand further the important roles of secondary products in different
plant organs, development stages, and stress responses of abaca. The candidate genes that
can be derived from these studies may then be used in the genetic improvement of desirable
characteristics in M. textilis and M. balbisiana including traits that will stimulate the

accumulation of bioactive compounds in its tissues. Further, studies involving the isolation,


characterization, and structure elucidation of these secondary metabolites, and
investigating their bioactivities must be conducted to establish the medicinal property of
this plant. Results of these studies can also lead to the exploitation and application of the
desirable compounds in abaca in the agricultural, industrial, and medical industries, and to
the discovery of ways on how the wastes produced during the abaca fiber processing can

be upcycled for different economic uses.

Also, the application of this in silico study to other non-model plants with available
genomic or transcriptomic sequences is recommended. This will help in the analysis of
their genes, their functions and expression, and their involvement in cellular metabolism
including the biosynthesis of economically valuable secondary metabolites. This will not
just widen the understanding on their secondary metabolism, but will also improve or

establish the economic potentials and applications of these plants.


LITERATURE CITED

Abdallah, I., & Quax, W. (2017). A glimpse in the biosynthesis of terpenoids. NRLS
Conference Proceedings, International Conference on Natural Resources and Life
Sciences (pp. 81-98). KnE Life Sciences. doi:10.18502/kls.v3i5.981

Abdul Khalil, H., Siti Alwani, M., & Omar, A. (2006). Chemical composition, anatomy,
lignin distribution and cell wall structure of Malaysian plant waste fibers.
Bioresources, 1(2), 220-232.

Abe, R., & Ohtani, K, (2013). An ethnobotanical study of medicinal plants and traditional
therapies on Batan Island, the Philippines. Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 145,
554-565. doi:10.10164,jep.2012.11.029

Abueg, L. (2017). An econometric history of Philippine trade: 1810-1899. DLSU Business
& Economics Review, 26(2), 125-146.

Alduhisa, G., & Demayo, C. (2019). Ethnomedicinal plants used by the Subanen tribe in
two villages in Ozamis City, Mindanao, Philippines. Pharmacophore, 10(4), 28-
42.

Ali, M., Miao, L., Hou, Q., Darwish, D., Alrdahe, S., Ali, A... . Zhao, J. (2021).
Overexpression of terpenoid biosynthesis genes from garden sage (Salvia
officinalis) modulates thizobia interaction and nodulation in soybean. Frontiers in
Plant Science, 12. doi:10.3389/fpls.2021.783269

Alquézar, B., Volpe, H., Magnani, R., de Miranda, M., Santos, M., Marques, V., .. . Pefia,
L. (2021), Engineered orange ectopically expressing the Arabidopsis B-
caryophyllene synthase is not attractive to Diaphorina citri, the vector of the
bacterial pathogen associated to huanglongbing. Frontiers in Plant Science, 12, 1-
15. doi:10.3389/fpls.2021.641457

Altschul, S., Gish, W., Miller, W., Myers, E., & Lipman, D. (1990). Basic local alignment
search tool. Journal of Molecular Biology, 215, 403-410.

Anulika, N., Ignatius, E., Raymond, E., Osasere, O., & Abiola, A. (2016). The chemistry
of natural product: plant secondary metabolites. International Journal of
Technology Enhancements and Emerging Engineering Research, (8), 1-8.

Ammecin, R. (2008). Nutrient composition of abaca (Musa textilis Nee) at seedling,
vegetative, and flagleaf stages of growth. Journal of Natural Fibers, 5(4), 331-346.
doi:10.1080/15440470802457136


Ammecin, R., Sinon, F., & Moreno, L. (2014). Chapter 6: Abaca Fiber: A Renewable Bio-
resource for Industrial Uses and Other Applications. In K. Hakeem, M. Jawaid, &
U, Rashid, Biomass and Bioenergy. Switzerland: Springer International Publishing.

Arquion, R., Galanida, C., Villamor, B., & Aguilar, H. (2015). Ethnobotanical study of
indigenous plants used by local people of Agusan del Sur, Philippines. Asia-Pacific
Higher Education Research Journal, 2(2).

Ashaari, N., Rahim, M., Sabri, S., Lai, K., Song, A., Rahim, R.,... Abdullah, J. (2020).
Functional characterization of a new terpene synthase from Plectranthus
amboinicus. PLoS ONE, 15(7), 1-22. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0235416

Asian Development Bank. (2002). Indigenous peoples/ethnic minorities and poverty
reduction: Philippines. Manila: Asian Development Bank.

Aspuria, E. T., & Garcia, L. Z. (2018). Establishment of cell suspension cultures of four
abaca cultivars, "Abuab”, "Inosa", "Parang", and "Tangongon". Journal of ISSAAS,
24(2), 105-115.

Assani, A., Bakry, F., Kerbellec, F., Haicour, R., Wenzel, G., & Foroughi-Wehr, B. (2003).
Production of haploids from anther culture of banana [Musa balbisiana (BB)].
Plant Cell Reports, 21(6), 511-516. doi:10.1007/s00299-002-0557-6

Asuquo, E., & Udobi, C. (2016). Antibacterial and toxicity studies of the ethanol extract
of Musa —paradisiaca leaf. Cogent _— Biology, + -2,_—‘1-10.
doi:10.1080/23312025.2016.1219248

Asuquo, E., & Udobi, C. (2016). Antibacterial and toxicity studies of the ethanol extract
of Musa —paradisiaca leaf. Cogent_— Biology, ~—-2,_—*1-10.
doi:10.1080/23312025.2016.1219248

Ayer, D., Modha, K., Parekh, V., Patel, R., Vadodariya, G., Ramtekey, V., & Bhuriya, A.
(2020). Associating gene expression with curcuminoid biosynthesis in turmeric.
Journal of Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, 18, \-14. doi:10.1186/s43141-
020-00101-2

Ayoola, 1, Gueye, B., & Sonibare, M. A. (2017). Antioxidant activity and
acetylcholinesterase inhibition of field and in vitro grown Musa L. species. Journal
of Food Measurement and Characterization, 1 1(2), 488-499.

Ayoola-Oresanya, I., Sonibare, M., Gueye, B., Abberton, M., & Morlock, G. (2021).
Elicitation of antioxidant metabolites in Musa species in vitro shoot culture using
sucorse, temperature and jasmonic acid. Plant Cell, Tissue and Organ Culture, 146,
225-236. doi:10.1007/s1 1240-021-02062-x


Ayoola-Oresanya, I., Sonibare, M.. Gueye, B., Paliwal, R.. Abberton, M., & Morlock, G.
(2020). Effect-directed profiling and identification of bioactive metabolites from
field, in vitro-grown and acclimatized Musa spp. accessions using high-
performance thin-layer chromatography-mass spectrometry. Journal of
Chromatography A, 1616, 460774. doi:10.1016/j.chroma.2019.460774

Azadfar, M., Gao, A., Bule, M., & Chen, S. (2015), Structural characterization of lignin:
A potential source of antioxidants guaiacol and 4-vinylguaiacol. International
Journal of _~—_-Biological Macromolecules, 75, 58-66.
doi:10.1016) ijbiomac.2014.12.049

Backirayani, S., Uma, S., Saraswathi, S., Saravanakumar, A., & Chandrasekar, A. (2015).
Transcriptome analysis of banana (Musa balbisiana) based on next-generation
sequencing technology. Turkish Journal of Agriculture and Forestry, 39, 705-717.
doi:10.3906/tar-1406-171

Backiyarani, S., Uma, S., Saraswathi, S., & Chandrasekar, A. (2014). Transcriptome
analysis of Musa and its applications in banana improvement. In D. Nandwani
(Ed.), Sustainable Horticultural Systems, Sustainable Development and
Biodiversity Volume 2 (pp. 275-299). Switzerland: Springer International
Publishing. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-06904-3_12

Bagheri, H., Dyer, R., Severin, A., & Rajan, H. (2020), Comprehensive analysis of non
redundant protein database. Research Square, 1-9.

Balic, A., Vlasic, D., Zuzul, K., Marinovic, B., & Mokos, Z. (2020). Omega-3 versus
omega-6 polyunsaturated fatty acids in the prevention and treatment of
inflammatory skin diseases. Jnternational Journal of Molecular Sciences, 21(741),
1-26. doi:10.3390/ijms21030741

Balinado, L., & Chan, M. (2017). An ethnomedicinal study of plants and traditional health
care practices in District 7, Cavite, Philippines. 20/7 International Conference on
Chemical, Agricultural, Biological and Medical Sciences (CABMS-17) (pp. 131-
143). Manila.

Balinado, L., & Chan, M. (2019). Assessment of cytotoxic activity of five common
philippine medicinal plants using brine shrimp lethality assay. Mindanao Journal
of Science and Technology, 17, 138-152.

Bande. (2012). Ecophysiological and agronomic response of abaca (Musa textilis) to
different resource conditions in Leyte Island, Philippines. Dissertation. University
of Hohenheim.

Bande, M., Grenz, J., Asio, V., & Sauerborn, J. (2013). Morphological and physiological
response of abaca (Musa textilis var. Laylay) to shade, irrigation and fertilizer


application at different stages of plant growth. International Journal of
AgriScience, 3(2), 157-175.

Bara, H. (n.d.). The history of the Muslim in the Philippines. Retrieved July 8, 2022, from
National Commission for Culture and the Arts: https://ncca.gov.ph/about-neca-
3/subcommissions/subcommission-on-cultural-communities-and-traditional-arts-
secta/central-cultural-communities/the-history-of-the-muslim-in-the-philippines/

Barbosa, C., Koh, R., Aquino, V., & Galvez, L. (2020). Accurate diagnosis of
multicomponent babuviruses infecting abaca by simultaneous amplification of their
genome segments. Philippine Journal of Science, 149(2), 373-382.

Bastasa, G., & Baliad, A. (2005). Biological control of Fusarium wilt of abaca (Fusarium
oxysporum) with Trichoderma and yeast. Philippine Journal of Crop Science,
30(2), 29-37,

Behiry, S., Okla, M., Alamri, S., EL-Hefny, M., Salem, M., Alaraidh, I. . Salem, A.
(2019). Antifungal and antibacterial activities of Musa paradisiaca L. peel extract:
HPLC analysis of phenolic and flavonoid contents. Processes, 7, I-11.
doi:10.3390/pr7040215

Bergman, M., Davis, B., & Phillips, M. (2019). Medically useful plant terpenoids:
Biosynthesis, occurrence, and mechanism of action. Molecules, 24(3961), 1-23.
doi: 10.3390/molecules24213961

Bharadwaj, R., Kumar, S., Sharma, A., & Sathishkumar, R. (2021). Plant metabolic gene
clusters: Evolution, organization, and their applications in synthetic biology.
Frontiers in Plant Science, 12, 1-23. doi:10.3389/fpls.202 1.697318

Bloomberg. (2020, August 1). Masks made from abaca cut COVID's plastic waste. Manila
Bulletin Business News. Retrieved from https://mb.com.ph/2020/08/01/masks-
made-from-abaca-cut-covids-plastic-waste/

Boris, R.. Elenea, T., Erich, S.. Walter, J., Gerhard, B., & Leopold, J. (2011). Cytotoxic
properties of selected sesquiterpene alcohols on human cervix carcinoma cell line.
Journal of Essential Oil Bearing Plants, 14, 316-319.

Boutet, E., Lieberherr, Tognolli, M., Schneider, M., & Bairoch, A. (2007).
UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot: The Manually Annotated Section of the UniProt
KnowledgeBase. In D. Edwards, Methods in Molecular Biology, Volume 406:
Plant Bioinformatics Methods and Protocols (pp. 89-112). Totowa, New Jersey:
Humana Press, Inc.

Brahma, G., Mondal, K., Mishra, A., & Das, A. (2020). Surfactant-mediated ultrasound
assisted extraction of phenolic compounds from Musa balbisiana bracts: Kinetic


study and phytochemical profiling. In Food Product Optimization for Quality and
Safety Control Process, Monitoring, and Standards. USA: CRC Press.

Brew Baker, L., Gorres, D., & Umali, D. (1956). Classification of Philippine Musae Il.
Canton, Minay. putative hybrid forms of Musa textilis and Musa balbisiana Colla.
The Philippine Agriculturist, 40, 242-257.

Brink, M., & Escobin, R. (2003). Plant resources of South-East Asia No. 17: Fiber plants.
Leiden, Netherlands: Backhuys Publishers.

Britannica, T. Editors of Encyclopedia. (2014, July 7). Abaca. Retrieved October 14, 2021,
from Encyclopedia Britannica: https://www. britannica.com/plant/abaca

Brodelius, P. (1990). Transport and accumulation of secondary metabolites. In H. Nijkamp,
& L. Van Der Plas (Eds.). Amsterdam, The Netherlands: Springer.
doi: 10.1007/978-94-009-2103-0_85

Buer, C., Muday, G., & Djordjevic, M. (2007). Flavonoids are differentially taken up and
transported long distances in Arabidopsis. Plant Physiology, 145, 478-490.
doi:10.1104/pp.107.101824

Busche, M., Acatay, C., Martens, S., Weisshaar, B., & Stracke, R. (2021). Functional
characterization of banana (Musa spp.) 2-oxoglutarate-dependent diooxygenases
involved in flavonoid biosynthesis. Frontiers in Plant Science, 12, 1-14.
doi:10.1038/srep31361

Cabancs, J.. Gandia-Herrero, F., Escribano, J., Garcia-Carmona, F., & Jimencz-Atienzar,
M. (2014). One-step synthesis of betalains using a novel betalamic acid derivatized
support. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 62, 3776-3782.
doi:10.1021/jf500S06y

Cagayan, M., Sia, I., Manzo, A., Hafalia, D., Dando, L., Nava, & L. (2017). Herbal
therapies for women’s health in indigenous Atis of Brgy. Sta. Barbara, Iba,
Zambales. Philippine Journal of Health Research and Development, 21(3), 14-23.

Camargos, H., Moreira, R., Mendanha, S., Femandes, K., Dorta, M., & Alonso, A. (2014).
Terpenes increase the lipid dynamics in the Leishmania plasma membrane at
concentrations similar to their [C50 values. PLoS ONE, 9, €104429.

Cao, S., Huang, C., Luo, L., Zheng, S., Zhong, Y., Sun, J.,.. . Li, L. (2020). Cell-specific
suppression of 4-coumarate-CoA ligase gene reveals differential effect of lignin on
cell physiological function in Populus. Frontiers in Plant Science, 11, 1-11.
doi:10.3389/fpls.2020.589729

Car, A. R. (2022, February 25). Corporate Owner, Carexherb Coconutri Cosmetica. (L.
Balinado, Interviewer)


Castelo-Branco, V., Guimaraes, J., Souza, L., Guedes, M., Silva, P., Ferro, L.. .. . Zago,
L. (2017). The use of green banana (Musa balbisiana) pulp and peel flour as an
ingredient for tagliatelle pasta. Brazilian Journal of Food Technology, 20, 1-8.
doi:10.1590/1981-6723.11916

Celeste, B., Condino, M., Dadang, R., & Amoroso, V. (2020). Forest care,
interconnectivity and maintenance of ecological resources among the Manobo-
Matigsalug people of the Southern Philippines. Environmental & Socio-economic
Studies, 8(3), 21-33.

Chan, W., Tan, L., Chan, K., Lee, L., & Goh, B. (2016). Nerolidol: A sesquiterpene alcohol
with multi-faceted pharmacological and biological activities. Molecules, 21(5).
doi:10.3390/molecules21050529

Chavali, A., & Rhee, S. (2018). Bioinformatics tools for the identification of gene clusters
that biosynthesize specialized metabolites. Briefings in Bioinformatics, 19(5),
1022-1034. doi:10.1093/bib/bbx020

Cheesman, E. (1947). Classification of the bananas. I. The genus Ensete Horan and the
genus Musa L. Kew Bulletin, 2, 97-117.

Cheesman, E. (1948). Classification of the bananas. III. Critical notes on species: Musa
balbisiana Colla. Kew Bulletin, 3, 11-17.

Cheesman, E. (1949). Classification of the bananas: Critical notes in species: M. textilis.
Kew Bulletin, 4(3), 262-272.

Chen, S., Luo, H., Li, Y., Sun, ¥., Wu, Q., Niu, Y.,... Sun, C. (2011). 454 EST analysis
detects genes putatively involved in ginsenoside biosynthesis in Panax ginseng.
Plant Cell Reports, 30, 1593-1601.

Chen, S., Zhang, L., Cai, X., Li, X., Bian, L., Luo, Z.,. .. Xin, Z. (2020). (E)-Nerolidol is
a volatile signal that induces defenses against insects and pathogens in tea plants.
Horticulture Research, 7, 1-15. doi:10.1038/s41438-020-0275-7

Chen, X., Chen, H., Yuan, J., Kollner, T., Chen, Y., Guo, Y.,... Chen, F. (2018). The rice
terpene synthase gene OsTPS19 functions as an (S)-limonene synthase in planta,
and its overexpression leads to enhanced resistance to the blast fungus
Magnaporthe oryzae. Plant Biotechnology Journal, 16, 1778-1787.
doi:10.1111/pbi.12914

Chen, X., Wang, H., Li, X., Ma, K., Zhan, Y., & Zeng, F. (2019). Molecular cloning and
functional analysis of 4-Coumarate:CoA ligase 4(4CL-like 1) from Fraxinus
mandshurica and its role in abiotic stress tolerance and cell wall synthesis. BMC
Plant Biology, 19, 1-16. doi:10.1186/s12870-019-1812-0



Citkova, J., Hribova, E., Christelova, P., Van den Houwe, I., Hakkinen,
Dolezel, J. (2015). Molecular and cytogenetic characterization of wild Musa
species. PLoS One, 10(8), 1-19.

Connor, W., Lin, D., Pappu, A., Frohlich, J., & Gerhard, G. (2005). Dietary sitostanol and
campestanol: Accumulation in the blood of humans with sitosterolemia and
xanthomatosis and in rat tissues. Lipids, 40(9), 919-923. doi:10.1007/s11745-005-
1452-7

Cordero, C., Meve, U., & Alejandro, G. (2022). Ethnobotanical documentation of
medicinal plants used by the indigenous Panay Bukidnon in Lambunao, Iloilo,
Philippines. Frontiers in Pharmacology, 12, 1-20. doi:10.3389/fphar.2021.790567

Corvalan, C., & Choe, S. (2017). Identification of brassinosteroid genes in Brachypodium
distachyon. BMC Plant Biology, 17. 1-11. doi:10.1186/s12870-016-0965-3

Creste, S., Neto, A., Vencovsky, R., & Figueira, A. (2004). Genetic diversity of Musa
diploid and triploid accessions from the Brazilian banana breeding program
estimated by microsatellite markers. Genetic Resources and Crop Evolution, 51,
723-733.

Cruz-Cardenas, C., Miranda-Ham, M., Castro-Concha, L., Ku-Cauich, J., Vergauwen, R.,
Reijinders, .  Escobedo-GraciaMedrano, R. (2015). Fructans and other water
soluble carbohydrates in vegetative organs and fruits of different Musa spp.
accessions. Frontiers in Plant Science, 6, 1-10. doi:10.3389/fpls.2015,00395

Cui, Y., Wang, A., Zhang, Z., & Speers, R. (2015). Enhancing the levels of 4-vinylguaiacol
and 4-vinylphenol in pilot-scale top-fermented wheat beers by response surface
methodology. Journal of the Institute of Brewing, 121(1), 129-136.
doi:10.1002/jib.189

Curvelo, J., Marques, A., Barreto, A., Romanos, M., Poertela, M., Kaplan, M., & Soares,
R. (2014). A novel nerolidol-rich essential oil from Piper clauss
Candida albicans biofilm. Journal of Medical Microbiology, 63, 697-702.

DA. (2018). The Philippine Abaca Industry Roadmap 2018-2022 - Executive Summary.
Philippines: Department of Agriculture.

da Silva, M., da Camara, C., de Moraes, M., de Melo, J., dos Santos, R., & Neves, R.
(2020). Insecticidal and acaricidal activity of essential oils rich in (E)-nerolidol
from Melaleuca leucadendra occurring in the state of Pemambuco (Brazil) and
effects on two important agricultural pests. Journal of the Brazilian Chemical
Society, 31(4), 813-820. doi:10.21577/0103-5053.20190245

Dahham, S., Tabana, Y. I., Ahamed, M., Ezzat, M., Majid, A., & Majid, A. (2015). The
anti-cancer, antioxidant and antimicrobial properties of the sesquiterpene B-



caryophyllene from the essential oil of Aquilaria crassna. Molecules, 20, 11808-
11829. doi:10.3390/molecules20071 1808

Daimari, M., & Swargiary, A. (2020). Study of phytochemical content and antioxidant
propertics of Musa balbisiana corm extract. Indian Journal of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, 707-712.

Daniells, J., Jenny, C., Karamura, D.. & Tomekpe, K. (2001). Musalogue: A Catalogue of
‘Musa, Montpellier, France: International Network for the Improvement of Banana
and Plantain.

Dapar, L. P. (2019). Agricultural management practices of farmers in the production of
abaca (Musa textilis Née) fiber in Biliran Island, Philippines. International Journal
of Science and Engineering Investigations, 8(89), 180-183.

Davidson, V. (2010). 7.19 - Protein-Derived Cofactors. In H. Liu, & L. Mander,
Comprehensive Natural Products II (pp. 675-710). Elsevier. doi:10.1016/B978-
008045382-8.00143-X

de Lacerda Leite, G., Barbosa, M., Lopes, M., Delmondes, G., Bezerra, D., Araujo, J.,...
Kerntof, M. (2021). Pharmacological and toxicological activities of a-humulene
and its isomers: a systematic review. Trends in Food Science & Technology, 115,
255-274. doi:10.1016/j.tifs.2021.06.049

De Langhe, E., Perrier, X., Donohue, M., & Denham, T. (2015). The original banana split:
Multi-disciplinary implication of the generation of African and Pacific plantains in
Island Southeast Asia. Ethnobotany Research & Applications, 299-312.
doi:10.17348/era.14.0.299-312

Deka, P., Kashyap, A., Sharma. D., & Baruah, C. (2018). A review on Musa balbisiana
Colla. International Journal of Pharmaceutical Science Invention, 7(7), 14-17.

del Rio, C., Rencoret, J., Gutierrez, A., Elder, T., Kim, H., & Ralph, J. (2020). Lignin
monomers from beyond the canonical monolignol biosynthetic pathway: Another
brick in the wall. ACS Sustainable Chemistry & Engineering, 8, 4997-5012.
doi:10.1021/acssuschemeng.0c01109

Del Rio, J., & Gutierrez, A. (2006). Chemical composition of abaca (Musa textilis) leaf
fibers used for manufacturing of high quality paper pulps. Journal of Agricultural
and Food Chemistry, 54, 4600-4610.

Del Rio, J., Jimenez-Barbero, J., Chavez, M., Politi, M., & Gutierrez, A. (2006).
Phenylphenalenone type compounds from the leaf fibers of abaca (Musa textilis).
Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 54, 8744-8748.


del Rio, J., Prinsen, P.. Cadena, E., Martinez, A., Gutierrez, A., & Rencoret, J. (2016).
Lignin-carbohydrate complexes from sisal (Agave sisalana) and abaca (Musa
textilis): Chemical composition and structural modifications during the isolation
process. Planta, 243, 1143-1158, doi:10.1007/s00425-016-2470-1

Del Rio, J., Rodriguez, I., & Gutierrez, A. (2004). Identification of intact long-chain p-
hydroxycinnamate esters in leaf fibers of abaca (Musa textilis) using gas
chromatography/mass spectrometry. Rapid Communications in Mass
Spectrometry, 18, 2691-2696. doi:10.1002/rem.1677

Dela Cruz, F., Laude, R., Sandoval, C., Gueco, L., Huelgas, V., Garcia, R., & Mendoza, E.
(2019). Genetic characterization of Philippine saba germplasm collection using
microsatellite markers. Philippine Journal of Science, 149(1), 169-197.

Deng, S., Cheng, C., Liu, Z., Chen, Y., Zhang, Z.. Huang, Y., .. . Lai, Z. (2019).
Comparative transcriptome analysis reveals a role for anthocyanin biosynthesis
genes in the formation of purple peel in Minhou wild banana (Musa itinerans
Cheesman). The Journal of Horticultural Science and Biotechnology, 94(2), 184-
200. doi:10.1080/14620316.2018.1473055

Devi, K., Mishra, S., Sahu, J., Panda, D., Modi, M., & Sen, P. (2016). Genome wide
transcriptome profiling reveals differential gene expression in secondary metabolite
pathway of Cymbopogon winterianus. Scientific Reports, 6, 1-11.
doi:10.1038/srep21026

D'Hont, A., Denoeud, F., Aury, J., Baurens, F., Carreel, F., Garsmeur, O.,... Wincker, P.
(2012). The banana (Musa acuminata) genome and the evolution of
monocotyledonous plants. Nature, 488, 213-217. doi:10.1038/nature1 1241

Dias, M., Pinto, D., & Silva, A. (2021). Plant flavonoids: Chemical characteristics and
biological activity. Molecules, 26, 1-16. doi:10.3390/molecules26175377

DOH-PITAHC, DENR-PAWB, Samar Island Natural Park Office, UP Tacloban,
University of Eastern Philippines, UP Manila. (2012). Documentation of Philippine
traditional knowledge and practices in health: The people of Samar Island Natural
Park, Samar Island. Retrieved from www.tkdl.ph

DOH-PITAHC, UP Manila, & UP Mindanao. (2000[a]). Ethnomedical documentation of
and community health education for selected Philippine ethnolinguistic groups: the
Mansaka people of Pantukan and Maragusan Valley, Compostela Valley Province,
Mindanao, Philippines. Retrieved from www.tkdl.ph

DOH-PITAHC, UP-Manila, & UP Mindanao. (2000[b]). Ethnomedical documentation of
and community health education for selected Philippine ethnolinguistic groups: the
Bagobo people of Marilog, Davao City, Philippines, Retrieved from www.tkdl.ph


DOH-PITAHC, UP Manila, & UP Mindanao. (2000[c]). Ethnomedical documentation of
and community health education for selected Philippine ethnolinguistic groups: the
Mandaya people of Davao Oriental, Philippines, Retrieved from www.tkdl.ph

DOH-PITAHC, UP Manila, & UP Mindanao. (2000{d]). Ethnomedical documentation of
and community health education for selected Philippine ethnolinguistics groups.
the Ata-Manobo people of Talaingod, Davao Province, Philippines. Retrieved from
www.tkdl.ph

Doloiras-Larafio, A., Garcia, R., Sandoval, C., Lalusin, A., Gueco, L., Huelgas, V., &
Tecson-Mendoza, E. (2018). DNA fingerprinting and genetic diversity analysis of
Philippine saba and other cultivars of Musa balbisiana Colla using simple sequence
repeat markers. Philippine Journal of Crop Science, 43(2), 1-11.

Dong, X.. Yi. H.. Lee. J.. Nou, I.. Han. C.. & Hur. Y. (2015). Global gene expression
analysis to identify differentially expressed genes critical for the heat stress
response in Brassica rapa. PLoS ONE, 106), _~—‘1-26.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0130451

DOST. (2020). DOST-FPRDI: Abaca hybrid yields quality fiber. Department of Science
and Technology. Retrieved December 2, 2021, from Department of Science and
Technology: hitps://www.dost.gov.ph/knowledge-resources/news/67-2020-
news/1832-dost-fprdi-abaca-hybrid-yields-quality-fiber.html

DOST-PCARRD. (2007). Profitability analysis: Abaca fiber production. Los Bafios,
Laguna: Department of Science and Technology-Philippine Council for
Agriculture, Forestry and Natural Resources Research and Development.

DTI. (2017). The Philippines in the paper global value chain. Philippines: Department of
Trade and Industry.

Duan, F., & Song, W. (2019). Overexpression of SoCYP8SA\ increases the accumulation
of castasterone and confers enhanced black shank tolerance in tobacco through
modulation of the antioxidant enzymes’ activities. Frontiers in Plant Science, 10,
1-10. doi:10.3389/fpls.2019.00349

Duan, Q., Bonn, & Kreuzwieser, J. (2020). Terpenoids are transported in the xylem sap in
Norway spruce. Plant, Cell & Environment(43), 1766-1778. doi:10.1002/ps.5410

Echeverri, F., Torres, F., Quifiones, W., Escobar, G., & Archbold, R. (2012).
Phenylphenalenone phytoalexins, will they be a new type of fungicide?
Phytochemistry Reviews, 11, 1-12. doi:10.1007/s11101-010-9205-x

Eggert, K., & von Wiren, N. (2017). Response of the plant hormone network to boron
deficiency. New Phytologist, 216, 868-881. doi:10.1111/nph.14731


Fjigu, G...& Jung, J. (2020). Review on the computational genome annotation of sequences
obtained by next-generation sequencing. Biology, 9,_—*1-27.
doi:10.3390/biology9090295

Elago, M., Dando. R., Pizon, J., Galang, R., & Sia, I. (2013). Phase I! Documentation of
Philippine Traditional Knowledge and Practices on Health and Development of
Traditional Knowledge Digital Library on Health for Selected Ethnolinguistic
Groups: The SUBANEN people of Salambuyun, Lapuyan, Zamboanga del Sur.
Retrieved from www.tkdl.ph

Elarabi, N., Abdelhadi, A., Sief-Eldein, A., Ismail, I., & Abdallah, N. (2021).
Overexpression of chalcone isomerase A gene in Astragalus trigonus for
stimulating apigenin. Scientific Reports, 11, 1-9. doi:10.1038/s41598-021-03704-y

Emms, D.. & Kelly. S. (2018). OrthoFinder2: Fast and accurate phylogenomic orthology
analysis from gene sequences (preprint), 1-34, doi:10.1101/466201

Ereful, N., Lalusin, A., & Laurena, A. (2022). RNA-Seq reveals differentially expressed
genes associated with high fiber quality in abaca (Musa textilis Nee). Genes, 13, 1-
19, doi:10.3390/genes13030519

Evans, W. (2009), Trease and Evans Pharmacognosy (16th ed.). Elsevier Limited.

Falowo, T., Ejidike, I., Lajide, L., & Clayton, H. (2021). Polyphenolic content of Musa
acuminata and Musa paradisiaca bracts: Chemical composition, antioxidant and
antimicrobial potentials, Biomedical and Pharmacology Journal, 14(4).
doi:10.13005/opj/2276

FAO. (2020). Abaca in Lanao del Sur. Philippines: Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations.

Farag, M., & Gad, M. (2022). Omega-9 fatty acids: Potential roles in infammation and
cancer management. Journal of Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, 20, 1-11.
doi:10.1186/s43141-022-00329-0

Febryanto, R., Hajrah, & Rijai, L. (2016). Potensi ekstrak daun pisang (Musa fextilis Nee)
terhadap penurunan kadar gula darah. Prosiding Seminar Nasional Kefarmasian
Ke-4, (pp. 282-288).

Feduraev, P., Riabova, A., Skrypnik, L., Pungin, A., Tokupova, E., Maslennikov, P., &
‘Chupakhina, G. (2021). Assessment of the role of PAL in lignin accumulation in
wheat (Triticum aestivum L.) at the early stage of ontogenesis. Jnternational
Journal of Molecular Sciences, 22, 1-16. doi:10.3390/ijms22 189848

Fernandes, E., Passos, G., Medeiros, R.. da Cuncha, F., Ferreira, J., Campos, M.. . . .
Calixto, J. (2007), Anti-inflammatory effects of compounds alpha-humulene and


(-}trans-caryophyllene isolated from the essential oil of Cordia verbenacea.
European Journal of Pharmacology, 228-236. doi:10.1016/j.ejphar.2007.04.059

Femandez, A., & Amores, E, (2015). Severity of foliar fungal diseases and growth
performance of abaca hybrids, USA.

Fernandez, A., Dela Torre, R., Fabon, M., & Lalusin, A. (2015). Growth and fiber yield of
abaca hybrids. USA.

Fernandez-Pérez, F., Pomar, F., Pedrefio, M., & Novo-Uzal, E. (2015). Suppression of
Arabidopsis peroxidase 72 alters cell wall and phenylpropanoid metabolism, Plant
Science, 239, 192-199, doi:10.1016/j.plantsci.2015.08.001

Fiber Development Authority. (1984). Catalogue on fiber properties, products, and
machines, tools, and devices for fober extraction and processing. Section I: Fiber
Properties. Makati: Fiber Development Authority.

Flora Malesiana website. (2022). Flora Malesiana: About. Retrieved June 21, 2022, from
Flora Malesiana: https://floramalesiana.org/new/

Francomano, F., Caruso, A., Barbarossa, A., Fazio, A., La Torre, C., Ceramella, J., .. .
Sinicropi, M. (2019), B-Caryophyllene: A sesquiterpene with countless biological
properties. Applied Sciences, 9, 1-19. doi:10.3390/app9245420

Frank, L., Wenig, M., Ghirardo, A., van der Krol, A., Vlot, A., Schitzler, J., & Rosenkranz,
M. (2021). Isoprene and B-caryophyllene confer plant resistance via different plant
internal signalling pathways. Plant, Cell & Environment, 4(4), 1151-1164.
doi:10.1111/pce.14010

Frederick, N., & Mani, J. (2016). Total phenolic content, total flavonoid content, total
tannin content and antioxidant activity of Musa acuminata. Journal of International
Academic Research for Multidisciplinary, 4(1), 300-308.

Fujioka, S., Inoue, T., Takatsuto, S., Yanagisawa, T., Yokota, T., & Sakurai, A. (1995).
Identification of a New brassinosteroid, cathasterone, in cultured cells of
Catharanthus roseus as a biosynthetic precursor of teasterone. Bioscience,
Biotechnology. and Biochemistry, 59(8), 1543-1547.

Fujita, Y., Hara, Y., Ogino, T., & Suga, C. (1981). Production of shikonin derivatives by
cell suspension cultures of Lithospermum erythrorhizon: |. Effects of nitrogen
sources on the production of shikonin derivatives. Plant Cell Reports, 1, 59-60.

Fujita, Y., Hara, Y., Suga, C., & Morimoto, T. (1981). Production of shikonin derivatives
by cell suspension cultures of Lithospermum erythrorhizon: 11. A new medium for
the production of shikonin derivatives. Plant Cell Reports, 1, 61-63.


Gall, D., Ralph, J, Donohue, T., & Noguera, D. (2017). Biochemical transformation of
lignin for deriving valued commodities from lignocellulose. Current Opinion in
Biotechnology, 45, 120-126. doi:10.1016/j.copbio.2017.02.015

Galvez, L., Koh, R., Barbosa, C., Asunto, J., Catalla, J., Atienza, R., ... Zhang, D. (2021).
Sequencing and de novo assembly of abaca (Musa textilis Née) var. Abuab genome.
Genes, 12, 1-12. doi:10.3390/genes1 2081202

Gambley, C., Thomas, J., Magnaye, L., & Herradura, L. (2004). Abaca mosaic virus: A
distinct strain of sugarcane mosaic virus. Australasian Plant Pathology, 33, 475-
484, doi:10.1071/AP04050

Gamez, R., Rodriguez, F., Vidal, N., Ramirez, S., Alvarez, R., Landsman, D., & Marifio-
Ramirez, L. (2019). Banana (Musa acuminata) transcriptome profiling in response
to thizobacteria: Bacillus amyloliquefaciens Bs006 and Pseudomonas fluorescens
Ps006. BMC Genomics, 20, 1-20. doi:10.1186/s12864-019-5763-5

Ganapathy, G., Preethi, R., Moses, J., & Anandharamakrishnan, C. (2019).
Diarylheptanoids as nutraceutical: A review. Biocatalysis and Agricultural
Biotechnology, 19, 1-14. doi:10.1016/j.beab.2019.101126

Gandia-Herrero, F., Escribano, J., & Garcia-Carmona, F. (2016). Biological activities of
plant pigments betalains. Critical Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition, 56, 937-
945. doi:10.1080/10408398.2012.740103

Gene Ontology Consortium. (2004). The Gene Ontology (GO) database and informatics
resource. Nucleic Acids Research, 32, D258-D261. doi:10.1093/nar/gkh036

Ghorbani, M., & Karimi, H. (2015). Bioinformatics approaches for gene finding.
International Journal of Research in Science & Technology. 1(4). 12-15.

Gleadow, R., & Moller, B. (2014). Cyanogenic glycosides: Synthesis, physiology, and
phenotypic plasticity. Annual Review of Plant Biology, 65, 155-185.
doi:10.1146/annurev-arplant-050213-040027

Goicoechea, E., & Guillen, M. (2014). Volatile compounds generated in com oil stored at
room temperature. Presence of toxic compounds. European Journal of Lipid
Science and Technology, 116, 395-406. doi:10.1002/ejlt.201300244

Gongalves, O., Pereira, R., Gongalves, F., Mendo, S., Coimbra, M., & Rocha, S. (2011).
Evaluation of the mutagenicity of sesquiterpenic compounds and their influence on
the susceptibility towards antibiotics of two clinically relevant bacterial strains.
Mutation Research - Genetic Toxicology and Environmental Mutagenesis, 723, 18-
25.


Géngora-Castillo, E., Fedewa. G., Yeo, Y., Chappell, J.. Della Penna, D., & Buell, C.
(2012). Genomic approaches for interrogating the biochemistry of medicinal plant
species. Methods in Enzymology, 517, 139-159. doi:10.1016/B978-0-12-404634-
4,00007-3

Gopalan, G., Prabha, B., Joe, A. R., Sherin, D., Abraham, B., Sabu, M., . . . Nisha, P.
(2019). Screening of Musa balbisiana Colla seeds for antidiabetic properties and
isolation of apiforol, a potential lead, with antidiabetic activity. Journal of the
Science of Food and Agriculture, 99(5), 2521-2529. doi:10.1002/jsfa.9462

Guerriero, G., Berni, R., Mufioz-Sanchez, J., Apone, F., Abdel-Salam, E., Qahtan, A.,...
Faisal, M. (2018). Production of plant secondary metabolies: Examples, tips and
suggestions for biotechnologists. Genes, 9, 1-22. doi:10,3390/genes9060309

Guevara, C., & Garcia, M. (2018). Ethnobotanical practices of Matigsalug tribe on
medicinal plants at Barangay Baganihan, Marilog District, Davao City. Journal of
Complementary and Alternative Medical Research, 6(3), 1-14.

Gupta, P., Goel, R., Pathak, S., Srivastava, A., Singh, S., Sangwan, R., & Tivedi, P. (2013).
De novo assembly functional annotation and comparative analysis of Withania
somnifera leaf and root transcriptomes to identify putative genes involved in the
withanolides biosynthesis. PLoS ONE, 8, €62714.

Gutzeit, H., & Ludwig-Muller, J. (2014). Plant natural products: synthesis, biological
functions and practical applications. Ist ed. Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.
KGaA.

Gylling, H., & Simonen, P, (2015). Phytosterols, phytostanols, and lipoprotein metabolism.
Nutrients, 7, 7965-7977. doi:10.3390/nu7095374

Hada, T., Shiraishi, A., Furuse, S., Inoue, Y., Hamashima, H., Matsumoto, Y., ... Shimada,
J. (2003). Inhibitory effects of terpenes on the growth of Staphylococcus aureus.
Natural Medicine, 57, 64-67.

Haft, D., Selengut, J., & White, O. (2003). The TIGRFAMs database of protein families.
Nucleic Acids Research, 31(1), 371-373. doi:10.1093/nar/gkg128

Hakkinen, M. (2013). Reappraisal of sectional taxonomy in Musa (Musaceae). Taxon,
62(4), 809-813.

Halos, S. (2008). The abaca, Philippines: Department of Agriculture-Biotechnology
Program Office, Biotechnology Coalition of the Philippines, Inc., and Philippine
Rice Research Institute,


Hamberger, B., & Bak, S. (2014). Plant P450s as versatile drivers for evolution of species-
specific chemical diversity. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B, 368,
1-16, doi:10.1098/rstb.2012.0426

Hansel, R., Keller, K., Rimpler, H., & Schneider, G. (1993). Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis: Drogen E—O. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag.

Hartmann, M. (1998). Plant sterols and the membrane environment. Trends in Plant
Science, 3(5), 170-175.

Hastuti, Purnomo, Sumardi, I., & Daryono, B. (2019). Diversity wild banana species (Musa
spp.) in Sulawesi, Indonesia. Biodiversitas. 20(3), 824-832.
doi: 10.1305 7/biodiv/d200328

Hay, R. (2018). Investigation of the role of gene clusters in terpene biosynthesis in
Sorghum bicolor. Theses. University of Missouri, St. Louis. Retrieved from

Hayase, S. (2018). Manila hemp in world, regional, national, and local history. Journal of
Asia-Pacific Studies, 31, 171-188.

He, J., Yang, W., Cheng, B., Ma, L., Tursunjiang, D., Ding, Z., . .. Li, G. (2020). Integrated
metabolomic and transcriptomic profiling reveals the tissue-specific flavonoid
compositions and their biosynthesis pathways in Ziziphora bungeana. Chinese
Medicine, 15. doi:10.1186/s13020-020-00354-6

Heide, L., & Tabata, M, (1987). Enzyme activitics in cell-free extracts of shikonin-
producing Lithospermum erythrorhizon cell suspension cultures. Phytochemistry,
26(6), 1645-1650. doi:10.1016/S003 1-9422(00)82262-1

Herrera, D. (2015). The Philippines: an overview of the colonial era. Education Ahout Asia,
20(1), 14-19.

Hewlings, S., & Kalman, D. (2017), Curcumin: A Review of its effects on human health.
Foods, 6(92), 1-11. doi:10.3390/foods6100092

Hidalgo, W., Kai, M., & Schneider, B, (2015). 4-Methoxycinnamic acid - An unusual
phenylpropanoid involved in phenylphenalenone biosynthesis in Anigozanthos
preissii. Phytochemistry, 117, 476-481

Hill, R., & Connolly, J. (2013). Triterpenoids. Natural Product Reports, 30, 1028-1065.

Hirai, H. (2015). Indigenous communities in the Philippines: A situation analysis. Manila:
Yuchengco Center, De La Salle University.


Hu, B., Tao, H., Peng, X., Wang, R., Li, F., Wang. Z.,.. . Jin, L. (2019). Overexpression
of chalcone synthase improves flavonoid accumulation and drought tolerance in
tobacco. Preprints. doi:10.20944/preprints201906.0103.v1

Huang, A., & Osbourn, A. (2019). Plant terpenes that mediate below-ground interactions:
prospects for bioengineering terpenoids for plant protection. Pest Management
Science, 75, 2368-2377. doi:10.1002/ps.5410

Huang, X., Xiao, Y., Kollner, T., Jing, W., Kou, J., Chen, J.,... Guo, Y. (2017). The
terpene synthase gene family in Gossypium hirsutum harbors a linalool synthase
GhTPS12 implicated in direct defence responses against herbivores. Plant, Cell &
Environment, 41, 261-274. doi:10.111 l/pce.13088

Huerta-Cepas, J., Szklarezyk, D., Heller, D., Hernandez-Plaza, A., Forslund, S., Cook, H.,
. «Bork, P. (2019). eggNOG 5.0: A hierarchical, functionally and phylogenetically
annotated orthology resource based on 5090 organisms and 2502 viruses. Nucleic
Acids Research, 47, D309-D314. doi:10.1093/nar/gky 1085

Humann, J., Lee, T., Ficklin, S.. & Main, D. (2019). Structural and functional annotation
of eukaryotic genomes with GenSAS. In M. (. Kollmar, Gene Prediction: Methods
and Protocols (pp. 29-51). New Jersey, USA: Humana Press.

Huskova, Z., Steigerova, J., Oklestkova, J., Rarova, L., Kolar, Z., & Strnad, M. (2020).
Molecular mechanisms of plant steroids and study of their interaction with nuclear
receptors in prostate cancer cells, Food and Chemical Toxicology, 137, 1-12.
doi: 10.1016/j.fet.2020.111164

Hyam, R., & Pankhurst, R. (1995). Plants and their names: A concise dictionary. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.

Ikram, N., Zhan, X., Pan, X., King, B., & Simonsen, H. (2015). Stable heterologous
expression of biologically active terpenoids in green plant cells. Frontiers in Plant
Science, 6, 1-10. doi:10.3389/fpls.2015.00129

Itchhaiya, R., Kumar, A., Yadav, A., Gupta, N., Kumar, S., Gupta, N. K., ... Gurjar, H.
(2015). Metabolites in plants and its classification. World Journal of Pharmacy and
Pharmaceutical Sciences, 4(1), 287-305.

Jain, C., Khatana, S., & Vijayvergia, R. (2019). Bioactivity of secondary metabolites of
various plants: A review. International Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences and
Research, 10(2), 494-504.

Jang, H., Rhee, K., & Eom, Y. (2020). Antibacterial and antibiofilm effects of a-humulene
against Bacteroides fragilis. Canadian Journal of Microbiology, 66(6), 389-399.
doi:10.1139/ejm-2020-0004


Jeandet, P. (2015). Phytoalexins: current progress and future prospects. Molecules, 20,
2770-2774. doi:10.3390/molecules20022770

Jeon, L., Kim, Y., Jeong, H., & Lee, J. (2018). Protective activity of caffeic
sinapic acid against UVB-induced photoaging in human fibroblasts.

Journal of Food Biochemistry, 43, 1-8. doi:10.1111/jfbc.12701

Slang, W., Yin, Q., Wu, R., Zheng, G., Liu, J., Dixon, R., & Pang, Y. (2015). Role of
chalcone isomerase-like protein in flavonoid biosynthesis in Arabidopsis thaliana.
Journal of Experimental Botany, 66(22), 7165-7179. doi:10.1093/jxb/erv413

Joc. A.. Sreejith, P., & Sabu, M. (2014). A new varicty of Musa balbisiana Colla
(Musaceae) from South India. Phytotaxa, 175(2), 113-116.
doi:10.11646/phytotaxa.175.2.6

Jones, F., Nichols, M.. & Pappas, S. (2017). Drying oils. In F. Jones, M. Nichols, & S.
Pappas, Organic Coatings: Science and Technology, Fourth Edition (pp. 205-212).
John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

Joshi, A., Prakash, O., Pant, A., Kumar, R., Szczepaniak, L., & Kucharska-Ambrozej, K.
(2021). Methyl eugenol, 1,8-cineole and nerolidol rich essential oils with their
biological activities from three Melaleuca species growing in Tarai Region of North
India, Brazilian Archives of Biology and Technology, 64, 1-15.

Joshi, R., Wagh, T., Sharma, N., Mulani, F., Sonavane, U., Thulasiram, H.,. . . Giri, A.
(2014), Way toward “dietary pesticides”: Molecular investigation of insecticidal
action of caffeic acid against Helicoverpa armigera. Journal of Agricultural and
Food Chemistry, 62(45), 10847-10854, doi:10.1021/jf503437r

Judzentiené, A., & Bidiené, J. (2021). Mugwort (Artemisia vulgaris L.) essential oils rich
in germacrene D, and their toxic activity. Journal of Essential Oil Research, 33(3),
256-264. doi:10.1080/10412905.2020.1857854

Jung, G. F. (2020). Review on the computational genome annotation of sequences obtained
by next-generation sequencing. Biology, —«9(295),—=—1-27.
doi:10.3390/biology9090295

Kallow, S., Longin, K., Sleziak, N., Janssens, S., Vandelook, F., Dickie, J.,... Panis, B.
(2020). Challenges for ex situ conservation of wild banana seeds collected in Papua
New Guinea have variable levels of desiccation tolerance. Plants, 9(1243), 1-21.
doi:10.3390/plants9091243

Kanehisa, M., & Goto, S. (2000). KEGG: Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes.
Nucleic Acids Research, 27-30.


Kanehisa, M., Sato, Y.. & Kawashima, M. (2021). KEGG mapping tools for uncovering
hidden features in biological data. Protein Science, 31, 47-53.
doi:10.1002/pro.4172

Kautsar, S., Suarez Duran, H., Blin, K., Osbourn, A.. & Medema, M. (2017).
plantiSMASH: Automated identification, annotation and expression analysis of
plant biosynthetic gene clusters. Nucleic Acids Research, 45, W55-W63.
doi:10.1093/nar/gkx305

KEGG. (2022). KEGG pathway map update history. Retrieved July 9, 2022, from Kyoto
Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes:
https://www.kegg.jp/kegg/docs/upd_map.htm!

Kent, W. (2002). BLAT—the BLAST-like alignment tool. Genome Research, 12, 656-664.

Khan, T., Lee, J., & Kim, H. (2019). Chapter 9 - Lignin-Based Adhesives and Coatings. In
H. Ariffin, S. Sapuan, & M. Hassan, Lignocellulose for Future Bioeconomy (pp.
153-206). Elsevier Inc.

Khosla, C., & Keasling, J. (2003), Metabolic engineering for drug discovery and
development. Nature Reviews Drug Discovery, 2, 1019-1025. doi:10.1038/nrd1256

Kim, B., Fujioka, S., Takatsuto, S., Tsujimoto, M., & Choe, S. (2008). Castasterone is a
likely end product of brassinosteroid biosynthetic pathway in rice. Biochemical and
Biophysical Research Communications, 374, 614-619.
doi:10.1016/j.bbre.2008.07.073

Kim, Y., Kim, J., Uddin, M., Xu, H., Park, W., Tuan, P.,... . Park, S. (2013). Metabolomics
analysis and biosynthesis of rosmarinic acid in Agastache rugosa Kuntze treated
with methyl jasmonate. PLoS ONE, 8(5), 1-8. doi:10,1371/journal.pone.0064199

Kim, Y., Thwe, A., Kim, Y., Li, X., Cho, J., Park, P.,.. . Park, S. (2014). Transcripts of
anthocyanidin reductase and leucoanthocyanidin reductase and measurement of
catechin and epicatechin in tartary buckwheat. The Scientific World Journal, 1-10.
doi:10.1155/2014/726567

Kohli, S., Bhardwaj, A., Bhardwaj, V., Sharma, A., Kalia, N., Landi, M., & Bhardwaj, R.
(2020). Therapeutic potential of brassinosteroids in biomedical and clinical
research. Biomolecules, 10, 1-27. doi:10.3390/biom 10040572

Kokate, C., Purohit, A., & Gokhale, S. (2008). Pharmacognosy, Forty Second Edition.
India: Nirali Prakashan.

Konta, B., & Frank, W. (2008). The treatment of Parkinson's disease with dopamine
agonists. GMS Health Technology Assessment, 8(4). 1-11.


Koonin, E. (2005). Orthologs, paralogs, and evolutionary genomics. Annual Review of
Genetics, 39, 309-338.

Kour, J., Kohli, S., Khanna, K., Bakshi, P., Sharma, P., Singh, A.,.. . Sharma, A. (2021).
Brassinosteroid signaling, crosstalk and physiological functions in plants under
heavy metal stress. Frontiers in Plant Science, 12, 1-19.
doi:10.3389/fpls.20211.608061

Koyama, S., Purk, A., Kaur, M., Soini, H., Novotny, M., Davis, K.,... Mescher, A. (2019).
Beta-caryophyllene enhances wound healing through multiple routes. PLoS ONE,
14(12), 1-32. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0216104

Kreis, W., & Reinhard, E. (1985). Uptake, metabolism, and storage of cardenolides by
Digitalis lanata cells. Pharmazeutische Zeitung, 130, 2315-2316.

Kreis, W., & Reinhard, E. (1989). The production of secondary metabolites by plant cells
cultivated in bioreactors. Planta Medica, 55, 409-416.

Krist, S., Banovac, D., Tabanca, N., Wedge, D., Gochev, V., Wanner, J., . . . Jirovetz, L.
(2015). Antimicrobial activity of nerolidol and its derivatives against airbome
microbes and further biological activities. Natural Products Communications,
10(1), 143-148.

Kufs, J., Hoefgen, S., Rautschek, J., Bissell, A., Graf, C., Fiedler, J.,... Valiante, V.
(2020), Rational design of flavonoid production routes using combinational and
precursor-derived biosynthesis. ACS Synthetic Biology, 9, 1823-1832.
doi:10.1021/acssynbio.0c00172?ref=pdf

Kulik, T., Stuper-Szablewska, K., Bilska, K., Busko, M., Ostrowska-Kolodziejezak, A.,
Zaluski, D., & Perkowski, J. (2017). Sinapic acid affects phenolic and trichothecene
profiles of F. culmorum and F. graminearum Sensu Stricto. Toxins, 9(9), 1-10.
doi:10.3390/toxins9090264

Kulma, A., & Szopa, J. (2007). Catecholamines are active compounds in plants. Plant
Science, 172, 433-440. doi:10.1016/.plantsci.2006.10.013

Kumari, S., Katare, P., Elancheran, R., Nizami, H., Paramesha, B., Arava, S., ... Banerjee,
S. (2020). Musa balbisiana fruit rich in polyphenols attenuates isoproterenol-
induced cardiac hypertrophy in rats via inhibition of inflammation and oxidative
stress. Oxidative Medicine and Cellular Longevity, 1-14,
doi:10.1155/2020/7147498

Kumari, S., Katare, P., Elancheran, R., Nizami, H., Paramesha, B., Arava, S.,... Banerjee,
S. (2020). Musa balbisiana fruit rich in polyphenols attenuates isoproterenol-
induced cardiac hypertrophy in rats via inhibition of inflammation and oxidative


s . Oxidative Medicine and Cellular Longevity, 2020, ‘1-14.
doi:10.1155/2020/7147498

Kusuma, S., Mita, S., Firdayani, I., & Mustarichie, R. (2017). Study on the antibacterial
activity of fruit extracts of klutuk banana (Musa balbisiana Colla) against Shigella
dysenteriae ATCC 13313. Asian Journal of Pharmaceutical and Clinical Research,
10(7), 220-223.

Kwon, S., Mora-Pale, M., Lee, M., & Dordick, J. (2012). Expanding nature's small
molecule diversity via in vitro biosynthetic pathway engineering. Current Opinion
in Chemical Biology, 16, 186-195. doi:10.1016/j.cbpa.2012.02.001

Labrador, D., Lalusin, A., Mendoza, M., & dela Vifia, C. (2020). Morphological
characterization and karyotype analysis of abaca (Musa textilis Nee) and its hybrids
with Musa balbisiana Colla. The Philippine Agricultural Scientist, 103(1), 13-28.

Lacuna-Richman, C. (2002). The role of abaca (Musa textilis) in the household economy
of a forest village. Small-scale Forest Economics, Management and Policy, I(\),
93-101.

Langenberger, G., Prigge, V., Martin, K., Belonias, B., & Sauerborn, J. (2009).
Ethnobotanical knowledge of Philippine lowland farmers and its application in
agroforestry. Agroforestry Systems, 76, 173-194. doi:10,1007/s10457-008-9189-3

Lee, K., Lee, J., Kim, S., Cho, M., & Lee, J. (2014). Anti-biofilm, anti-hemolysis, and anti-
virulence activities of black pepper, cananga, myrrh oils, and nerolidol against
Staphylococcus aureus, Applied Microbiology and Biotechnology, 98, 9447-9457.

Lee, S., & Lee, J. (2006). Cultural value orientations of selected Southeast Asian countries.
EYES AF 84), 369-387.

Lei, Z., Zhou, C., Ji, X., Wei, G., Huang, Y., Yu, W.,.. . Qiu, Y. (2018). Transcriptome
analysis reveals genes involved in flavonoid biosynthesis and accumulation in
Dendrobium catenatum from different locations. Scientific Reports, 8.
doi:10.1038/s41598-018-24751-y

Lewis, D., Fields, W., Shaw, & G. (1999). A natural flavonoid present in unripe plantain
banana pulp (Musa sapientum L. var. paradisiaca) protects the gastric mucosa from
aspirin-induced erosions. Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 65(3), 283-288.
doi:10.1016/s0378-874 1(99)00005-7

Li, C., & Hou, L. (2018). Review on volatile flavor components of roasted oilseeds and
their products. Grain & Oil Science and Technology, I(4), 151-156.


Li, C., Sun, X., Chang, C., Jia, D., Wei, Z.. Li, C.. & Ma, F. (2014). Dopamine alleviates
salt-induced stress in Malus hupehensis. Physiologia Plantarum, 1-19.
doi:10.1111/ppl.12264

Li, Liu, K., Chen, Y., Huang, X., Liang, W., Li, B., .. . Liang, H. (2021). Comprehensive
transcriptome and metabolome analysis of Lithocarpus polystachyus leaf revealed
key genes in flavonoid biosynthesis pathways. Journal of the American Society for
Horticultural Science, 146(3), 147-157. doi:10.21273/JASHS05020-20

Li, Liu, X., Cai, X., Shan, X., Gao, R., Yang, S., .. . Gao, X. (2017). Dihydroflavonol 4-
reductase genes from Freesia hybrida play important and partially overlapping
roles in the biosynthesis of flavonoids. Frontiers in Plant Science, 8, 1-15.
doi:10.3389/fpls.201 7.00428

Li, P.. Ruan, Z.. Fei. Z.. Yan. J.. & Tang. G. (2021). Integrated transcriptome and
metabolome analysis revelealed that flavonoid biosynthesis may dominate
resitance of Zanthoxylum bungeanum against stem canker. Journal of Agriculture
and Food Chemistry, 69(22), 6360-6378. doi:10.1021/acs,jafc.1c00357

Li, X., Cao, M., Ma, W., Jia, C., Li, J., Zhang, M.,... Hu, X. (2020). Annotation of genes
involved in high level of dihydromyricetin production in vine tea (Ampelopsis
grossedentata) by transcriptome analysis. BMC Plant Biology, 20, 1-12.
doi:10.1186/s12870-020-2324-7

Liang, J., An, T., Zhu, J., Chen, S., Zhu, J., Peters, R., ... Zi, J. (2021). Mining of the
Catharanthus roseus genome leads to identification of a biosynthetic gene cluster
for fungicidal sesquiterpenes. Journal of Natural Products, 84(10), 2709-2716.
doi:10.1021/acs,jnatprod.1c00588

Liao, P.. Wang, H., Hemmerlin, A., Nagegowda, D.. Bach, T.. Wang, M., & Chye, M.
(2014). Past achievements, current status and future perspectives of studies on 3-
hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA synthase (HMGS) in the mevalonate (MVA)
pathway. Plant Cell Reports, 33, 1005-1022. doi:10.1007/s00299-014-1592-9

Lima, D., Ballico, L., Rocha Lapa, F., Gongalves, H., de Souza, L., Iacomini, M.,... da
Silva, L. e. (2012). Evaluation of the antinociceptive, anti-inflammatory and gastric
antiulcer activities of the essential oil from Piper aleyreanum C.DC in rodents.
Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 142, 274-282.

Lin, D., Xiao, M., Zhao, J., Li, Z., Xing, B., Li, X.,... Chen, S. (2016). An overview of
plant phenolic compounds and their importance in human nutrition and
management of type 2 diabetes. Molecules, -21,——‘1-19.
doi:10.3390/molecules21 101374


Lin, Z., Nielsen, J., & Liu, Z. (2020). Bioprospecting through cloning of whole natural
product biosynthetic gene clusters. Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology,
8, 1-9, doi:10.3389/fbioe.2020.00526

Linder, J. (2008). Role of oils in the topical treatment of acne. Cosmetic Dermatology,
21(4), 211-214.

Liu, D., Wu, J., Lin, L.. Li, P., Li, S., Wang, Y..... Wang, Y. (2021). Overexpression of
cinnamoyl-CoA reductase 2 in Brassica napus increases resistance to Sclerotinia
sclerotiorum by affecting lignin biosynthesis. Frontiers in Plant Science, 12, 1-13.
doi:10.3389/fpls.2021.732733

Liu, H., & Ho, Y. (2018). Anticancer effect of curcumin on breast cancer and stem cells.
Food Science and Human Wellness, 7, 134-137. doi:10.1016/j.fshw.2018.06.001

Liu, J., Hou, J., Jiang, C., Li, G., Lu, H., Meng, F., & Shi, L. (2015). Deep sequencing of
the Scutellaria baicalensis Georgi transcriptome reveals flavonoid biosynthetic
profiling and organ-specific gene expression. PLoS ONE, 10(8), 1-15.
doi:10.1371 journal. pone.0136397

Lobrigo, M. (2008). The fate of Bicol (Philippines) abaca handicraft industry in the global
market, Master Thesis. Institute for Intemational Business, Karl Franzens
University.

Lopes, S., Borges, V., Cardoso, S., da Rocha, M., & Maraschin, M. (2020). Banana (Musa
spp.) as a source of bioactive compounds for health promotion. In M. Siddiq, J.
Ahmed, & M. Lobo, Handbook of Banana Production, Postharvest Science,
Processing Technology, and Nutrition, First Edition (pp. 227-244). John Wiley &
Sons, Ltd.

Lullman, H., Mohr, K., Hein, L., & Bieger, D. (2005). Color Atlas of Pharmacology. New
York: Thieme.

Ma, C., Wang, H.. Wen, J.. Shi, Q.. Wang, S., Yuan, T.. & Sun, R. (2020). Structural
elucidation of lignin macromolecule from abaca during alkaline hydrogen peroxide
delignification. International Journal of Biological Macromolecules, 144, 596-602.
doi:10.1016/.ijbiomac.2019.12.080

Ma, Q., Ma, R., Su, P., Jin, B., Guo, J., Tang, J.,... Huang, L. (2022). Elucidation of the
essential oil biosynthetic pathways in Cinnamomum burmannii through
identification of six terpene synthases. Plant = Science, 317.
doi:10.1016/j.plantsci.2022.111203

Ma, X., Vaistij, F., Li, Y., Jansen van Rensburg, W., Harvey, S., Bairu, M.,... Denby, K.
(2021). A chromosome-level Amaranthus cruentus genome assembly highlights
gene family evolution and biosynthetic geneclusters that may underpin the


nutritional value of thistraditional crop. The Plant Journal, 1-16.
doi:10.1111/tpj.15298

Magnani, C., Isaac, L., Correa, M., & Salgado, H. (2014). Caffeic acid: A review of its
potential usc in medications and cosmetics. Analytical Methods, 6, 3203-3210.
doi:10.1039/c3ay41807c

Mai, J.. Li, W, Ledesma-Amaro, R., & Ji, X. (2021). Engineering plant sesquiterpene
synthesis into yeasts: A review. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry,
69(33), 9498-9510. doi:10.1021/acs.jafc.1c03864

Mank, V., & Polonska, T. (2016). Use of natural oils as bioactive ingredicnts of cosmetic
products. Ukranian Food Journal, 5(2), 281-289.

Mantovani, L., & Pugliese, C. (2021). Phytosterol supplementation in the treatment of
dyslipidemia in children and adlescents: A systematic review. Revista Paulista de
Pediatria, 39, 1-9. doi:10.1590/1984-0462/2021/39/2019389

Manzoor, M., Goyal, P., Pandotra, P., Dar, M., Dar, M., Misra, P., . . . Gupta, S. (2021).
Transcriptome-wide identification of squalene epoxidase genes from Glycyrrhiza
glabra L.: Expression analysis and heterologous expression of GgSQEI suggest
important role in terpenoid biosynthesis. Protoplasma, 258, 991-1007.
doi:10.1007/s00709-021-01616-2

Marchev, A., Vasileva, L., Amirova, K., Savova, M., Koycheva, I., Balcheva-Sivenova,
Z., ... Georgiev, M. (2021). Rosmarinic acid - from bench to valuable applications
in food industry. Trends in Food Science & Technology, 117, 182-193.
doi:10.1016/j.tifs.2021.03.015

Marchler-Bauer, A., Anderson, J.. Cherukuri. P., Scott, C.. Geer, L., Gwadz, M. :
Bryant, S. (2005). CDD: a Conserved Domain Database for protein classification.
Nucleic Acids Research, 33, D192-D196. doi:10.1093/nar/gki069

Mari, E. L., O., A. C., Torres, A. S., & Domingo, E. P. (2019). Residual grade and waste
abaca fibers as reinforcement for packaging and printing/writing papers from
recycled fiber. Philippine Journal of Science, 148(2), 349-358.

Marineli, R., Furlan, C., Marques, A., Bicas, J., Pastore, G., & Marostica, M. (2015).
Chapter 23: Phytosterols: Biological effects and mechanisms of,
hypocholesterolemic action. In V. Gupta, M. Tuohy, M. Lohani, & A. O'Donovan,
Biotechnology of Bioactive Compounds: Sources and Applications, First Edition.
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Maritim, T., Seth, R., Parmar, R., & Sharma, R. (2021). Multiple-genotypes transcriptional
analysis revealed candidates genes and nucleotide variants for improvement of


quality characteristics in tea (Camellia sinensis (L.) ©. Kuntze). Genomics, 113,
305-316. doi:10.1016/.ygeno.2020.12.020

Marques, G., del Rio, J., & Gutierrez, A. (2010). Lipophilic extractives from several
nonwoody lignocellulosic crops (flax, hemp, sisal, abaca) and their fate during
alkaline pulping and TCF/ECF bleaching. Bioresource Technology, 101, 260-267.
doi:10.1016) biortech.2009.08,036

Martinez, A., Rencoret, J., Marques, G., Gutiérrez, A., Ibarra, D., Jiménez-Barbero, J., &
del Rio, J. (2008). Monolignol acylation and lignin structure in some nonwoody
plants: A 2D NMR study. Phytochemistry, 69, 2831-2843.
doi:10.1016/.phytochem.2008.09.005

Martinez, G., Regente, M., Jacobi, S., Del Rio, M., Pinedo, M., & de la Canal, L. (2017).
Chlorogenic acid is a fungicide active against phytopathogenic fungi. Pesticide
Biochemistry and Physiology, 140, 30-35. doi:10.1016/j.pestbp.2017.05.012

Mathe, C., Sagot, M., Schiez, T., & Rouze, P. (2002). Current methods of gene prediction,
their strengths and weaknesses. Nucleic Acids Research, 30(19). 4103-4117.

Mathew, N., & Negi, P. (2016). Traditional uses, phytochemistry, and pharmacology of
wild banana (Musa acuminata Colla): A review. Journal of Ethnopharmacology.
doi:10.1016/ jep.2016.12,009

McDonnell, E., Strasser, K., & Tsang, A. (n.d.). Manual gene curation and functional
annotation. In R. De Vries, Fungal genomics: Methods and Protocols, Methods in
Molecular Biology, vol. 1775. Springer Nature.

Melendres, R., Parducho, M., Abustan, M., & Lalusin, A. (2015). Comparative analysis of
the tensile strength and bunchy top virus resistance of parentals and backcrosses of
abaca (Musa textilis Nee) hybrids. Philippine Journal of Crop Science, 40, 100-
101.

Mera, I.. Falconi, D.,. & Cérdova, V. (2019). Secondary metabolites in plants: Main classes.
phytochemical analysis and pharmacological activities. Bionatura, 4(4), 1000-
1009. doi:10.21931/RB/2019.04.04.11

Metcker, M. (2010). Sequencing technologies—the next generation. Nature Reviews
Genetics, 11, 31-46.

Milan, P. P., & Géltenboth, F. (2005). Abaca and rainforestation farming: A guide to
sustainable farm management. Leyte: Desktop Publishing.

Mistry, J., Chuguransky, S., Williams, L., Qureshi, M., Salazar, G., Sonnhammer,
Bateman, A. (2021). Pfam: The protein families database in 2021. Nucleic Acids
Research, 49, D412-D419. doi:10.1093/nar/gkaa913



Mohd-Shukri, H., & Zainal-Abidin, B. (2011). The effects of nerolidol, allicin and berenil
on the morphology of Trypanosoma evansi in mice: A comparative study using
light and electron microscopic approaches. Malaysian Applied Biology, 40, 25-32.

Moo, C., Yang, S., Osman, M., Yuswan, M., Loh, J., Lim, W., .. . Lai, K. (2020).
Antibacterial activity and mode of action of B-caryophyllene on Bacillus cereus.
Polish Journal of Microbiology, 65(1), 49-54. doi:10.33073/pjm-2020-007

Moore, H. (1957). Musa and Ensete the cultivated bananas. Baileya, 5, 177.

Moreno, L., & Protacio, C. (2012). Chemical composition and pulp properties of abaca
(Musa textilis Ncc) cv. Inosa harvested at different stages of stalk maturity. Annals
of Tropical Research, 34(2), 45-62. doi:10.32945/atr3423.2012

Morilla, L., Sumaya, N., Rivero, H., & Madamba, R. (2014). Medicinal plants of the
Subanens in Dumingag, Zamboanga del Sur, Philippines. International Conference
on Food, Biological and Medical Sciences, (pp. 38-43).
doi:10.15242/IICBE.CO114577

Morita, Y., Takagi, K., Fukuchi-Mizutani, M., Ishiguro, K., Tanaka, Y., Nitasaka, E.,.. .
Tida, S. (2014). A chalcone isomerase-like protein enhances flavonoid production
and flower pigmentation. Plant Journal, 78(2), 294-304. doi:10.1111/tpj.12469

MusaNet. (2016). Global strategy for the conservation and use of Musa (banana) genetic
resources. Montpellier, France: Biodiversity International.

Nadarajah, K. (2018). In silico identification of plant-dcrived sccondary metabolites in
defense. In D. Choudhary, In Silico Approach for Sustainable Agriculture (pp. 275-
293). Springer Nature Singapore Pte. Ltd. doi:10.1007/978-981-13-0347-0_16

Nagel, R., Berasategui, A., Paetz, C., Gershenzon, J. & Schmidt, A. (2014).
Overexpression of an isopreny! diphosphate synthase in spruce leads to unexpected
terpene diversion products that function in plant defense. Plant Physiology, 164,
555-569.

Naive, M., Binag, S., & Alejandro, G. (2021). Plants with benefits: Ethnomedicinal plants
used by the Talaandig tribe in Portulin, Pangantucan, Bukidnon, Philippines. Indian
Journal of Traditional Knowledge, 20(3), 754-766.

Nandiyanto, A., Wiryani, A., Rusli, A., Purnamasari, A., Abdullah, A., Ana, . .. Hurriyati,
R. (2017). Extraction of curcumin pigment from Indonesian local turmeric with its
infrared spectra and thermal decomposition properties. JOP Conf. Series: Materials
Science and Engineering, 180, pp. 1-6. doi:10.1088/1757-899X/180/1/012136



Nansamba, M., Sibiya, J., Tumuhimbise, R., Karamura, D., Kubiriba, J., & Karamura, E.
(2020). Breeding banana (Musa spp.) for drought tolerance: A review. Plant
Breeding, 139, 685-696. doi: 10.111 L/pbr.12812

National Center for Biotechnology Information. (2022). PubChem Compound Summary
for CID 5280598, Farnesal, National Center for Biotechnology Information.
Retrieved March 31, 2022, from
hutps://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/compound/Farnesal

Nayar, N. (2010). The Bananas: Botany, Origin, Dispersal. In J. Janick, Horticultural
Reviews (Vol. 36, pp. 117-164). New Jersey: Wiley-Blackwell.
doi:10.1002/9780470527238.ch2

Nazari, M., Azadi, A., Ashrafi, H., & Badr, P. (2018). Roast natural products for
gastrointestinal disorders. Traditional and Integrative Medicine, 3(2), 51-62.

Neube, B., & Staden, J. (2015). Tilting plant metabolism for improved metabolite
biosynthesis and enhanced human benefit. Molecules, 20, 12698-12731.

Ndiege, I., Budenberg, W., Lwande, W., & Hassanalia. (1991). Volatile components of
banana pseudostem of a cultivar susceptible to the banana weevil. Phytochemistry,
30(12), 3929-3930.

Nelson, S. (2008). Black leaf streak of banana. Cooperative Extension Service, College of
Tropical Agriculture and Human Resources, University of Hawai'i, Manoa.

Neuvonen, P., & Olkkola, K. (1988). Oral activated charcoal in the treatment of
intoxications: Role of single and repeated doses. Medical Toxicology, 3, 33-58.

Nizinski, S., Wendel, M., Rode, M., Prukala, D., Sikorski, M., Wybraniec, S., &
Burdzinski, G. (2017). Photophysical properties of betaxanthins: Miraxanthin V —
insight into the excited-state deactivation mechanism from experiment and
computations. RSC Advances, 7, 6411-6421. doi:10.1039/c6ra28110a

Noge, K., & Becerra, J. (2009), Germacrene D, a common sesquiterpene in the genus
Bursera (Burseraceae). Molecules, 14, 5289-5297.
doi:10.3390/molecules14125289

Noriega, P., Guerrini, A., Sacchetti, G., Grandini, A., Ankuash, E., & Manfredini, S.
(2019). Chemical composition and biological activity of five essential oils from the
Ecuadorian amazon rain _— forest. = Molecules, = 24, 1-12.
doi:10.3390/molecules24081637

Norman, E., Lever, J., Brkljaga, R., & Urban, S. (2019). Distribution, biosynthesis, and
biological activity of phenylphenalenone-type compounds derived from the family


of plants, Haemodoraceae. Natural Product Reports, 36(5), 753-768.
doi:10.1039/C8NP00067K

Nuneza, O., Rodriguez, B., & Nasiad, J. (2021). Ethnomedicinal plants by the Subanen of
Barangay Lake Duminagat, Mindanao Island, Philippines. Philippine Journal of
Health Research and Development, 25(3), 27-42.

OGTR. (2016). The biology of Musa L. (banana). Australia: Australian Government Office
of the Gene Technology Regulator.

Olowa, L., & Demayo, C. (2015). Ethnobotanical uses of medicinal plants among the
Muslim Maranaos in Iigan City, Mindanao, Philippines. Advances in
Environmental Biology, 9(27), 204-215.

Olowa, L., Torres, M., Aranico, E., & Demayo, C. (2012). Medicinal plants used by the
Higaonon Tribe of Rogongon, Iligan City, Mindanao, Philippines. Advances in
Environmental Biology, 6(4), 1442-1449.

Onyema, C., Ofor, C., Okudo, V., & Ogbuagu, A. (2016). Phytochemical and antimicrobial
analysis of banana pseudo stem (Musa acuminata). British Journal of
Pharmaceutical Research, 10(1), 1-9.

Oresanya, I., Sonibare, M., Gueye, B., Balogun, F., Adebayo, S., Ashafa, A. & Morlock,
G. (2020). Isolation of flavonoids from Musa acuminata Colla (Simili radjah, ABB)
and the in vitro inhibitory effects of its leaf and fruit fractions on free radicals,
acetylcholinesterase, 15-lipoxygenase, and carbohydrate hydrolyzing enzymes.
Journal of Food Biochemistry, 1-14, doi:10.1111/jfoc.13137

Ouyang, S., Thibaud-Nissen, F., Childs, K., Zhu, W., & Buell, C. (2009). Plant genome
annotation methods. In D. Somers, Methods in Molecular Biology. Plant Genomics,
vol. 513 (pp. 263-282). Humana Press. doi:10.1007/978-1-59745-427-8_14

Oyeyinka, B., & Afolayan, A. (2020). Potentials of Musa species fruits against oxidative
stress-induced and diet-linked chronic diseases: In vitro and in vivo implications of
micronutritional factors and dietary secondary metabolite compounds. Molecules,
25, 1-30. doi:10.3390/molecules25215036

Pandey, A., Alok, A., Lakhwani, D., Singh, J., Asif, M., & Tivedi, P. (2016). Genome-
wide expression analysis and metabolite profiling elucidate transcriptional
regulation of flavonoid biosynthesis and modulation under abiotic stresses in
banana. Scientific Reports, 6, 1-13. doi:10.1038/srep31361

Pandiangan, D., Silalahi, M., Dapas, F., & Kandou, F. (2019). Diversity of medicinal plants
and their uses by the Sanger tribe of Sangihe Islands, North Sulawesi, Indonesia.
Biodiversitas, 2(2), 611-621. doi:10.13057/biodiv/d200301


Panes, V.. & Discar, M. (2021). Discovering genes involved in the synthesis of secondary
metabolites from the seeds of Moringa oleifera through transcriptome analysis.
Acta Horticulturae, 51-58, doi: 10.17660/ActaHortic.2021.1306.7

Parac, E., Lalusin, A., Pangga, I, & Sta. Cruz, F. (2020). Characteristics of sclected hybrids
of abaca (Musa textilis Nee) with resistance to bunchy top. Philippine Agricultual
Scientist, 103(1), 1-12.

Paraguison, L., Tandang, D., & Alejandro, G. (2020). Medicinal plants used by the Manobo
tribe of Prosperidad, Agusan Del Sur, Philippines-An ethnobotanical survey. Asian
Journal of Biological and Life Sciences, (3), 326-333.
doi:10.5530/ajbls.2020.9.49

Parducho, M., Rama, R., & Lalusin, A. (2020). Stability analysis of BC2 abaca (Musa
textilis Nee) hybrids across different locations in the Philippines. Philippine
Journal of Crop Science, 45, 44-49.

Park, S., & Park, Y. (2010). Eco-dyeing and antimicrobial properties of chlorophyllin
copper complex extracted from Sasa veitchii. Fibers and Polymers, 11(3),357-362.
doi:10.1007/s12221-010-0357-5

Passos, M., de Cruz, V., Emediato, F., de Teixeira, C., Azevedo, V., Brasileiro, A... ..
Miller, R. (2013). Analysis of the leaf transcriptome of Musa acuminata during
interaction with Mycosphaerella musicola: Gene assembly, annotation and marker
development. BMC Genomics, 14, —_‘1-17.__-Retrieved-—_ from
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/14/78

Patzke, H., & Schieber, A. (2018). Growth-inhibitory activity of phenolic compounds
applied in an emulsifiable concentrate - ferulic acid as a natural pesticide against
Botrytis cinerea, Food Research International, 113, ‘18-23.
doi:10.1016/j.foodres.2018.06,062

Pavlopoulos, G., Oulas, A., Iacucci, E., Sifrim, A., Moreau, Y., Schneider, R... .
iopoulos, 1. (2013). Unraveling genomic variation from next generation
sequencing data, BioData Mining, 6, 13.

Pavlovic, I., Mlinaric, S., Takowska, D.. Oklestkova, J., Novak. O., Lepedus, H., . . .
Salopek-Sondi, B. (2019). Early Brassica crops responses to salinity stre:
comparative analysis between Chinese cabbage, white cabbage, and kale. Frontiers
in Plant Science, 10, 1-16. doi:10.3389/fpls.2019.00450

Peng, Y., Bishop, K., & Quek, S. (2019). Compositional analysis and aroma evaluation of
Feijoa essential oils from New Zealand grown cultivars. Molecules, 24, 1-21.
doi:10.3390/molecules241 12053


Pereira, A.. & Maraschin, M. (2015). Banana (Musa spp) from peel to pulp:
Ethnopharmacology, source of of bioactive compounds and its relevance for human
health. Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 160, 149-163.

Petersen, M., & Simmonds, M. (2003). Rosmarinic acid. Phytochemistry, 62, 121-125.

Petersen, M., Hasuler, E., Karwatzki, B., & Meinhard, J. (1993). Proposed biosynthetic
pathway for rosmarinic acid in cell cultures of Coleus blumei Benth. Planta, 189,
10-14.

PhiIFIDA. (2016). Abaca technoguide, Quezon City: Philippine Fiber Industry
Development Authority.

PhilFIDA. (2017). The Philippine Abaca Industry Roadmap 2018-2022. PhilFIDA.

PhiIFIDA website. (2017, December). Retrieved from Philippine Fiber Industry
Development Authority: —_ http://www. philfida.da.gov.phv/index.php/news-
articles/1 16-3-abaca-varities-now-regsitered-with-nsic

PhiIFIDA, GIZ GmbH, & Glatfelter GmbH. (2016). Abaca sustainability manual.
Philippine Fiber Industry Development Authority; Deutsche Gesellschaft for
International Zusammenarbeit (GIZ) GmbH and Glatfelter GmbH.

Pichersky, E., & Gang, D. (2000). Genetics and biochemistry of secondary metabolites in
plants: An evolutionary perspective. Trends in Plant Science, 5(10), 439-445.

Piras, A., Maccioni, A., Falconieri, D., Porcedda, S., Goncalves, M., Alves-Silva, J., ...
Maxia, A. (2021). Chemical composition and biological activity of essential oil of
Teucrium scordium L. subsp. scordivides (Schreb.) Arcang. (Lamiaceae) from
Sardinia Island (Italy). Natural Product Research, 1-8.
doi:10.1080/14786419.2021.2018432

Pizon, J., Nufieza, O., Uy, M., & Senarath, W. (2016). Ethnobotany of medicinal plants
used by the Subanen tribe of Lapuyan, Zamboanga del Sur. Bulletin of
Environment, Pharmacology and Life Sciences, 5(5), 53-67.

Ploetz, R., Kepler, A., Daniells, J., & Nelson, S. (2007). Banana and plantain-An overview
with emphasis on Pacific island cultivars. In C. Elevitch, Species Profiles for
Pacific Island Agroforestry (pp. 1-27). Holualoa, Hawai'i: Permanent Agriculture
Resources (PAR).

Ptonka, J.. Barchanska, H., Kokoszka, K., & Krzyzanowska. A. (2022). Effect of herbicide
stress on the content of tyramine and its metabolites in Japanese radish sprouts
(Raphanus sativus). Journal of Food Composition and Analysis, 1-7.
doi:10.1016/j,jfea.2021.104301



Poli, A., Marangoni, F., Corsini, A.. Manzato, E., Morrocco, W., Martini, D.. . . . Visioli,
F, (2021). Phytosterols, cholesterol control, and cardiovascular disease. Nutrients,
13, 1-13, doi:10.3390/nu13082810

Polturak, G., & Osbourn, A. (2021). The emerging role of biosynthetic gene clusters in
plant defense and plant interactions. PLOS Pathogens, 17(7), 1-11.
doi:10.1371 journal. ppat.1009698

Pothavorn, P., Kitdamrongsont, K., Swangpol, S., Wongniam, S., Atongwasa, K., Savasti,
J., & Somana, J. (2010). Sap phytochemical compositions of some bananas in
Thailand. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 58(15), 8782-8787.

Pothiraj, R., Ravikumar, M., Suthanthiram, B., Subbaraya, U., & Krishnamurthy, P.
(2021). Genome-scale analyses of polyketide synthases in banana: Phylogenetics
and expression profiling forecast their candidacy in specialized metabolism. Gene.
778, 1-12. doi:10.1016/j.gene.2021.145472

Prakash, V. (2017). Terpenoids as source of anti-inflammatory compounds. Asian Journal
of Pharmaceutical and Clinical Research, 10(3), 68-76.

Prawitwong, P., Kosugi, A., Arai, T., Deng, L., Lee, K., Ibrahim, D., . .. Mori, Y. (2012).
Efficient ethanol production from separated parenchyma and vascular bundle of oil
palm trunk. Bioresource Technology. 125, 37-42.
doi:10,1016/j.biortech.2012.08,136

PSA. (2021a). Major non-food and industrial crops quarterly bulletin (January-March
2021). Quezon City, Philippines: Philippine Statistics Authority.

PSA. (2021b). Major fruit crops quarterly bulletin (January-March 2021). Quezon City,
Philippines: Philippine Statistics Authority.

PSA. (2022). Major non-food and industrial crops quarterly bulletin (January-March
2022). Quezon City: Philippine Statistics Authority.

Pucot, J., & Demayo, C. (2021{a]). Ethnomedicinal documentation of polyherbal
formulations and other folk medicines in Aurora, Zamboanga del Sur, Philippines.
Biodiversitas, 22(12), 5331-5343. doi:10.13057/biodiv/d221214

Pucot, J., & Demayo, C. (2021[b]). Medicinal plants of Aurora, Zamboanga del Sur,
Philippines: Traditional knowledge and use amongst healers and locals. Plant
Diversity. doi:10.1016/j.pld.2021.12.005

Purwar, S., Gupta, S., & Kumar, A. (2012). Enzymes of the phenylpropanoid metabolism
involved in strengthening the structural barrier for providing genotype and stage
dependent resistance to Karnal bunt in wheat. Amercian Journal of Plant Sciences.
3, 261-267. doi:10.4236/ajps.2012.32031


Purwati, R.. Harran, S., & Sudarsono. (2007). In vitro selection of abaca for resistance to
Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. cubense. Hayati Journal of Biosciences, 14(2), 65-70.
doi:10.4308/hjb.14.2.65

Quisumbing, E. (1978). Medicinal Plants of the Philippines. Quezon City: Katha
Publishing Co., Inc.

Rabara, R., Sotto, R.. & Salas, E. (2020). Species distribution modeling and phenotypic
diversity reveals collection gap in the Musa balbisiana germplasm conservation in
Philippines. Asian Journal of _— Agriculture, —-4(2),_—71-82.
doi:10.130S7/asianjagric/g040203

Ramachandhiran, D., Sankaranarayanan, C., Murali, R., Babukumar, S., & Vinothkumar,
V. (2022). B-Caryophyllene promotes oxidative stress and apoptosis in KB cells
through activation of mitochondrial-mediated pathway — An in-vitro and in-silico
study. Archives of Physiology and Biochemistry, 128(1), 148-162.
doi:10.1080/13813455.2019.1669057

Rani, A., Neelima, G., Mukhopadhyay, R.. Jyothi, K., & Sulakshana, G. (2018), In silico
characterization of plant secondary metabolites. In D. Choudhary, In Silico
Approach for Sustainable Agriculture (pp. 251-273). Springer Nature Singapore
Pre. Ltd.

Rastogi, S., Meena, S., Bhattacharya, A., Ghosh, S., Shukla, R., Sangwan, N., . .. Shasany,
S. (2014). De novo sequencing and comparative analysis of holy and sweet basil
transcriptomes. BMC Genomics, 15, 588-606.

Rattis, B., Ramos, S., & Celes, M. (2021). Curcumin as a potential treatment for COVID-
19. Frontiers in Pharmacology, 12, 1-14. doi:10.3389/fphar.202 1.675287

Rehman, A., Shahzad, B., Haider, F., Ahmed, H., Lee, D., Im, S., & Khan, I. (2021).
Chapter I - An introduction to brassinosteroids: History, biosynthesis, and chemical
diversity. In G. Ahammed, A. Sharma, & J. Yu, Brassinosteroids in Plant
Developmental Biology and Stress Tolerance (pp. 1-14). Elsevier, Inc.
doi:10.1016/C2016-0-04006-8

Revadigar. V., Al-Mansoub-M., Asif, M.. Hamdan, M.. Majid, A., Asmawi, M.. &
Murugaiyah, V. (2017). Anti-oxidative and cytotoxic attributes of phenolic rich
ethanol extract of Musa balbisiana Colla inflorescence. Journal of Applied
Pharmaceutical Science, 7(05), 103-110.

Rimpler, H. (1999). Biogene Arzneistoffe, 2. Auflage. Stuttgart: Deutscher Apotheker
Verlag Stuttgart.


Rita, W.. Asih, I, Swantara, 1, & Damayanti, N. (2021). Antibacterial activity of
flavonoids from ethyl acetate extract of milk banana peel (Musa x paradisiaca L.).
Hayati Journal of Biosciences, 28(3), 223-231. doi:10.4308/hjb.28.3.223

Rogerio, A., Andrade, E., Leite, D. F., & Calixto, J. (2009), Preventive and therapeutic
anti-inflammatory properties of the sesquiterpene a-humulene in experimental
airways allergic inflammation. British Journal of Pharmacology, 158, 1074-1087.

Roy, S., Coldren, C., Karunamurthy, A., Kip, N., Klee, E., Lincoln, S., . . . Carter, A.
(2018), Standards and guidelines for validating next-generation sequencing
bioinformatics pipelines: A joint recommendation of the Association for Molecular
Pathology and the College of American Pathologists. Journal of Molecular
Diagnostics, 20, 4-27.

Ruwizhi, N., & Aderibigde, B. (2020). Cinnamic acid derivatives and their biological
efficacy. International Journal of — Molecular Sciences, —_21(16).
doi:10.3390/ijms21 165712

Ryabchenko, B., Tulupova, E.. Schmidt, E.. Wicek, K., Buchbauer, G., & Jirovertz, L.
(2008). Investigation of anticancer and antiviral properties of selected aroma
samples. Natural Product Communications, 3, 1085-1088.

Saathoff, A., Sarath. G., Chow, E., Dien, B., & Tobias, C. (2011). Downregulation of
cinnamyl-alcohol dehydrogenase in switchgrass by RNA silencing results in
enhanced glucose release after cellulase treatment, PLoS ONE, 6(1), 1-10.

Sadgrove, N., Padilla-Gonzalez, G., & Phumthum, M. (2022). Fundamental chemistry of
essential oils and volatile organic compounds, methods of analysis and
authentication. Plants, 11(6), 1-34. doi:10.3390/plants1 1060789

Sainn, M., Kyaw, J., & Than, N. (2020). Study on antimicrobial and antioxidant activities
of Musa acuminata C. peel (Phee-Gyan banana). 3rd Myanmar Korea Conference
Research Journal, 3(4), 1644-1652.

Salehi, B., Quispe, C., Sharifi-Rad, J., Cruz-Martins, N., Nigam, M., Mishra, A. Koch,
W. (2021). Phytosterols: From preclinical evidence to potential clinical
applications. Frontiers in Pharmacology, 11. doi:10.3389/fphar.2020.599959

Saleme, M., Cesarino, I., Vargas, L., Kim, H., Vanholme, R., Goeminne, G.,. . . Boerjan,
W. (2017). Silencing caffeoy! shikimate esterase affects lignification and improves
saccarification in poplar. Plant Physiology, —-175(3), 1040-1057.
doi:10.1104/pp.17.00920

Sangeetha, P., Ramesh, M., & Prapulla, S. (2005). Recent trends in the microbial
production, analysis and application of fructooligosaccharides. Trends in Food
Science & Technology, 16, 442-457. doi:10.1016/j.tifs.2005.05.003


Santana-Galvez, J.. Cisneros-Zevallos, L.. & Jacobo-Velasquez, D. (2017). Chlorogenic
acid: Recent advances on its dual role as a food additive and a nutraceutical against
metabolic syndrome. Molecules, 22, 1-21. doi:10.3390/molecules22030358

Santos, A., Amorim, E., Ferreira, C., & Pirovani, C. (2018), Water stress in Musa spp.: A
systematic review. PLoS ONE, 13(12), 1-17. doi:10.1371/journal. pone.0208052

Sardos, J., Perrier, X., Dolezel, J., Christelova, P.. Van Den Houwe, I., Kilian. A., & Roux,
N. (2016). DArT whole genome profiling provides insights on the evolution and
taxonomy of edible banana (Musa spp.). Annals of Botany, 118, 1269-1278.

Schilbert, H., Schone, M., Baicr, T., Busche, M., Vichover, P., Weisshaar, B., &
Holtgrawe, D. (2021). Characterization of the Brassica napus flavonol synthase
gene family reveals bifunctional flavonol synthases. Frontiers in Plant Science, 12,
1-19. doi:10.3389/fpls.2021.733762

Sebastian, A., Dando, L., Dando, S, Galang, R., & Sia, S. (2013). Phase I! Documentation
of Philippine Traditional Knowledge and Practices on Health and Development of
Traditional Knowledge Digital Library on Selected Ethnolinguistic Groups: The
TAU-BUID MANGYAN people of Sitio Safa, Barangay Sabang, Pinamalayan,
Oriental Mindoro. Retrieved from www.tkdl.ph

Secretaria, M., Eroy, M., & Macarayan, O. (2012). Productivity and profitability of abaca
varieties/hybrids (Musa textilis Nee) under mature tall coconuts in Davao City,
Southern Mindanao, Philippines. Cord, 28(2), 34-42.

Shah, M., Alharby, H., Hakeem, K., Ali, N., Rahman, I, Munawar, M., & Anwar, Y.
(2020), De novo transcriptome analysis of Lantana camara L.. revealed candidate
genes involved in phenylpropanoid biosynthesis pathway. Scientific Reports, 10.
doi:10.1038/s41598-020-70635-5

Shannon, P., Markiel, A., Ozier, O., Baliga, N., Wang, J., Ramage, D., . . . Ideker, T.
(2003). Cytoscape: A software environment for integrated models of biomolecular
interaction networks. Genome Research, 13, 2498-2504. doi:10.1101/gr.1239303

Sharma, K., Sharma, V., & Sharma, S. (2018). Dye-sensitized solar cells: Fundamentals
and current status. Nanoscale Research Letters, 13, 1-46. doi:10.1186/s11671-018-
2760-6

Sheng, Z., Dai, H., Pan, S., Ai, B., Zheng, L., Zheng, X.,. . . Xu, Z. (2017). Phytosterols
in banana (Musa spp.) flower inhibit a-glucosidase and a-amylase hydrolysations
and glycation reaction. International Journal of Food Science & Technology, 52(1),
171-179, doi:10.111 1/ijfs.13263

Shimura, K., Okada, A., Okada, K., Jikumaru, Y., Ko, K., Toyomasu, T.,... Yamane, H.
(2007). Identification of a biosynthetic gene cluster in rice for momilactones, The


Journal of Biological Chemistry, 282(47), 34013-34018.
doi:10.1074/jbc.M703344200

Shin, D., Choi, M., Kang, C., Park, C., Choi, S., & Parl, Y. (2016). Overexpressing the
wheat dihydroflavonol 4-reductase gene TaDFR increases anthocyanin
accumulation in an Arabidopsis dfr mutant. Genes & Genomics, 38, 333-340.
doi:10.1007/s13258-015-0373-3

Shinya, T., Hayashi, K., Onogi, S., & Kawaoka, A. (2014). Transcript level analysis of
lignin and flavonoid biosynthesis related genes in Eucalyptus globulus. American
Journal of Plant Sciences, 5, 2764-2772. doi:10.4236/ajps.2014.518293

Shitan, N., Hayashida, M., & Yazaki, K. (2015). Translocation and accumulation of
nicotine via distinct spatio-temporal regulation of nicotine transporters in Nicotania
tabacum. Plant Signaling & Behavior. 10(7), 1-4.

Singh, P., Kumar, K., Jha, A., Yadava, P., Pal, M., Rakshit, S., & Singh, I. (2022). Global
gene expression profiling under nitrogen stress identifies key genes involved in
nitrogen stress adaptation in maize (Zea mays L.). Scientific Reports, 12, 1-18.
doi:10.1038/s41598-022-07709-z

Singhal, M., & Ratra, P. (2013). Antioxidant activity, total flavonoid and total phenolic
content of Musa acuminate peel extracts. Global Journal of Pharmacology. 7(2).
118-122. doi: 10.5829/idosi.gjp.2013.7.2.72158

Sivasamugham, L., Nimalan, V., & Subramaniam, G. (2021). Antibacterial effects of Musa
sp. ethanolic leaf extracts against methicillin-resistant and susceptible
Staphylococcus aureus. South African Journal of Chemical Engineering, 35, 107-
110. doi:10.1016/j.sajce.2020.09.007

Smit, A. Hubley, R, & Green, P. (1996). RepeatMasker. Retrieved from
http://Awww.repeatmasker.org/

Smith, R., Cass, C., Mazaheri, M., Sekhon, R., Heckwolf, M.. Kaeppler. H..... Ralph, J.
(2017). Suppression of cinnamoyl-CoA reductase increases the level of monolignol
ferulates incorporated into maize lignins. Biotechnology for Biofuels, 10, 1-10.
doi:10.1186/s13068-017-0793-1

Sobrinho, A., de Morais, S., de SOuza, E., Albuquerque, M., dos Santos, H., Cavalcante,
C.,... Fontenelle, R. (2020). Antifungal and antioxidant activities of Vernonia
chalybaea Mart. ex DC. essential oil and their major constituent f-caryophyllene.
Brazilian Archives of Biology and Technology., 63, 1-11. doi:10.1590/1678-4324-


Song. C., Lin, Y.. Hong, P., Liu, H., & Zhou, C. (2022). Low-content pre-emulsified
safflower seed oil enhances the quality and flavor of the Nemipterus virgatus surimi
gel. Gels, 8, 1-16. doi:10.3390/gels8020106

Song, Z., Guo, L., Liu, T., Lin, C., Wang, J., & Li, X. (2017). Comparative RNA-scquence
transcriptome analysis of phenolic acid metabolism in Salvia miltiorrhiza, a
traditional Chinese medicine model plant. International Journal of Genomics, 1-
10, doi:10.1155/2017/9364594

Sotto, R., & Rabara, R. (2000). Morphological diversity of Musa balbisiana Colla in the
Philippines. InfoMusa, 9(2), 28-30.

Sova, M. (2012). Antioxidant and antimicrobial activities of cinnamic acid derivatives.
Mini Reviews in’ Medicinal_~— Chemistry, —«'12(8),._—-749-767
doi:10.2174/138955712801264792

Spencer, J. (1953). The abaca plant and its fiber (Manila hemp). Economic Botany, 7(3),
195-213.

Spieth, J., & Lawson, D. (2005). Overview of gene structure. Genome Biology and
Evolution. doi:10.1895/wormbook. 1.65.1

Stirk, W., Balint, P., Tarkowska, D., Stmad, M., van Staden, J., & Ordég, V. (2018).
Endogenous brassinosteroids in microalgae exposed to salt and low temperature
stress. | European Journal of _—- Phycology, ~—-53(3),._-—-273-279.
doi:10.1080/09670262.2018.1441447

Stover, R. (1962). Fusarial wilt (Panama disease) of bananas and other Musa species.
Surrey, UK: The Commonwealth Mycological Institute Kew.

Suardi, Homma, H., & Abubakar. (2018). Identification of tensile strength properties of
abaca fiber by weakest-linkage approach-statistic property of fiber diameter. /0th
International Conference Numerical Analysis in Engineering. 308, pp. 1-6. 1OP
Publishing. doi:10.1088/1757-899X/308/1/012037

Suhelmidawati, E. (2016). Tensile tests of abaca fiber as one of alternative materials for
retrofitting of unreinforced masonry (URM) houses. Rekayasa Sipil, XIII(2), 22-29.

Sui, C., Zhang, J., Wei, J., Chen, S., Li, Y., Xu, J.,... Xu, Y. (2011). Transcriptome
analysis of Bupleurum chinense focusing on gene involved in the biosynthesis of
saikosaponins. BMC Genomics, 12(1), 539.

Sui, J., Qu, C., Yang, J., Zhang, W., & Ji, Y. (2019). Transcriptome changes in the

phenylpropanoid pathway in senescing leaves of Toona sinensis. Acta Physiologiae
Plantarum, 41. doi:10.1007/s11738-019-2915-9


Sulistyaningsih, L. (2016). The diversity of wild banana species (genus Musa) in Java.
Makara Journal of Science, 20(1), 40-48. doi:10.7454/mss.v20i1 5660

Sun, H., Song, M., Zhang, Y., & Zhang, Z. (2021). Transcriptome profiling reveals
candidate flavonoid-related genes during formation of dragon's blood from
Dracaena cochinchinensis (Lour.) S.C.Chen under conditions of wounding stress.
Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 273. doi:10.1016/j,jep.2021.113987

Sun, R., Fang, J., Goodwin, J, Lawther, J., & Bolton, A. (1998). Isolation and
characterization of polysaccharides from abaca fiber. Journal of Agricultural and
Food Chemistry, 46, 2817-2822.

Sun, S., & Fang, H. (2021). Curcumin inhibits ovarian cancer progression by regulating
cire-PLEKHM3/miR-320a/SMGI axis. Journal of Ovarian Research, 14, 1-13.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1186/s13048-021-00916-8

Sun, X., Liang, L., & Liu, Y. (2022). Curcumin played an anti-cancer role in colorectal
cancer via mediating circ KIAA1199-related regulatory axis. Food Science and
Technology, 42, 1-12. doi:10.1590/fst.86221

Sun, Y., He, J., & Kong, J. (2019). Characterization of two flavonol synthases with iron-
dependent flavanone 3-hydroxylase activity from Ornithogalum caudatum Jacq.
BMC Plant Biology, 19, 1-15. doi:10.1186/s12870-019-1787-x

Supiandi, M., Ege, B., Julung, H., Zubaidah, S., & Mahanal, S. (2021). Ethnobotany of
traditional medicine in Dayak Jangkang tribe, Saggau District, West Kalimantan,
Indonesia. Biodiversitas, 22(12), 5417-424, doi:10,13057/biodiv/d221224

Swargiary, A., Boro, H., Roy, M., & Akram, M. (2021). Phytochemistry and
pharmacological property of Musa balbisiana Colla: A  mini-review.
Pharmacognosy Reviews, 15(29), 91-95. doi:10.5530/phrev.2021.15.11

Swe, K. (2012). Study on phytochemicals and nutritional composition of banana flowers
of two cultivars (Phee kyan and Thee hmwe). Universities Research Journal, 15(1).
1-7.

Syanifar, R., Gomesh, N., Irwanto, M., Fareq, M., & Irwan, Y. (2015). Chlorophyll
pigments as nature based dye for dye-sensitized solar cell (DSSC). Energy
Procedia, 79, 896-902. doi:10.1016/j.egypro.2015.11.584

Szabo, E., Thelen, A., & Petersen, M. (1999). Fungal elicitor preparations and methyl
jasmonate enhance rosmarinic acid accumulation in suspension cultures of Coleus
blumei. Plant Cell Reproduction, 485-489.

Szklarczyk, D., Gable, A., Nastou, K., L, D., Kirsch, R.. Pyysalo, S.,... von Mering. C.
(2021). The STRING database in 2021: customizable protein-protei networks, and



functional characterization of user-uploaded gene/measurement sets. Nucleic Acids
Research, 49, D605-D612. doi:10.1093/nar/gkaal074

Szklarezyk, D., Morris, J., Cook, H., Kuhn, M., Wyder, S., Simonovic, M., ... von Mering,
C. (2017), The STRING database in 2017: quality-controlled protein-protein
association networks, made broadly accessible. Nucleic Acids Research, 45, D362
D368. doi:10.1093/nar/gkw937

Tabora, P. J. (1978). Historical background. In P. Tabora, & J. Carlos, The Abaca.
International Documentation Center on Abaca, University of the Philippines at Los
Bafios. (Unpublished).

Talampas, R. (2015). Indonesian diaspora identity construction in a Southern Mindanao
border crossing. Journal of Critical Perspectives on Asia, 51(1), 130-162.

Tantengco, 0. Condes, M., Estadilla, H., & Ragragio, E. (2018). Ethnobotanical survey of
medicinal plants used by Ayta Communities in Dinalupihan, Bataan, Philippines.
Pharmacognosy Journal, 10(5), 859-870. doi:10.5530/pj.2018.5.145

Tapado, B. M., & Palaoag, T. D. (2018). Data visualization of abaca production in
Catanduanes. International Conference on Advancements in Computational
Sciences (pp. 65-70). Beijing, China: Association for Computing Machinery.
doi:10.1145/3242840.3242878

The Gene Ontology Consortium. (2000). Gene Ontology: Too! for the unification of
biology. Nature Genetics, 25, 25-29.

The International Work Group for Indigenous Affairs. (2021). The Indigenous World 2021.
Copenhagen, Denmark: Eks-Skolen Trykkeri.

The Plant List website. (2013). Retrieved August 21, 2021, from The Plant List:
http://www theplantlist.org/I.1/browse/A/Musaceae/

Thirumurugan, D., Cholarajan, A., Raja, S., & Vijayakumar, R. (2018). An introductory
chapter: Secondary metabolites, In Secondary Metabolites-Sources and
Applications (pp. 3-21). IntechOpen. doi:10.5772/intechopen.79766

Tholl, D. (2015). Biosynthesis and biological functions of terpenoids in plants. Advances
in Biochemical —_Engineering/Biotechnology. 148, (63-106.
doi:10.1007/10_2014_295

Tian, H., Xu, X., Zhang, F., Wang, Y., Guo. S., Qin, X., & Du, G. (2015). Analysis of
Polygala tenuifolia transcriptome and description of secondary metabolite
biosynthetic pathways by Illumina sequencing. International Journal of Genomics,
2015, 1-11. doi:10.1155/2015/782635


Tin, H., Birdie, P., & Chye, F. (2020). Elucidation of antibacterial compounds from
inflorescences of banana (Musa balbisiana ev. Saba) using liquid chromatography-
tandem mass spectrometry. Current Nutrition and Food Science, 16(7), 1130-1140.

Tin, H., Padam, B., Kamada, T., Vairrapan, C., Abdullah, M., & Chyc, F. (2016). Isolation
and structure elucidation of triterpenes from infloresence of banana (Musa
balbisiana cv. Saba). International Food Research Journal, 23(2), 866-872.

Tiwari, R., & Rana, C. (2015). Plant secondary metabolites: A review. International
Journal of Engineering Research and General Science, 3(5), 661-670.

Togashi. N., Hamashima., H., Shiraishi, A., Inoue, Y.. & Takano, A. (2010). Antibacterial
activities against Staphylococcus aureus of terpene alcohols with aliphatic carbon
chains. Journal of Essential Oils Research, 263-269.

Tohge, T., Yonekura-Sakakibara, K., Niida, R., Watanabe-Takahashi, A., & Saito, K.
(2007), Phytochemical genomics in Arabidopsis thaliana: A case study for
functional identification of flavonoid biosynthesis genes. Pure and Applied
Chemistry, 79(4), 811-823. doi:10.1351/pac20077904081 1

Trieu, L., Huyen, L., Thao, L., Thanh, L., Huyen, P., Khoi, N., & Minh, L. (2020).
Pharmacognostical standardization, phytochemical analysis, and antioxidant
activity of Musa balbisiana Colla fruits. International Journal of Research in
Pharmaceutical Sciences, 1 (4), 7920-7931. doi:10.26452/ijrps.v1 114.4702

Tripathi, L., Tripathi, J., Shah, T., Muiruri, K., & Katari, M. (2019). Molecular basis of
disease resistance in banana progenitor Musa balbisiana against Xanthomonas
campestris pv. musacearum. Scientific Reports, 9, 1-17. doi:10.1038/s41598-019-
43421-1

Tripathi, S., Jadaun, J., Chandra, M., & Sangwan, N. (2016). Medicinal plant
transcriptomes: The new gateways for accelerated understanding of plant
secondary metabolism. Plant Genetic Resources: Characterization and Utilization,
14(4), 256-269. doi:10.1017/S14792621 16000162

Tryjillo-Moya, C., Ganthaler, A., Stoggl, W., Kranner, I., Schuler, S., Ertl, R., ... Mayr,
S. (2020). RNA-Seq and secondary metabolite analyses reveal a putative defence-
transcriptome in Norway spruce (Picea abies) against needle bladder rust
(Chrysomyxa rhododendri) infection. BMC Genomics, 21, 1-21.
doi:10.1186/s12864-020-6587-z

Ullah, A., Munir, S., Badshah, S., Khan, N., Ghani, L., Poulson, B., ...Jaremko, M. (2020).
Important flavonoids and their role as a therapeutic agent. Molecules, 25, 1-39.
doi:10.3390/molecules25225243


Unilab. (n.d.). Binat Overview, Causes, and Treatment. Retrieved April 11, 2022, from
Unilab: https://www.unilab.com.ph/articles/binat-overview-causes-and-treatment

United Nations. (2016). State of the World's Indigenous Peoples: Indigenous Peoples’
Access to Health Services. New York: United Nations Publications.

Valasek, P., D'Amato, R., Milller, M., & Ruggiero, A. (2018). Musa textilis cellulose fibres
in biocomposites - An investigation on mechanical properties and microstructure.
BioResources, 13(2), 3177-3194.

Valmayor, R., Espino, R., & Pascua, O. (2002). The wild and cultivated bananas of the
Philippines. Laguna, Philippines: Philippine Agriculture and Resources Rescarch
Foundation, Inc., and Bureau of Agricultural Research.

Valmayor, R., Jamaluddin, S., Silayoi, B., Kusumo, S., Danh, L., Pascua, O., & Espino, R.
(2000). Banana cultivar names and synonyms in Southeast Asia. Laguna,
Philippines: International Network for the Improvement of Banana and Plantain-
Asia and the Pacific Office.

Vanisree, M., Lee, C., Lo, S., Nalawade, S., Lin, C., & Tsay, H. (2004). Studies on the
production of some important secondary metabolites from medicinal plants by plant
tissue cultures. Botanical Bulletin of Academia Sinica, 45, 1-22.

Varga, Z., Matyas, C., Erdeyli, K., Cinar, R., Nieri, D., Chicca, A.,.. . Pacher, P. (2018).
Beta-caryophyllene protects against alcoholic steatohepatitis by attenuating
inflammation and metabolic dysregulation in mice. British Journal of
Pharmacology, 175(2), 320-334. doi:10.1111/bph.13722

Velasquez, J., Rojas-Fermin, L., Velasco, J., Aparicio, R., Usubillaga, A., & Sanoja, E.
(2019). Chemical diversity and antibacterial activity of volatile compounds from
two Centrolobium paraense Tul. varieties. Bionatura, 4(3), 908-912.

Velumani, S. (2016). Phytochemical screening and antioxidant activity of banana peel.
ARIE International Journals, 2(1), 91-102

Venkataramana, R., Sampangi-Ramaiah, M., Ajitha, R., Khadke, G., & Chellam, V.
(2015). Insights into Musa balbisiana and Musa acuminata species divergence and
development of genic microsatellites by transcriptomics approach. Plant Gene, 4,
78-82. doi:10.1016/j.plgene.2015.09.007

Vijayakumar, S., Presannakumar, G., & Vijayalakshmi, N. (2009). Investigations on the
effect of flavonoids from banana, Musa paradisiaca L. on lipid metabolism in rats.
Journal of Dietary Supplements, 6(2), 111-123.


Vilela, C., Santos, S., Villaverde, J., Oliveira, L., Nunes, A., Cordeiro, Silvestre, A.
(2014), Lipophilic phytochemicals from banana fruits of several Musa species.
Food Chemistry, 162, 247-252. doi:10.1016/.foodchem.2014.04.050

Villafucrte-Abonal, L. (2006). ABACA Philippines. Luis R. Villafuerte.

Villalta, G., Salinas, M., Calva, J., Bec, N., Larroque, C., Vidari, G., & Amijos, C. (2021).
Selective BuChE Inhibitory activity, chemical composition, and enantiomeric
content of the essential oil from Salvia leucantha Cav. collected in Ecuador. Plants,
10, 1-10. doi:10.3390/plants10061169

Villanueva, E. (1982). Potential industrial utilization of abaca. Proceedings: Symposium
on Abaca Research and Development (pp. 44-46). Legaspi City: FIDA and
PCARRD.

Vinardell, M., & Mitjans, M. (2017). Lignins and their derivatives with beneficial effects
on human health. International Journal of Molecular Sciences, 18, 1-15.
doi:10.3390/ijms!1 8061219

Vogt, T. (2010). Phenylpropanoid biosynthesis. Molecular Plant, 3(1), 2-20.
doi:10.1093/mp/ssp106

Wahua, C., & Nkpumah, K. (2021). Taxonomic properties of Musa paradisiaca L. of
Musaceae. Journal of Global Biosciences, 10(4), 8647-8658.

Wang, L., Jiang, Y., Yuan, L., Lu, W., Yang, L., Karim, A., & Luo, K. (2013). Isolation
and characterization of cDNAs cncoding leucoanthocyanidin reductase and
anthocyanidin reductase from Populus trichocarpa. PLOS ONE, &(5), 1-10.
doi: 10.1371 journal. pone.0064664

Wang, L., Pan, X., Jiang, L.., Chu, Y., Gao, S., Jiang, X.,... Peng, C. (2022). The biological
activity mechanism of chlorogenic acid and its applications in food industry: A
review. Frontiers in Nutrition, 9, 1-22. doi:10.3389/fnut.2022.94391 1

Wang, R., Xu, S., Wang, N., Bing, X., Jiang, Y., & Wang, R. (2017). Trancriptome analysis
of secondary metabolism pathway, transcription factors, and transporters in
response to methyl jasmonate in Lycoris aurea. Frontiers in Plant Science, 7,1-13.
doi:10.3389/fpls.2016.01971

Wang, X., Chiang, T., Roux, N., Hao, G., & Ge, X. (2007). Genetic diversity of wild
banana (Musa balbisiana Colla) in China as revealed by AFLP markers. Genetic
Resources and Crop Evolution, 54, 1125-1132. doi:t0.1007/s10722-006-9004-9

Wang, Z., Chen, Y., & Li, Y. (2004). A brief review of computational gene prediction
methods. Genomics, Proteomics & Bioinformatics, 2(4). 217-221.


Wang, Z.. Miao, H., Liu, J., Xu, B., Yao, X., Xu, C., .. . Jin, Z. (2019). Musa balbisiana
genome reveals subgenome evolution and functional divergence. Nature Plants, 5,
810-821.

WCSP website. (n.d.). Retrieved from Royal Botanic Gardens Kew Science: World
Checklist of Selected Plant Families: http://wesp.science.kew.org/

Weber, T., & Kim, H. (2016). The secondary metabolite bioinformatics portal:
Computational tools to facilitate synthetic biology of secondary metabolite
production. Synthetic and —‘Systems_—_—Biotechnology, _—_69-79.
doi:10.1016/j.synbio.2015.12.002

Wei, J., Liu, D., Liu, Y., & Wei, S. (2022). Physiological analysis and transcriptome
sequencing reveal the effects of salt stress on banana (Musa acuminata cv. BD)
leaf. Frontiers in Plant Science, 13, 1-15. doi:10.3389/fpls.2022.822838

Weiss, R., Guebitz, G., Pellis, A., & Nyanhongo, G. (2020). Hamessing the power of
enzymes for tailoring and valorizing lignin. Trends in Biotechnology, 38(11), 1215-
1232. doi:10.1016/j.tibtech.2020.03.010

Weng, J., & Noel, J. (2012). Structure-function analyses of plant type III polyketide
synthases. In D. Hopwood, Methods in Enzymology (Vol. 515, pp. 317-335).
Elsevier, Inc. doi:10.1016/B978-0-12-394290-6,00014-8

Weremfo, A., Pappoe, A., & Adinortey, M. (2011). Wound healing potential of Musa
paradisiaca L. (Musaceae) stem juice extract formulated into an ointment.
Research Journal of Pharmacology and Pharmacodynamics, 3(6), 294-296.

Weston, L., & Mathesius, U. (2013). Flavonoids: their structure, biosynthesis and role in
the rhizosphere, including allelopathy. Journal of Chemical Ecology. 39, 283-297.
doi:10.1007/s10886-013-0248-5

Whelan, J., & Fritsche, K. (2013). Linoleic acid. Advances in Nutrition, 4, 311-312.
doi:10.3945/an.113.003772

Wink, M. (1987). Physiology of the accumulation of secondary metabolites with special
reference to alkaloids. In Cell Culture and Somatic Cell Genetics of Plants. vol. 4
(pp. 17-42). Academic Press, Inc.

Wong, C., Kiew, R., Loh, J., Gat, L., Set, O., Lee, S., & Lum, S. G. (2001), Genetic
diversity of the wild banana Musa acuminata Colla in Malaysia as evidenced by
AFLP. Annals of Botany, 88, 1017-1025. doi:10.1006/ambo.2001.1542

Wong, S., Kamarudin, M., & Naidu, R. (2021). Anticancer mechanism of curcumin on
human glioblastoma. Nutrients, 13, 1-20. doi:10.3390/nul 3030950


Wu, Q.. Sun, C., Luo, H., Li, Y., Niu, Y., Sun, Y.,... Chen, $. (2011). Transcriptome
analysis of Taxus cuspidata needles based on 454 pyrosequencing. Planta Medica,
77, 394-400.

Wu, Y., Wang, T., Xin, Y., Huang, S., Wang, G., & Xu, L. (2021). Exogenous GHHMGS1
overexpression improves the contents of three terpenoids in transgenic Populus.
Forests, 12, 1-14. doi:10.3390/f12050595

Xiong, D., Lu, S., Wu, J., Liang, C., Wang, W., Wang, W.,... Tang, S. (2017). Improving
key enzyme activity in phenylpropanoid pathway with a designed biosensor.
Metabolic Engineering, 40, 115-123. doi:10.1016/j.ymben.2017.01.006

Xiong, J. (2006). Essential bioinformatics. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Xu, M., Zeng, C., He, R., Yan, Z., Qi, Z., Xiong, R.,.. . Tang, H. (2019). Transcriptome
analysis of banana (Musa acuminata L.) in response to low-potassium stress.
Agronomy, 9, 1-20. doi:10.3390/agronomy9040169

Yadav, P., Kaur, R., Kohli, S., Sirhindi, G., & Bhardwaj, R. (2016). Castasterone assisted
accumulation of polyphenols and antioxidant to increase tolerance of B. juncea
plants towards copper toxicity. Cogent Food & Agriculture, 2, 1-14.
doi:10.1080/23311932.2016.1276821

Yang, L., Ding, G., Lin, H., Cheng, H., & Kong, Y. (2013). Transcriptome analysis of
medicinal plant Salvia miltiorrhiza and identification of genes related to tanshione
biosynthesis. PLoS ONE, 8, e80464.

Yassin, H. R., Hassan, N., & Sean, H. S. (2018), Experiment on abaca fiber and its
implementation in product making. Advances in Social Science, Education and
Humanities Research, 207. 375-377.

Yeo, D., Hwang, S., Song, Y., & Lee, H. (2021). Humulene inhibits acute gastric mucosal
injury by enhancing mucosal integrity. Antioxidants, 10, 1-16.
doi:10.3390/antiox10050761

Yi, Y., Wang, L., Chen, L., Lin, Y., Luo, Z., Chen, Z., . . . Zhong, Z. (2020). Farnesal-
loaded pH-sensitive polymeric micelles provided effective prevention and
treatment on dental caries. Journal of Nanobiotechnology, 18, 1-16.
doi:10.1186/s1295 1-020-00633-2

Yin, Y., Hou, J., Tian, S., Yang, L., Zhang, Z., Li, W., & Liu, Y. (2019). Overexpressing
chalcone synthase (CHS) gene enhanced flavonoids accumulation in Glycyrrhiza
uralensis hairy roots. + Botany ~—Letters, —«167(2),_— 219-231.
doi:10.1080/23818107.2019.1702896


Yingyuen, P.. Sukrong, S., & Phisalaphong, M. (2020). Isolation, separation and
purification of rutin from banana leaves (Musa balbisiana). Industrial Crops and
Products, 149(2020), 112307.

Yingyuen, P., Sukrong, S., & Phisalaphong, M. (2020). Isolation, separation and
purification of rutin from banana leaves (Musa balbisiana). Industrial Crops &
Products, 149, 1-9. doi:10.1016/.indcrop.2020.112307

Yuan, Y., Zuo, J., Zhang, H., Zu, M., Yu, M., & Liu, S. (2022). Transcriptome and
metabolome profiling unveil the accumulation of flavonoids in Dendrobium
officinale. Genomics, 114(3). doi:10.1016/j.ygeno.2022.110324

Yulvianti, M., & Zidorn, C. (2021). Chemical diversity of plant cyanogenic glycosides: an
overview of reported natural products. Molecules, 26, ‘1-19.
doi:10.3390/molecules26030719

Zainal-Abidin, R., Afigah-Aleng, N., Abdullah-Zawawi, M., Harun, S., & Mohamed-
Hussein, Z. (2022). Protein-protein interaction (PPI) network of zebrafish
oestrogen receptors: a bioinformatics workflow. Life, 12, 1-19.
doi:10.3390/ife12050650

Zdufska, K., Dana, A., Kolodziejezak, A., & Rotsztejn, H. (2018). Antioxidant properties
of ferulic acid and its possible applications. Skin Pharmacology and Physiology.
31, 332-336. doi:10.1159/000491755

Zenk, M., El-Shagi, H., & Ulbrich, B, (1977). Production of rosmarinic acid by cell-
suspension cultures of Coleus blumei. Naturwissenschaften, 64, 585-586.

Zhan, X., Qian, Y., & Mao, B. (2022). Metabolic profiling of terpene diversity and
response of prenylsynthase-terpene synthase genes during biotic and abiotic
stresses in Dendrobium catenatum, International Journal of Molecular Sciences,
23, 1-15, doi:10.3390/ijms23126398

Zhang, H.. & Stephanopoulos, G. (2016). Co-culture engineering for microbial
biosynthesis of 3-amino-benzoic acid in Escherichia coli. Biotechnology Journal,
11, 981-987.

Zhang, L., Yang, G., Zhang, R., Dong, L., Chen, H., Bo. J., ... Huang, Y. (2018). Curcumin
inhibits cell proliferation and motility via suppression of TROP2 in bladder cancer
cells. International Journal of Oncology, 53, 515-526. doi:10.3892/ijo.2018.4423

Zhang, S., Zhang, L., Tai, Y., Wang, X., Ho, C., & Wan, X. (2018). Gene discovery of
characteristic metabolic pathways in the tea plant (Camellia sinensis) using 'omics-
based network approaches: A future prespective. Frontiers in Plant Science, 9, 1-
12.


Zhang, W., Zhou, Q., Lin, J., Ma, X., Dong, F., Yan, H., . . . Ming, R. (2022).
Transcriptome analyses shed light on floral organ morphogenesis and bract color
formation in Bougainville, BMC Plant Blology, 22. doi:10.1186/s12870-022-
03478-2

Zhang, X., & Liu, C. (2015). Multifaceted regulations of gateway enzyme phenylalanine
ammonia-lyase in the biosynthesis of phenylpropanoids. Molecular Plant, 8, 17-
27. doi:10.1016/j.molp.2014.11.001

Zhang, Y., Zhang, H., Wang, M., & Qian, F. (2021). B-Caryophyllene attenuates
lipopolysaccharide-induced acute lung injury via inhibition of the MAPK
signalling pathway. Journal of Pharmacy and Pharmacology, 73(10), 1319-1329.
doi:10.1093/jpp/rgab074

Zhao, X., Yan, Y.. Zhou, W., Feng, R., Shuai, Y., Yang, L.. . . . Wei, Q. (2022).
Transcriptome and metabolome reveal the accumulation of secondary metabolites
in diferent varieties of Cinnamomum longepaniculatum. BMC Plant Biology, 22,
1-14, doi:10.1186/s12870-022-03637-2

Zhu, Y., Wang, H., Peng, Q., Tang, Y., Xia, G., Wu, J., & Xie, D. (2015). Functional
characterization of an anthocyanidin reductase gene from the fibers of upland
cotton (Gossypium hirsutum). Planta, 241(5), 1075-1089. doi:10.1007/s00425-
014-2238-4

