Agriculture 4.0 Readiness Among Crops and Livestock Research and Development Organizations in the Philippines

JESSELLE SOLIVAS LARANAS

UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES LOS BAÑOS

Doctor of Philosophy in Development Studies

JANUARY 2023

ABSTRACT

This study aims to develop a readiness model to assess the levels of readiness of the crops
and livestock R&D organizations in the Philippines, toward Agriculture 4.0, with focus on human
capital development. An exploratory sequential mixed method research design was employed in
the development of the readiness tool. The qualitative phase entailed desk research, real-time (RT)
Delphi Technique, and key informant interviews (KII). The model was administered during the
quantitative phase, through online survey covering research and development organizations in the
Philippines, and subsequently validated through Confirmatory Factor Analysis (CFA) and
Structural Equation Modeling (SEM). Readiness levels of each organization were determined for
policy reforms on capability development, particularly focusing on education and training. Agriculture 4.0 in the context of Philippine R&D covers the concepts and technologies of
4IR used to enhance and develop agriculture innovations and systems across the agri-food value
chain that will improve agriculture productivity, environmental sustainability, food and nutrition,
and income. Frontier technologies include biotechnology, sensors and remote sensing technologies,
Artificial Intelligence (AI) and machine learning, advance genomics and gene editing,
nanotechnology, 3D printing and additive manufacturing, Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAV) or
drone, Internet of Things (IoT), Big data, and robotics and automation, and Blockchain. Five basic
readiness dimensions for Agriculture 4.0 namely (1) Human Capital, (2) Organizational
Leadership, (3) Strategy and Skills Development, (4) Smart Operations, and (5) Technology
Management. To validate the said readiness model, a second order factor analysis was done.
Construct validity, convergent validity, and discriminant validity were performed using the SPSS
program Amos. After achieving model fit and establishing regression coefficients significantly
related to agriculture readiness, which indicated that the model developed is valid and reliable. Based on this, the R&D community is still at the Level 2 readiness or conceptualization stage
with some organizations reaching the co-creation level. Among the readiness dimensions, the
human capital was able to obtain a relatively higher readiness level (3). Meanwhile, strategy and
skills development, and smart operations were able to garner the lowest level of readiness
(awareness). Competencies related to biotechnology, sensors and remote sensing, oT, big data and
AUVs were considered priority areas for human capital investments. While digital literacy skills
are needed by the current workforce, these need to be complemented by social and personal skills
to be ready for the Agriculture 4.0.

Keywords: Agriculture 4.0, R&D, human capital development, education, lifelong learning

CHAPTER I

INTRODUCTION

Background of the Study

Agriculture is considered an engine of growth in many developing countries as it
provides food to the increasing population while generating income and employment for
many rural areas (Dethier & Effenberger, 2012). This, despite facing productivity and
sustainability issues brought forth by climate change among other challenges. Since the
1980’s, the Philippine agriculture sector has been facing issues of low productivity and
technology adoption, as well as shortage of value adding rural enterprises, among others
(Habito & Briones, 2005). According to US Department of Agriculture, Total Factor
Productivity (TFP) in agriculture, grew by only 0.64%, way behind Philippines’ ASEAN
neighbors. Prior to the pandemic, when the country’s economy sustained a steady growth
of 6.4%, Philippine agriculture sector posed a meager 1.3% growth (World Bank, 2020).
Even with the passage of the Agriculture and Fisheries Modernization Act in 1997,
agriculture sector performed below expectation and potential because of various reasons,
which included the misallocation of priorities and low investment in Research and

Development (A. M. Balisacan & Hill, 2003).

Despite the foregoing, agriculture continues to play an important role in the
country’s development. In general agriculture is known to serve as take-off point to
economic growth (Javaid et al., 2022). With many small hold farmers and fisherfolks
relying on subsistence agriculture, poverty in the country is considered “highly
agricultural” in nature (Reyes et al., 2012). Prior to the global health crisis, the sector
remained a primary source of employment, with close to 30% of the country’s labor force
found in agriculture, according to the Philippine Statistics Agency (PSA, 2019). During
the pandemic, it was the sector that posed growth when the rest of the sectors were
declining (World Bank, 2020). Subsequently, there was a reversal in the trend of
agriculture employment when workers in the urban centers went back to find work in the

agriculture sector (Briones, 2021).

The government recognizes the vital role of agriculture with the previous Philippine
Development Plan 2017-2022 and the umbrella blueprint, AmBisyon Natin 2040. These
policy frameworks seek to expand the economic opportunities for the sector by
improving the agriculture value-chains, improving access to technology, as well as
ensuring equitable financing, among others (NEDA, 2017). And now, with the new
medium term development plan, agriculture modernization (Chapter 5), as well as
advance research and development, technology, and innovation (Chapter 8) are
considered priority programs and strategies that are propelled with the digital and high-

end technologies of the 4IR (NEDA, 2023). The rapid, sustainable, and equitable growth

of the agriculture sector will address not just food security, but ultimately poverty

alleviation (David, 2003).

In addressing the multi-faceted dimensions of poverty and inequitable distribution
of opportunities in the Philippines, science, technology, and innovation (STI) has a big
role to play. Technological innovation and its adoption are considered a crucial
dimension in agriculture productivity, particularly with increasing urbanization
(Baconguis, 2022). Accordingly, increasing Research and Development (R&D)
investments to improve farmers’ productivity and human capital is needed, including
considerable investment in technology and innovation including the support services are
regarded as requisites to the successful agricultural transformation (E. Brown et al.,
2018). R&D in this sense covers any systematic and creative work done to improve and
generate knowledge and use such to develop new applications and innovation, which can

translate to social and individual gains (Cororaton, 1999).

Through technological innovation of the Fourth Industrial Revolution (4IR), the
agriculture sector can address challenges of food security and productivity amidst
changing climate, within an enabling environment (Santos Valle & Kienzle, 2020). These
technologies are perceived to push for positive economic, social, environmental outcomes
in general and even accelerate achieving the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) in
particular (World Economic Forum, 2020). They can transform the sector into Agri 4.0,

characterized by efficient and technology-based approaches that improve farm

productivity, increase food production, and farmer income including developing more
value adding food products and services (Santos Valle & Kienzle, 2020). This can
include sustainable agriculture that uses big data to run robotic solutions that also
incorporates Artificial Intelligence (AI) techniques (Saiz-Rubio & Rovira-Mas, 2020). AI
in combination with robotics can also transform production processes and businesses
(UNCTAD, n.d.). Agri 4.0 is also foreseen to create new opportunities that can attract
youth and more farmer entrepreneurs into the sector, addressing some of challenges in
rural-urban migration, ageing agriculture population, and contributing to the economic

component of sustainability (Santos Valle & Kienzle, 2020).

But while technologies, as in the previous industrial revolutions, can improve
economic growth and productivity, the benefits and advantages that go with these
advancements also bring challenges and concerns, including inequalities that can be
aggravated with the digital divide (UNCTAD, 2018). Without the appropriate education
and training that will upskill and reskill human resources, organizations and societies
cannot leverage on any technological breakthroughs. Technological unemployment is
expected to widen inequalities, particularly for those whose jobs can be displaced by
machines. This issue has been further aggravated by the current pandemic that has

affected around 7.2 million Filipino workers (ILO, 2020).

Inarguably, human capital investments directed towards education, reskilling and

upskilling are needed to prepare the present and future workforce for Agriculture 4.0

(WEF, 2018). At present, there is already a shortage of human resource in science-
technology-innovation as well as insufficient R&D spending (NEDA, 2023). Foremost,
there is a need to better understand and appreciate these emerging trends that go with this
technological revolution, including how it can be harnessed and its perils addressed and

avoided.

For the R&D community, it is imperative that they need to know where they stand,
where they want to go, and most importantly how to get to that desired situation. For this,

a readiness evaluation can be a first step.

However, while developed countries have had considerable discussions on 4IR,
there is still limited activities among developing countries, including the Philippines
(Kim et al., 2019). In the same sense, readiness assessments and maturity models for
developed countries are not directly applicable to developing countries, primarily because
the Global South may not go through 4IR the same way that the Global North does
(Roodt & Koen, 2020), since there is no uniformity about the advancement of

technological innovation (Kim et al., 2019).

Thus, coming up with a readiness model tailor-fit for the Philippine agriculture
R&D is needed particularly acknowledging the critical role that this group plays in the
agriculture sector’s goals of food security and poverty alleviation. At present, while the

Philippine R&D agenda for the AANR considers using enabling technologies of Agri 4.0

as tools to address the various challenges and concerns of the sector and develop new
products and services that will positively impact business models in the AANR sector
(Ebora, 2022), there are no readiness assessments or maturity models that have been

developed for the Philippine agriculture R&D sector, particularly for Agriculture 4.0.

Statement of the Problem

With digital technology and automation characteristic of the Fourth Industrial
Revolution disrupting and transforming the biophysical, social, and economic landscape,
how prepared is the Philippine agriculture community, particularly the R&D institutions
to move towards Agriculture in the context of the Fourth Industrial Revolution and

Agriculture 4.0?

To address this, the study would like to focus on answering the following research
questions:

R1: What does Agriculture 4.0 mean for the Agriculture R&D Community?

R2: What conditions, particularly human capital and technological requirements,
need to be met for the ARD organizations to be ready and thrive within Agriculture 4.0?

R3: How do the ARDs stand based on these conditions of readiness for Agriculture

4.0?

R4: What policies and strategies related to capability building are needed to move

these organizations into Agriculture 4.0?

Objectives of the Study

This study aims to develop a readiness model and assess the levels of readiness of
the crops and livestock R&D organizations in the Philippines, towards Agriculture 4.0,
with focus on human capital development and technological requirements. In particular,
the study would like to:

1, Determine how crops and livestock R&D organizations in the Philippines
characterize Agriculture 4.0 including its technological and human resource
requirements,

2. Develop a readiness assessment model for Agriculture R&D organizations,
towards Agriculture 4.0 or Smart Agriculture;

3. Validate the readiness model by evaluating the readiness levels of crops and
livestock R&D organizations in the Philippines; and

4. Recommend appropriate capability development policy interventions based on

the results of the assessment.

Significance of the Study

The impact of technological advancements particularly to human capital and labor
market can be three-fold — as substitute for labor; as complement of labor; and creation of
new jobs (Dadios et al., 2018). These impacts are now being felt at a faster rate than
before with the global health pandemic accelerating digitization and automation.
Accelerated efforts towards automation of jobs are foreseen to lower operational cost in
the long run or reduce health risks and observe social distancing guidelines (Karr et al.,
2020). Aside from this, the Future of Jobs (WEF, 2020) disclosed that more organizations
have indicated their intent to hasten the automation of jobs sooner than previously
planned. As jobs have been disrupted and transformed by the twin forces of the COVID
pandemic and the 4IR, the International Labour Organization (ILO) projected that around
195 million workers have already been displaced in the second quarter of 2020 (WEF,
2020). ILO (2020) in a separate report also revealed that an estimated 7.2 million Filipino
workers are now exposed to the double-tiered risk of job disruption due to digitalization
and COVID-19. However, it is worthwhile to note that these forecasts on technology and
unemployment may have failed to consider whether the available technology will and can
be adopted. This is because factors such as relative costs, skills and competence of work

force, and societal readiness in general, need to be examined (Esguerra, 2020).

Nonetheless, the need to adapt to the changing times in order to thrive is

imperative. Aside from putting Science, Technology, and Innovation (STI) in the

forefront, investing in R&D, hard and soft infrastructure, as well as human capital is
considered a prerequisite to a globally competitive economy (Dadios, et al., 2018). To do
this, organizations and individuals need to reskill and upskill, particularly towards higher
order skills and competencies. Adoption strategies for 4IR will be a collaborative effort
of governments, organizations, and citizens in supporting the transformation of society
into a modem and smart one driven by frontier technologies, appropriate knowledge, and
skills, and enabling policies (Manda & Ben Dhaou, 2019). As economies, societies, and
production systems enter this technological revolution post pandemic, countries foremost
need to build awareness, and eventually motivation of the changing nature of production,
determine how to best prepare and benefit from this transformation and collaborate across
the public and private sector to enhance readiness. This means first understanding the
factors and conditions that have the greatest impact on the various production systems
and then assess their readiness for the future (WEF, 2018) before eventually moving

toward closing potential gaps.

Readiness is generally regarded as the ability to capitalize on future production
opportunities, mitigate risks and challenges, and be resilient and agile in responding to
unknown future shocks (WEF, 2018). It entails assessing current capabilities, identifying
new ones needed to succeed in a new production paradigm and developing solutions to
address the gap and facilitate transformation. By measuring readiness, organizations can
systematically undertake transformational change. A readiness assessment can address

possible challenges when new procedures, structures and processes will take place by


identifying the gaps within the existing organization and remedying these gaps either

before, or as part of, the implementation plan (HRSA, 2011).

The study aims to develop the readiness model and assess the readiness of
agriculture R&D organizations towards Agriculture 4.0. Readiness assessment tools can
help the agriculture R&D community establish the level of preparedness and identify any
gaps and strategies to close the difference. Results of the assessment can be used by
organizations in crafting their human resources and lifelong learning strategies, as well as
in allocating resources for hard and soft infrastructure. The said initiatives are considered
timely as the new PDP puts emphasis on modernizing agriculture, intensifying R&D
investments, and upgrading infrastructure that includes automated logistics and faster and

more reliable internet services, among others (NEDA, 2023).

The study can serve as useful input in enhancing the curriculum of higher education
institutions to make them 4IR-ready. Likewise, it can help set public policy directions
particularly on the human resources development plan of the agriculture R&D

community, as well as the S&T sector.

The same way that there is limited information about Agriculture 4.0 in the
Philippines, readiness assessment tools suitable for the agriculture R&D community are

also lacking. This research could contribute to this growing body of knowledge by


developing a readiness model that will identify the dimensions and related factors that
affect Agriculture 4.0 readiness in the context of the Philippine R&D.
~

Scope and Limitations of the Study

This study will focus on organizational readiness towards Agriculture 4.0,
particularly of crops and livestock R&D institutions in the country considered
institutional partners of the Philippine Council for Agriculture, Aquatic, Forestry and
Natural Resources Research and Development of the Department of the Science and
Technology (DOST-PCAARRD). As such, the readiness variables and other findings
may not be applicable to other sub-sectors in Philippine agriculture, particularly R&D
institutions focused on forestry, marine, and aquatic resources. It will make use of the
exploratory sequential mixed method research design comprising of a qualitative phase
that will lead to a quantitative phase and eventually an integration phase that

characterizes the study as mixed methods research and highlights its value.

The readiness model including the Agriculture 4.0 definition and characteristics
were developed and finalized through a purposeful sampling, particularly through a
Delphi panel consisting of at most 25 experts who have had involvements in R&D
initiatives as local program leaders, researchers, and scientists on frontier technologies of

4IR mentioned by the World Economic Foundation (WEF).


Meanwhile, the readiness assessment was conducted through online self-assessment
via Qualtrics among the R&D partners of DOST-PCAARRD as identified by the various
Regional R&D Consortium secretariats. The results on the field was then used to validate

the model using Confirmatory Factor Analysis and Structural Equation Modeling.

CHAPTER 2

REVIEW OF LITERATURE

The Fourth Industrial Revolution

We have so far undergone three industrial revolutions and history has taught us that
while these transformative events have significantly contributed to economic production,
refined efficiency, and precision of manufacturing processes, these have also reduced
labor cost and increased unemployment (Dadios et al., 2018). Along with the benefits
therefore, come negative impacts that have contributed to widening the inequalities

among societies.

The First Industrial Revolution, characterized by the invention of steam engine,
textile manufacturing, and construction of railroads, was the so-called “Age of
mechanical production” (Roodt & Koen, 2020). It started in 1760 and initiated the shift
from muscle power to mechanical power, and from agriculture to industry as the main
driver of growth and economy of a society (Schwab, 2016). Textile and steel were the
leading industries that generated the most employment, value of output, and capital

invested (M. Xu et al., 2018). This also led to social unrest, creation of excess labor in

farming areas, which eventually led to the migration of people from the rural farmlands

to urban production centers and cities (Roodt & Koen, 2020).

The ample workforce in urban areas, natural resources, railroad networks and the
invention of internal combustion engine ushered in the Second Industrial Revolution in
the 1900’s (Roodt & Koen, 2020). This was marked by the rapid industrialization that
used oil and electricity to power mass production within assembly lines (M. Xu et al.,
2018). Those countries, mostly in Europe that were able to maximize electricity,
electrical machines, telecommunications technology, and transportation were able to
propel their economies into fully industrialized ones in the said era (Dadios et al., 2018).
Consequently, unemployment also rose with more machines taking over the tasks of

humans.

When electronics and information technology were developed and harnessed to
further automate production, the Third Industrial Revolution began (M. Xu et al., 2018).
Aptly called the digital revolution or information age, it was characterized by
technological innovations such as semiconductors, mainframe computing (1960s),
personal computing (1970s and 80s) and the internet (1990s) that drove the dynamic
transformation of societies (Schwab, 2016). During the information age, cellular and
satellite communication systems connected seamlessly made possible borderless data
sharing and availability of the wealth of information through the cyberspace (Roodt &

Koen, 2020). While benefits of such technological drivers have been highlighted, so were


the negative consequences particularly on civil and human rights. Mass surveillance,
intrusion, and personal privacy, as well as massive piracy of data, movies and songs also
proliferated (Dadios et al., 2018). At the same time, the concept of digital divide, between
and among individuals, societies and countries has become a growing and pervasive

concern today.

The Fourth Industrial Revolution (4IR) takes off from digitization of the Third
Industrial Revolution. The concept started in Europe, with Germany coining the term
“Industry 4.0” at the Hannover Fair in 2011 to emphasize the need for digitizing of entire
value chain in manufacturing to enable “smart factories” (Roodt & Koen, 2020).
However, it was Prof. Klaus Schwab (2016), Founder and Executive Chair of the World
Economic Foundation who underscored that 4IR is more than smart and connected
machines and systems. Rather, it is the fusion of different technologies and their
interaction across the physical, digital, and biological domains that make the 4IR

fundamentally different from the digital and other revolutions.

There are three reasons why today’s transformations represent not merely a
prolongation of the Third Industrial Revolution but rather the arrival of a Fourth
and distinct one: velocity, scope, and systems impact. The speed of current
breakthroughs has no historical precedent. When compared with previous
industrial revolutions, the Fourth is evolving at an exponential rather than a linear

pace. Moreover, it is disrupting almost every industry in every country. And the


breadth and depth of these changes herald the transformation of entire systems of

production, management, and governance (Schwab, 2016).

This technological revolution is marked by the harmonization and integration of
various disciplines and spheres or the so-called cyber-physical systems (CPS) (Schwab,
2016). For instance, artificial intelligence, loT and big data can be used together in
Precision Agriculture. With iPhone’s SIRI and Amazon’s Alexa and other intelligent
assistants, Artificial Intelligence (AI) is integrated in many aspects of everyday lives,
producing new efficiencies and enhancing human capacities (Pew Research Center,
2018). This so-called CPS is paving the way for smart cities, smart factories, smart

economies and even smart agriculture.

While WEF may be one of the forerunners when it comes to understanding 4IR,
there is no one definition of 4IR (Lee et al., 2018) and its opportunities and challenges
have yet to be fully characterized (Schwab, 2016). Even so, organizations and experts
have recognized the fact that 4IR frontier technologies developed and are being
developed, have higher cognitive and analytic powers that are starting to replace human
capacities across occupations (Paolo et al., 2019), making the challenge of labor

displacement and inequality more prominent.

Current innovations, classified as frontier technological breakthroughs, identify the

4IR or any industrial revolution for that matter. Physical “megatrends” or technologies


identified by Schwab include autonomous vehicles, 3D printing, advanced robotics, and
new materials. On the digital front, we have the Internet of Things (IoT) and the many
digital-enabled platforms that have been made possible including blockchain, big data
analytics, cloud computing. Innovations in the biological realm include synthetic biology,
genetics and more sophisticated gene characterization and editing techniques (Schwab,

2016).

The same way that there is no one acceptable definition of 4IR, frontier
technologies are varied across different organizations and societies. UNESCAP (2018)
summarizes key emerging technologies as identified by various organizations that are

related to 4IR, with IoT, 3D printing, AI, and robotics as the most common (Table 1).

These technologies offer a multitude of opportunities to reimagine economy,
society, and environment. Localized renewable energy production, such as solar power
coupled with new battery storage technology, can substitute for expensive power
distribution networks. Drones could help to distribute small yet high-value goods such as
medical supplies to remote areas. An archipelagic country like the Philippines can be
connected where physical connectivity has long been a concern for economic
development (Menon & Fink, 2019). Most frontier technologies are categorized as
general-purpose technologies because of their pervasiveness, efficiency and effectivity,
and ability to spawn more innovation, they affect changes across sectors of society

(UNESCAP, 2018).

Table 1. Summary of Frontier Technologies as identified by various organizations

World McKinsey Institute of MIT
OECD World bank Economic Global " Technology
5 Dev't Studies 5
Forum Institute Review 2018
Internet of Internet of Internet of Internet of Internet of Perfect Online
Things Things Things things Things Privacy
3D printing 3D printing 3D printing 3D Printing 3D printing 3D Metal
additive Printing
manufacturing
Big data Artificial Artificial Automation of | Alternative Artificial
analytics Intelligence intelligence knowledge internet intelligence for
delivery everybody
Neuro Robotics Robotics Advanced Airships Sensing City
technologies robotics
Nano/micro Autonomous | Autonomous | Autonomous | Unmanned Duelling
satellites vehicles Vehicles and near- aerial neural
autonomous vehicles/dron | networks
Vehicles es
Nanomaterials | 5** generation | Nanotechnolo | Next Smog- Babel-fish
(5G) mobile ey generation reducing earbuds
phones genomics technologies
Advanced Materials Energy storage | Solar Genetic
energy science desalination fortune-telling
storage
technologies
Synthetic Biotechnology | Cloud Atmospheric Artificial
biology technology water embryos
condensers
Blockchain Quantum Advanced Household- Materials’
Computing materials scale Quantum Leap
batteries
Energy storage | Advanced oil Collaborative | Zero-Carbon
and gas economy tools | Natural Gas
exploration
Renewable
energy
Mobile
internet

Source (UNESCAP, 2018)



In the case of the SARS-COV 2 or COVID-19, the sequencing of the viral genome
has helped the study of the lethal virus and hastened the development of treatments and
vaccines compared to its predecessor virus. The pandemic has enabled the integrated use
of 4IR technologies — i.e., the physical, digital, and biological components have been
used in the health sector, as well as in the education, agriculture, commerce, and other
sectors (Sobrosa Neto et al., 2020). While some societies have alluded to the concept of
digital transformation and 4IR, the Covid-19 pandemic has served as a living and
breathing example to fully accept and appreciate the current digital transformation

(Golinelli et al., 2020).

As Schwab mentioned, technology and digitization will revolutionize everything
and that the speed of innovation in terms of both its development and diffusion is faster
than ever. Aside from speed, the returns to scale are something worth noting. With
digitization and automation, many progressive companies and businesses produce the
same or greater value with relatively fewer employment-associated costs. Automation
also means using lesser labor and human resources, downsides that can have a silver
lining, only with human capital upskilling and reskilling of appropriate 21° century
competencies. Considering the effects of the pandemic, by 2025 it was projected that
around 85 million jobs may be displaced with automation, but 97 million new jobs may
emerge that are more adapted to the new division of labor between humans, machines,

and algorithms (WEF, 2020).


The same technological innovations can fuel and exacerbate inequalities and
threaten individual freedoms, which is more probable in developing and resource poor
countries (Kim et al., 2019). Simply put, the impact of the industrial revolutions, past or
present, affects countries, sectors, and societies in different ways. With the globalized
nature of value chains in this era, most parts of the world are seen to eventually be
affected by 41R, directly or indirectly, positively, or negatively (United Nations Industrial
Development Organization, 2019). This is because countries have varying levels of
productivity brought about by the difference in tacit knowledge, physical investments, as
well as social and political support which are part of the enabling environment for

technological innovation (UNCTAD, n.d.).

This inequality is expected to intensify with the dual impact of technology and the
pandemic recession as jobs held by low wage earners, women and younger workers were
more deeply impacted in the first phase of the economic contraction (WEF, 2020). In this
regard, recognizing emerging social challenges on jobs, quality of life, as well as social
and ethical issues should also be prioritized (Lee et al., 2018). Life-long and life-wide
learning and reskilling particularly higher order skills are needed by individuals and

organization to adapt to this rapidly changing environment.


Agriculture 4.0

Industries and manufacturing are the focus of industrial revolution, but other
sectors are also benefiting and are very much impacted by technological revolutions.
Because agriculture and the conditions for food production are continuously changing,
farmers and fisherfolks as well as agri-enterpreneurs need to continuously adapt
production and management systems. For the past decade urbanization, growing
inequities, human migration, globalization, changing dietary preferences, climate change,
environmental degradation, and increasing population and food security have been
considered driving forces for the farmers to continuously change and innovate (von
Miinchhausen & Haring, 2012). With 4IR, blockchain, IoT, AI, Big Data, robotics, 3D
Printing, and the likes are also influencing consumer preferences and demand, as well as
e-commerce, agri-food trade and production (Trendov et al., 2019). Based on the
literature available, overall agriculture production including the value-added food
products within the 4IR is valuable in addressing two important challenges — food
security and climate change. These are also considered the two biggest challenges in
agriculture and food systems (Santos Valle & Kienzle, 2020). With 4IR, agriculture
technologies can improve production efficiency by reducing associated costs through
valuable information provided by big data analytics, among others (United Nations
Industrial Development Organization, 2019). In a nutshell, the four pillars of Agriculture
4.0 as data-driven management, new tool-based production, sustainability, and

professionalization (Javaid et al., 2022).


Agriculture 4.0, Intelligent Agriculture, Digital Farming, or Smart Farming are all
synonymously used to characterize modern agriculture practices that are mainly
technology and data-driven (Sponchioni et al., 2019). The concept was said to have been
initiated by and is based on Precision Agriculture principles that espouse the use inputs
only when and where they are exactly needed (Saiz-Rubio & Rovira-Mas, 2020). Javaid
et al. (2022) mention that Agriculture 4.0 technologies need to be integrated into farming

practices for precision agriculture to be fully realized.

To date, there is no single definition of Agriculture 4.0, although all definitions
presented so far are very much similar. Also similar among various literature, is that the
technological advances of Industry 4.0 help farmers and stakeholder improve production,
and make it more sustainable(Bonneau et al., 2017; da Silveira et al., 2021; Eastwood et
al., 2021; Javaid et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2021; Trendov et al., 2019; WEF, 2020).
Moreover, these authors stress that with planning, Industry 4.0 could help address food

scarcity while safeguarding human and ecosystem health.

A report of the European Commission considered Agriculture 4.0 as the
“development and introduction of new tools and machines in production including
deployment of sensors for precision agriculture, automation, new measurement tools like

drones, satellite imagery; where connectivity is the cornerstone of this transformation


and IoT a key enabling technology that is increasingly part of agricultural equipment”

(Bonneau et al., 2017).

On the other hand, Trendov et al. (2019) report that the Food and Agriculture
Organization prefers digital agricultural revolution or digital agriculture and characterizes
it as “systems that are highly productive, anticipatory and adaptable to changes such as
those caused by climate change; and will result to greater food security, profitability and
sustainability”. More than using the technologies of 4IR, digital agriculture can change
how the entire agri-food system value chain works, from sourcing the necessary inputs, to
production, distribution, processing and retailing of the harvest to optimizing end-
consumer experience (Serraj & Pingali, 2020). With the right and adequate agriculture
technologies, rural women can also be empowered and more youth can be attracted to

agriculture (Santos Valle & Kienzle, 2020).

Like FAO and EC, the global platform the World Government Summit, also
foresees Agriculture 4.0 to enhance the entire value chain, but also emphasizes the
environmentally sustainable techniques that can be employed in the process, through
cross-industry technologies and applications (de Clercq et al., 2018). OECD, on the other
hand, cites that Agriculture 4.0 will complement these through agribusiness start-ups,
also known as “Agtechs”, as leaders in the digital agriculture (Campos, 2019). With
respect to Agriculture 4.0, researchers and social scientists, are expected to look beyond

the productivity and environmental sustainability concerns to include societal concerns


including data privacy; gender, minorities, and justice; power and control, and

international relations among others (Sponchioni G et al., 2019).

Altogether, these factors push for more agricultural innovations, and a
transformation of the agriculture mindset from production to sustainable agribusiness
(Gregorio & Ancog, 2020). Notably, these paradigm shifts are not just driven by
technology but will greatly depend on agriculture stakeholders who have the capacity to
leverage these technologies. Based on the Agriculture 4.0 paradigm, farmer—machine
interaction is the heart of the farm, with interconnected machines and technology being

run by farmers who also make critical decisions (Santos Valle & Kienzle, 2020).

Smartphones are bettering farmers’ access to market prices, weather information,
and knowledge about soil, seeds, and fertilizer (Chuang et al., 2020) and enable a
“sharing economy” where farmers who cannot afford to buy mechanical equipment can
rent through online sharing sites like that of Trringo in India (Menon & Fink, 2019).
Remote sensing technologies are used to monitor agriculture production and generate
data to be stored on a platform that will empower farmers and producers for information-

based decision making (Santos Valle & Kienzle, 2020).

Agriculture Decision Support Systems (ADSS) have been widely used through AI
and machine learning, together with the loT and remote sensors to efficiently apply

fertilizers and agriculture inputs, monitor pests and diseases, floods, drought, manage


temperature and humidity and overall optimize production efficiency while minimizing
impacts to the environment and resource use (da Silveira et al., 2021; Javaid et al., 2022;

Liu et al., 2021; Zhai et al., 2020).

In all these instances, it is necessary for farmers, entrepreneurs, scientists,
extensionists and other stakeholders to upskill, re-learn, and unlearn various dimensions
of agriculture and food systems. Coupled with limited resources and information
however, these transformations may be more challenging with developing countries,
especially with smallhold farmers and fisherfolks (Roodt & Koen, 2020; Trendov et al.,

2019).

Agriculture 4.0 in the Philippines

At present, there are already pockets of Agriculture 4.0 programs and activities
done in the Philippines. Under the “New Thinking” strategy of the Philippine agriculture
department, digital technologies are now considered integral to the modernization and
industrialization strategies that aim to transform the Philippines’ production-oriented
agriculture to an inclusive, innovation-enabled, and market-driven agro-industrial
development system characteristic of Agriculture 4.0. This strategy includes use of data
analytics, artificial intelligence, geo-mapping, computerization and tapping the IoT and

drones (World Bank, 2020).


Earlier, the Harmonized National Research and Development Agenda (HNRDA) of
the Department of Science and Technology (DOST) outlined the critical role of some 4IR
frontier technologies in achieving the targets of priority S&T based agriculture programs.
In particular, the HNRDA regards enabling technologies of Agriculture 4.0 as tools to
address the various challenges and concerns of the sector; as well as develop new
products and services that will positively impact business models in the AANR sector

(Ebora, 2022).

Foremost, the Department has been actively supporting Al-enabled R&D programs
and projects of various ARD organizations to detect and map diseases, improve crop
productivity, and develop decision support tools for farmers, local governments and
policy makers (DOST, 2021). For example are the various programs and projects
implemented and/or funded by the DOST-PCAARRD, such as the Industry Strategic
S&T Programs (ISPs) and the Smarter Approaches to Reinvigorate Agriculture as an

Industry (Project SARAI).

ISPs are science-based solutions and innovations addressing various challenges and
concerns in the agriculture value chain. An integrated crop forecasting and crop
monitoring system has been developed by the project Smarter Approaches to
Reinvigorate Agriculture as an Industry (Project SARAI) implemented by the University
of the Philippines Los Bafios (UPLB) that makes use of big data, IoT, satellite data and

images, and the like (Espaldon et al., 2018). Project SARAI generates crop forecasts,


planting calendar, nutrient management, pest and diseases management, water
management, and early warning system for climate extremes for the benefit of farmers

and other stakeholders.

Nanotechnology as applied to agriculture is also gaining popularity with DOST
leading the crafting and financing of a ten-year Nanotechnology roadmap, together with
local scientists (Brown et al., 2020). Meanwhile, the Philippines is considered one of the
leaders in the application of biotechnology in the region despite controversies
surrounding the said technology. Bt Eggplant, beta-carotene-enriched rice or Golden Rice
(GR2E), and Bt cotton are just some of agricultural products developed through this

technology (Corpuz, 2018).

The Philippine Rice Research Institute (PhilRice) had been advocating for precision
agriculture through information and communication technology (ICT) based platforms
such as the Philippine Rice Information System (PRiSM), the Rice Crop Manager
(RCM), Smartphone Apps for rice production, and drone technology or Unmanned Aerial
Vehicle (UAV) for rice seeding, chemical spraying, ad fertilizer application (Tallada,
2019). The Department of Agriculture’s Agri-Pinoy program has been known to use
climate-smart agriculture technologies and research breakthrough for food security and

sustainable resource management (TESDA, 2020).


Thus, despite the absence of a concrete Agriculture 4.0 definition or comprehensive
plan in the local setting, the Philippine R&D community has already been conducting

various initiatives characteristic of the 4IR.

These initiatives have shown that there are numerous opportunities for the use of
4IR technologies in the Philippines. This despite low technology adoption and limited
studies on the impact of 4IR in agriculture, including its potential to attract youth back to
agriculture. The Filipino youth in Agriculture 4.0 has great potentials, especially with
around 40 % of our current demography between the age of 15 to 24 years of age much

into technology and innovation.

These initiatives also reveal the potential of the Philippines to take advantage of the
benefits of 4IR to realize Agriculture 4.0. However, an operational definition of
Agriculture 4.0 that captures the said technological breakthrough within the context of
the country has yet to be outlined. To establish this definition, there is a need to
systematically assess the resources and conditions that will enable such to take place
particularly in a developing country like the Philippines. Going beyond directly pushing
for adoption of certain technologies, there is a need to co-create innovation by engaging
stakeholders, like farmers in knowledge generation through on-farm experimentation and

systematic observation (Steinke et al., 2020).


Several conditions must be satisfied for the digital transformation of agriculture in
different contexts, including basic conditions, or the minimum requirements needed to
use 4IR technology and enabling conditions or those factors that further facilitate the
adoption of technologies. Basic conditions include the availability, connectivity,
affordability of ICT infrastructure, and ICT in education and supportive policies and
programmes (e-government). Enabling conditions on the other hand include the ability of
the people to use of internet, mobile phones and social media, as well as the level of

digital skills and support for agripreneurial and innovation culture (Trendov et al., 2019).

Considerable investment on research and development (R&D) is a strategy of
sustainable economic growth that continues to promote transition efforts of the developed
countries into Industry 4.0 (Ersoz et al., 2018). In the effort to strengthen knowledge-
based societies at the same time, policymakers need to ensure that their countries have an
adequate supply of researchers. These human resources will conceive or create new
knowledge; conduct research and improve or develop concepts, theories, models,
techniques instrumentation, software or operational methods, in the framework of R&D
projects (UNESCO, 2019). The same is true for the Philippines, according to the study of
Cororaton (1999) in which he expounded how R&D and innovation activities in the
country are attributed to as high as 60 percent rates of return in the primary and service

sectors. These rates were higher than public infrastructure capital investments.

According to UNESCO, the international standard for the gross expenditure on

R&D (GERD) is pegged at one percent. The Philippines has not even reached the 0.5


mark (Figure 1), which was the target of the 2017-2022 PDP. With respect to the total
government budget, R&D accounts for only 0.44 percent in 2018 (PIDS, n.d.) and

currently has gone down to 0.34 percent (NEDA, 2023).

0.3
0.3
0.2
0.1

01 @——_—__»_—__&

GERD as a % of GDP

0.1

ee,
2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018

Figure 1. Philippines Gross Domestic Expenditure on R&D as % of GDP, 2009-2017
(Source: UIS-UNESCO.org).

In 2019, the Philippines was able to improve its Global Innovation Index (GII)
ranking up to 54 from rank 73. However, it was apparent that among the indicators of
GIl, gross expenditure on R&D, along with the number of scientific and technical articles
rated low (Cornell University et al., 2019). In 2022, the country’s GII ranking fell to 59
out of the 131 countries with innovations pillars on human capital and research and

knowledge and technology outputs significantly decreasing (San Juan, 2022).


Meanwhile, the current PDP lays out an ambitious goal of achieving 1.0 GERD and

moving up to rank 50 in the GII by 2028.

GERD by sector of performance

fa

2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018
™© Business enterprise Government
© Higher education | Private non-profit
@ Not specified

GERD by source of funds

% 100
” 20 i @

0 ‘] Y
2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018

@ Business enterprise Government
1 Higher education Private non-profit
@ Abroad Not specified

Figure 2. GERD by Sector Performance and Fund Source, Philippines
(Source: UIS-UNESCO.org)


As we enter the Fourth Industrial Revolution (4IR), with technology and innovation
as driving forces, S&T based Agriculture R&D should be heavily considered. Strategic
and innovative research and development programs should be responsive to the needs of
society. Unfortunately, with our agriculture sector still facing issues like low productivity
and absence of infrastructure support, the country cannot easily move past the previous
revolutions. There is still a need to strategically invest on R&D activities that will
eventually be commercialized and scaled-up to contribute towards the realization of

Philippine Agriculture 4.0.

Increasing R&D investments will encompass building a critical mass of human
resources and improving infrastructure in support of the Harmonized National R&D
Agenda for Agriculture, Aquatic and Natural Resources 2017-2022 which makes use of
advanced and emerging technologies characteristic of this industrial revolution (Brown et

al., 2018).

UNESCO recommends that for a country to move towards industrialization, it
should have at least 380 researchers, scientists, and engineers (RSE) per million
population doing R&D activities. Meanwhile the PDP targets 300 RSEs per million
population by the end of the plan (NEDA, 2017). However, at present, we are at the 270

per million population mark (DOST-SEI, 2018). To close the gap between the 380 RSE


recommendation and current 270 mark, SEI (2018) projects we will need more than

16,000 RSE, including those who will work on Agriculture R&D.

Cognizant of the fact that conventional knowledge and skills are not enough for
4IR, human capital investment needs to be strategic and efficient (WEF, 2017).
Correspondingly, capable and sufficient number of researchers, scientists and engineers
(RSE) will be the heart of a well-oiled Agriculture R&D program. In the long run,
increasing the number of quality human resources for R&D would help fuel innovation
and breakthroughs towards agricultural productivity. Also needed at the same time, is
building the current capacities of RSEs so that they can develop and implement

responsive and demand-driven R&D activities.

Capacity building for RSEs in the context of the 4IR would entail a combination of
relevant formal education, lifelong training, as well as providing relevant and
commensurate work opportunities that would further hone their knowledge, and skills, as
well as shape their attitudes. Organizations need to support the upskilling of their
workforce for new and higher-skilled roles, while workers need to take personal
responsibility for their learning trajectory and embrace the concept of lifelong learming
(European Commission, 2020). Consequently, revisions in formal education curriculum,
as well as lifelong training need to be done to ensure that people remain responsive to
what society demands and expects. Without proper education planning, we could lose our

talent pool to opportunities abroad and continue suffering brain drain, much like the


problem of unemployment and underemployment of our RSEs back in the 1970’s (Caoili,

1980).

Readiness Assessment

Adoption strategies for 4IR will be a collaborative effort of governments,
organizations, and citizens in supporting the transformation of society into a modern and
smart one driven by frontier technology, appropriate skills, and enabling policies (Manda
& ben Dhaou, 2019). As economies, societies, and production systems enter this
technological revolution post pandemic, countries foremost need to build awareness, and
eventually motivation of the changing nature of production, determine how to best
prepare to benefit from this transformation and collaborate across the public and private
sector to enhance readiness. This means first understanding the factors and conditions
that have the greatest impact on the various production systems and then assess their
readiness for the future (WEF, 2018) before eventually moving toward closing potential

gaps.

Readiness is generally regarded as the ability to capitalize on future production
opportunities, mitigate risks and challenges, and be resilient and agile in responding to
unknown future shocks (WEF, 2018). It entails assessing current capabilities, identifying
new ones needed to succeed in the new production paradigm, and developing solutions to

address the gap and facilitate transformation.


Readiness assessments for 4IR can be done in macro (country, regional), meso
(sectoral), and micro (companies and organizations) levels (Demeter et al., 2018). On a
macro or regional level, the World Economic Forum’s report (2018) on the Readiness of
Countries for the Future of Production revealed that ASEAN member states are in
different levels of preparedness and action orientation. It classified countries based on

four archetypes namely:

(1) Leading: Countries with a strong production base today that exhibit a high level
of readiness for the future through strong performance across the Drivers of Production
component. These countries also have the most current economic value at stake for future

disruptions;

(2) Legacy: Countries with a strong production base today that are at risk for the

future due to weaker performance across the Drivers of Production component;

(3) High-Potential: Countries with a limited production base today that score well
across the Drivers of Production component, indicating that capacity exists to increase

production in the future depending on priorities within the national economy.


(4) Nascent: Countries with a limited production base today that exhibit a low level
of readiness for the future through weak performance across the Drivers of Production

component.

In the said assessment, Philippines was considered a “Legacy” country that is
characterized by its weak performance in technology and innovation, human capital and
institutional framework. The mid-level assessment, which focused on the structure of
production and driver of production, did not dwell on the balances across different sectors
in the national economy (e.g. services or agriculture), neither does it look into country
positions in specific sub-sectors or industries within production (e.g. textile or
automotive) (WEF, 2018). Likewise, only seven of the ten ASEAN countries were
included in the assessment. Thus, the ASEAN Secretariat adopted the same framework,
customized the methodology to fit the ASEAN environment, re-assessed all member
states. The recalibrated readiness assessment showed that Singapore and Malaysia were
considered Leading countries, while Brunei Darussalam is the only country that on the
High Potential category. Meanwhile, Cambodia, Myanmar, Laos, and Vietnam were
considered Nascent, while Indonesia was the lone country classified as a Legacy Country.
Interestingly, the Philippines was borderline High Potential and Nascent, which is
different from its “Legacy” classification in the WEF readiness tool. This can be
probably attributed to the fact that the Philippines’ contribution to the global economy is
its service sector, characterized by overseas skilled and unskilled workers and workers in

the Business Process Outsourcing (BPO) industry. With 4IR, these types of jobs and


skills are however now facing threats of displacement due to lower-cost automation and

technological alternatives (Kim et al., 2019).

High Potential

8G

©
: @
@ 50 ER
% wor
c Our’ |@ o
= Lar A
bs MM
Nascent
0.0 —
0.0 5.0

Structure of Production

Leading

Legacy

10.0

Figure 3. Archetypes of ASEAN countries based on recalibrated WEF Readiness for
the 4IR (Source: ASEAN, 2013)

This ASEAN level assessment reflected uneven progress made by countries in

addressing and capitalizing the 4IR, primarily since some countries have already

launched their comprehensive national strategies, namely Singapore’s Smart Nation

initiative (www.smartnation.gov.sg), Thailand 4.0 (Kohpaiboon, 2020), Malaysia’s

Industry4WRD (Nagsamy & Sivan, 2019), and Making Indonesia 4.0 (Hidayatno et al.,


2019). Prior to the pandemic, Vietnam has been reviewing the 2"4 version of its National

Strategy for the 4IR (Cuong, 2020).

Recognizing that many 4IR-related programs and strategies are already in place,
ASEAN also came up with a consolidated strategy on the fourth industrial revolution
which provides policy guidance towards building the ASEAN Digital Community. To
realize digital community, the strategy has three focus areas namely, Technological
Governance and Cybersecurity, Digital Economy, and Digital Transformation of Society

(ASEAN, 2021a).

The Philippines has crafted several strategies on digitalization and innovation such
as Philippines Digital Strategy 2011-2015 (2011), the Inclusive, Innovation-led Industrial
Strategy (i3s) (2017); National Broadband Plan; e-Government Master Plan 2016-2020
(EGMP 2.0) and the Accelerate PH: Future-ready Roadmap 2022. Recently, several
government bodies have released their respective roadmaps and strategic plans which
will move forward digitalization and innovation within the 4IR. NAST launched its
foresight and strategic Science, Technology and Innovation plan called Pagtanaw 2050
which fosters a sustainable and productive science culture (NAST, 2021). Likewise, the
Artificial Intelligence (AI) Roadmap crafted by the Department of Trade and Industry is
the country’s national strategy and policy on Al, which subsequently provided the basis
for the establishment of the National Center for AI Research (\www.dti.gov.ph). The

Department of Information and Communications Technology (DICT) E-Government


Masterplan 2022 outlines the country’s e-Government systems and digital transformation
of basic services across the whole-of-government (DICT, 2019). However, there is little
or no information yet about a national strategy for Industry 4.0 or Agriculture 4.0 and a

human capital strategy to cope.

Apart from the WEF and ASEAN readiness assessments of the Philippines, other
readiness assessments focused on the country or some of its sectors are more exploratory,
making use of existing literature available to provide insights on how the Philippines can

best participate in the said revolution (Kim et al., 2019; Pangandaman et al., n.d.).

In the Philippines, a case study explored the readiness of the technology reliant IT
Business Process Outsourcing (IT-BPO) and found the sector only to be “nominally
ready” for 4IR as it still needs to improve its ICT infrastructure, among other structural
barriers (Kim et al., 2019). It is worthwhile to note that various sectors will need different
types of technological frontiers, collection, and management of data for innovation, and
will therefor face different challenges within the 4IR environment (United Nations

Industrial Development Organization, 2019).

By measuring readiness, organizations can systematically undertake
transformational change. A readiness assessment can address possible challenges when
new procedures, structures and processes are employed by recognizing the gaps within
the existing organization and remedying these gaps either before, or as part of, the
implementation plan (HRSA, 2011). Strategies can be initiated by the organization, or the

people themselves, as evidenced by a study in Turkey where the employees themselves,


as they become more aware of the digital trends and are motivated to look for more and
varied education and training programs to improve their capabilities and increase their

employability (Ersoz et al., 2018).

In a systematic literature review of readiness models for 4IR, it was observed that
most models were conceived during the three-year period from 2016 to 2018, making
Industry 4.0 readiness assessment tools a relatively new, and emerging concept (Hizam-
Hanafiah, Soomro, & Abdullah, 2020). The same study also established six most
common dimensions used in readiness models for 4IR, which are Technology, People,
Strategy, Leadership, Process, and Innovation. While this study revealed Technology to
be the most important dimension, the ADB study identified the readiness of workforce as
the most important factor to consider (Kim & Park, 2020). Similar research on the other
hand identified the 4IR key ingredients to be Top Management, Involvement and
Commitment, Employee Adaptability with 4IR, Smart Products and Services, Extent of
Digitization of Supply Chain, Level of Digitation of the Organization, and Readiness of
Organizational Strategy (Sony & Naik, 2019). Looking at these two SLRs side by side
(Figure 5), there are similarities in their analysis with Top Management Commitment
characterizing Leadership, Employee Adaptability to 4IR pertaining to People, Readiness
of Organizational Strategy the same with a more general “Strategy”, Smart Products and
Services are the Innovations, while Level of Digitization of Organization pertains to

Technology and extent of supply chain digitization pertaining to Process.


Top Management, Involvement & Commitment Leadership

Employee Adaptability with 4IR People

Smart Products and Services Innovations
Extent of Digitization of Supply Chain Process

Level of Digitation of the Organization Technology
Readiness of Organizational Strategy Strategy

Figure 4. Congruence of 4IR Systematic Literature Review Findings

A common organizational level readiness assessment tool for 4IR implementation
is the IMPULS — Industrie 4.0 Readiness (Lichtblau et al., 2015). In the IMPULS
readiness assessment, there are six levels (0-5) used for assessing a readiness level. The
levels are divided into three groups consisting of newcomers (0-1), learners (2) and

leaders (3-5), described as follows:

Level 0 Outsider, indicates that a company either does not know of industry 4.0,

thinks it is irrelevant or has not taken any steps towards an implementation.

Level 1 Beginner, involves some steps taken towards industry 4.0, such as doing
pilot studies and having some system compatibility for industry 4.0, along with very little

competence in the organization and only planned IT security.


Level 2 Intermediate, companies have implemented industry 4.0 to some extent into
their strategies, some investments are being made, the infrastructure is to some extent
using industry 4.0, inhouse sharing of information, there are competencies in the

company and sufficient IT security.

Level 3 Experienced, is assigned to companies that have an industry 4.0 strategy,
makes investments in more than a few areas, promotes industry 4.0 via the innovation
department, have information sharing inhouse and partly external and have connected
infrastructure with future expansion in mind that collects data automatically. Also,
necessary IT security is implemented, cloud is used for future expansions and major steps
are taken to make sure competencies for all this already exists in the company or making

efforts to achieve it.

Level 4 Expert, is for companies already using and monitoring industry 4.0, makes
investments in almost all areas, supported by interdepartmental innovation, IT-systems
supports almost all production and collects vast amounts of data also used for
optimization. Here, future expansions can easily be made due to already supporting
systems, information sharing is on both internal and business level, IT security is applied
and scalability is not a problem, data-driven services are used and the company has all

necessary skills inhouse.

Level 5 Top performer, is for companies that have already implemented their
industry 4.0 strategy and monitor implementations of other projects in the company,

which is supported by investments across the company. The innovation department is

covering the entire company, IT systems are fully implemented along with autonomous
processes, collecting vast amounts of relevant data. The infrastructure fulfills all needs
for integration, across the company's system and for both internal and business
information sharing. The IT-architecture is flexible, IT security is at a comprehensive

level and the competencies in the company is all expertise they need.

Employee

Sl acquisition Leaders

faired iEmpleyeet

Share ot Data-driven,
revenue eae

1 Learners
Shove of
Auused

Figure 5. IMPULS Readiness Assessment for Industry 4.0 (www.industrie40-readiness.de’

According to Sony and Naik (2018) IMPULS can be a suitable model for several
types of industries as it measures the company’s readiness level for industry 4.0
implementation. In creating a readiness assessment fit for the sector or organization to be
evaluated, IMPULS assessment model can be used to measure the readiness levels, as
well as the corresponding descriptions and groups, which is what was done in a readiness

assessment of small and medium enterprises (SMEs) regarding Industry 4.0


implementation (Grufman & Lyons, 2020). In their study, they used grounded theory and
literature review to determine the dimensions and fields of readiness for SMEs, while the
IMPULS model was used in computing for and describing the levels of readiness of the

SMEs.

Another mixed method research design was used in determining the readiness of
Human Resource Professionals towards 4IR. This time, RMIT for their exploratory
sequential research also made use of focus groups to complement literature search to
identify the dimensions of readiness of HR professionals, which eventually were used in

developing their own readiness model (Nankervis et al., 2021).

Cognizant of the fact that 4IR was primarily conceived with developed and
industrialized countries in mind, there is understandably a lack of research on how the
new era will affect the developing world (Kim et al., 2019). In the same sense, readiness
models for one group may not be applicable to another, and that developing countries
will not go through the fourth industrial revolution in the same way that developed
countries do (Roodt & Koen, 2020), since there is no uniformity about the advance of
technological innovation (Kim et al., 2019). Likewise, models and surveys despite having
a reputable history and widespread use, does not inevitably provide adequate validity
evidence for it being appropriate measurement instrument particularly when used in
different population and circumstance (Knekta et al., 2019). Nonetheless, these models
and tools are of great contribution on the 4IR discourse and can serve as a general

framework that will need to be tailored to individual sectors or country-context. Research


can test the relevance and applicability of these readiness models for diagnostics, road
mapping and roadmap implementation (United Nations Industrial Development

Organization, 2019).

The results of these assessments will eventually have implications on policy,
education, and capacity building. While curriculum review may be necessary in the
formal education setting, it is not the sole training ground for worker productivity.
Organizations are said to acknowledge the need for lifelong learning of workers and
recognize that learning and acquiring skills throughout a worker’s life is equally
important (Kim & Park, 2020). At the same time, other social implications that can
exacerbate inequality and other development concerns should be given considerable

attention, particularly for women, children, youth, and other vulnerable sectors.

Theoretical Framework

Technological breakthroughs create both positive and negative impacts in the
society. Thus, there is a need to fully understand its multi-dimensionality such that
individuals, organizations, and society can take full advantage of their features. Related

theories can help in the process of understanding and appreciating these innovations.

Three theories and concepts are regarded to be related to this study and help shape
its framework, namely the Human Capital Theory, Institutional Isomorphism, Digital

Divide and the Resource Appropriation Theory.


Technological Unemployment and the Human Capital

Technological progress and job displacements is a double-edged sword that is
nothing new. As seen in the previous discussions, as early as the nineteenth and twentieth
centuries, same fears had arisen with the technological achievements of these centuries
also paving the way for creation of new jobs that had fully compensated the
consequences of the new job-saving technology adoption (K. Zervoudi, 2020). This is
reflective of the Keynesian paradigm of technological unemployment introduced in the
1930’s, that looks at technological unemployment as a “temporary illness.” It only
impacts short or medium term because as technology improves productivity, new
products and services are foreseen to be developed, which in turn will create jobs for

displaced workers (Wilson, 2017).

The same Keynesian paradigm was the basis of the Frey and Osborne study (2017)
that projected 47 percent of jobs in the United States will be at risk in two years’ time
because of computerization. The study expounded that the low-skill workers displaced
can transfer to tasks that are non-susceptible to computerization, such as those requiring
creative and social intelligence, to avoid the negative impact. For them to be successful in
the shift, reskilling and upskilling will be needed (Frey & Osborne, 2017). Human capital
investment, in this perspective needs to be strategic and efficient, cognizant of the fact

that with 41R, conventional knowledge and skills are not enough (WEF, 2017).


The term “Human Capital,” along with the analytical framework of the Human
Capital Theory was developed in the early 1960s by Chicago School of Economics
academicians Theodore Schultz (1961) and Gary Becker (1964). It challenged the
prevailing assumption in those times that the growth of physical capital is paramount to
economic success. Human Capital Theory implies that with education and training, the
productivity and earnings of the individuals can be increased. As such, education, along
with lifelong learning is considered as an investment, that is crucial for the individual, the

organization, and nation’s economic growth.

Thus, human capital investment should be at the core of organizational strategies to
prepare for the impact of digitization and technology on jobs. In agriculture, the returns to
schooling seem to increase substantially as a country goes from traditional agriculture to
modernizing, which creates a dynamic technical and economic environment requiring
information acquisition, technology evaluation, and adjustments to change (Schultz,

1964; Schultz 1975; Becker 1993, p.1-13, cited by Huffman, 1999).

As we move into 4IR and knowledge economy, higher level cognitive skills,
education and lifelong learning are deemed necessary to navigate through the
technological advances that it offers. Appropriately, quality education and lifelong

learning are also emphasized in the SDGs.

Many techno-optimists recognize that the exponential growth of technologies can
be disruptive but eventually improves productivity and increase wealth. That in turn leads

to greater demand for goods and services and new types of jobs to satisfy it. Employment


will grow in high-income cognitive and creative jobs and low-income manual
occupations, but it will greatly diminish for middle-income routine and repetitive jobs
(Schwab, 2016). Same inference are concluded by a United Nations study that revealed
higher-skilled workers with higher flexibility, creativity, and critical thinking, and
communication skills will leverage on frontier technologies of 4IR, while low and middle
skilled jobs will decline that will further cause wage inequality that is already seen in
many developed countries (Gay et al., 2017). Similarly, the Asian Development Bank
sees technological advancements to displace workers across sectors, as robots and
computers can take over a multitude of tasks more efficiently. However, this is more
applicable to employees with manual and routine jobs such as farm labor, assembly line
workers, many of which are found in the ASEAN countries (ADB, 2017) but also those

in low value-added services.

The share of jobs at risk to automation and digitization may vary but reach
staggering numbers of over 80 per cent (Gay et al., 2017). Chang and Huynh (2016)
using the same methodology developed by Frey and Osborne found that with 4IR about
56 percent of jobs in selected ASEAN countries such as Cambodia, Indonesia,
Philippines, Thailand, and Vietnam are at risk of automation, many of which are
occupied by women. Vietnam is considered most at risk (70 percent) while Thailand is
least at risk (44 percent). In the Philippines, 49 percent of jobs, many of which are in

agriculture, forestry, and fisheries, are considered at risk of automation.


These findings are consistent with the global study of WEF done prior to the
pandemic. It revealed that routine-based, middle-skilled white-collar roles are susceptible
to advances in new technologies and process automation, hence might be considered
redundant in the immediate future. However, jobs that are enhanced by the use of
technology, such as data analysts, scientists, ecommerce and social media specialists, as
well as those whose roles leverage distinctively ‘human’ skills like those in training and
development, customer service, sales and marketing are expected to experience

increasing demand (WEF, 2018).

This shows how human capital development can be a proactive response that
enterprises, governments, policymakers, workers, and jobseekers need to adapt to these
fast-encroaching technologies. Otherwise, opportunities may be lost, and numerous
industries may find themselves unprepared for the consequences. This is true for
developing and emerging economies, as well (Chang & Huynh, 2016). Despite lower
wage rates that may be considered when evaluating technological feasibility, national and
local policies need to embrace and direct these new technologies and promote national

capacities to innovate (Gay et al., 2017).

Lastly, education production function model, which likewise draws on human
capital theory implies that an individual’s human capital is determined by several
cognitive and non-cognitive factors (Britton & Vignoles, 2018). Hanushek (2020)
elaborated that human capital formation is a function of several variables including the

individual, school and school resources, family and peers.


Institutional Isomorphism towards common Dimensions of Readiness

The disruptive nature of technological breakthroughs coupled with globalization are
continuously influencing the practices of societies and organizations. Within such a
dynamic environment it is a goal of every organization to survive and remain relevant
and establish legitimacy within the world of institutions (Elangovan, 2015).
Technological innovations characteristic of 41R can drive organizations towards a certain
level of homogenization explained by the concept of institutional isomorphism. Di
Maggio and Powel (1983) introduced the said institutional theory which argues
organizational models, once institutionalized will cause like institutions to become more
alike. Various pressures prompt organizations to revisit their goals or develop new

practices based on the demands of the environment and like organizations.

Institutional isomorphism can cause coercive, mimetic processes, and normative
pressures (Dimaggio & Powell, 1983). Coercive pressure can be forces in the
organization’s external environment such as other players in the supply chain, cultural
expectations from society, government and legal norms, reporting norms from financial
and taxation bodies (Elangovan, 2015). As organizations exert effort to thrive through the
uncertainties in the new era, they can look for the best practices of organizations within
the same situation. Such practice of emulating successful organizations which can be
diffused with employee movements are identified as mimetic pressures. Meanwhile,

education and training, and social capital like professional groups and organizations, can


become normative pressures that will define how things should be done and what norms
and rules are based on ‘logic of appropriateness rather than optimality (Kwok, 1996).
Education and training that upskill and improve employees become normative pressures

that prompt organizations to also change and grow (Elangovan, 2015).

Several studies have been conducted that have defined the degree and mechanisms
of isomorphism that different types of organization and sectors undergo which in turn can
help in crafting strategic directions (DiMaggio & Powell, 1983; Kontinen & Onali, 2017;

Pal & Ojha, 2017).

For this research, it is argued that Agriculture 4.0 can provide such pressures within
the R&D community to push for certain homogenization to prepare them for Agri 4.0 and
at the same time address development issues of digital divide through human capital

investments, among others.

The Digital Divide and Resources and Appropriation Theory

The issue on the adoption, diffusion and utilization of ICTs and many advanced
technologies for that matter have been causing disparities between and among those who
have access and those who do not. The Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development (OECD) defines digital divide as the “gap between individuals, households,
businesses and geographic areas at different socio-economic levels with regard both to

their opportunities to access ICTs and to their use of the Internet for a wide variety of


activities” (Pick & Sarkar, 2016). Following the Resources and Appropriation Theory of
van Djik (2012), causal relationship of digital divide and inequality can be explained. The
theory relates digital inequalities to economic, social, political inequalities, and that
digital divide can be addressed by providing the right access and use. However, this
concept of access and use is also multi-faceted. It is categorized into four levels that start
with motivation, that will enable the physical and material access, and will lead to the
development of digital skills, which, when understood can be and should be used in

diverse situations regularly (van Dijk, 2006).

The succession is depicted in Figure 6, below:

PHYSICAL AND
MATERIAL ACCESS

MOTIVATION

Figure 6. Four Successive Kinds of Access in the Appropriation of Digital
Technology (van Dijk, 2012)


These levels are similar to the three levels of digital divide disclosed by Nielsen
(2006) namely Economic, Usability, and Empowerment. Among the three, the economic
stage which focuses on the “original idea of digital divide,” may be the simplest form. As
it only focuses on the access to technologies, the simple physical and technological
ownership only provides a limited image of digital inequalities (Ragnedda & Kreitem,
2018). Nonetheless, acquisition and management of the frontier technologies may still be
quite a challenge for many developing countries to even achieve. Likewise, considering
limited financial resources, identifying the appropriate technologies to invest in would

also become critical (Nielsen, 2006).

Thus, to address the digital divide, an organization or individual’s motivation and
eventually the readiness is a critical step toward adaptive or transformational change.
This can be followed by the acquisition of technological frontiers, as well as the
management practices that will ensure maintenance and sustainability of technology. The
knowledge, skills and relevant experience of the human resource will also play an
important role in addressing the second level of digital divide, while enabling
mechanisms such as organizational strategies, operations and leadership will enable

individuals to leverage these technologies to their advantage.

Conceptual Framework

The framework for readiness assessment was initially adopted from the IMPULS

model, which includes several readiness variables or what are considered dimensions and


associated fields. However, this model was refined through the consultation with experts

during the qualitative phase.

The dimensions represented in the inner ring of the tool reflect areas of the
organization and the fields are areas of 4IR and Agriculture 4.0 associated with the
dimensions. These fields and dimensions are used as measurements for readiness levels.
Along with the technology drivers of Agriculture 4.0, the fields and dimensions were
confirmed and finalized through the Delphi Technique and subsequent Key informant

interviews.

Based on the readiness assessment, the tool can eventually determine that gaps
between the current situation and the ideal, which will then serve as inputs to the
innovation culture of the organization, education and lifelong learning strategies, and

other government and organizational plans and policies.

Figure 7 illustrates the conceptual framework for the study.

READINESS FRAMEWORK (“Adopted from IMPULS, Germany, 2015)

Figure 7. Conceptual Framework of the study.


Operational Definition of Terms

Agriculture 4.0 - refers to the range of concepts & technologies of IR 4.0 used to
develop and improve agriculture innovations and systems across the agri-food
value chain that will enhance agriculture productivity, environmental sustainability,
food and nutrition security, and income. Agriculture sector in this study covers
crops and livestock, fisheries and marine resources, forestry and natural resources

or collectively called the agriculture, aquatic and natural resources (AANR).

Fourth Industrial Revolution — a new era characterized by a fusion of technologies,
such as the Internet of Things, Robotics, Artificial Intelligence, Big Data, that is

blurring the lines between the physical, digital, and biological spheres.

Readiness Assessment - systematic analysis of a country. sector, organization, or
individual's ability to undertake a transformational process or change: it measures
current capabilities, identify new ones needed to succeed in the new production
paradigm and develop solutions to address the gap and facilitate transformation.
For this study, readiness assessment pertains to the preparedness of agriculture
organizations (crops and livestock) are in implementing agriculture 4.0 activities

and programs.


Dimensions of readiness — variables or key factors that influence an organization’s
ability to implement innovation, transformational process or change. Through the
qualitative research process (Delphi and KIJ), this study considered five dimensions
of readiness namely Human capital Organizational Leadership, Strategy and Skills
Development, Smart Operations, and Technology Management as the broad

readiness dimensions for Agri 4.0.

Human Capital — pertains to the skills, knowledge, and experience possessed by an
individual or population, viewed in terms of their value or cost to an organization.
For this study, human capital as a dimension of readiness is comprised of the
technical or digital skills, soft skills, and personal skills and competencies related

Agriculture 4.0.

Frontier Technologies (Technology and Innovation) — technological breakthroughs
such as artificial intelligence, internet of things, blockchain and synthetic biology,
that define the industrial revolution and drives transformation of economies and
societies.

As a result of the Delphi Technique and qualitative phase of the study, the frontier
technologies of the Agriculture 4.0 in the Philippine R&D include biotechnology,
nanotechnology. sensors and remote sensing, artificial intelligence (Al) next

generation omics and gene editing echnology, big data, internet of things, robotics


and automation, Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAV), 3D printing and additive

manufacturing, and blockchain.

Organizational Strategies — organizational plans and processes that outline how
technology and human capital are maximized for the efficient and effective

Agriculture 4.0. implementation.

Organizational Leadership — management approach that focuses on what is best for the
organization and its people. For this study, leadership considers how the top
management are involved and committed to harnessing technology and developing

human capital towards Agriculture 4.0.

Smart Operations — pertain to the efficient integration, interoperability, and sharing of
information of components and systems in the R&D organization, as well as its

partners.

Technology Management - scaling-up and commercialization of products of Agriculture
4.0 related R&D programs and initiatives, including Intellectual Property

generation and protection.

Latent variables or constructs — used in SEM and CFA to pertain to phenomena that

are not directly observable. In this study, Agriculture 4.0 Readiness and its


readiness dimensions are considered latent variables or constructs which are

measured through observable variables or indicators.

Exogenous variable — used in SEM or CFA to refer to latent variable that is used to
predict another latent variable. In this study, the 13 sub-dimensions or related fields
are considered exogenous variables used to measure the readiness level of an

organization.

Endogenous variable - used in SEM or CFA to refer to the dependent variable or the
latent variable being predicted, which in this study pertains to the Agriculture 4.0

readiness.

Agriculture R&D Organizations — institutions based on the Philippines that conduct
research and development programs, projects and activities towards improving the
agriculture sector. This particular study will focus on higher education institutions
and other R&D organizations that work on crops and livestock research and

development programs and projects and supported by DOST-PCAARRD.

Levels of Readiness - described as the degree of preparedness of organizations to take
advantage of the Agri 4.0. In the study, there are four levels of readiness identified

namely Awareness, Conceptualization, Creation, and Innovation.


Level 1: Awareness. Describes R&D Organization who have little or no activity on Agri

4.0 or at the very least aware of the concepts and principles of Agriculture 4.0.

Level 2: Conceptualization. Describes R&D Organizations that have already recognized
and are starting to develop strategies and programs to implement Agriculture 4.0.
Pilot initiatives have been launched on some indicators. Accordingly, human and
technological requirements are already present but are inadequate and need further

improvement.

Level 3. Creation: Describes R&D Organizations that have a wide array of experts who
have been developing and implementing Agriculture 4.0 programs and projects for
quite a time. As such, organizational plans and strategies have integrated human
resource development plans, technological requirements and most of the readiness
indicators. This likewise indicates that organizations’ linkage and network with
LGUs, private sector, and the farmers and fisherfolks, and international
organizations, are also established and sustained. Subsequently, S&T based
agriculture products, services and business models have already been developed

while IP policies and protocols are established and are being implemented.

Level 4. Innovation: In the innovation level, R&D Organizations have satisfied all

readiness indicators and have produced a significant number of outputs and


outcomes towards improved productivity, sustainability, and food and nutrition

security across the agri-food value chain.


CHAPTER 3

METHODOLOGY

The Fourth Industrial Revolution, Agriculture 4.0, and readiness to these, are
relatively new topics of study in the Philippines. Thus, this research used an exploratory
sequential mixed method research design in the development of a readiness tool and
assessment of the levels of readiness of agriculture R&D Organizations. The exploratory
design is three-phase mixed methods approach in which the researcher begins by
collecting and analyzing qualitative data. From the initial exploratory results, the
researcher builds a second development phase in which the qualitative results are used to
inform the development of a specific feature. In the third phase, the researcher collects
and analyzes quantitative data to test or generalize the initial qualitative findings. In the
survey-development variant, the initial qualitative phase plays a role in helping to define
the measures and the questions on a survey instrument. Then, after development of the
instrument, it is administered to a representative sample. As expounded by Creswell &
Plano Clark (2018), the need for exploratory sequential design is justified when (1)
measures, instruments, or experimental activities are not available; (2) the variables are
unknown; (3) there is no guiding framework or theory; or (4) there is a need to make an
existing quantitative measure or instrument as specific to the participants or culture as
possible. As its name implies, this this approach first explores a topic prior to determining

what variables need to be measured (Edmonds & Kennedy, 2020).


In a mixed methods study examining participant reaction to research on violence in
Jordan, Clark et al. (2012) first gathered qualitative focus group data, next constructed a
survey instrument with dichotomous questions, and then administered the survey to a
large sample (Creswell & Plano Clark, 2018). Figure 8 illustrates how the research design

will be employed.

Qualitative Data { Quantitative Data ‘
Collection and >  buildsto jam} Collection and fmm INTERPRETATION
Analysis Analysis

Figure 8. Exploratory Sequential Mixed Method Research Design
(Creswell & Plano Clark, 2018)

For this study, the qualitative phase used desk research, Delphi Technique and Key
informant interviews that captured how the crops and livestock R&D organizations view
Agriculture 4.0 including its technological drivers and human resource requirements.
Eventually, the said qualitative phase developed the readiness assessment model.
Thereafter, the model was validated during the quantitative phase, through online
assessment among with Higher Education Institutions and Research and Development
Centers, working on crops and livestock R&D programs and projects in the Philippines.

Readiness levels of each organization were determined through this phase.


Area of the Study

The study was done in the Philippines and involved scientists, researchers, program
and project leaders affiliated with R&D organizations working on agriculture,
particularly crops and livestock. These organizations are those considered by DOST-
PCAARRD as partners in the AANR sector, as of December 2021. However, due to
travel restrictions, actual field work was limited, and data gathering may be limited to

virtual or electronic communications only.

Among its mandates. DOST-PCAARRD is responsible for the programming
and allocation of government and external funds for research and development and
overall monitoring of research and development projects in the AANR sector. To
fulfill this, the council partners with R&D organizations all over the country that will
in turn implement Science and Technology based R&D activities according to the

priorities and strategies set by DOST-PCAARRD.

Participants and Respondents of the Study

Qualitative Phase

The Delphi panel consists of 22 scientists and researchers considered agriculture

R&D experts. They are leaders of DOST-PCAARRD funded programs and projects that


have already characteristic of 4IR frontier technologies for R&D such as CRISPR-Cas9,
nanotechnology and biotechnology, Al and robotics, big data, IoT, and the likes.
Snowball sampling was also employed to make sure that all frontier technologies are
represented.

Meanwhile the Key Informant Interview involved research managers and renowned

leaders in the AANR both in private and public, local and aboard.

Quantitative Phase

The quantitative phase consists of an online survey where unit of analysis were the
R&D organizations engaged in crops and livestock R&D activities in agriculture. In
particular, these are R&D organizations considered by DOST-PCAARRD as agency

partners mainly through their respective Regional Research and Development consortia.

At present, DOST-PCAARRD has 15 Regional R&D Consortia in the various
regions of the country. While there is no R&D Consortia for the National Capital Region
and the BARMM at the moment, the study was able to identify DOST-PCAARRD R&D
Partners in the said regions included in the survey. The study primarily touched base with
the various Regional R&D consortium secretariat to seek their assistance in distributing
the assessment tool to the consortium member agencies (CMA) that are actively pursuing

R&D activities in agriculture, aquatic and natural resources.


Data Collection

This study used an exploratory sequential design to develop an assessment tool that
evaluated the levels of readiness of selected R&D institutions. It initially adopted the
IMPULS Industrie 4.0 Readiness framework developed by Lichtblau et al. (2015) which
also used the same mixed method design. The said framework was modified to tailor-fit
into the needs and situation of the Agriculture R&D community, particularly identifying
the readiness dimensions for the R&D organizations through qualitative research process

and validated through the quantitative phase.

Qualitative Phase

To define and characterize Agriculture 4.0 in the context of the Philippine R&D, a
qualitative research approach was employed. Within an exploratory sequential research
design, constructivist principle of qualitative research is more suitable in evaluating
multiple perspectives and obtaining deep awareness of the culture and society being
studied (Creswell & Plano Clark, 2018). The interpretivist epistemology of qualitative
research puts more emphasis on understanding Agriculture 4.0 through an examination of

the interpretation of such by its experts (Bryman & Bell, 2011).

The qualitative phase entailed using Real-time (RT) Delphi technique and Key
Informant Interviews (KII) to establish what Agriculture 4.0 is in the context of

Philippine R&D, as well as its frontier technologies, fields and dimensions. This is


different from what has been done in other 4IR readiness studies (Lichtblau et al., n.d.,
2015; Nankervis et al., 2021) which made use of focus groups and workshops to identify

the dimension and fields of readiness.

However, this is also not the first time that RT Delphi Technique was used to
validate a readiness assessment model, particularly on a meso (sector) level. An e-
readiness model that focus on barriers and influencing factors for IT adoption in SMEs
was conducted through a two-round conventional Delphi study with 45 experts
participating in the panel (Fathian et al., 2007). The first round was used to validate the
readiness dimensions, as well as the weights of each dimension, while the second round
distinguished the indicators of each dimension (or in this study the related fields) and
their respective weights. Meanwhile, Delphi technique was also used to validate a
readiness model for Enterprise Architecture among public sectors in Malaysia (Hussein et

al., 2018).

Delphi technique was developed by the RAND Corporation in the late 1950s, when
it investigated the political and social impact of future technology for military purposes
(Gordon & Pease, 2006). As a research approach, the Delphi technique is considered
useful in collecting and synthesizing informed opinion on a specific topic particularly
where knowledge or information are still not comprehensive (Vax et al., 2021). Delphi
has been used widely used for futures research, in planning, decision making, and policy
studies (Gordon & Pease, 2006). While the original technique has had several

modifications, the four main characteristics of the Delphi method of (1) anonymity; (2)


controlled feedback, (3) statistical aggregation of group response, and (4) iteration,

should be apparent (Gnatzy et al., 2011).

Still, this is also not the first time that RT Delphi Technique was used to validate a
readiness assessment model, particularly on a meso (sector) level. An e-readiness model
that focus on barriers and influencing factors for IT adoption in SMEs was conducted
through a two-round conventional Delphi study with 45 experts participating in the panel
(Fathian et al., 2007). The first round was used to validate the readiness dimensions, as
well as the weights of each dimension, while the second round distinguished the
indicators of each dimension (or in this study the related fields) and their respective
weights. Meanwhile, Delphi technique was also used to validate a readiness model for

Enterprise Architecture among public sectors in Malaysia (Hussein et al., 2018).

A list of project and program leaders of R&D projects funded by DOST-
PCAARRD that fall within the Agriculture 4.0 general definition served as initial list of
target participants. Snowball sampling was then employed to ensure that most 4IR
frontier technologies have been covered. A total of 32 experts were invited to take part in
the study, and 24 accepted the invitation. These were composed of scientists and
researchers from HEls, Regional and National R&D Centers, DOST Balik Scientists and

from private sector.


Real Time (RT) Delphi

This study used the Delphi technique to define and characterize Agriculture 4.0 in
the context of Philippine R&D, including its frontier technologies, readiness dimensions
and related fields. A Real-Time (RT) Delphi through online platform Surveylet was used,
which contrary to the conventional technique, does away with the sequential rounds of
the original and modified Delphi, which makes the process more efficient (Gordon &
Pease, 2006). The said approach circumvents the repetitive and multiple feedback nature
of conventional Delphi methods, which increases the likelihood of dropouts and low
response rates (Gnatzy et al., 2011). Likewise, the accessibility and interactive capacity
of the internet and smart devices characteristic of the 4IR paved the way for online
software systems to make data collection and analysis of such approach more efficient
(Varndell et al., 2021). For better user-experience, a web-based software program for RT
Delphi was used, as it takes advantage of today’s digital technologies. The study adopted
the recommendation of Aengenheyster et al. (2017) to use Calibrum’s proprietary online

software Surveylet based on data output, user-friendliness, and ease of administration.

The study run asynchronously, meaning expert participants entered the platform at
their most convenient times and the group consensus and their answers, as well as
comments from other experts are viewed real-time. However, as in any Delphi technique,

all comments are anonymous.

Schmalz et al. (2021) considered conducting a literature or desk review as an

indispensable component of a Delphi study. As expounded by Beiderbeck, et.al (2021),


desk reviews may not necessarily need to be confined to those published in scientific
journals, particularly when existing literature are limited. The desk research for this study
then included academic papers, and seminal reports from reputable international and local
organizations such as FAO, UN, Worldbank, APO, ADB, WEF, DA, DOST, TESDA
published from 2016 up to present were examined. Google Scholar, EBSCO, Science
Direct and Web of Science were searched using predefined keywords. As
inclusion/exclusion criteria, articles should have explicitly defined Agriculture 4.0 or
related concepts, identified frontier technologies or skills/competencies. Articles have

been written in English and accessible through the institution.

Key Informant Interviews

Apart from validating the RT Delphi results with the Delphi panel, a series of Key
Informant Interviews (KII) were conducted after the RT-Delphi Technique. By adopting
a triangulation protocol, a more comprehensive understanding of a phenomena can be
achieved which in turn enhances the credibility and quality of a qualitative analysis
(Merriam & Tisdell, 2016; Patton, 1999). For this study, the results of the RT Delphi
were validated with six research managers and pioneers in AANR R&D in the
Philippines. Validation included cross-checking of frontier technologies in R&D,
perceived outcomes and impact; and the organizational variables for readiness, related
fields. During the KIIs, the weights (percentage) per readiness variable were also

solicited.


Quantitative Phase

To determine the Agriculture 4.0 readiness of the R&D organizations, it is crucial
that the levels, constructs or readiness dimensions, and their respective criteria are
succinctly defined during the qualitative phase. The qualitative phase developed the
readiness model and finalized the assessment tool, which were administered and
validated in the quantitative phase. The assessment tool was pilot tested prior to actual
launch and revised based on the results of the pilot test including the results of the

Cronbach’s alpha test of internal consistency and reliability.

The Agriculture 4.0 Readiness, is a self-assessment tool that was administered
through the online survey tool Qualtrics. Qualtrics is a professional survey administration
and management tool which is made available to UP students, faculty and staff. The

survey period ran for ten weeks after which was subjected to data cleaning.

To determine the readiness levels, participants rated their own organization for each
indicator, using the following rating scale:
4: Programs and initiatives mentioned implemented and are subject to continuous
improvement
3: Programs and initiatives mentioned are already in practice
2: Pilot initiatives have been launched

1: We are aware but have little or no experience


DK- Do not know (there is little or no information available to answer this

question)

If no information (DK) is provided to determine whether the criteria for level 1
have been met, the missing values for level 1 are interpreted as not meeting the criteria.

In this case, the organization is therefore assigned to a score of 0.

The five dimension-level readiness scores were then consolidated and averaged to

produce a total readiness index.

Data Analysis

Qualitative Phase

Consensus measurement is the central part of a Delphi survey. However, different
Delphi studies have theorized consensus differently and no standards have been set on
which criteria is best (Giannarou & Zervas, 2014; Habibi et al., 2014a; Trevelyan &
Robinson, 2015). Thus, it is significant that the level of consensus and stability is defined
a priori (Varndell et al., 2021). A study on the various measures of consensus and
stability in Delphi studies recommended employing a combination of statistics to reduce

subjectivity and ensure validity of results (Trevelyan & Robinson, 2015).


Since the questionnaire of this study consisted of ordinal variables, median is
considered a robust consensus measure among the Measures of Central Tendency (Hsu &
Sandford, 2019). Aside from the median, this study defined consensus to be achieved if >
51 % of experts ranked the item > 4 on the 5-point Likert scale and coefficient of
variation (CV) is < 0.5 as recommended by Strasser (2019). Interquartile range (IQR),

mode and arithmetic mean were also determined and presented.

Cronbach’s Alpha Test for Internal Consistency and Reliability

The initial questionnaire was pre-tested for a week with participants who had the
same level of research management experience. After the duration, the responses were
subjected to Cronbach's Alpha testing to determine each question’s consistency.
Cronbach’s alpha is considered as an important and prevalent statistics in research
involving test construction and use as it measured the internal consistency or reliability
between several items, measurements or ratings. It can inform how reliable the responses
of a questionnaire is (or domain of a questionnaire), ultimately indicating how stable the

tool can be (Bujang et al., 2018; Drost, 2011).

Cronbach’s alpha ranges from zero to one with values 0.7 or higher indicating more
acceptable internal consistency. However, if the value is very low, either the
questionnaire is too short or the items are not related to each other (Drost, 2011). Criteria

Cronbach alpha values are presented in Table 2.


Table 2. Cronbach alpha Criteria value

CRONBACH ALPHA CRITERIA INTERNAL CONSISTENCY
a>0.9 Excellent

08<a<09 Good

0.7<a<08 Acceptable

0.6<a<0.7 Questionable
0.5<a<0.6 Poor

a<0.5 Unacceptable

Source: (Bujang et al., 2018)

Quantitative Phase

Quantitative data was analyzed using descriptive statistics such as measures
of central tendency (mean, median and mode) and dispersion measures (standard
deviation). For inferential statistics, Confirmatory Factor Analysis (CFA) and Structural
Equation Modeling (SEM) were done to establish associations between and among the
latent or unobservable variables and observable measures and indicators (Brown, 2006)

and overall, validate the Agriculture 4.0 readiness model developed.

CFA and SEM are considered second generation methods of multivariate analysis
used when validating or testing a hypothesis or theory by informing researchers about a
particular unobserved or latent factor and its relationship to other observable indicators
(Phakiti, 2018). The relationship of these variables is established through survey and data
on observable variables are analyzed to infer or conclude about the unobservable or latent

variables (Knekta et al., 2019). For this study, the Agriculture 4.0 Readiness and its


readiness dimensions were considered latent constructs or unobservable variables which

based on its hierarchy will entail second-order factor analysis, testable in CFA. To

illustrate, Agriculture 4.0 Readiness is considered the higher-order factor that governs

several readiness dimensions, which are then considered second order factors; the related

fields are considered first order factors based on primary observed variables (Figure 9).

Component
and items

Latent

Organizational construct

Leadership

‘Skils Davelopmant

Strategy and
Skills
Development

Agri 4.0
Readiness

Smart

Operations

Techncioay
management
ems)

Technology
Management

Figure 9. Agriculture 4.0 Readiness framework of second order constructs

(Source: author’s own illustration)


Confirmatory Factor Analysis

CFA is a statistical method used to validate whether a hypothesized latent construct
or variable can be inferred from observed indicators, and overall examine the latent
structure of a measurement model or questionnaire (T. Brown, 2006; Phakiti, 2018). As
suggested by Awang (2015), a study needs to execute CFA for all latent constructs or
variables prior to modeling their inter-relationships in SEM. This is because beyond
confirming or rejecting a factor model, CFA can inform researchers to revise, refine and
retest a CFA model using a well-defined set of criteria (Phakiti, 2018). In particular
construct validity and convergent validity, as well as discriminant validity. when needed

are prescribed (Awang, 2015).

Construct validity looks at how well a study translates a construct - a concept, idea
or behaviour into a functioning and operating reality (Drost, 2011). In this study,
construct validity affirms whether the observable variables can assess the overall
readiness of organization towards Agriculture 4.0, as well as its various dimensions.
Construct Validity is said to be attained if fit indices (Table 3), which indicate how fit is
the items in measuring their respective latent constructs, achieved the required level
(Awang, 2015). If the required level of any fitness index is not achieved, the study then
modifies the structural model by deleting items that have the lowest factor loading in

each construct.


Table 3. Fitness Index and the level of acceptance for every index

FITNESS CATEGORY NAME OF INDEX LEVEL OF ACCEPTANCE

1. Absolute Fit Root Mean Square Error of RMSEA< 0.06

Approximation (RMSEA) Range 0.05 to 0.1 is acceptable

2. Incremental Fit Comparative fit index (CFI) CFI >0.90
CFI = 0.95 is a good fit
Tucker—Lewis index (TLI) 20.95
3. Parsimonous Fit Chisq/df Chi-Square/ df < 3.0

Source: (Awang, 2015; Hu & Bentler, 1999)

RMSEA is considered absolute fit index which evaluates how far a hypothesized
model is from a perfect model (Pavlov et al., 2021; Xia & Yang, 2019). Incremental fit
indices, such as CFI and TLI on the other hand compare the fit of a hypothesized model

and a baseline model (Xia & Yang, 2019).

Convergent validity describes how approximately a new scale relates to other
measures of the same construct (Mohamad & Sihes, 2021). Evaluating the convergent
validity entails computing for the average variance extracted (AVE) and Construct
Reliability (CR). Convergent validity is observed if the value of AVE is more than 0.45

and CR is higher than the AVE. (Awang, 2015; Sarmento & Costa, 2019)

Discriminant validity implies if the measurement model of a construct is free from

redundant items. This is done by the discrepancy measure called Modification Indices


(MI) and is usually performed when fitness index are not achieved after low factor
loadings have been removed (Awang, 2015). This type of validity can already be seen
through the diagonal matrix showing the AVE square root — if is higher to the

correlations of the constructs (Sarmento & Costa, 2019).

It is worthwhile to note that once all fit indices meet their required values or levels
and all constructs are considered valid and reliable, SEM can now be performed to model

and establish the various associations and relationships among constructs.

Structural Equation Modeling

As a key statistical tool in social science, SEM describes the relationships between
and among different causal theoretical frameworks including multiple independent and
dependent variables by validating the direct, indirect and moderating effect of different
variables in complex models (Cresnar et al., 2020a). To understand the complex
relationship among the latent and observed variables or constructs of the Agriculture 4.0
readiness model, a SEM diagram is produced. In SEM, agriculture 4.0 readiness is
considered an endogenous (or dependent) variable, while the sub-dimensions or latent
variables used to predict another latent variable is considered exogenous or independent

variables.

SEM and CFA can be performed through various software programs such as R,
LISREL (linear structural relationships), AMOS (Analysis of Moment Structure) and

STATA. While there may be differences among these programs, Phakiti (2018) identified


the eight common steps when validating and analyzing measurement models using CFA
and SEM in Figure 10. This particular study used R with Lavaan to run CFA and SEM

and validate the Agriculture 4.0 Readiness Model.

| Step 1 Step 6 =— Step 7

Model retest (if Model acceptance and
Model specification 1) . :
necessary) interpretation

a aL
i:

Step 5
Model respecification
and modification

] (
] Ww

Step 3 ae Step 4

Assessment and
Model estimation ee ee
| evaluation of model fit

Step 2
Model identification

Step 8
Report

Figure 10. Essential steps in SEM and CFA
(Source: Phakiti, 2018).

While CFA and SEM are analytical tools used to test the readiness model, it is also
worthwhile to note that results of the tests are expected to change when the hypothesis is

being tested in different conditions (Sarmento & Costa, 2019).

Thus, performing CFA and SEM as part of the research process is recommended.


Ethical Considerations

Data gathering and analysis in scientific research requires a responsible approach
embodied through ethical practices. For the qualitative phase of the study, the Delphi
panel and expert interviewees were invited to participate in the study through email
communication which included an explanation of the project background, objectives,
expected outputs, as well as their roles in the study. In the case of the Delphi panel, those
who accepted the invitation were sent the online survey which included the informed
consent as part of the preliminary page of the questionnaires. In compliance with the Data
Privacy Act of 2012, the said consent explicitly stated that the participation of the
respondents is voluntary; personal information provided will be processed and used
solely for research; and that these can only be accessed by the researchers of the project,
unless written consent is secured. Data disposition process will also be followed, as
prescribed by the National Archives of the Philippines. In lieu of the participant's
signature or conforme, the Delphi expert panel can tick the “agree” button, implying they
fully accept to participate in the research. Only then can the online survey proceed. With
the KII, expert interviewers were also accorded the same ethical considerations including
confidentiality of their personal information. Their permission to record their respective

interviews only for the objectives of the project was likewise sought.

On the quantitative part of the study, the project first sought the endorsement of
DOST-PCAARRD and the regional R&D Consortia secretariat so that we can contact the

R&D partners of PCAARRD. After securing the partners’ contact information, they were


sent a formal email invitation which explained the project, its objectives, and the role of
the respondents. A link to the survey via Qualtrics was also included in the email
invitation. Moreover, the first page of the actual survey consists of the informed consent
similar to what was sent to the Delphi expert panel. Those who are willing to engage in
the survey will then tick the “agree” button which will bring them to the project
background page and subsequently the survey. By proceeding with the survey, the

participants also understand that they fully agree to participate in the research.

Limitations of the Methodology

The study employed an exploratory sequential mixed method research design that
started with a qualitative study and validated through a quantitative phase. The qualitative
phase made use of the RT Delphi Technique and KII in developing the Agriculture 4.0
readiness assessment tool. While RT Delphi is deemed as an effective tool in gathering
expert consensus (Gordon & Pease, 2006), the judgements and opinions established are
not necessarily regarded wrong or right. Moreover, it can become time-consuming for
both researchers and participants making it vulnerable to drop-outs (Fink-Hafner et al.,
2019). Likewise, with RT Delphi, researchers need to constantly engage participants to
visit and revisit their responses through emails and follow-ups, for a more robust research

result.


On the other hand, the quantitative phase because of restrictions brought forth by
the pandemic, the study used an online self-assessment tool is prone to respondents’ bias.
Because of the absence of enumerators or interviewers, clarification and probe are not

easily done, although the researchers can be easily contacted online.

Thus the assessment tool can be considered a ‘living’ document which can be
subject to continuous updating and revision based on the feedback and experiences from

actual practice.

Lastly, CFA and SEM which established the validity and reliability of the readiness
model are known to be affected by the model size and the number of variables to be
modeled (Pavlov et al., 2021). As model size increases finding a well-fitting model can

become time consuming.


Summary of the Methodology

Following the Exploratory Sequential Mixed Methods Research Design framework,
Figure 11 summarizes the procedures and products expected in developing the readiness

model and assessment for Agriculture 4.0

Qualitative Data M {Quantitative Data SG =
Collection and aa builds to uma} Collection and jmmp( INTERPRETATION »)
Analysis -_ : ( Analysis J y
\ y re
PROCEDURES PROCEDURES PROCEDURES PROCEDURES
Secondary Consensus Survey items R&D Regional Descriptive Summarize
data measurements Consortia Statistics readiness levels
Likert Scale CMAs CFA
RT-Delphi SEM.
Technique
Cronbach's alpha
Kil
PRODUCTS PRODUCTS PRODUCTS PRODUCTS
List of experts Readiness Raadiness Readiness Descriptive/ Readiness

indicators Resecinonl Levels Inferential stats assessment (levels)

recon Survey
orate 0 Readiness mcr Education and
(Human Capital Assessments Frequency lifelong leaming
and Percentages ‘opportunities
Technological
frontiers)

Figure 11. Procedures and Products for Exploratory Sequential Mixed Methods
Research Design


Table 4. Methodology Matrix

OBJECTIVES METHOD VARIABLES ANALYSIS

1, Determine how crops and | Secondary data and | Agri4.0 definition Content
livestock R&D literature review Frontier lanalysis
organizations in the RT Delphi (policy technologies Consensus
Philippines characterize delphi) Human capital measures
Agriculture 4.0 including requirements
its technological and
human resource
requirements.

2. Develop a readiness Readiness Readiness variables | Cronbach's
assessment model for assessment tool and related fields alpha
Agriculture R&D
organizations, towards R&D Organization
Agriculture 4.0 or Smart as unit of analysis
Agriculture. (n=135)

3. Validate the readiness Online Descriptive
model by evaluating the assessment/survey statistics
readiness levels of crops
and livestock R&D Validating of
organizations in the model:
Philippines. Confirmatory

Factor
Analysis
Structural
Equation
1 Modeling

4. Recommend appropriate Policy analysis Priority fields of
human capital policy specializations in
interventions based on the higher/graduate
results of the assessment. education

Training needs
based on
competencies



CHAPTER 4

DEFINING AND CHARACTERIZING AGRICULTURE 4.0 AMONG THE

RESEARCH AND DEVEOPMENT ORGANIZATIONS IN THE PHILIPPINES

Introduction

Agriculture continues to play an important role addressing global problems of food
security and climate change amidst growing population and changing demographics (de
Clercq et al., 2018; FAO, 2017). However, the Philippine agriculture sector has been
facing issues of low productivity and technology adoption, as well as shortage of value
adding rural enterprises, since the 1980’s (Habito & Briones, 2005). The passage of the
AFMA in 1997 failed to transform the sector from resource-based to a technology-based
industry due to issues of low productivity-enhancing investment given to Research and
Development along with misallocation of priorities continued to stifle the growth of

agriculture sector in the country (A. M. Balisacan & Hill, 2003).

Inarguably, considerable investment on research and development (R&D) is a
proven strategy of sustainable economic growth that continues to promote transition
efforts of the developed countries into Industry 4.0 (Ersoz et al., 2018). Studies have

likewise affirmed the positive role of R&D in stimulating growth in TFP and eventually


poverty reduction (Baconguis, 2022). Remarkably, the Philippine agricultural research
system has been considered one of the biggest in Asia (Stads et al., 2007). Yet, with
respect to the total government budget, R&D in general, accounts for only 0.44 percent in
2018 (PIDS, n.d.). This is below the Philippine Development Plan for 2017-2022 targets,
which was pegged to be at least 0.5 (NEDA, 2017) and the UNESCO recommended rate
of a gross expenditure on R&D (GERD) of one percent. Nonetheless, the growth in terms

of R&D budget has been seen gradually increasing through the years.

The technological innovations characteristic of the so-called Fourth Industrial
Revolution (4IR) are seen to address challenges of food security and productivity amidst
changing climate, within an enabling environment (Santos Valle & Kienzle, 2020).
These breakthrough technologies are perceived to push for positive economic, social,
environmental outcomes in general and even accelerate achieving the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs) in particular (World Economic Forum, 2020). They can
transform the sector into Agriculture 4.0, characterized by efficient and technology-based
approaches that improve farm productivity, increase food production, and farmer income
including developing more value adding food products and services, in a more
sustainable way (Santos Valle & Kienzle, 2020; ). These outcomes are described by
Javaid, et al (2022) to include both on-farm and off-farm advancements, from production

to processing until it reaches the consumers.


Defining Agriculture 4.0

Agriculture 4.0, Intelligent Agriculture, Digital Farming, or Smart Farming have
been considered synonymously used to characterize modern agriculture practices that are
mainly technology and data-driven (Javaid et al., 2022; Sponchioni et al., 2019).
Precision agriculture and Agriculture 4.0 is very much related that literature have
considered Agriculture 4.0 initiated by and is based on principles that use only the needed
inputs when and where they are exactly needed (Saiz-Rubio & Rovira-Mas, 2020).
However, Javaid et al. (2022) consider Agriculture 4.0 technologies more as a means to

successfully implement precision agriculture.

However, unlike precision agriculture, digital or smart farming which only focuses
on modern technologies to boost on-farm activities (Klerkx et al., 2019; TESDA, 2020),
Agriculture 4.0 goes beyond agriculture production. Accordingly, there is no single
definition of the Agriculture 4.0 to date, although various definitions presented in
different literature present common categories and themes (da Silveira et al., 2021;
Eastwood et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2021; Trendov et al., 2019; Sponchioni G et al., 2019;
WEF, 2020). It was also observed that research on Agriculture 4.0 has been increasing in
the past years (Mihl & de Oliveira, 2022). However, studies on Agriculture 4.0 in the

Philippines are still quite scarce as far as this researcher is concerned.


Agriculture 4.0 and the sustainable value chain

Beyond simply employing modern technologies of 4IR for improved practice, De
Clercq, et al (2018) emphasized sustainable use to address the food scarcity both on the
demand and supply side of agriculture. While smart farming or precision farming, focus
on using frontier technologies for on-farm activities (Sponchioni et al., 2019),
Agriculture 4.0 revolutionizes the entire agri-food system value chain, from sourcing the
necessary inputs, to production, distribution, processing and retailing of the harvest to
optimizing end-consumer experience (da Silveira et al., 2021; Javaid et al., 2022; Serraj
& Pingali, 2020). Eastwood, et al (2021) uses the term digital agriculture to pertain to the
wide range of digital tools beyond the individual farm and into the supply chain. For
instance, with blockchain technology, even smallholder farmers gain connection directly
to their buyers, as well as inputs suppliers, financial institutions, insurance companies,
and other development partners within a trusted ecosystem; and provide access to
delivery services and real-time market information, through SMS and voice services
(Diem & Do, 2020; Quayson et al., 2020). As Agriculture 4.0 enhances the marketing
and business side of the sector, OECD complements that the technological revolution will
also feature agribusiness start-ups, also known as “Agtechs”, as leaders in digital

agriculture (Campos, 2019).


Agriculture 4.0 and responsible innovation

Meanwhile, researchers and social scientists, with respect to Agriculture 4.0, are
expected to look beyond the productivity and environmental sustainability concerns, but
also include societal concerns including data privacy; gender, minorities, and justice;
power and control, and international relations among others (Sponchioni et al., 2019).
The adoption and practice of Agriculture 4.0 also gave rise to the concept of Responsible
Innovation (RI) as a response to the unintended consequences of science and technology,
including for food systems (Eastwood et al., 2021; Klerkx et al., 2019). Digital inclusion
of smallholder farmers and other rural enterprises by ensuring access to digital
technology is an example of such approach. RI can also means empowering rural women
and attracting the youth back to agriculture education and profession (Santos Valle &
Kienzle, 2020). More than pushing technologies to the target vulnerable groups and
individuals, RI looks at social inclusion these different stakeholders, particularly in the
design process as decision-makers, implementers, participants, users, and silent observers
(McCampbell et al., 2022; Steinke et al., 2020). In the same way, farmers and rural
people are regarded as “co-learners” and source of indigenous knowledge and

information (Javaid et al., 2022).

Because of such scale, research and development organizations are encouraged to
collaborate and take a more holistic approach to capability development and ensure that

benefits of Agriculture 4.0 are equitably shared (Eastwood et al., 2021; Klerkx et al.,


2019). This means bringing together of traditional agricultural research expertise such as
agricultural scientists, agronomists, and rural sociologists and the relatively new skillsets
such as human centered design, data science, software engineering and development and

disciplinary backgrounds to the agricultural research domain (Fleming et al., 2021).

Agriculture 4.0 in the Developing Countries

With the globalized nature of value chains, most parts of the world are seen to
eventually be affected by 4IR, directly or indirectly, positively or negatively (United
Nations Industrial Development Organization, 2019). The same holds true for Agriculture
4.0 which Miihl & de Oliviera (2022) expounded to cover social, environmental, and
economic impacts. While developed countries have had considerable initiatives on 4IR,
developing countries, including the Philippines have limited activities (Kim et al., 2019),
mirrored subsequently with Agriculture 4.0 and its various technologies and innovations.
Because there is no uniformity about the advancement of technological innovation
between developed and developing countries these countries will not go through 4IR the
same way (Roodt & Koen, 2020). As explained by UNCTAD (n.d.) countries have
varying levels of productivity brought about by the difference in tacit knowledge,
physical investments, as well as social and political support which are part of the
enabling environment for technological innovation. Developed or advanced countries
leverage on the 4IR technologies in increasing growth, product diversity, productivity,

flexibility and at the same time lowering production, transaction, communication, and


labour costs (Pianta, 2019). For developing countries like the Philippines, Agriculture 4.0
becomes an opportunity to ‘leapfrog’ their growth trajectory, by using the frontier
technologies as means to catch up faster with technological frontrunners (Pianta, 2019).
The same concept of “leapfrogging,” was also emphasized by Adhikari (2020) who
emphasized how developing societies can future-proof by investing in Science,

Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics education, aside from vocational training.

Logically, global economies, societies, and production systems are already entering
this technological revolution. But without a clear understanding of what enabling
technologies are included in the revolution it would be difficult to understand how they
are perceived by different stakeholders and the inequitable outcomes and impacts they
may have across society. Likewise, coming up with a clearly defined Agriculture 4.0 that
conform to the Philippine socio-cultural, economic and political conditions can help
determine how to best prepare and benefit from this transformation, which led us to the
question, “What does Agriculture 4.0 mean for the Research and Development

community in the Philippines?”

To address this, we established how crops and livestock R&D organizations in the
Philippines characterize Agriculture 4.0 including the frontier technologies that define it.
In particular, this phase of the study examined how Agriculture 4.0 is defined and

characterized by R&D experts in the Philippines.


Materials and Methods

To define and characterize Agriculture 4.0 in the context of the Philippine R&D, a
qualitative research approach through desk research, RT Delphi, and KII was employed.
Within an exploratory sequential research design, constructivist principle of qualitative
research is more suitable in evaluating multiple perspectives and obtaining deep
awareness of the culture and society being studied (Creswell & Plano Clark, 2018). The
interpretivist epistemology of qualitative research puts more emphasis on understanding
Agriculture 4.0 through an examination of the interpretation of such by its experts

(Bryman & Bell, 2011).

RT Delphi

Because studies on 4IR, including Agriculture 4.0 specific to developing countries
are still very limited (Kim et al., 2019), this study adopted the RT Delphi technique to
define and characterize Agriculture 4.0 in the context of Philippine R&D, including its

frontier technologies, readiness dimensions and related fields.

As a research approach, the Delphi technique is considered useful in collecting and
synthesizing informed opinion on a specific topic particularly where knowledge or
information are still not comprehensive (Vax et al., 2021), highly context and expertise

specific. or future-oriented (Fletcher & Marchildon, 2014).


In particular, a RT Delphi through online platform Surveylet was used. Contrary to
the conventional technique, RT Delphi does away with the sequential rounds of the
original and modified Delphi, which makes the process more efficient (Gordon & Pease,
2006). The study adopted the recommendation of Aengenheyster et al. (2017) to use
Calibrum’s proprietary online software Surveylet based on data output, user-friendliness,

and ease of administration.

The study ran asynchronously, with expert members entering the platform at their
most convenient times and the group consensus and their answers, as well as comments
from other experts are seen real time. Nonetheless, as in any Delphi technique, all

comments are anonymous.

For this study, project and program leaders of R&D projects funded by DOST-
PCAARRD that fall within the Agriculture 4.0 general definition were listed target
participants. Snowball sampling was further employed to ensure that most 4IR frontier
technologies would be covered. A total of 32 experts were invited to take part in the
study, and 24 accepted the invitation. These were composed of scientists and researchers
from HEIs, Regional and National R&D Centers, DOST Balik Scientists and from the

private sector.


Desk Research

The desk research for this study covered academic papers, and seminal reports from
reputable international and local organizations such as FAO, UN, Worldbank, APO,
ADB, WEF, DA, DOST, TESDA published from 2016 up to present. Google Scholar,
EBSCO, Science Direct and Web of Science were searched using predefined keywords.
As inclusion/exclusion criteria, articles should have explicitly defined Agriculture 4.0 or
related concepts, identified frontier technologies or skills/competencies. Articles were

written in English and accessible through the institution.

Key Informant Interviews

After the RT-Delphi Technique, the study conducted a series of KIIs. By adopting a
triangulation protocol, a more comprehensive understanding of a phenomena can be
achieved which in turn enhances the credibility and quality of a qualitative analysis
(Merriam & Tisdell, 2016; Patton, 1999). For this study, the results of the RT Delphi
were validated with six research managers and pioneers in AANR R&D in the
Philippines. Validation included cross-checking of frontier technologies in R&D,
perceived outcomes and impact; and the organizational variables for readiness, related
fields. During the KIIs, the weights (percentage) per readiness variable were also

solicited.


Data analysis

Consensus measurement is the central part of a Delphi survey. However, different
Delphi studies have theorized consensus differently and no standards have been set on
which criteria is best (Giannarou & Zervas, 2014; Habibi et al., 2014a; Trevelyan &
Robinson, 2015). Thus, the level of consensus and stability is defined a priori (Varndell
et al., 2021). A study on the various measures of consensus and stability in Delphi studies
recommended employing a combination of statistics to reduce subjectivity and ensure

validity of results (Trevelyan & Robinson, 2015).

Since the questionnaire of this study consisted of ordinal variables, median is
considered a robust consensus measure among the Measures of Central Tendency (Hsu &
Sandford, 2019). Aside from the median, this study defined consensus to be achieved if >
51 % of experts ranked the item > 4 on the 5-point Likert scale and coefficient of
variation (CV) is < 0.5 as recommended by Strasser (2019). Interquartile range (IQR),

mode and arithmetic mean were also determined and presented.

The Delphi questionnaire consists of a 5-point Likert scale establishing the
importance of the items, where I=not at all important, 2= slightly important, 3=

moderately important, 4=very important, 5= extremely important.


Aside from the Likert scale, each item was provided a comments section, that
allowed participants to elaborate on their responses provided the “depth” characteristic of
a qualitative research. These comments served as input to other experts to help them in
areas or topics that they may not be too well versed. After an initial meeting, the link to
the survey was sent to all participants through the email address they provided. The
invitation also included a consent to participate to comply with the requirements of
research ethics . Every week, experts were updated through email of the status of the
survey; and those who have not yet provided their inputs were prodded. Experts were
also urged whenever new items have been added by experts in the Delphi, which need
their review and rating. At the end of each stage, the results of the Delphi were processed

and presented to the experts for further discussion.

Results and Discussion

The following section discusses the results of the Delphi study including the
feedback given by the participants. From the desk research, three themes emerged related
to Agriculture 4.0 definition, namely: enabling/frontier 4.0 technologies; agriculture
technologies and innovative systems; and perceived outcomes and impact of Agriculture
4.0. These themes were then used to construct the questionnaire for validation and

feedback of the experts of the Delphi Panel.


A RT Delphi was conducted in April 2022 which focused on defining and
characterizing Agriculture 4.0 in the context of the Research and Development
community in the Philippines. From the 24 experts who accepted the invitation, 22 were

able to eventually participate in the survey, accounting for a 92% response rate.

Thereafter, six KIIs were conducted to validate and refine the results of the RT
Delphi. Prior to the interview, experts were given the results of the RT-Delphi which also

served as guide for the discussion during the actual interview.

A. Frontier Technologies for Agriculture 4.0

Apparent in the various Agriculture 4.0 literature reviewed, technologies that have
shaped the Fourth Industrial Revolution serve as the backbone for Agriculture 4.0
(Bigliardi et al., 2020; da Silveira et al., 2021; de Clercq et al., 2018; Javaid et al., 2022;
Klerkx & Rose, 2020). While frontier technologies mentioned differ from one reference
to another, these 4IR technologies in general are anticipated to enhance agriculture
technologies and systems which are regarded as tools to improve production efficiency
(Jagannathan & Geronimo, 2021; UNIDO, 2020). A report of the European Commission
considered Agriculture 4.0 as the “development and introduction of new tools and
machines in production including deployment of sensors for precision agriculture,

automation, new measurement tools like drones, satellite imagery; where connectivity is


the cornerstone of this transformation and IoT a key enabling technology that is

increasingly part of agricultural equipment,” (Bonneau et al., 2017).

On the other hand, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
prefers digital agricultural revolution or digital agriculture and characterizes it as
“systems that are highly productive, anticipatory and adaptable to changes such as those
caused by climate change; and will result to greater food security, profitability and
sustainability” (Trendov et al., 2019). More than using the technologies of 4IR, digital
agriculture can change how the entire agri-food system value chain works, from sourcing
the necessary inputs, to production, distribution, processing and retailing of the harvest to

optimizing end-consumer experience (Serraj & Pingali, 2020).

In the Philippines, Agriculture 4.0 is likewise regarded as a means to improve
agriculture productivity, increase small hold farmers’ income and eventually drive
economic growth (Ebora, 2022). To contextualize the said definition, the RT Delphi
foremost identified which technological frontiers have been shaping or have the potential

to revolutionize the agriculture R&D community into Agriculture 4.0.

Table 5 shows the enabling technologies of the 4IR identified by the survey
participants. These technologies can be harnessed by the R&D community in the

Philippines to transform the Agriculture, Aquatic and Natural Resources (AANR) sector


into Agriculture 4.0. taking into consideration the available human capital, financial

resources. policies, and other resources.

Table 5. Enabling/Frontier Technologies of Agriculture 4.0

ENABLING FRONTIER TECHNOLOGIES %24 Median Mean wv

Internet. of Things _(loT)/

1 Connectivity 95 4 4.43 0.13

2 Big Data 95 4 4.43 0.13
Sensors and remote — sensing

3 technologies 100 5 4.76 0.09

4 Augmented Reality 25 3 2.90 0.30

$s Robotics and automation 86 4 4.29 0.17
Artificial Intelligence (Al) and

6 Machine Learning 90 5 4.55 0.15
Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAVs)/

7 Drones 90 4 4.24 0.15

8 Advance Genomics/Gene Editing 95 E 4.58 0.13

9 Nanotechnology 89 5 4.47 0.15

10 _ Biotechnology 100.5 4.79 0.09

11 _3Dprinting/ Additive manufacturing 68 4 3.74 0.20

12 Block chain 50 3.5 3.56 0.22

Source: Agriculture 4.0 Real Time Delphi, 2022.

Biotechnology. The Philippines has long been considered a forerunner in the field

of biotechnology, being the first Asian country to explore genetically engineered crops

back in 2003 (Mojica-Sevilla, 2021). Among mega-biotech countries in the world, the

Philippines ranked 12" with almost 1 million hectares of corn area; and ranked 2™ in


Asia in terms of adoption area (Domingo et al., 2021). The national biotechnology
program of the Department of Agriculture has also facilitated the establishment of the
Livestock Biotechnology Center at the Philippine Carabao Center and the Crop
Biotechnology Center at the Philippine Rice Research Institute. The rich experience in
the field of biotechnology in Philippines R&&D could account for its high awareness of
and importance in Agriculture 4.0. As expounded by the experts “in tandem with
genetics, [biotechnology] can provide solutions to problems facing crop productivity and
pestilence.” And because the field is broad, there is also “vast application of

biotechnology.”

Field and remote sensing. Remote sensing makes use of imaging sensors
embedded in platforms such as UAVs, airplane flights or satellites from close or long
distances to measure soil or crop characteristics and the like (Mouazen et al., 2020).
Without direct contact with the actual crops, livestock or agriculture areas, higher

precision and accurate information is obtained through such advanced techniques.

In the Philippines, field and remote sensing is also used to gather data for plantation
monitoring such as for cacao, abaca, and giant taro (Ebora, 2022). Project SARAI’s real-
time crop monitoring and forecasting system for selected crops uses a combination of
remote sensing, GIS, weather-data, and field monitoring reports to empower farmers and

producers for information-based decision making (Espaldon et al., 2018). In livestock


R&D, Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) on the other hand tracks and identifies the

farm animals during transport (DOST, 2021).

During the RT Delphi, the experts recognized field and remote sensing
technologies as highly important not just to agriculture, but also to “many fields of
endeavor such as health, medicine, agriculture, forestry etc.” This is because they are
needed “for proper assessment of the state of the systems and environment where the
agricultural systems are contextualized; without these, we do not get consistent, frequent

and real-time information.”

AI and Machine Learning. Artificial Intelligence generally refers to computer
systems that can perform tasks that normally require human intelligence (UNESCAP,
2018). Such tasks are those associated with thinking, multitasking and fine motor skills
(WEF, 2018A). In agriculture 4.0, Al and machine learning serve as backbones to
Agriculture Decision Support Systems (ADSS), together with the loT and remote sensors
to efficiently apply fertilizers and agriculture inputs, monitor pests and diseases, floods,
drought, manage temperature and humidity and overall optimize production efficiency
while minimizing impacts to the environment and resource use (Javaid et al., 2022;
Trendov et al., 2019; Zhai et al., 2020). In the Philippine R&D, the Automated Furrow
Irrigation System developed by the Central Luzon State University facilitates precision
irrigation among sugarcane plantations, while Al and Internet of Things are powering

smart hydroponics greenhouses (Ebora, 2022). The RT Delphi established a consensus on


the value of combining AI with big data analytics, and loT among others to analyze

various data for forecasting.

Advance genomics and gene editing. Omics technologies such as genomics,
transcriptomics, proteomics and metabolomics involve studying genome sequences, gene
expression profiles, protein content and metabolites of an organism (Shalini et al., 2018).
These technologies can increase yields and reduce production inputs while reducing labor
requirements and increasing “eco-efficiency” by enabling the production of more food on
existing land. At present, genomics programs are being developed in the Philippines
R&D to address low productivity for commodities such as swine, banana, abaca, tomato,
coconut, and shrimp (Ebora, 2022). Moreover, capacity building is being undertaken in
selected HEIs in the country on Clustered Regularly Interspaced Short Palindromic
Repeats (CRISPR) /Cas 9 genome editing - the most widely used method in genome
editing or targeted mutagenesis. (Lubang, 2020). Cognizant of the potentials of these
technologies in food security and agriculture, RT Delphi panel members agreed on the

importance of omics and gene editing for agriculture.

Nanotechnology. Nanotechnology looks into creating materials and nanostructures
in order to develop beneficial material properties and new functionality (WEF, 2018A). It
draws on multiple disciplines and has a wide variety of applications from agriculture,
food safety, biosensors to biomedical diagnostics. As confirmed by the experts of the RT

Delphi, “Nanotechnology products can enhance the useful or service life, and functions


of many industrial products.” In Philippine agriculture, some of the endeavors on
nanotechnology include formulation of nanofertilizers for effective plant growth
promotion and higher crop yield, and nanobiosensors for biological and chemical activity
detection in agriculture and food safety areas (Brown et al., 2020). Ready for commercial
scale development in particular is the application of nanofertilizers with macronutrients

N, P, and K for cavendish banana, cacao and sugarcane, and (Sanchez et al., 2022).

3D printing and additive manufacturing. 3D printing, also referred to as additive
manufacturing, refers to a set of manufacturing technologies where 3D objects are
created by adding successive layers of material on top of one another, aided by
specialized computer programs for both process control and object design (UNESCAP,
2018). It is gradually gaining ground over formative manufacturing due to its ability to
produce complex shapes in a shorter time (Crisostomo & Dizon, 2021). While additive
manufacturing and 3D printing are not characteristic of digital or smart agriculture in
many literature, 3D printing nonetheless is considered useful in agriculture in developing
prototypes, as well as fabricating farming tools and replacement parts without
considerably compromising quality (Crisostomo & Dizon, 2021). Ardufarm, a 3D printed
agricultural drone recently developed by high school students in Bataan, Philippines, was
proven capable of planting seeds faster and more efficiently than traditional land-based
farming equipment (Venegas et al., 2022). Such approach to farming technologies was
also affirmed by the experts in the RT Delphi, “We have to transition into such advanced

techniques as our manufacturing especially in farm machines have lagged behind


seriously compared to even our ASEAN neighbors. [With additive manufacturing, we can
fabricate many products otherwise not possible with traditional labor and equipment

complement.”

Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAV). More commonly known as drones, UAVs can
be used in agriculture for seed dispersal, fertilizer application, crop monitoring and other
related functionalities. Together with data analytics, loT, and AI, drones enable more
efficient application of agriculture inputs (Schwab, 2016). SARAI’s Crop Health
Assessment and Monitoring System makes use of drones that have RGB and multi-
spectral cameras to measure various vegetation indices, which in turn can be used in
different circumstances such as identification of pests and diseases, weather conditions,
nutrient and water imbalances (Espaldon et al., 2018). In general, experts in the RT
Delphi perceive UAVs to be valuable in obtaining data and generating relevant
information, but also in transporting materials “especially in situations where the area is

difficult/expensive to get to such as in mariculture/ocean areas.”

Internet of Things (oT). IoT refers to a network of interconnected items and
technology, beyond the traditional computers and smartphones, which are used to gather
data and exchange these with one another and with humans (Javaid et al., 2022;
UNESCAP, 2018). In agriculture, loT makes possible the cyber-physical systems when
internet connects physical components, for instance animals and plants. environmental

elements. production tools, and cyber “objects” in the agricultural system. Through


agricultural information perception equipment. it facilitates information exchange and
communication and helps “recognize. manage, and control various agricultural elements,
processes, and systems in a more refined and dynamic way” (J. Xu et al., 2022). Aside
from SARAI, another case in the Philippines using IoT in agriculture is the mobile, near
real-time surveillance disease surveillance system for banana which gathers and

disseminates relevant information at the farm level (DOST, 2021; Ebora, 2022).

As further elaborated in the RT Delphi, “JoT enables gathering and sharing of
information at one's fingertips. [It is] very important in developing a sustainable
production system that will maximize the efficient use of resources and profit.”” However,
the experts also recognized that the digital infrastructure, particularly automation and

connectivity are not yet fully established in the Philippines.

Big data analytics. As its name implies, big data refers to large, diverse, complex,
longitudinal, and/or distributed data sets generated from digital sources, the nature of
which can be described in terms of volume, velocity, variety, and veracity (Coble et al.,
2018). Examining these data to reveal useful information such as market trends and
customer preferences is referred to as big data analytics. With big data, decision-making
becomes more strategic and systematic. Farmers and other agriculture stakeholders are
given predictive insights to agriculture operations and make the agriculture value chain
more productive (Javaid et al., 2022). With oT and big data, any factor that affects the

agriculture value chain can generate data that can be processed into useful information


(Santos Valle & Kienzle, 2020). In the pipeline is the DOST-funded Ricelytics,
PhilRice’s data analytic model whichaims to provide information on the state of the art
in the Philippine rice industry and is accessible through

https://www.philrice.gov.ph/ricelytics. As emphasized by the experts during the RT

Delphi, “Big data is important for efficient prediction and toll for sound decision making
and strategizing the production system. The information derived from sensors, IoT,
regular monitoring of agricultural products, environmental conditions, market
conditions, etc - all need to be analyzed so that proper evaluation of performance and the
system are done and also importantly impacts on the environment and _ socio-

economically.”

Robotics and automation. This technological breakthrough covers development of
machines — robots - that are programmed to perform a variety of human tasks,
increasingly associated with thinking, multitasking, and fine motor skills (UNESCAP,
2018; WEF, 2018A). Integrating Al and ML, sensors and big data, robotics have
increased levels of intelligence as compared to usual machines (Santos Valle & Kienzle,
2020). Agricultural robotics includes a wide range of applications from automated data
scouting at a different stage of crop growth, to land preparation, sowing, planting,
harvesting and phenotyping (Oliveira et al., 2021). However, in the Philippines,
initiatives towards automation are more apparent than developing robotics in agriculture.
This is probably because the cost of manual labor is deemed a cheaper investment in

developing countries than investments in robotics. Likewise, experts in the RT Delphi


raised the issue of labor displacement and technological unemployment. However,
another perspective on the importance of robotics was also emphasized in the discussion,
“due to the increasing cost of labor and thus the rise in labor cost we need to consider

automation not only in the farm but in other nodes of the agriculture value chain.

In relation to these developments, a smart management system for hydroponics
greenhouse is being developed that involves the use of robotics, automation and AI for
optimized plant growth and nutrition (DOST, 2021). A livestock R&D project that uses
computer-aided remote expert automates the detection of heat stress and estrus related
activities among swine farms. Agrotis is a Global Positioning System (GPS)-Guided
Hand Tractor Robot that has been developed at the University of Santo Tomas for

rice farming applications (DOST, 2021).

Among the technologies listed, augmented reality (AR) and blockchain
technologies received weak consensus. According to the experts, there is “no perceived
practical use” for AR at the moment, and that “the unfamiliarity of small holder of
farmers with AR-based technology” makes it less important to Agriculture 4.0 in the

Philippines.

Meanwhile, blockchain technology for Agriculture is something “unfamiliar” even
to most of the experts in the panel. However, considering the value-chain perspective in

the contextual definition, blockchain, particularly how it relates to agriculture supply


chain management may be given attention by the R&D community. The KII validated the
importance of blockchain in agriculture R&D for traceability and food safety and even in
corruption. These were affirmed by the literature which looks at blockchain in detecting
poor quality food in food chains facilitating immediate and valuable responses, and
overall creating a competitive advantage for those who use the technology (Trendov et

al., 2019).

B. Agriculture 4.0 Technology and Innovation System

While the frontier technologies of Industry 4.0 serve as the foundation of
Agriculture 4.0, these technological breakthroughs serve as inputs in the enhancement of
existing or development of new agriculture technologies or technological innovation
systems. However. beyond simply employing modern technologies of 4IR for improved
practice, De Clercq et al. (2018) emphasized sustainable utilization of frontier
technologies to address the food scarcity on both the demand and supply side of
agriculture. Smart farming or precision farming focuses on using frontier technologies for
on-farm activities (Sponchioni et al., 2019); but Agriculture 4.0 in general revolutionizes
the entire agri-food system value chain, from sourcing the necessary inputs, to
production, distribution, processing and retailing of the harvest to optimizing end-
consumer experience (da Silveira et al., 2021; Serraj & Pingali, 2020). Eastwood et al.
(2021) use the term digital agriculture to pertain to the wide range of digital tools beyond

the individual farm and into the supply chain. For instance, blockchain technology and


loT as applied in supply chain management can enable smallholder farmers to directly
transact with buyers, inputs suppliers, financial institutions, insurance companies, and
other development partners within a trusted ecosystem; and provide access to delivery
services and real-time market information through SMS and voice services (Diem & Do,
2020; Quayson et al., 2020). As Agriculture 4.0 enhances the marketing and business side
of the sector, OECD adds that the technological revolution will also feature agribusiness
start-ups, also known as “Agtechs”, as leaders in digital agriculture (Campos, 2019).
Remote sensing technologies have also been used to monitor agriculture production and
generate data to be stored in a platform that empower farmers and producers for

information-based decision making (Santos Valle & Kienzle, 2020).

The Delphi identified and validated 10 game-changing technologies and innovation
systems that will push forward Agriculture 4.0 (Table 6). By enabling the adaptive
question feature of Surveylet. experts were able to input additional items that they think
were not included in the original list but are also important. Among those added. digital

crop insurance received consensus decision.

As mentioned by an expert in the RT Delphi “farmers who invest in planting crops
should be protected from unforeseen events that can yield to loss in their crops." Using
digital tools, particularly online platforms through blockchain technology for insurance
registration and filing and processing of claims, among other activities have already been

initiated by the Philippine Crop Insurance Corporation and private partners (PCIC, 2021).


Table 6. Agriculture 4.0 Technology and Innovation Systems to push Agriculture
4.0, as identified by survey participants

Agriculture 4.0 Technology and
Innovation System Hr

Median.

Mean

Mode

wv

Consensus
value

Geographic Information Systems
(GIS) and Global Positioning
1__System-based farming 100


0.08

Smart Devices (e.g. smartphones,
2___ tablets) 100

4.86

0.15

Variable Rate Technology (e.g.
fertilizers and chemicals, irrigation,
3___seedings) 94.45

4.61

0.13

Field Sensors (e.g. water
availability, soil compaction, soil
fertility, leaf temperature, leaf
area index, plant water status,
local climate data, insect-disease-
4 weed infestation) 100

4.76

0.09

Genomics-assisted breeding (e.g.
new breeds with improved yields
and resistance, crops with
5 ___ particular vitamins and minerals) 100

4.75

0.09

Modern Farming Systems (e.g.
vertical and urban farms;
6 __ hydroponics, aquaponics) 95.23

4.57

0.13

Agriculture Decision Support
Systems through predictive
analytics (e.g. crops, flood,
drought, disease management,
7__ ete.) 100

4.76

0.09

Digital & Data-driven agriculture
supply chain management (e.g.
agricultural management
8 __ platforms, RFID tags) 95.24

4.62

0.13

‘Agro/Food Processing (e.g.
cultured meat, unique food
9 formulation) 7s

4.20

Internet-based business models
(e.g. suppliers, distribution
channels, transportation modes,
10 _ inventories) 94.74

4.42

0.17

11 __ Satellite Imagery 84.22

4.26

0.17

12___Unmanned Delivery Systems 50

3.57

0.24

13___ Digital Crop Insurance (new) 83.33

4.08

& [w fa lo

0.16

a lw fa lo

Simulations (ability to forecast
14 __likely outcomes) 100

5.00

w


Because of the twin-challenge of climate change and food security, there is a need
to produce more with less resources. As such, the concept of precision agriculture within
the Agriculture 4.0 umbrella takes a more critical role. In precision agriculture, using GIS
and GPS have been used widely in the Philippines. 4IR technologies such as IoT, Big
Data, and AI have further enhanced these geospatial technologies to “generate
information that otherwise would have taken a long time to gather.” Project SARAI’s
monitoring and forecasting system uses GIS, remote sensing, crop modeling, and field
validation activities to develop and recommend on farm issues such as pests and diseases,
crop-water stress, crop-weather recommendations, and nutrient and soil dynamics.
Likewise, the Philippine Rice Information System (PRiSM) is collaborative program that
makes use of GIS, IoT, remote and field sensing technology among others to monitor and
guide rice production in the country. Another technology within the domain of the
precision agriculture that makes efficient utilization of agriculture inputs achievable is
VRT. Based on the Delphi, VRT is regarded as an important component of Agriculture
4.0 primarily “considering the cost of inputs for crops...to save on cost and actual
amount of such resources." Smart agriculture field sensors are also deemed important for
the Philippine Agriculture 4.0 since they “quick responding to impending devastation of
planted crops due to environment or externally-triggered physiological changes

occurring in crops.”

ll

The KII also validated the importance of a holistic agri-food system value chain

approach towards Agri 4.0.

“Looking at Philippine agriculture in the context of value-chain is better, because

that way, you get to see the totality of agriculture.”

“As it is, our food system is dysfunctional, - the farmers are producing the wrong
kind of food; and the impact is on the health of the consumers and the environment. By
addressing the agri-food system, issues of food processing, trade, transport, marketing,

and finally consumption and waste management can be addressed.”

“The technologies can be disruptive — positively or negatively. We should look at
them how they are affecting one another in the value-chain. To have sustainability, look
at the culture systems — from the land to the water to the sea. And by culture we mean

socio-culture system and culture of food production.”

Accordingly, the ability to think holistically is lacking and should also be

considered in Agri 4.0 according to the experts.


C. Perceived Outcomes and Impacts of Agriculture 4.0 in the Philippines

Agriculture is inarguably a development concer; and in order to fully understand
what Agriculture 4.0 entails for the R&D Community in the Philippines, this study
attempted to identify the perceived outcomes and impacts of using the enabling and
frontier technologies of 4IR in the Philippine agriculture. Anticipating these outcomes
and impacts — both positive and negative - is considered an important dimension of
responsible innovation. which many studies have argued should be given due
consideration within the technological transformation (Klerkx et al., 2019; Klerkx &

Rose, 2020; McCampbell et al., 2022).

As emphasized during the KII, “Agriculture 4.0 should be looking into really into
the future and what S&T — basic and applied - do we need to be able to have that future
that we are thinking, and that we prefer. We want healthy, self-sufficient, health and
environment. All these outcomes and impacts should be interacting. DOST’s Pagtanaw

2050 captures these and should be the anchor of Agri 4.0 in the Philippines”

Table 7 presents the results of the Delphi survey relating to the said topic. There
was consensus on all items presented; and there were no new items added by the

participants.


As validated by the participants, Agriculture 4.0 within an enabling environment
can help achieve improvements in agriculture inputs such as seeds/planting materials,
fertilizers, pesticides, feeds (livestock). This is considered an extremely important
outcome “given the natural limitations of existing crops, the changing environment, and

the increase in population.”

Table 7. Perceived outcomes and impacts of Agriculture 4.0 in the Philippines

Consensus
%24 Median Mean Mode wv value
1_Economic
a. Improve agriculture inputs (e.g.
varietal improvement for
seeds/planting materials;
fertilizers; pesticides) 94.44 45 4.44 5 0.14 5
b._ Increase agriculture productivity 100 5 4.83 5 0.08 5
¢. Increase farmer and agri-
entrepreneurs income 100 5 4.83 5 0.08 5
d._ Enhance distribution, agro-
processing, and marketing (value-
chain) 100 5 4.67 5 0.10 5
e._Improve competitiveness 100 5 4.67 5 0.10 5
2__Environmental
a._ Boost climate resiliency 100 5 4.67 s 0.10 5
b. More efficient use of resources
(less inputs) 100 s 4.72 s 0.10 5
3__ Social/Health
a._Improve nutrition 94.45 5 4.61 5 0.13 s
b. Attract more youth back into
agriculture schools 88.88 4 4.33 4 0.16 4
¢. Attract more youth back into
agriculture-related profession 88.88 4 4.33 4 0.16 4
d._Safer production 94.12 5 4.47 Ss 0.14 5

Meanwhile, increased agriculture productivity as an anticipated outcome of

Agriculture 4.0 is considered extremely important as it relates to food security and


climate change, as well as producing goods for other sectors such as manufacturing.
Along with increased productivity, Agriculture 4.0 can help farmers and agri-
entrepreneurs increase their income. With improved income, farmers are motivated to
become gri-entrepreneurs themselves “that "see agriculture as a career and

profession.”

“Increasing income is a good incentive for farmers to continue to engage in

productive activities such as agriculture.’

Improved production efficiency and yield through Agriculture 4.0 can also improve
our export industry. With “regional economies are becoming borderless, new tech should

bring in competitive if not comparative advantages to enter and survive the competition.’

Aside from the economic impact, the sustainable practices associated with
Agriculture 4.0 can also help boost climate resiliency, albeit “difficult given the country's
location and the worsening of climate events.” Nonetheless, modern technologies are still
anticipated to “introduce new modalities for production that will minimize climate impact

to food production.”

The social outcome and impacts of using Agriculture 4.0 pertain to bringing more
youth involved in agriculture first through education, and eventually through profession.

“Currently, there is a very sharp decline of youth going to the agri-related professions


because it is viewed as a dead-end profession that has no financial reward. With Agri4.0
we can introduce the experience that there is a professional future with agriculture that
can be a fulfilling career.” On the other hand, health related outcomes and impact cover
improved nutrition and food safety. “Using enabling technologies. We are able to
establish food traceability and document the journey of the food we consume.” The
concept of food traceability is related to blockchain technology, which based on the first

part of the Delphi was evaluated not as important as other enabling technologies.

Summary and Conclusion

Following the emic perspective that recognizes foremost the socio-cultural setting,
a definition and characteristic of Agriculture 4.0 within the context of the Philippine
Research and Development sector were drawn through desk research, RT Delphi
technique and KII. Recognizing the themes that emerge in defining Agriculture 4.0, and
validated through the Real-Time Delphi technique, this study defines Agriculture 4.0 in
the Philippines as the range of concepts and technologies of IR 4.0 used to enhance and
develop agriculture innovations and systems across the agri-food value chain that will
improve agriculture productivity, environmental sustainability, food and nutrition, and
income. Pagtanaw 2050, DOST’s foresight document that illustrated a strategic path for

the STI sector is a validation of the anticipated outcomes and impact of Agri 4.0.


Frontier technologies include Biotechnology, Sensors and remote sensing
technologies, AI and machine learning, Advance genomics and gene editing,
Nanotechnology, 3D printing and additive manufacturing, Unmanned aerial vehicles or

drone, Internet of things, Big data, and Robotics and automation.

While blockchain in Agriculture R&D may still be in its infancy, improved
awareness and more education on its uses should be done considering its importance in
various processed of the agriculture value-chain including index-based and digital crop

insurance, food safety, traceability, and data security to name a few.


CHAPTER 5

DEVELOPING A READINESS MODEL FOR AGRICULTURE 4.0 IN THE

PHILIPPINE R&D ORGANIZATIONS

Introduction

Agriculture 4.0 in the Philippine Research and Development community covers the
range of concepts and technologies of IR4.0 used to enhance and develop Agriculture
innovations and systems across the agri-food value chain. Based on the RT Delphi
Technique, the frontier technologies that are continuously revolutionizing the Agriculture
R&D community include biotechnology, sensors and remote sensing technologies, AI
and machine learning, advance genomics and gene editing, nanotechnology, 3D printing
and additive manufacturing, UAVs or drones, loT, Big data, and robotics and automation.
Additionally, increased awareness and education on the benefits of blockchain
technology should be considered because this technology, while it may be unfamiliar to
many of the experts, serves as foundation of various technological processes along the
Agriculture value chain including efficient traceability of information, food safety, index-
based insurance, and data security among others. It is worthwhile to note that Agriculture

in this study encompass agriculture, aquatic and natural resources (AANR).


Within an enabling environment, Agriculture 4.0 accelerates economic and societal
growth and progress in a sustainable manner. In general, while many developed countries
have had considerable experience on 4IR, developing countries, including the Philippines
still have relatively limited activities (Kim et al., 2019). Consequently, there is no
uniformity about the advancement of technological innovation between the Global South
and the Global North (Roodt & Koen, 2020). Aside from the unequal technology access,
the uneven governance and institutional quality, and across and within countries also

equal unbalanced participation in globalization (NAST, 2021).

The Philippine R&D agenda for the AANR sector regard enabling technologies of
Agriculture 4.0 as relevant tools to address various challenges and concerns of the sector
and to develop new products and services that will positively impact business models in
the AANR sector (Ebora, 2022). However, Agriculture 4.0 can be made possible if
institutions and their human resources can fully harness these innovations. Currently,
there are no readiness assessments or maturity models that have been developed for the
Philippine Agriculture R&D sector, particularly for Agriculture 4.0 that define the
conditions, individual specifications, and IR4.0 principles that provide the greatest
chances of fulfilling the goals and objectives of the sector. Thus, coming up with a
readiness model tailor-fit for the Philippine Agriculture R&D is needed particularly
acknowledging the critical role that this community plays in the Agriculture sector’s

goals of improved productivity and social impact.


Institutional Isomorphism and Organizational Readiness

Technological innovations characteristic of 4IR driving organizations towards a
certain level of homogenization is expounded by the concept of institutional
isomorphism. This institutional theory by DiMaggio and Powel (1983) argues that
organizational models, once institutionalized, will cause like institutions to become more
alike or homogenous. Coercive, mimetic, or normative pressures characteristic of
institutional isomorphism inform organizations to revisit their goals and develop new
practices based on the demands of the environment and like organizations. Institutional
isomorphism pushes organizations that face similar environmental conditions to adopt
similar structures, strategies, and processes (DiMaggio & Powell, 1983). Several studies
have defined the degree and mechanisms of isomorphism that different types of
organizations and sectors undergo, which in turn aid in crafting their respective strategic
directions (DiMaggio & Powell, 1983; Jeyaraj & Zadeh, 2020; Kontinen & Onali, 2017;
Pal & Ojha, 2017). However, the said institutional theory has not yet been assessed in the

agriculture landscape, as far as this researcher is concerned.

For this research, it was argued that within the R&D community, institutional
isomorphism impacts and establishes appropriate structural changes and strategies that

readies the organizations for Agriculture 4.0.

Readiness is generally regarded as the ability to capitalize on future production

opportunities, mitigate risks and challenges, and be resilient and agile in responding to


unknown future shocks (WEF, 2018A). It entails assessing current capabilities,
identifying new ones needed to succeed in the new production paradigm, and developing
solutions to address the gap and facilitate transformation. Readiness assessments can be
done in macro (country, regional), meso (sectoral), and micro (companies and

organizations) levels (Demeter et al., 2018).

The readiness of crops and livestock R&D organizations in the Philippines was
evaluated using IMPULS — Industrie 4.0 Readiness model as initial guide. The said
model is deemed by various studies as suitable for several types of industries as it
measures the company’s readiness level for industry 4.0 implementation (Grufman &
Lyons, 2020; Sony & Naik, 2019). The said model is considered scientifically grounded
and its structure is clearly described (Schumacher et al., 2016). It consists of an inner
circle that identifies basic readiness dimensions and an outer circle of fields associated
with each of the basic readiness dimensions. Using appropriate indicators, these fields are
evaluated, which then inform the readiness level of an organization. This is the basic

framework that was followed by this study, as illustrated in Figure 12.


ik \
el

g-STINTOVIT TO STIATT

Figure 12. Conceptual framework of the Agriculture 4.0 Readiness among R&D
Organizations in the Philippines.
The results of these assessments inform policy, education and training or capacity
building. Towards this end, a readiness model towards Agriculture 4.0 in the Philippine

crops and livestock R&D community has been developed.

Materials and Methods

To develop a readiness model towards Agriculture 4.0 in the Philippine crops and
livestock R&D community, the qualitative research approach was employed. In
particular, the study initially conducted a desk review informing RT-Delphi Technique

and eventually validation of results through Key Informant Interviews (KII).

The results of the said process facilitated the development of the readiness model
and assessment tool, which was then subjected to pre-testing and reliability and validity

test.


RT Delphi

Because there is still very limited research on Agriculture 4.0 in the Philippine
R&D setting, the Delphi technique, is considered as an appropriate scientific method to
generate insights on either current or emerging issues and where knowledge or
information are still not comprehensive highly context and expertise specific, or future

oriented (Beiderbeck et al., 2021; Vax et al., 2021; Fletcher & Marchildon, 2014).

This research used the RT-Delphi technique that capitalizes on the digital
technologies of the 4IR for better user-experience. It does away with the sequential
rounds of the original and modified Delphi, making the process more efficient (Gordon &
Pease, 2006). However, it is critical that online discussions should be elicited among the
Delphi panel to ensure that the information and goals of the exercise are met. Facilitators
of the RT-Delphi should likewise regularly urge expert panel members to revisit the
questionnaire so that they can review and revise their answers when experts deem
necessary. By evaluating the viability of the said technique in the Agriculture R&D
community, this research served as a proof of concept, which according to Gordon and

Pease (2006) needs to be tested in various sectors and strategies.

The consensus measurements adopted in the first phase of the RT Delphi namely
media, CV, and IQR were also used for determining the readiness variables for

Agriculture 4.0.


The RT-Delphi also used the 5-point Likert scale with questions transformed into
“adaptive” format. This feature of the Surveylet, the online platform used in the
technique, enabled Delphi panel members to add and rate new readiness variables that
they deemed relevant but were not included in the initial list. Likewise, the comment
sections for each Likert type item were provided to enable discussion among Delphi

panel members including elaborating responses.

Key Informant Interviews

Apart from validating the RT Delphi results with the Delphi panel, a series of Key
Informant Interviews (KII) were conducted after the RT-Delphi Technique. By adopting
a triangulation protocol, a more comprehensive understanding of a phenomena can be
achieved which in turn enhances the credibility and quality of a qualitative analysis
(Merriam & Tisdell, 2016; Patton, 1999). For this study, the results of the RT Delphi
were validated with six research managers and pioneers in AANR R&D in the
Philippines. Validation included cross-checking of frontier technologies in R&D,
perceived outcomes and impact; and the organizational variables for readiness, related
fields. During the KIIs, the weights (percentage) per readiness variable were also

solicited.


Reliability and Validity Test

The initial questionnaire was pre-tested for a week with participants who had
research management experience. After the duration, the responses were subjected to
Cronbach's Alpha testing to measure the internal consistency and reliability of the
instrument used in data collection. As a standard, Cronbach alpha values of 0.7 or higher

indicate acceptable internal consistency.

Results and Discussion

The following section discusses the results of the RT-Delphi Technique; validated
and finalized through the KII that led to the development of the Agriculture 4.0
Readiness Model. The contextual description of Agriculture 4.0 formulated during the
first stage provided the appropriate foundation for the second stage RT Delphi which

identified the organizational readiness variables towards Agriculture 4.0.

Variables of Agriculture 4.0 Readiness

The 22 participants who completed the first stage were included in the survey. The
said RT-Delphi was conducted in May 2022 for a span of three weeks. By the end of the
survey period, 18 experts were able to fully participate, accounting for 82% response rate.

The expert panel was composed of scientists and researchers from HEIs, Regional and


National R&D Centers, DOST Balik Scientists and from the private sector who have had

considerable experience in working with Agriculture 4.0 programs and projects.

Thereafter, six expert interviews were conducted to validate the results of the RT-
Delphi and further refine the assessment tool prior to pre-testing. By the end of the
exercise, the study was able to establish five basic readiness dimensions for Agriculture
4.0 were namely (1) Human Capital, (2) Organizational Leadership, (3) Strategy and
Skills Development, (4) Smart Operations, (5) Facilities, Equipment and Technology
Management. The study was also able to establish 13 sub-dimension or related fields and
59 corresponding readiness indicators. Details of these are presented in the subsequent

sections.

Human Capital (21st Century Digital Literacy)

To be able to capitalize on the digital and frontier technologies, digital literacy
across all industries is considered crucial (Trendov et al., 2019). UNESCO defines digital
literacy as the ability to access, manage, understand, integrate, communicate, evaluate,
and create information safely and appropriately through digital devices and networked
technologies for participation in economic and social life. Such technical skills however
must be complemented by certain social and personals skills within the 41R (Maisiri et

al., 2019). This was acknowledged by the WEF Future of Jobs Report for 2020, which


emphasized that soft skills or the 21% century skills are the key or priority areas for skills
development.

Contrary to the findings of Sony and Naik (2019) and Hizam-Hanafiah et al.
(2020) that emphasizes technology assessment as the most critical dimension of Industry
4.0 readiness, human capital was considered as the primary readiness dimension by the
expert interviewees. While the four other dimensions are considered equally necessary
for the organization to thrive in the 4IR, all the other dimensions require human capital to
effectively function.

“We need to start with the people. When the people are ready, planning can be
made easier, Set with the right vision, give them the right infrastructure and facilities,
and the appropriate training, everything will move.”

The worst thing that can happen in an organization is that you have a 21" Century

leader and 19" Century followers.”

In the context of the 21st Century Digital Literacy, technical digital literacy skills
alone will not be enough. As Bonekamp and Sure (2015) emphasized, human resources
need to have an increased level of technical and non-technical know-how. Thus, these
technical skillsets NEED to be accompanied by social and personal skills that altogether

comprise the human capital requirements in the Agriculture 4.0 R&D environment.

Technical Skills. Technical skills are digital competencies for lifelong learning that

should be mastered to prepare organizations and the workforce for a wide range of digital


tasks. The Digital Competency (DigComp) Framework (Vuorikari et al., 2022) is one of
the most referenced in identifying the information and data literacy competences. The
DigComp pertains to the ability to (1) articulate information needs, (2) locate, and
retrieve digital data, information, and content, as well as (3) store and organize digital
data, information and content . Using the adaptive question feature of Surveylet, Delphi
panel were able to add and rate new competences that they deem important. At the end of
the survey, six technical skills were identified by the expert panel and validated by the

expert interviewees, as indicators of Agriculture 4.0 readiness (Table 8).

Table 8. Importance of technical skills in the research and development (R&D)
community of Agriculture, aquatic and natural resources (AANR) sector.

TECHNICAL SKILLS 0 COEFF
(INFORMATION AND DATA LITERACY) oe pe VAR tar
1. Browsing, searching, filtering data,
information and digital content 94.12 5 4.59 0.13 1.00

2. Managing data, information and

digital content including identifying

knowledge gaps 94.12 5 4.65 0.13 1.00
3. Working with a spreadsheets, word

processing and presentation

programs

(Concise and understandable data

visualization) 94.12 5 4.59 0.13 1.00
4. Basic knowledge of statistics and

programming

(multivariate statistics, data storage

and computation on the cloud; data

analysis ) 94.12 4 4.35 0.14 1.00
5. Interacting, collaborating and sharing
through digital technologies 100.00 S 4.71 0.10 1.00

6. Netiquette, data security and privacy 100.00 5 4.81 0.08 0.00

Social Skills. While technological change requires technical or cognitive skills,

certain job requirements cannot be fully accomplished by such skills alone. Deming

(2017) presented a model that demonstrates how cognitive skill and social skills


complement each other and yields positive returns in the labor market. Social skills are

specific competencies that help people interact effectively with other people and

institutions (Baron & Markman, 2000).

As presented by Frey and Osborne (2013), jobs that require social skills — those that

entail creative and social intelligence are not susceptible to computerization and

automation and therefore are not high risk.

In the RT-Delphi, socials skills that are inter-related and relevant in the Agriculture

4.0 readiness include understanding diversity, communication, establishing social

connections and networks, tact and ethics and empathy (Table 9).

Table 9. Importance of social skills in the research and development (R&D)
community of Agriculture, aquatic and natural resources (AANR) sector

COEFF lar
SOCIAL SKILLS %24 | MEDIAN| MEAN VAR

1. Understanding diversity 94.11 5 4.53 0.14 1.00
2. Communicating through verbal

and non-verbal means (both

Filipino language or other

Philippine dialects; concise and

understandable data

visualization) 94.12 5 4.65 0.13 1.00
3. Collaboration (Establishing and

actively participating in social

connections and networks) 88.24 4 4.35 0.16 1.00
4. Training and educating others 100 S 4.88 0.07 0.00
5. Tact and Ethics 100 5 4.85 0.11 0.00
6. Empathy 86.67 5 4.53 0.16 1.00


To the expert panel, these are relevant skills to consider with the growing number
of stakeholders and key-players in the sector that challenge limited resources and social
equity. As commented by the expert panel:

“As we expand our borders through virtual linkages and expand the groups needed
to bring about Agriculture 4.0 traditional stereotypes should be removed including any
bias based on gender, age, cultural orientation.”

“The social environment will become more diverse in the future, and the scientists
must know how to deal with diverse clients.”

“As we bring broad groups that are diverse, researchers would need to temper the

manner and approach in order to solicit the best response to the groups they are

engaging with.”

According to Klerx and Rose (2020), over-emphasis on high-tech solutions to the
Agriculture-food system challenges can create inclusion and exclusion concerns.
Therefore, empathy particularly towards vulnerable and disadvantaged stakeholders —
farmers and fisherfolks, is an important cog in Agriculture 4.0. As a development
concern, digital divide and inequity can be worsened if not addressed explicitly within the
Agriculture 4.0 environment. As espoused by the concept of responsible innovation, apart
from farmers and fisherfolks there should be the integration and inclusion of other
stakeholders such as the LGUs, entrepreneurs, and private sector, in the technological

revolution within Agriculture-food system (McCampbell et al., 2022).


As further substantiated by the experts in the KII:

“The technologies can be disruptive — positively or negatively. We should look at

them how they are affecting one another.”

“We should not romanticize technology but consider farmers and the vulnerable

who are exposed to the digital divide and inequality.”

“You have to be careful about the adaptability of technology in Agriculture 4.0,
since Agriculture is site-specific... in technology development, first is the pace of
adaptation, second is the adaptability to certain areas, and third is the acceptance of

farmers.”

Personal Skills. Personal skills considered relevant within the 21% Century skills
can be learned and adopted (Maisiri et al., 2019). The expert panel considers five
personal skills as indicators of Agriculture 4.0 readiness, which in general impacts on
life-long learning as response to a constraining and dynamic environment (Table 11).
Commitment was a new item added by the expert panel, which can take any Agriculture

4.0 initiative “forward and complete even during the most adverse situations.”


Table 10. Importance of personal skills in the research and development (R&D)
community of Agriculture, aquatic and natural resources (AANR) sector

PERSONAL SKILLS R24 MEDIAN MEAN on 1QR

1. Creativity and resourcefulness 100 5 4.76 0.09 0.00
2. Problem Solving and Critical

Thinking

(Solution rather than problem

oriented) 100 5 4.94 0.05 0.00
3. Capability and willingness to

learn new things 100 5 5.00 : 0.00
4. Conflict resolution 100 4 4.44 0.12 1.00
5. Commitment 100 5 4.92 0.06 0.00

Organizational Leadership

Leadership. In the organization, it is necessary to have top management support

and commitment, and a reasonable understanding of Agriculture 4.0 concepts (Hizam-

Hanafiah et al., 2020; Sony & Naik, 2019). The expert panel considered relevant the

awareness, as well as the leadership role that top management plays in Agriculture 4.0

readiness (Table 11).


Table 11. Importance of Leadership towards Agriculture 4.0 in the research and
development (R&D) community of Agriculture, aquatic and natural resources

(AANR) sector
LEADERSHIP %24 MEDIAN MEAN oan lar
LEADERSHIP

1. Leadership (Management) is
aware of Agriculture 4.0 and
related concepts. 100 5 4.59 0.11 1.00

2. Leadership (Management)

Management is in the forefront

of Agriculture 4.0 strategies

and roadmaps. 94.12 5 471 0.12 0.00

However, while the experts who participated in the RT Delphi affirmed the

important role of top management in Agriculture 4.0, experts in the KII emphasized that
leaders not managers are vital to the organization’s readiness (Table 11). Although top
management as expounded by Hizam-Hafiah (2020) need to transform into leaders, a
clear vision, pioneering efforts and ability to translate visions into reality through team
effort are needed. “Agriculture 4.0 is like a dream and therefore we need visionaries as
leaders.” Thus, leadership competencies like foresight and forecasting are considered
essential. Likewise, following the concept of transformational leadership, leaders should
effectively inspire and engage its workforce toward the common goal and vision.
Accordingly, top management is also anticipated to become the leaders who can
transform the organization to the required degree of change as a result of Agriculture 4.0

implementation (Sony & Naik, 2019).


Although the experts recognize the leadership role that the top management needs
to assume in Agriculture 4.0, they also looked at young leaders in the organization whose

mindset is more towards Agriculture 4.0.

Organization. Within the organization, structural innovations and team synergies
need to be realigned with Industry 4.0 landscape (Hizam-Hanafiah et al., 2020). This
includes making sure that Agriculture 4.0 strategies are already integrated to the overall
plans and strategies of the organization. With leaders in the forefront, digitally
transformed organizations are also expected to actively engage with stakeholders and
communities in order to implement their strategies. In the Philippines engaging LGUs,
particularly the agriculture and extension offices are also needed. Meanwhile,
technologies like blockchain, AI, robotics, big data and IoT are needed to be harnessed
even in rural and remote areas for this to happen (NAST, 2021). Tapping the Balik
Scientists program will help provide needed consultants and mentors when experts are

not yet available in the organization.


Table 12. Importance of organization towards Agriculture 4.0 in the research and
development (R&D) community of Agriculture, aquatic and natural resources

(AANR) sector.

ORGANIZATION R24

MEDIAN MEAN“

COEFF

VAR

IQR

ORGANIZATION
3. Organization has the number

of technical experts to

implement Agriculture 4.0

plans. 94.11
4. Organization has consultants

available to support Agriculture

4.0 projects. 94.11
5. Organization has connections

with the users of Agriculture

technologies (new item) 100
6. Organization is well networked

with other significant

organizations (new item) 100

Strategy and Skills Development

0.14

0.14

0.07

0.11

1.00

1.00

0.00

1.00

Strategy. Institutional isomorphism substantiates how technological breakthroughs

serve as pressures for organizations of similar nature to revisit their plans and develop

new business models. For this reason, Agriculture 4.0 can be regarded as a strategic issue

that can bring about changes and new approaches in the organization (Lichtblau et al.,

2015). In particular, strategic planning as a management tool has been proven to create

roadmaps that will lay-out how organizations can successfully implement 41R (CreSnar et

al., 2020b).


Table 13. Importance of Strategy towards Agriculture 4.0 in the research and
development (R&D) community of Agriculture, aquatic and natural resources
(AANR) sector.

STRATEGY AND SKILLS DEVELOPMENT

R24

MEDIAN MEAN

COEFF
VAR

1QR

STRATEGY

He

Organization has Agriculture 4.0 (or
related) strategic, and operational
plans or roadmap including
respective indicators

(Succession planning/ mentoring;
training to include field experience)
Organization's Research and
Development Agenda considers
Agriculture 4.0 activities

R&D Agenda includes a
communications plan
Procurement and other admin
processes are facilitative
Alignment of Academe to have
curriculum aligned to support
Agriculture 4.0 (new item)

94.12

94.12

94.12

94.12

91.67

5 4.59

5 4.65

5 4.59

5 4.71

4 4.33

0.13

0.13

0.13

0.12

0.15

1.00

1.00

1.00

0.00

1.00

The expert panel likewise found it necessary for those in the Higher Education

Institutions to include in their strategy the curriculum review and enhancement that

supports Agriculture 4.0. The same sentiment was expressed by the experts in the KII

who strongly suggested also enhancing practicum, finishing school or co-op education,

internship, or similar approaches that expose college students to field practice prior to

graduation. Revisiting basic and tertiary science and technology curriculum was also

recommended to attract more youth back to Agriculture.


Apart from the formulation, implementation, and review of strategic plans for
Agriculture 4.0, experts also consider communicating Agriculture 4.0 within the

organization.

Social Capital. Considering the agriculture value-chain approach, the expert panel
also underscored social capital as an important readiness indicator in Agriculture R&D.
Social capital looks at building people and networks with shared norms, values and
understandings to facilitate cooperation within or among teams and groups (Leron &
Baconguis, 2022). Consequently, organizations that cultivate partnerships with

international institutions “allows (sic) the organization to grow more.”

The expert panel believed that while partnerships between and among farmer
organizations and cooperatives, local government units, and private industries are
extremely important they stressed the importance of defining the qualifying mechanisms
on collaborative activities, like generating and sharing resources, and credits for the

outputs.


Table 14. Importance of social capital towards Agriculture 4.0 in the research and
development (R&D) community of Agriculture, aquatic and natural resources

(AANR) sector.

STRATEGY AND SKILLS DEVELOPMENT

R2A

MEDIAN

MEAN

COEFF
VAR

1QR

SOCIAL CAPITAL

6. Organization supports the membership
and active participation of its
researchers, scientists and engineers in
relevant professional organizations

7. Collaborative activities with other local
institutions of similar interests in
Agriculture 4.0 and are present or
being planned.

8. Collaborative activities with other
international institutions of similar
interests and are present or being
planned.

9. Collaborative activities with private
industries are present or being
planned.

88.23




4.47

4.65

4.47

4.71

0.17

0.11

0.12

0.10

1.00

1.00

1.00

1.00

According to the experts in the KII, considering a value-chain perspective, local

government units, farmer cooperatives and organizations, Agriculture-entrepreneurs and

private industries should also be considered as part of the social capital of Agriculture

R&D organizations. LGUs, particularly their Agriculture offices should also be made

aware of such developments (on Agriculture 4.0) that R&D organizations on the national

and regional level are doing.


Technical Skills Development. The disruptive nature of the 4IR technologies
necessitates that the workforce possess life-long learning capabilities (Maisiri & van Dyk,
2019). Accordingly, appropriate training and continuing education are needed for them to
remain employable. Here, the willingness of the people towards lifelong learning is seen

as paramount (Lichtblau et al., 2015).

The organization’s human resource development (HRD) plans need to take into
consideration the reskilling and upskilling of its workforce towards Agriculture 4.0. This
includes enhancement courses as well as graduate degree programs when necessary, as
well as incentives for those who carry out and complete continuous education and

training.

Skills development should likewise include mentorship programs for junior
researchers as “developing critical thinking is a more important lesson that senior

researchers can teach the junior researchers.”

There was a consensus among the experts to include globally recognized
certifications as an indicator of readiness. Adoption of such globally recognized quality
system like ISO is an example of coercive pressure that will drive structures and practices

of different organizations towards homogenization (Table 15).


‘Table 15. Importance of technical skills development towards Agriculture 4.0 in the
research and development (R&D) community of Agriculture, aquatic and

natural resources (AANR) sector.

STRATEGY AND SKILLS DEVELOPMENT

R24

MEDIAN

MEAN

COEFF
VAR

QR

TECHNICAL SKILLS DEVELOPMENT

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.
15.

Organization has mentorship program
where senior researchers teach junior
researchers on the use of Agriculture
4.0 facilities, equipment, and
technology

Organization's HRD plan identifies
specialized training and graduate
degree programs needed by
researchers on Agriculture 4.0
competencies

Organization's HRD plan identifies the
researchers who need to undertake
specialized training and graduate
degree programs on Agriculture 4.0
competencies.

Organization has allocated staff
training funds (scholarships) to upskill
and reskill for digital literacy or
technical competencies.

Training incentives are provided

Alignment to globally recognized
certifications (new item)



88.23


83.33

4.5


4.65

4.41

4.82
4.65

4.33

0.10

0.11

0.16

0.08
0.13

0.18

1.00

1.00

1.00

0.00
1.00

1.00


Resource Allocation. According to the expert panel of the RT Delphi, sustaining
operations for Agriculture 4.0 initiatives requires organizations to strategically allocate
not just equipment and people, but more so financial resources to upgrade and maintain

R&D facilities. These are importance readiness indicators as shown in Table 16.

Table 16. Importance of resource allocation towards Agriculture 4.0 in the research
and development (R&D) community of Agriculture, aquatic and natural
resources (AANR) sector.

STRATEGY AND SKILLS DEVELOPMENT %24 MEDIAN MEAN Oar QR

RESOURCE ALLOCATION

16. Agriculture 4.0 budget for

infrastructure, facilities, and equipment

are integrated into the organizational

plan and budget. 100 5 4.83 0.08 0.00
17. Budget for maintenance and upgrades

of facilities and equipment are

integrated into the organizational plan

and budget. 100 5 4.91 0.06 0.00

Smart Operations

Technological frontiers of 4IR creates great value through efficient integration,
interoperability, and sharing of information of components and systems in the
organization, as well as its partners (Lichtblau et al., 2015; Sony & Naik, 2019). When
applied in an Agriculture value-chain, the integrated internal systems result to a cohesive

system characterized by efficient interconnection of all internal and external value chain

partners, from the suppliers to the consumers, which can pave the way for a wide range of


potential to enhance productivity, quality, and flexibility (Javaid et al., 2022; Lichtblau et

al., 2015).

IT Security. While smart operations focus on planning and implementing
interoperability and data sharing, organizations foremost need to ensure the security of
their data and information. There was consensus in the expert panel that the presence of
IT security solutions and/or a digital risk management plan are extremely important
indicators for readiness. Moreover, the expert panel added stable and reliable internet

service (Table 17) which serves as foundation of Smart operation.

Table 17. Importance of IT Security towards Agriculture 4.0 in the research and
development (R&D) community of Agriculture, aquatic and natural resources
(AANR) sector.

SMART OPERATIONS %24 MEDIAN MEAN oan 1QR
IT SECURITY
1. Digital transformation in the
organization is implemented or
planned
94.11 5 4.53 0.14 1,00
2. IT security solutions/ digital risk
management plan in place or being
planned.
94.12 s 4.65 0.13 1,00

3. Reliability of internet services (new

item
) 92.31 5 4.85 0.11 0.00



Information Sharing. Within the R&D community, external integration of data and
information refers to system-integrated information sharing with development partners or

research institutions (Lichtblau et al., 2015).

While relevant data need to be accessible and interoperable, the expert panel
recognizes that at present, information sharing between and among government agencies,
the academe, and even the private sector is not seamless. For this to take place demands
the creation of an information management framework directed to Agriculture 4.0 that

clearly defines the rules, guidelines, and mechanisms of information sharing.

The creation of an Application Program Interfaces (APIs), a new standalone item,
may help in driving efficiency on computer resources by allowing data to be consumed

for a specific purpose without the need to store the data when it is no longer needed.


Table 18. Importance of information sharing towards Agriculture 4.0. in the
research and development (R&D) community of Agriculture, aquatic and
natural resources (AANR) sector.

IT SECURITY %24 MEDIAN MEAN on 1Qr

INFORMATION SHARING

4. Data interoperability to manage and
maximize sharing and diffusion of
data with other researchers and
research organizations (Information
Management Framework for

Agriculture 4.0) 100 5 4.59 0.11 1.00

5. Creation of Application Program

Interfaces API. (new item) en A ney sG Aloo

Facilities Equipment/Technology Management

Technology has been considered as the most important readiness dimension of most
Industry 4.0 readiness models, although this contention lacked evidence (Hizam-
Hanafiah et al., 2020). Accordingly, infrastructure, facilities, and equipment should be
systematically planned for and upgraded to encourage efficiency and maximization of its
use. According to the RT-Delphi, additional standalone associated fields should also be
considered, namely: creation of Agriculture 4.0 Technology Operations Framework
which involves more efficient and focused alignment of manufacturers, training, and
operators to use technologies, and finally, having manuals and summaries of best

practices for the technologies.


However, a different perspective of managing innovation in Agriculture R&D
within the value chain is on technology management that looks into scaling-up and
commercialization of the products of R&D programs and initiatives. Commercialization
of R&D products including the intellectual property is also affirmed by the 2023-2028

PDP (NEDA, 2023).

For this field, indicators identified by the expert panel included online services and
innovation systems as well as demonstration centers that will showcase the developed

technologies and innovation systems.

Table 19. Importance of facilities and equipment/technology management towards
Agriculture 4.0 in the research and development (R&D) community of
Agriculture, aquatic and natural resources (AANR) sector.

TECHNOLOGY MANAGEMENT %24 MEDIAN MEAN sell lar
6. Organization provides online services
and other innovation systems that
physical systems
showcase the cyber-physical sy: 91.67 4 433 0.15 1.00

7. Organization has technology
demonstration center or facility to

showcase innovative technologies
83.33 45 4.25 0.23 1.00

8. Creation of an Agriculture 4.0
Technology Operations Framework

(new item)
100 4 4.38 0.12 1,00

9. Manuals and summaries of best
practices for collation are in place

(new item)
88.89 4 4.11 0.15 0.00


The said approaches to technology management were also affirmed by the experts
during the KII. According to them, technology promotion and commercialization in R&D
organizations in the Philippines must be strengthened. This means developing closer
linkage with the private sector who may be interested in commercializing the technology.

As stated by the experts:

“There is no excuse that we cannot attain 4.0. We can hasten the pace from 2.0 to
4.0 because there are many private sector champions. And then we should take note of
those champions. At the end of the day it will be the entrepreneurs who will push this 4.0.
It’s not the researchers or the scientist. The scientist may provide the platform but it will

be the entrepreneurs who will make this into a reality.”

“University R&D programs can start things, private sector can develop it further.

There is no one-single source of technology. It can be anybody.”

“Many big inventions come from the university, like CRISPR. But the private sector
has very sharp eyes when conducting technology scouting. If we see some technologies
that we think have potential in business, we take a closer look and validate if high
potential then we can execute an agreement with the university to license whether

exclusive or not.”


Considering this aspect of technology management, Intellectual Property (IP)
generation and protection become crucial.
“IP generation and IP protection is very important. If you think about generating

new technology, you need to have strong IP Protection.”

Given the foregoing, the indicators were further refined to two categories —
technology management to refer to the strategic dissemination of R&D outputs to
stakeholders including patent generation and IP protection; and standardization that
defines the operational framework and best practices in management of Agriculture 4.0

technologies, facilities and equipment.

Table 20. Agriculture 4.0 Readiness Dimensions and related fields

READINESS DIMENSIONS SUB-DIMENSIONS/RELATED FIELDS INDICATORS
1. Human Capital (21st Century a. Technical Skills S items
Digital Literacy)
b. Social Skills 6 items
c. Personal Skills 5 items
2. Leadership and Organization a. Leadership 5 items
b. Organization S items
3. Planning and Strategy a. Strategies 6 (8 items)
b. Social Capital 4items
c. Skills Development 6 items
d. Resource Allocation 2 items
4. Smart Operations a. IT Security 5 items
b. Information Sharing 2 items
5. Technology Management a. Technology Management 4items

b. Standardization 2 items



Agriculture 4.0 Readiness Levels

Based on the readiness model, five basic readiness dimensions were identified,
namely: Human capital, Organization and Leadership, Strategy and Skills Development,
Smart Operations, and Facilities, Equipment and Technology Management. Each of these
five dimensions is further delineated into thirteen fields, which in turn are operationalized
with appropriate indicators. They form the basis for measuring the Agriculture 4.0
readiness of the R&D Organizations in the Philippines. Depending on the readiness

scores for each dimension, an organization can be categorized into four (4) levels.

Level 1: Awareness. Similar to the first phase of Gartner’s Hype Cycle (Dedehayir &
Steinert, 2016), this level is characterized by awareness about the technology starting to
spread and attracting “first media coverage.” Within this level, R&D Organizations have
little or no activity on Agriculture 4.0 or at the very least, are aware of the concepts and
principles of Agriculture 4.0. In such level, one or two human capital or technological
requirements may be present but programs and activities on Agriculture 4.0 are still

limited and still being explored.

Level 2: Conceptualization. R&D Organizations on this level have already recognized
Agriculture 4.0 and are starting to develop strategies and programs to implementit. Pilot

initiatives have been launched on some indicators. Accordingly, human and technological


requirements are already present but are inadequate and needs further improvement and

strategies for sustainability.

Level 3. Creation: R&D Organizations on this level already have a wide array of experts
who have been developing and implementing Agriculture 4.0 programs and projects for
quite a time. As such, organizational plans and strategies have integrated human resource
development plans, technological requirements and most of the readiness indicators. This
likewise indicates that organizations’ linkage and network with LGUs, private sector, and
the farmers and fisherfolks, and international organizations, are also established and
sustained, Subsequently, S&T based Agriculture products, services and business models
have already been developed while IP policies and protocols are established and are

being implemented.

Level 4. Innovation: Within the fourth industrial revolution, a holistic adoption of the
technological breakthroughs will be hallmark of the era. Consequently, the Agriculture
sector along with the other industries will entail structural and ontological
transformations towards a certain level of homogenization. At the innovation level, R&D
Organizations have satisfied all readiness indicators and have produced a significant
number of outputs and outcomes towards improved productivity, sustainability, and food
and nutrition security across the value chain along the Pagtanaw 2050 perspective. As
expounded by Leron and Banconguis (2022), innovation culture in the organization is

characterized primarily by continuous improvement among other dimensions, and results


to improved performance of R&D personnel in terms of producing R&D outputs. Along
this line, regular review and assessment of processes, plans and strategies are also evident

towards continuous improvement of the basic readiness dimensions.

Level4 Innovation

Level3 Creation

J nett is

Figure 13. Levels of Agriculture 4.0 Readiness and their description.

Cronbach’s Alpha

The Agriculture 4.0 Readiness Assessment tool was revised to consider the inputs
in the KII. The revised tool considered 5 readiness dimensions and 13 related fields
which are operationalized through 58 indicators. The said revised assessment tool was
pre-tested and assessed for internal consistency and reliability through Cronbach’s alpha.
The Cronbach's alpha coefficients of the sub-dimensions ranged between 0.882 to 0.989,

implying that the test accurately measured the variables of interest (Table 21).


Table 21. Cronbach’s Alpha Coefficient for Agriculture 4.0 Readiness Variables

READINESS DIMENSIONS No of Items Cronbach’s “
AND RELATED FIELDS Coefficient
Human Resource Requirements 11 0.955
Facilities Development Requirements 11 0.941

Organizational Readiness Variables

1) Human Capital Requirements

a) Technical skills 4 0.882
b) Social Skills 6 0.987
Cc) Personal Skills S 0.989

2) Leadership and Organization

a) Leadership 5 0.932

b) Organization 5 0.943

3) Planning and Strategies

a) Strategies 8 0.919
b) Social Capital 4 0.982
c) Skills Development 6 0.984
d) Resource Allocation 2 1.000

4) Smart Operations

a) IT Security 5 0.918

b) Information Sharing 2 0.985
5) Facilities, Equipment and Technology

Management

a) Technology Management 4 0.950

b) Standardization 2 0.965



Summary and Conclusion

The study aimed to develop an Agriculture 4.0 readiness model tailor-fit for the
Philippine Agriculture R&D organization. Agriculture 4.0 covers the range of concepts
and technologies of IR4.0 used to enhance and develop Agriculture innovations and
systems across the Agri-food value chain system. Towards this end, a qualitative research
approach was employed that comprised of a desk review informing RT-Delphi Technique

and eventually validation of results through Key Informant Interviews (KII).

The said readiness model is informed by the institutional theory on isomorphism
which explains how Industry 4.0 pressures organizations within the same environment to
undertake structural changes and develop new strategies to be ready for Agriculture 4.0.
Pressures in the internal and external environment can be normative, mimetic, and
coercive. The results of the qualitative research process facilitated the development of the
Agriculture 4.0 readiness model and assessment tool, which was then subjected to pre-

testing and reliability and validity test through Cronbach’s alpha.


As a result, the study was able to ascertain the five basic Agriculture 4.0
dimensions for which the readiness of the R&D community needs to be assessed. These
are Human Capital, Leadership and Organization, Strategies (including Skills
Development), Smart Operations, and Technology Management. Based on the
Cronbach’s alpha 13 related fields operationalized into 59 indicators as evaluated by the
experts in the RT Delphi technique and KII can assess the level of the organization in

terms of Agriculture 4.0 readiness.

Depending on their readiness score, an organization may be categorized into four
readiness levels, namely Level 1: Awareness, Level 2: Conceptualization, Level 3:
Implementation, Level 4: Innovation. Following the IMPULS readiness model, the

Agriculture 4.0 readiness model for R&D organization is depicted in the Figure 14.


Information,
Sharing

Level 4 B Innovation
{Security fi

Level 3 y Creation

Standardization

Technology,
Management

|
(eye Abe
E> ey

Figure 14. Agriculture 4.0 readiness assessment model

To evaluate the accuracy and performance of the said readiness model, a model
validation will be conducted by fielding the assessment tool to the R&D partner

organizations of DOST-PCAARRD in the Philippines.


CHAPTER 6

EVALUATING THE AGRI 4.0 READINESS OF R&D ORGANIZATIONS IN

THE PHILIPPINES

Introduction

Technological innovations, changing demographics, and emerging new business
models within the 4IR are just some of the significant drivers now changing society.
Industry 4.0 or 4IR is already happening and the digital transformation that goes with it
has increased at exponential rates given the pandemic (ASEAN, 2021b). These shifts
have considerable effects on the skills and competences needed for work, and
consequently on education and lifelong learning, which in turn can address challenges of
technological unemployment and digital divide. Inarguably, human capital investments
directed towards education, reskilling, and upskilling are needed to prepare the present

and future workforce especially within the Fourth Industrial Revolution (WEF, 2018A).

These changes inevitably impact the agriculture sector and its investments on the
research and development community. Investment in agriculture R&D has been
considered a formidable strategy that continues to promote transition efforts of the
developed countries into Industry 4.0 (Ersoz et al., 2018). At present, the Philippine R&D

agenda for the AANR considers using enabling technologies of Agriculture 4.0 as tools to


address the various challenges and concerns of the sector and develop new products and
services that will positively impact business models in the AANR sector (Ebora, 2022).
To strategically traverse the 4IR, we need to understand the factors and conditions that
have the greatest impact on the various production systems and then assess the readiness

for the future (WEF, 2018A).

Readiness is generally regarded as the ability to capitalize on future production
opportunities, mitigate risks and challenges, and be resilient and agile in responding to
unknown future shocks (WEF, 2018A). It entails assessing current capabilities,
identifying new ones needed to succeed in a new production paradigm and develop
solutions to address the gap and facilitate transformation. By measuring readiness,
organizations can systematically undertake transformational change. A readiness
assessment can address possible challenges when new procedures, structures and
processes will take place by identifying the gaps within the existing organization and

remedying these gaps either before, or as part of, the implementation plan (HRSA, 2011).

According to Demeter et al. (2018), readiness assessments can be done in macro
(country, regional), meso (sectoral), and micro (companies and organizations) levels.
Understandably, much of the readiness assessments for the 4IR usually focus on
manufacturing and industry (Akunyumu et al., 2021; Cinar et al., 2021; Lichtblau et al.,
2015; Maisiri & van Dyk, 2019; MITI, n.d.; Rasool & Rasool, n.d.; Schumacher et al.,

2016), but some studies looked into Micro Small and Medium Entrepreneurs (Fathian et


al., 2007; Grufman & Lyons, 2020). As far as this researcher is concerned, very few meso
level readiness assessments have been done for the Philippines, one of which was an
exploratory study conducted by Kim et al. (2019) for the Business Process Outsourcing
industry. This study was able to develop and conduct a meso level readiness assessment
for the AANR sector, particularly its R&D community using an exploratory sequential
mixed methods research approach. Studies on readiness assessments or maturity models
for the Philippine agriculture R&D sector particularly for Agri 4.0. are very limited.
Thus, this study aims to contribute to this body of knowledge by developing a readiness
model towards Agriculture 4.0 and tested the said model through an assessment tool for

the R&D partners of DOST-PCARRD.

Materials and Method

Using exploratory sequential mixed methods research, the qualitative phase of the
study was able to develop the Agriculture 4.0 Readiness assessment tool. Its reliability
and internal validity were established by performing Cronbach’s alpha during the pre-
testing period. This part of the study, the assessment tool was rolled out through self-

assessment survey using the online survey software Qualtrics.


Data collection

The agriculture R&D community considered for the study includes organizations in
the Philippines that conduct various R&D programs and projects for the agriculture,
marine, fisheries, forestry and natural resources sector collectively called the agriculture,
aquatic and natural resources (AANR). To effectively develop the regional capacity for
managing research all over the country, 15 regional &D consortia have been established,
composed of a base institution and their member agencies. The study was able to seek the
assistance of the base institutions or the consortium secretariat to distribute the

assessment tools.

The Agriculture 4.0 Readiness, is a self-assessment tool that was administered
through the online survey tool Qualtrics. Qualtrics is a professional survey administration
and management tool which is made available to UP students, faculty and staff. The

survey period ran for ten weeks after which data was subjected to cleaning.

To determine the readiness levels, participants rated their own organization for each
indicator, using the following rating scale:
4: Programs and initiatives mentioned implemented and are subject to continuous
improvement
3: Programs and initiatives mentioned are already in practice

2: Pilot initiatives have been launched


1: We are aware but have little or no experience
DK- Do not know (there is little or no information available to answer this

question)

If no information (DK) is provided to determine whether the criteria for level 1
have been met, the missing values for level 1 are interpreted as not meeting the criteria.

In this case, the organization is therefore assigned to a score of 0.

Data analysis

Quantitative data was analyzed using descriptive statistics such as measures
of central tendency (mean, median and mode) and dispersion measures (standard
deviation). For inferential statistics Confirmatory Factor Analysis (CFA) and Structural
Equation Modeling (SEM) were done to establish associations between and among the
latent or unobservable and observable readiness variables and overall, validate the

Agriculture 4.0 readiness model developed.

CFA and SEM are considered second generation methods of multivariate analysis
used when validating or testing a hypothesis or theory by defining the relationship of
unobserved or latent constructs or factors and observable variables (Phakiti, 2018). For

this study, the Agriculture 4.0 Readiness and its readiness dimensions are considered the


latent constructs or unobservable variables which will entail second-order factor analysis,

testable in CFA. In factor analysis, Agriculture 4.0 Readiness is considered a higher-

order factor that governs several readiness dimensions which are then considered second

order factors; the related fields are considered first order factors based on primary

observed variables (Figure 15).

Component
items

Capital

Second order

Organizational
; Latent construct

Leadership

Strategy and
Skills
Development

Agri 4.0
Readiness

Smart
Operations

a ser

Technobay

Firs order
Latent construct

Technology
Management

Figure 15. Agriculture 4.0 Readiness framework of higher order constructs

(Source: author’s own illustration)


Confirmatory Factor Analysis

CFA is used to validate whether a hypothesized latent construct or variable can be
inferred from observed variables, and overall examine the latent structure of a
measurement model or questionnaire (T. Brown, 2006; Phakiti, 2018). As suggested by
Awang (2015), a study needs to execute a second order CFA for all latent constructs or
variables prior to modeling their inter-relationships in SEM. Beyond confirming or
rejecting a factor model, CFA informs researchers to revise, refine and retest a CFA
model using a well-defined set of criteria (Phakiti, 2018). Construct validity, convergent

validity and discriminant validity were done.

Construct validity looks at how well a study translates a construct - a concept, idea
or behavior into a functioning and operating reality (Drost, 2011). In this study, construct
validity affirms whether the observable variables can assess the overall readiness of
organization towards Agriculture 4.0, as well as its various dimensions. Construct
Validity is said to be attained if the fit indices, achieved the required level (Awang,
2015). If the required level of any fitness index is not achieved, the study then modifies
the structural model by deleting items that have the lowest factor loading in each

construct.


Table 22. Fitness Index and the level of acceptance for every index

FITNESS CATEGORY NAME OF INDEX LEVEL OF ACCEPTANCE

1. Absolute Fit Root Mean Square Error of RMSEA < 0.06

Approximation (RMSEA) Range 0.05 to 0.1is

acceptable
2. Incremental Fit Comparative fit index (CFI) CFI >0.90
CFI = 0.95 is a good fit
Tucker—Lewis index (TLI) 20.95
3. Parsimonous Fit Chisq/df Chi-Square/ df < 3.0

Source: (Awang, 2015; Hu & Bentler, 1999)

Convergent validity that describes how approximately a new scale relates to other
measures of the same construct (Mohamad & Sihes, 2021) was done by computing for
the average variance extracted (AVE) and Composite Reliability (CR). Convergent
validity is achieved if the value of AVE is more than 0.45 and CR is above 0.60 (Awang,

2015; Mohamad & Sihes, 2021).

Discriminant validity implies whether a measurement model of a construct is free
from redundant items. This is done by the discrepancy measure called Modification
Indices (MI) and is usually performed when fitness indices are not achieved even after

low factor loadings have been removed (Awang, 2015).


Once all fit indices meet their required values or levels and all constructs are
considered valid and reliable. SEM was performed to model and establish the various

associations and relationships among constructs.

Structural Equation Modeling

SEM describes the relationships between and among different causal theoretical
frameworks including multiple independent and dependent variables by validating the
direct, indirect and moderating effect of different variables in complex models (Cresnar
et al., 2020a). In SEM, Agriculture 4.0 readiness is considered an endogenous (or
dependent) latent variable, while its five sub-dimensions were considered as exogenous
or independent variables. For this study, CFA and STEM were carried out in the IBM

SPSS structural equation modeling (SEM) software, Amos.

Results and Discussion

Descriptive Profile of the Respondents

Online self-assessment survey was distributed to the crops R&D organizations in
the Philippines through their regional R&D consortium secretariats. These Consortium

Member Agencies (CMA) are organizations considered by DOST-PCAARRD as agency


partners and have been implementing various R&D programs and projects for the AANR
through DOST-PCAARRD financial grants and other funding sources. The survey period
ran for 10 weeks with a total of 270 questionnaires distributed. By the end of November
2022, 168 respondents answered the survey and after data cleaning, 135 responses were

recorded for crops and livestock R&D organizations accounting for 50% return rate.

The participants for the study were the various research and development managers
and leaders of the CMAs plus other agencies that are not within the consortia system but
were considered by DOST-PCAARRD as R&D partners. The descriptive profiling of

these participants is presented in the succeeding sections.

The participating institutions were spread throughout the 17 regions, although more
than half (55%) of the respondents are based in the islands of Luzon (Table 18).
BARRM, which was still in the process of rejoining the R&D Consortia, was represented

by one respondent.


Table 23. Location profile of the respondents of the study

REGION n= 135 PERCENTAGE

NCR — National Capital Region 2 1.48%
CAR — Cordillera Administrative Region 27 20.00%
Region | — Ilocos Region 18 13.33%
Region II — Cagayan Valley 7 5.19%
Region Ill — Central Luzon 5 3.70%
Region IV-A — CALABARZON 5 3.70%
Region IV-B — MIMAROPA Region 6 4.44%
Region V — Bicol Region 4 2.96%
Region VI — Western Visayas 8 5.93%
Region VII - Central Visayas 7 5.19%
Region VIII — Eastern Visayas 10 7.41%
Region IX — Zamboanga Peninsula 5 3.70%
Region X — Northern Mindanao 7 5.19%
Region XI — Davao Region 6 4.44%
Region XII — SOCCSKSARGEN 2 1.48%
Region XIIl — Caraga 15 11.11%
BARMM -— Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in

Muslim Mindanao 1 0.74%

Source: 2022 Agri 4.0 Readiness Assessment Survey

The regional spread of the R&D agencies involved in the agriculture R&D in the
country partly makes it complex (Stads et al., 2007b). In general, R&D institutions in the
Philippines can be categorized into three clusters, namely national R&D centers, regional

R&D centers, and those in higher education institutions (HEI). HEIs, composed mainly


of public and private colleges and universities by their nature conducts research,
development, and extension, aside from their academic function. In the study, most of the
institutional respondents were part of a HEI (80%), followed by regional R&D centers,
which usually conduct applied research specifically for agriculture commodities of major
importance in their location. National R&D centers can either be single or multi-
commodity conducting research on a broad range of economically important

commodities and disciplines.

Out of the 135 respondents, 43 (32%) are part of institutions which have 300-499
employees. Meanwhile, most respondent institutions employ less than 40 percent of their
workforces in Agriculture R&D. This only considers the full-time equivalent researchers

or those who directly conduct R&D activities and exclude the auxiliary staff.

In terms of agriculture R&D activities, almost all respondents (91%) conduct close
to an average of 40 R&D activities annually and only one percent (1%) conducted an
average of more than 100 projects in a given year. Accordingly, most of the respondents
(93%) have around PhP 10 to 49 million a year for their R&D activities. This sum
includes internally-sourced or in-house budget as well as those externally sourced, such

as the Grants in Aid provided by DOST-PCAARRD.

Table 24. Profile of the respondents


Type R&D Institution Part of a Higher Education Institution 80.00%
National Research & Development Center 5.93%
Regional Research & Development Center 14.07%
Estimated size of institution Up to 19 employees 25.93%
workforce 20 to 99 employees 17.04%
100 to 300 employees 9.63%
301 to 499 employees 31.85%
500 or more employees 15.56%
Estimated number researchers up 19% of the total workforce 49.63%
working on AANR Research and 20 to 39% of the total workforce 32.59%
Development (R&D) 40 to 59% of the total workforce 8.89%
60 to 79% of the total workforce 5.93%
80 to 100% of the total workforce 2.96%
Average No. of R&D projects for up to 10 R&D Projects 65.93%
AANR per year 11-39 R&D Projects 25.19%
40 - 59 R&D Projects 5.19%
60 - 79 R&D Projects 1.48%
80 - 99 R&D Projects 0.74%
more than 100 R&D Projects 1.48%
Average R&D funds for AANR per up to Php 10 Million 69.63%
year Php 11 - 49 Million 23.70%
Php 50 - 79 Million 2.96%
Php 80 - 99 Million (¢)
more than Php 100 Million 3.70%

Source: 2022 Agri 4.0 Readiness Assessment Survey



Validating the model through second-order CFA and SEM

The Agriculture 4.0 Readiness model comprised of 58 items in five readiness
dimensions namely Human Capital, Organizational Leaderships, Strategies and Skills

Development, Smart Operations, and Technology Management (Figure 16).

When the CFA was carried out, items with factor loadings lower than 0.6 were
removed and the fitness indices were analyzed. To achieve the required values for the
various fitness indices, modification indexes (MI) were examined to identify correlated

items and appropriately modify the model as suggested in Awang (2015).

After removing the items with low factor loading and modifying the model, CFA
was again performed, and the fitness indices were able to achieve the required levels

based on the criteria set in Table 16.

O©OOOOOHOOOOOO

©00@-

© ai Reston S)

Figure 16. Agriculture 4,0 Readiness measurement model


Convergent Validity and Composite Reliability


With good model fit being achieved, the value of CR and AVE was computed

for every construct as well as every component of the construct as shown, and overall

determine the Convergent Validity and Composite Reliability. The Convergent

Validity is determined through AVE, while the Composite Reliability is determined

through CR. As seen in Table 20 values were above the required threshold of 0.45 and

0.6, respectively.

Table 25. Validity and Reliability Indices for the Agriculture 4.0 Readiness

Model
AVE cR
LATENT CONSTRUCT OBSERVABLE ITEM EAcTOR (ABOVE (ABOVE
LOADING
0.45) 0.6)

‘Agri4.0 Readiness Human Capital 0.524 0.573 0.731

Organizational

Leadership 0.778

Strategies and Skills 0.874

Development

Smart Operations 0.72

Technology

Management oe
Human Capital Ss2 0.903 0.673 0.948

ssi 0.834

Ts5S 0.778

Ts2 0.667

Ts1 0.672

$S3 0.892

$s4 0.873

SSS 0.901

Psi 0.823

PS2 0.830

PS3 0.825


Table 25. Continuation...

Organizational Lo2 0.878 0.885 0.958
Leadership LD3 0.967

LD4 0.974
Strategies and skills ST8 0.684 0.614 0.934
development sT7 0.684

STS 0.88

ST2 0.802

sT1 0.918

sc2 0.803

sc3 0.724

sb2 0.708

RAL 0.814
Smart Operations Is 0.742 0.678 0.893

IT4 0.903

(T3 0.917

(T1 0.712
Technology 1P3 0.755 0.631 0.773
Management

IP2 0.832

Discriminant Validity was assessed next and is presented in Table 21. The
diagonal matrix in bold is the square-root of AVE for the respective construct, while
other values are the correlation between the respective pair of constructs. As a rule of
thumb, discriminant validity for all constructs is achieved if the diagonal value (in

bold) is greater than any other values in its row and column (Awang, 2015).

Table 26. The Assessment for Discriminant Validity for Agri 4.0

STRATEGIES

Human Capital 0.822

Org Leadership 0.422 0.941

Smart Operations 0.462 0.535 0.575 0.945
Technology 0.434 0.576 0.741 0.712

Management 0.794


Since the prerequisites for unidimensionality, validity, and reliability of the

measurement models have been satisfied, the researcher then proceeded with

modeling the Structural Model and establishing the regression coefficients.

Table 27. The Regression Coefficients and Level of Significance

Estimate | _S.E. C.R. Label

HC <---  Agri4Readiness 1

OL <---  Agri4Readiness 2.569 0.477 5.38 A significant
SSD <---  Agri4Readiness 2.157 0.438 4.926 Ra significant
so <--- Agri4Readiness 2.062 0.421 4,898 Le) significant
™ <---  Agri4Readiness 2.022 0.404 5.008 At significant
Human Capital (11 observable items)

SS2 <--- HC 1

SSI <-- HC 1.055 0.076 13.86 Lh significant
TSS HC 1.024 0.085 12.067 *** significant
TS2 HC 1.084 0.116 9.318 Ri significant
TS1 HC 1.051 0.111 9.423 ea significant
SS3 <-- HC 0.997 0.061 16.264 *** significant
SS4 <--- HC 1.028 0.067 15.432 *** significant
SSS HC 1.053 0.063 16.67 ed significant
PSI HC 1.033 0.077 13.446 *** significant
PS2 HC 1.029 0.075 13.69 J significant
PS3 <-- HC 0.925 0.068 13.537 *** significant

Table 27. Continued...


Estimate | _S.E. CR. P Label

Strategies and Skills Development (9 items)
ST8 <-- SSD 1
ST7 SSD 0.98 0.091 10.828 *** significant
STS SSD 1.233 0.145 8.517 ee significant
ST2 SsD 1.09 0.137 7.949 bis significant
STI SSD 1,373 0.157 8.762 LAE significant
Sc2 SSD 1.106 0.139 7.964 Li significant
Sc3 SSD 1.166 0.159 7.335 +48 significant
SD2 SSD 1.021 0.142 7.213 ee significant
RAI <--- SSD 1.233 0.154 8.033 Ai significant
Smart Operations (4 items)
Isl <-- SO 1
IT4 <-- SO 1.109 0.103 10.728 = *** significant
IT3 <-- SO 1.15 0.106 10.899 *** significant
IT] <-- SO 0.752 0.091 8.225 Add significant
Technology Management (2 items)
IP3 <--- TM 1
IP2 <-- TM 1.122 0.138 8.119 Ci significant

Organizational Leadership (3 Items)
LD2 <-- OL 1
LD3 <-- OL 1.093 0.059 18.608 *** significant
LD4 <--- OL 1.122 0.059 19.047 __*** significant

The values in the table show that the five dimensions of readiness are directly

related, and along with its 30 items or observable indicators can be used to measure

Agriculture 4.0 readiness (Figure 17).


i
1 TSI RMSEA=.077, TLI=.905 , CFI=0.919, chsq/df= 1.79
; 5
~ i
ee) ga
- 0 ow
Loz je 10 <e

s

str) [Sz] Sts) Sz) Gre] Bea] Sea] [SQ] [Ra

Figure 17, Regression Path Coefficients between Agri 4.0 Readiness Constructs



Given the foregoing, the following observable indicators were then used to

eventually assess the Agriculture 4.0 Readiness of the R&D organizations sampled. The

researcher was likewise able to determine items that are closely related and redundant,

hence were merged or integrated.

Table 28. Observable indicators for determining Agriculture 4.0 Readiness.

OBSERVABLE READINESS INDICATORS REMARKS
HUMAN CAPITAL
Ts1 browse, search, and filter data, information & TS3 interact, collaborate, &

digital content

share knowledge
through digital
technologies

TS2 manage data, information, and digital content
including identifying knowledge gaps
TSS working knowledge of spreadsheets, word TS4 basic knowledge of
processing, and presentation programs statistics and
programming in
completing tasks as
necessary
SS1 value individual differences and works
collaboratively with people of diverse
backgrounds, viewpoints, and experiences
SS2 effectively communicate through verbal and non-
verbal means
$$3 establish and actively participate in social
connections and networks
ss4 can mentor, train, and educate others in the
organization
sss identify their stakeholders, understand their
needs, and consider these in their programs and
activities
Psi employ originality, inventiveness, and PS4 _ negotiate diplomatic

resourcefulness in the workplace

solutions to
interpersonal and
workplace issues

Table 28. Continuation...


Ps2 use sound reasoning to analyze problems,
evaluate potential solutions, and implement
effective courses of action

Ps3 accept constructive feedback well and are open

to new ideas and ways of doing things

ORGANIZATIONAL LEADERSHIP

LD2 Leadership is aware of Agri 4.0 and related
concepts

LD3 Leaders use foresight skills to outline long-term
Agri 4.0 strategies and roadmaps

LD4 Leaders have forecasting skills to craft short-term

and medium-term Agri 4.0 strategies

STRATEGIES AND SKILLS DEVELOPMENT

ST1 Organization has Agri 4.0 strategic, and/or
operational plans or roadmap
ST2 Organization’s Research and Development
Agenda considers Agri 4.0 activities
STS Procurement and other admin processes are
facilitative of Agri 4.0 activities
ST7 [For Academe/HEI] Our Curriculum has been
reviewed and revised to support Agri 4.0
ST8 [For Academe/HEl] There is support Agri 4.0
through internships and practicum with
industries
Sc2 collaborative activities on Agri 4.0 with local SC4__ collaborative activities
institutions and private industries with private
organizations and
industries
sc3 collaborative activities on Agri 4.0 with
international institutions of similar interests
SD2 HRD plan identifies specialized training & $D1 mentorship program on
graduate degree programs needed by Agri 4.0
researchers on Agri 4.0 competencies
RA1 Agri 4.0 budget for infrastructure, facilities, and RA2 Budget for

equipment are part of our organizational plan
and budget

maintenance and
upgrades of Agri 4.0
facilities and
equipment

Table 28. Continuatio

SMART OPERATIONS


IT1

has reliable internet services and other digital
infrastructure to support Agri 4.0

IT3 IT Security solutions that cover key areas such as
confidentiality, safety, ethical use, and security

(T4 Has digital risk management plans and policies

ITS IT security policies and procedures undergo a
regular cycle of review and improvements

IS1 There is data interoperability

TECHNOLOGY MANAGEMENT

1P2 Organization has connections with farmers,
farmer organizations, and other adopters

IP3 Organization has a technology demonstration

center or a facility

Overall results for Readiness

The indicators were then used to determine the overall readiness for Agriculture

4.0. A total of 135 respondents were included in the study which consisted of various

organizations working on crops and livestock R&D all over the country. The readiness

assessment revealed that R&D organizations in the Philippines are already aware and are

using Agriculture 4.0 technologies in various R&D programs and endeavors. Majority of

the organizations are either at Level 2 or 3 of the Agriculture readiness assessment and

only a few are still at the infancy or awareness level. Overall Readiness level for the

R&D community is at Level 2 which indicates that while R&D community have


significant gains when it comes to Agriculture 4.0, there are attributes within the

readiness dimensions that need to be addressed.

Table 29. Overall Results for Agriculture 4.0 Readiness

READINESS LEVELS ube PERCENTAGE
(n=135)
Level 1: Awareness 30 22
Level 2: Conceptualization 50 37
Level 3: Creation 54 40
Level 4: Innovation 1 1

Overall readiness (Average) 2.67

Information for average readiness: scale of 0 to 4
Source: 2022 Agri 4.0 Readiness Assessment Survey

The human capital was regarded as the dimension with the highest level of
readiness. This was followed by organizational leadership and technology management
which were also in Level 3 (Table 25.). This assessment level affirms the observation
during the KII and RT Delphi on the “people” dimension of Agriculture 4.0 in the
Philippines that the people are already skilled on the digital competencies, albeit this

needs further enhancement and sustainability through capacity development strategies.

Moreover, these capacities have to be translated and cascaded into other readiness
dimensions particularly smart operations, and organizational plans and strategies in order

to accelerate and sustain technological transformation.


Table 30. Agriculture 4.0 Readiness Measurement per Dimension

DIMENSIONS MEAN S.D. KURTOSIS
Human Capital 3.27 0.709 1.032
Organizational Leadership 2.68 1.261 -0.536
Strategies and Skills Development 2.42 1.024 -0.780
Smart Operations 2.37 1.024 -0.780
Technology Management 2.61 1.014 -0.282
OVERALL READINESS 2.67 0.808 -0.400

Information for average readiness: scale of 0 to 4
Source: 2022 Agri 4.0 Readiness Assessment Survey

Readiness levels in the dimension of Human Capital

The results of the human capital readiness revealed the importance of
communication in Agriculture 4.0. Accordingly, social skills scored highest in the
assessment. Within the concept of responsible innovation, collaboration, and social
inclusion, such skills are considered necessary particularly when dealing with
technological disruptions such as Agriculture 4.0 (Klerkx & Rose, 2020). WEF Future of
Jobs Report for 2020 likewise emphasized that soft skills or the 21 century skills are the

key or priority areas for skills development.

Meanwhile, digital skills were considered relatively low and would entail focus on

capacity development initiatives as requisites to bridging the digital divide.


Table 31. Readiness scores in the dimension of Human Capital

INDICATOR MEAN MEDIAN MODE SD
Ts1 2.985 3.00 4.00 1.044
TS2 2.800 3.00 3.00 1.0845
TSS 3.363 4.00 4.00 0.8776
ssi 3.281 3.00 4.00 0.8433
$S2 3.422 4.00 4.00 0.7378
SS3 3.393 4.00 4.00 0.7441
Ss4 3.400 4.00 4.00 0.7842
sss 3.363 4.00 4.00 0.7785
Ps1 3.274 3.00 4.00 0.8414
PS2 3.289 3.00 4.00 0.8274
Ps3 3.356 3.00 4.00 0.7478

Readiness levels in the dimension of Organizational Leadership

The three indicators to organizational leadership are inter-related in a way that
awareness to Agriculture 4.0 can eventually lead top management and leaders to create a
long-term vision and goals that will drive organizations to the technological
transformation. As expounded by Sony and Naik (2009), top management need to
become the leaders who can transform the organization to the required degree of change

as a result of Agriculture 4.0 implementation. Along with a good awareness of


Agriculture 4.0, leaders then need to translate such into strategic plans and programs

through foresight and futures thinking exercises.

Table 32. Readiness scores in Organizational Leadership

INDICATOR MEAN MEDIAN MODE sD
LD2 2.756 3.00 4.00 1.3128
LD3 2.667 3.00 4.00 1.3044
LD4 2.630 3.00 3.00 1.3256

Readiness levels in the dimension of Strategy and Skills Development

As aforementioned, skills and competencies, as well as foresight need to be

translated into tangible plans and strategies in order to thrive within the Agriculture 4.0

environment. Integral to these strategic blueprints are the communication plans that will

outline how the various initiatives and activities will be disseminated on various levels,

within and outside of the organization. As seen in the dimension of strategy, allocating

considerable financial resource to acquire and maintain Agriculture 4.0 technologies and

initiatives are scored relatively low. Acquisition of technologies is still considered second

level digital divide and needs to be addressed accordingly (van Dijk, 2012).


Table 33. Readiness scores in Strategy and Skills Development

INDICATOR MEAN MEDIAN MODE sD
sti 2.459 3.00 3.00 1.2916
ST2 2.778 3.00 4.00 1.1697
STS 2.319 3.00 3.00 1.2073
sT7 2.389 3.00 3.00 1.2368
ST8 2.537 3.00 3.00 1.2636
Sc2 2.667 3.00 3.00 1.1845
sc3 2.252 3.00 3.00 1.3861
SD2 2.259 3.00 3.00 1.2397
RAL 2.163 3.00 3.00 1.3056

For HEls, the importance of curriculum review and updating is likewise considered

as it is related to the reskilling and upskilling strategies.

Readiness levels in the dimension of Smart Operations

The efficient integration, interoperability, and sharing of information of
components and systems in the organization, as well as its partners are hallmarks of smart
operation (Lichtblau et al., 2015; Sony & Naik, 2019). Based on the readiness

assessment, data sharing and interoperability is one sub-dimension that needs more


attention, along with data risk management plans that integrates data security and data

sharing.

Table 34, Readiness scores in Smart Operations

INDICATOR MEAN MEDIAN MODE sD
IT1 2.630 3.00 3.00 1.0632
IT3 2.437 3.00 3.00 1.1697
IT4 2.333 3.00 3.00 1.2278
Is1 2.096 2.000 3.00 1.3432

Relatively low internet reliability and related infrastructure are pivotal not just in
Agriculture 4.0 but in the digital economy as well. However, this assessment can be a
reflection of the low internet penetration in the country, as revealed by the Digital 2022
report (Kemp 2022). With more than 30 percent of the population offline and having

unreliable internet connection, the problem of digital divide becomes more prominent.

Readiness levels in the dimension of Technology Management

Technology upscaling and commercialization is considered an integral component

of agriculture R&D, particularly Agriculture 4.0 to cover the entire agri-food value chain.

The two indicators of technology management focus on the importance of identifying


technology adopters and venues that can showcase the products of its R&D endeavors.

Based on the assessment, these indicators reveal level 2 readiness.

Table 35. Readiness scores in Technology Management

INDICATOR MEAN MEDIAN MODE sD
1p2 2.696 3.00 3.00 1.1215
IP3 2.519 3.00 3.00 1.1254

Summary and Conclusion

Assessing the readiness levels of R&D organizations towards Agriculture 4.0 is a

prerequisite to strategically defining plans and programs particularly on human capital

development. A readiness assessment tool with five readiness dimensions was developed

and validated using structural equation modeling. From analysis of the 58 indicators

identified in the qualitative phase, 30 items were identified as significant indicators for

the latent variables Agriculture 4.0 Readiness.

Based on the results of the SEM, the readiness assessment was then carried out with

the 135 crops and livestock R&D organizations that responded in the Qualtrics survey.

The readiness assessment revealed that R&D community has an overall readiness score

of 2.67 indicating that in general, the Philippines is at Level 2 or conceptualization phase


in the Agriculture 4.0. Human capital has the highest readiness level, while readiness

levels for Smart operations and Strategies are lower.

Results of the said assessment are foreseen to inform policy and capability
development interventions to bridge the gap and address challenges of digital divide and

inequity.


CHAPTER 7

POLICY RECOMMENDATIONS ON EDUCATION AND CAPACITY

DEVELOPMENT TOWARDS AGRICULTURE 4.0

Introduction

The Fourth Industrial Revolution is characterized by technology breakthroughs that
are fusing into what is called the cyber physical system (Schwab, 2016). While 4IR’s
primary focus is on industries, the agriculture sector has likewise harnessed these
technologies to improve productivity and enhance and develop more value-adding

services that are sustainable and propel the sector into what is called Agriculture 4.0.

Through the results of the study, Agriculture 4.0 in the Philippines has been found
to cover the range of concepts and technologies of 4IR used to enhance and develop
innovations and systems across the agri-food value chain. The frontier technologies that
are currently influencing the agriculture R&D system both on and off-farm include
biotechnology, sensors and remote sensing, nanotechnology, next generation omics and
gene editing, Al and Machine Learning, UAVs or drones, 3D printing and additive
manufacturing, IoT, big data and robotics and automation. Blockchain, an emerging
technology used for traceability across the agri-food value chain, among other benefits is

also deemed an important frontier technology that should be further explored and


harnessed from a sustainable agri-food products and services perspective. All these
anticipated outcomes and impact are embodied in the NAST foresight blueprint
Pagtanaw 2050 which envisions the significant role of science, technology, and
innovation (STI) in nation building within the long-term. This confirms the relevance of
STI in the agriculture sector as an imperative when the multi-faceted dimensions of

poverty and inequitable distribution of opportunities (ASEAN, 2017).

Opportunities to harness 4IR technologies in the Philippines are apparent,
evidenced by the various STI-based programs and projects currently undertaken by the
R&D community. However, the R&D community is still considered at the early stages of
adopting Agriculture 4.0 with many of our institutions still at the awareness and
conceptualization phase. Based on Garner’s Hype Cycle, most of the R&D community in
general is still at the innovation and trigger (kick-off) phase, and for it to progress into the

succeeding phases, certain strategies and interventions must take place.

Nonetheless, there are already some organizations within the higher readiness
levels of Agriculture 4.0., mostly in the dimension of human capital. This reveals that the
country can fully take advantage of the benefits of 4IR to realize Agriculture 4.0, given
the enabling mechanisms. These enabling mechanisms, identified in this study as
determinants of Agriculture 4.0 readiness, include human capital, organizational

leadership that fosters foresight and futures thinking, appropriate strategies particularly


on skills development, smart operations that promotes interconnectivity and data security,

and technology management.

In 2017, an ASEAN study on the various S&T policies and development strategies
of its member states recommended that the Philippines needs to direct significant
investments in R&D, particularly on capacity development for R&D. Accordingly, it was
also proposed that the country invest in technology platforms like biotechnology,
nanotechnology, genomics, and ICT (ASEAN, 2017) which are considered frontier
technologies of Agriculture 4.0. The said ASEAN study also pushed for the establishment
of more technology business incubators, considered part of the technology management
readiness. Coincidentally, Technology Management is the readiness dimension that

garnered the lowest assessment level in the study.

Further results of the assessments eventually inform policy, education and training

or capacity building, which will be presented in this chapter.

Results and Discussion

Considerable investments in technology and innovation including the support

services are requisites to agricultural transformation (Brown et al., 2018). While the 4IR

may be characterized by a technologically-driven society, focus should be given to


appropriately accessing and using these in order to leverage on their benefits, and address
the pitfalls of digital divide, among others. Van Djik’s Resource Appropriation Theory
(2006) aptly elaborates on the multi-faceted perspective of technology access and use as a
strategy to bridge digital divide. He categorizes technology access and use into four
levels that start with motivation, that will enable the physical and material access, and
will lead to the development of digital skills, which, when understood can and should be
used in diverse situations sustainably (van Dijk, 2006). To further address these
emerging concerns and challenges of digital divide, organizations of similar
circumstances are believed to move towards a certain level of homogenization expounded
by the concept of institutional isomorphism (Dimaggio & Powell, 1983). Within the said
theory, human capital that includes education and training (lifelong learning), and social
capital like professional groups and organizations, are considered normative pressures
that defines how things should be done and what norms and rules are based on ‘logic of
appropriateness’ rather than optimality (Kwok, 1996). Consequently, such normative

pressures motivate organizations to also change and grow (Elangovan, 2015).

Given these theoretical underpinnings, capacity development initiatives that can
upskill and reskill human resources and improve their level of digital skills are
considered critical within the 4IR (Trendov et al., 2019). Significant human capital
investments enable R&D to effectively engage in continuous knowledge generation,
develop concepts, theories, new business models, techniques instrumentation, software,

or operational methods (UNESCO, 2019). Support for entrepreneurial and innovation


culture within the agriculture R&D is also essential. The effort to strengthen knowledge-
based societies, necessitates higher investment in human capital development in R&D.
The same has been echoed by the new Philippine medium term development plan, which
puts emphasis on Science, Technology and Innovation-driven R&D to accelerate growth

and development (NEDA, 2023).

Investments to Human Capital Development towards Agriculture 4.0

In the previous stages of this study, 11 frontier technologies of the 4IR have been
established to disrupt the agriculture R&D Community in both positive and negative
ways. These technologies include biotechnology, nanotechnology, sensors and remote
sensing, next generation omics and gene editing, Al and ML, UAVs, big data, loT, 3D

printing and additive manufacturing, robotics and automation, and Blockchain.

While the participants of the study identified the need for more human capital
investment on all 11 technologies, the inter-connected technologies of sensors and remote
sensing, IoT, big data and AUVs were considered priority areas for capability

development (Figure 18).


Blockchain Technology

and Automation

nternet of Thing

rinting/Additive Manufacturing

Al) and Machine Learning

ation omics; Gene Editing

Besser tarsi]

fresusmaertn asses ]

ig Data Pescssiennsase sinaiest S -o-|
ES

Pre NY

pisisscisn rears]

nsors and Remote Sensing Technology [seanauessereran ceri er or)

Nanotechnol

70!
NT, BUT INADEQU

90% 100%

QUATE

Figure 18. Human capital requirements on Agriculture 4.0

Moreover, despite the country’s significant experience in biotechnology R&D, the
respondents still expressed the need for more human capital interventions on modern
biotechnology. One implication of this finding may be related to the concept of
intergenerational learning and knowledge transfer where senior researchers and scientists
are unable to transfer their knowledge and experience through mentoring and coaching

(Rup@ié, 2018).

While there are relatively more R&D organizations that expressed a high number of
human capital in nanotechnology, many of these still are considered inadequate.
Furthermore, considering the vast potential of nanotechnology in agri-food value chain

(Brown et al., 2020), there is still a need for more human capital investments to further


boost the said discipline. Investments to further human capital through education, training
and in-depth experience are needed so that based on Gartner’s Hype Cycle, they can
move past the peak of inflated expectations towards slope and enlightenment and plateau

of productivity and maturity (Dedehayir & Steinert, 2016).

With an overall Agriculture 4.0 readiness of 2.0, there are R&D organizations that
have less regard for human capital investment on big data and the IoT. Nevertheless,
within the 4IR, these technologies are considered ubiquitous and cross cutting regardless
of the nature of organization (de Clercq et al., 2018). In this sense, it can be said that
awareness and appreciation of Industry 4.0 and Agriculture 4.0 are still needed within the

R&D community particularly for cross-cutting technologies.

Policy interventions towards Education and Capacity Development

The challenge of digital divide and technological unemployment emphasizes the
value of quality education and lifelong learning to reskill and upskill the current
workforce and make them more resilient. To be responsive to the needs of the future,
formal and informal learning structures must evolve to improve employability and meet
workplace expectations (Rainie & Anderson, 2017). Within the theoretical framework of
Human Capital, education and training are considered by Schultz and subsequently

Becker, as relevant investments that will yield positive returns to the individual,


organization, and society (Teixeira, 2014). In this regard, a more holistic approach to

capacity development should be taken.

UN considers capacity development as a process where “people, organizations and
society as a whole unleash, strengthen, create, adapt, and maintain capacity over time,”
to achieve desired development results (UNDG, 2017). In this framework, there are three
inter-connected dimensions of capacities, namely capacity at the enabling environment,

organization, and individual (Figure 19).

ENABLING ENVIRONMENT

Policy framework to address economic,
political, environmental and social
factors

ORGANIZATIONAL CAPACITY

INDIVIDUAL CAPACITY

Strategies, plans, rules and
regulations, partnerships, leadership,
and strengthening organizational
systems, processes, and roles and
responsibilities

Individual skills, knowledge and
performance through training,
experiences, motivation and

incentives

Figure 19. UN Capacity Development Framework
(Source: (UNDG, 2017)


Enabling Environment. For societies, the rise of the 4IR will require enhanced
skillsets, trustworthy digital content, and up-to-date social welfare guidelines to ensure
inclusivity in the digital space, while providing tools and solutions for improved social
services delivery to different segments of society. The enabling environment for
Agriculture 4.0 entails improving policy framework that can address economic, political,
environmental, and social concerns in a logical and mutually reinforcing manner (UNDG,

2017).

In the Philippines, various roadmaps and blueprints have already been laid out by
the government to support digitalization, 4IR, and Agriculture 4.0 (Table 31). Many of
these enabling policies are still in their infancy stages and further analysis of their

implementation and impact may be necessary.

Table 36. Enabling policy frameworks and plans towards Agriculture 4.0

BLUEPRINT/ POLICY FRAMEWORK AGENCY
Ambisyon Natin 2040 NEDA
Pagtanaw 2050 DOST
Philippines Development Plan (2023-2028) NEDA
Philippine Inclusive Innovation Industrial Strategy (i3S) DTI
Science for Change Programme DOST
Harmonized National Research and Development Agenda 2022-2028 DOST

National Agriculture and Fisheries Modernization and Industrialization Plan DA


Table 36. Continuation...


BLUEPRINT/ POLICY FRAMEWORK AGENCY
RA. 11899 Second Congressional Commission on Education (EDCOM II) Act DepEd,
CHED,
TESDA
RA 11293: Philippine Innovation Act of 2019 NEDA
RA 11337: Innovative Startup Act of 2019 OTI
National ICT Ecosystem Framework (NICTEF) DICT
RA 10929: Free Internet Access Programme of 2017 DICT
National Artificial Intelligence Strategy for the Philippines DTI
National Cybersecurity Plan 2022 DICT

Ambisyon Natin 2040. This captures the long-term vision of the Filipino people for

the Philippines for the next 25 years. As expounded in the document, Filipinos

collectively aspire for prosperous middle-class society characterized by “strongly rooted,

comfortable and secure lifestyle,” with agriculture as one of the priority sectors that have

a direct impact on the said foresight document. To achieve such vision, Filipinos should

be well-educated, and innovative and that the government, among the many stakeholders,

must ensure that education and lifelong learning opportunities will hone foundational

literacies, needed competencies, and character qualities of the present and future human

resources in the country (NEDA, n.d.). However, these competencies should particularly

be directed towards enabling human capital to leverage on the technological changes,


which need to be captured in an in-depth labor market analysis that would lay-out the

skill sets needed for future jobs in the country (World Bank Group, 2019).

Pagtanaw 2050. This foresight and strategic plan anticipates the STI sector’s path
in the development of its scientific capital in the coming 30 years. According to the
document, agricultural food systems transformation should be sustainable and inclusive.
As such, a shift from an extractive to green agriculture needs to happen. Along this line,
key priority areas for technology-based research and development are laid out, which
puts a spotlight on frontier technologies for identified stakeholders including farmers,
producers, processors, retailers, and eventually consumers (NAST, 2021). Technologies
like blockchain, cognitive systems, robotics, and quantum computing including last-mile
connectivity to serve users in rural and remote areas will be needed (NAST, 2021).
Overall, the national innovation system will be grounded in the Intellectual Property
Code (Republic Act 8293) which protects the rights of scientists, inventors, artists, and

other gifted citizens to their Intellectual Property (IP) and creations.

Philippines Development Plan (2023-2028). The new medium term development
plan maps out the strategies to achieve economic and social transformation within the
next six years which is also anchored in Ambisyon 2040. The plan, which is guided by a
whole-of-government and whole-of-society approach, focus on food security and
enlarging people’s freedoms and choices. Consistent with the characteristic of

Agriculture 4.0 promoted in this study, the new PDP regards agriculture as part of a


bigger agri-food systems will take a value-chain approach that will link agriculture
production to other value-chain processes including post-harvest management,
processing, marketing, consumption, and waste management (NEDA, 2023). Meanwhile,
to advance R&D, technology, and innovation, the said plan will increase quantity and
quality of human capital in basic, technical-vocational and higher education in Industry
4.0 skills framework to upskill and reskill the workforce on technical skills, as well as
social and personal skills such as critical thinking, decision-making, communication and
collaboration which are all included as human capital for Agri 4.0 readiness. Indicators of
success include a goal of 1.0 GERD and moving up to rank 50 in the GII by 2028, as well

as increasing the number of adopted and commercialized R&D products and services.

Philippine Inclusive Innovation Industrial Strategy (i3S). The Inclusive Innovation
Industrial Strategy (i3S) acknowledges the role of innovation in the country’s industrial
policy towards a globally competitive manufacturing, agriculture, and services that have
“strong forward and backward linkages” (Aldaba, 2017). The policy seeks to invest more
resources on areas where the country has comparative advantage. For regional growth
and development, the policy acknowledges agriculture productivity and agribusiness will
be instrumental in transforming regional economies from traditional to more modern
agribusiness. The said policy will serve as basis for the significant investments in
infrastructure and logistics that would boost agriculture competitiveness and improve
connectivity within the country and pave the way for more innovation-centered programs

in the country.


Science for Change Program (S4CP). This is DOST’s deliberate effort to expand
and lay-out new investments in R&D and human capital development programs that will
improve the competitiveness of the science community in the various regions including
human capital development, and investment in R&D programs and projects that leverage
on cutting edge frontier technologies of Industry 4.0. Four programs compose the S4CP
namely the (1) Niche Centers in the Region for R&D (NICER) Program that focus on the
comparative advantage of regions and institutions; (2) RD Leadership Program (RD
Lead) that harness the leadership of experts and scientists of cutting edge technologies;
(3) Collaborative R&D to Leverage Philippine Economy (CRADLE) Program that
furthers the industry-academe-government linkage; and (4) Business Innovation for S&T
(BIST) Program that enhances the value chain by strengthening private companies to

undertake relevant R&D initiatives (DOST, 2020).

DOST Harmonized National Research and Development Agenda 2022-2028
(HNRDA). Cognizant of the importance of science-based and strategic R&D in overall
growth and development in the country, the HNRDA was also developed by DOST and
its various councils and attached agencies that will guide the national R&D system in
developing programs and projects in the AANR among the priority sectors. It explicitly
supports Agriculture 4.0 and the various frontier technologies such as biotechnology,
omics, nanotechnology, Al, UAV, big data, loT and robotics and automation as translated

into farm mechanization and smart farming, urban forestry, among others. Aside from


promoting whole-of-government approach and collaborative and synergistic partnerships
towards common goals in agriculture development, the said document also provides a
framework for capability development in the R&D community (DOST-PCAARRD,

2021).

National Agriculture and Fisheries Modernization and Industrialization Plan
(NAFMIP) 2021-2030. National Agriculture and Fisheries Modernization and
Industrialization Plan 2021-2030. NAFMIP 2021-2030, as a whole-of-nation plan that
provides policy and strategic directions for the agriculture sector’s transformative
interventions that ultimately will improve the farmers and fisherfolks standard of living
by diversifying income sources and employment in a sustainable manner and without
negative impact to health and nutrition (DA, 2022). Following a whole-of-nation
approach, the plan will serve as the main guide for the agriculture department and other
stakeholders including the local government units to develop commodity specific
operational roadmaps on national, regional, and local levels. It adopts the value-chain
approach to agri-fishery development, which as emphasized in this study is made more
feasible through the Agriculture 4.0 frontier technologies. The science-based approaches
to transformative strategies also highlight the importance of accurate, comprehensive and
interoperable data and information, as well as the synergy and coordination among
various agri-food stakeholders for vertical and horizontal integration. The said blueprint
likewise articulates on the economic, environmental and social (including health and

nutrition) impacts of modernized agriculture.


Second Congressional Commission on Education (EdComm II) Act (RA 11899).
This law enacted in 2022 will assess, evaluate and correspondingly develop strategic
plans and investments in education, considering foremost the digital transformation in
education that will promote digital literacy, 21" century skills such as critical thinking,
communication, collaboration, social skills, problem-solving and other core
competencies. The said human capital requirements are mostly espoused in this study as
readiness indicators towards Agriculture 4.0. As part of the assessment, the Philippine
Institute for Development Studies (PIDS) will study the current mandates of the Department
of Education (DepEd), the Commission on Higher Education (CHED) and the Technical
Education and Skills Development Authority (TESDA) and develop strategies to address the

learning poverty within the digital ecosystem (Chi, 2022).

Philippine Innovation Act of 2019 (RA 11293). The law recognizes the impact of
innovation to the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises and provides the basis for
establishment of the National Innovation Council (NIC). The council is tasked with
promoting innovation and internationalization activities of MSMEs through education,
training, research and development. Within an innovation ecosystem, the said law, pushes
for a whole-of-government approach that will facilitate and more forward the various
inclusive and sustainable innovation efforts. This includes the collaboration between and

among the academe, industry, scientific community and research and development


community that are all considered stakeholders of the Agriculture 4.0 ecosystem

(innovate.dti.gov.ph).

Innovative Startup Act of 2019 (RA 11337). The said law pushes for inclusive
growth and development through an innovative economy characterized by new jobs and
opportunities and advanced innovation and trade among others. These are then made
possible by encouraging and providing incentives to innovative R&D activities by startup
companies and organizations including startup enablers. Government agencies DOST,
DICT, and DTI are regarded as lead for the said law that will assess and monitor the

developments and roll-out of the said law (ecommerce.dti.gov.ph).

National ICT Ecosystem Framework (NICTEF). Building on the Philippine Digital
Strategy as the antecedent of the NICTEF, the said blueprint intends to serve as the
backbone in that road towards the digital transformation of the economy. For this to be
realized, the framework identifies several elements that are highly interdependent,
namely — human capital, affordable access and devices, platform solutions, info- and
infrastructure, and the standards, regulations and policies. Accordingly, the framework
acknowledges the impact of the Fourth industrial revolution and its frontier technologies
and thorough analysis of these are essential for that innovation ecosystem and sustainable
development to thrive. Under the NICTEF, digital transformation strategies are focused
on six areas that includes among others capacity building through ICT-related education

and training.


Free Internet Access Program of 2017 (RA 10929). With data and interconnectivity
as linchpin to Agriculture 4.0, the “Free Internet Access in Public Places Act”
provides free internet or WiFi access in various spaces such as “public schools, state
universities and colleges, government offices, and publicly-owned transport terminals,
hospitals, parks, and libraries, among others.” The said service is expected to promote
knowledge building and inclusive social participation that will address the second level

digital divide level of inaccessibility and use.

National Artificial Intelligence Strategy for the Philippines. The said strategy aims
to address the low adoption of AI in the country, cognizant of the fact that the service
sector which is the fastest growing sector of the country is vulnerable to job loss due to
AI technologies. As such, a governance framework that will morally guide the
deployment of AI in the country is needed (Sy, 2022). The four dimensions of AI
readiness are outlined in the framework are (1) Digitization and Infrastructure, (2)
Research and Development, (3) Workforce Development, and (4) Regulation. The said
roadmap also created the National Center for AI Research (NCAIR) which now serves as
the hub of AI activities in the country. At the same time, the said roadmap was able to
identify priority R&D projects in agriculture, among other sectors. Overall, workforce
development for AI includes digital literacy through education and lifelong learning,

including learning and development programs to upskill and reskill current workforce.


Along with Al, data science, data visualization, and analytics are also considered vital to

its success (DTI, n.d.).

National Cybersecurity Plan 2022. Cybersecurity is an indispensable policy as we
forward digital transformation. The The NSCP 2022 identifies sources of threats and
strategies to protect internet users, businesses, information infrastructure (CII), and
private and public networks, and of all sizes against these. The said plan which was

launch in 2019 is being reviewed to include emerging issues and concerns that impact

For capacity development of S&T researchers, the Department of Science and
Technology through its human resource development arm, the Science Education
Institute has been in the forefront of human capital development through provision of
undergraduate and graduate education scholarships. The Science and Technology Human
Resource Development Plan is a medium-term plan of DOST that outlines the priority
fields of specializations for human capital investment to ensure that the STI has enough

supply of qualified S&T human resources in the country (DOST-SEI, 2018).

This policy framework serves as guide in the implementation of various scholarship
programs of DOST such as the Accelerated Science and Technology Human Resource
Development Program (ASTHRDP) and Engineering Research and Development for

Technology (ERDT).


With the new PDP and in congruence with the recommendation of Baconguis
(2022) to invest in formal and non-formal education in cutting-edge technologies, the
next five-year STHRDP of the science department should continuously provide human
capital investments on the disciplines related to the frontier technologies namely
biotechnology, omics and gene editing, remote sensing, nanotechnology, IoT, big data,
UAVs, robotics, AI and machine learning, 3D printing and additive manufacturing and
blockchain. However, Agriculture 4.0 goes beyond technical sciences, and to deal with

social sciences and policy discourse (Klerkx & Rose, 2020).

Thus, technology management and related courses should also be included in the
priority programs. Meanwhile, as response to the growing discipline of responsible
innovation and awareness, science communication and social science courses that focus
of addressing the concerns on social justice and digital divide need to be considered in

the human capital strategy.

Foreign graduate studies and other forms of student and researcher mobilities
should be given consideration particularly when specialization is still relatively new or

lacking in the country.


Table 37. Priority specializations and courses related to Agriculture 4.0

AGRICULTURE 4.0 TECHNOLOGIES.
AND THRUSTS

RELATED COURSES AND SPECIALIZATION

Biotechnology

Sensors and Remote Sensing

Nanotechnology

Omics and Gene Editing

Artificial Intelligence and Machine

Learning

Big Data

Internet of Things

3D printing and additive
manufacturing

AUVs

Robotics and Automation

Block chain

Technology Management

Social Science for

Innovation

Responsible

Molecular Biotechnology, Molecular Biology And
Biotechnology, Agricultural Biotechnology

Remote Sensing & GIS, Digital Imaging
Biology/Molecular Biology, Biochemistry Chemical
Biology, Chemistry, Computer Science, Electronics,

Engineering Materials Science, Nanoscience, Physics

Genetics And Genomics, Molecular Biology,
Biochemistry, Biology, Microbiology

Artificial Intelligence, Data Science, Al Programming
Data Analytics, Computer Science, Mathematics,
Statistics

Computer Science, Electrical Engineering,

Network Forensics and Security, Cyber Security,
Artificial Intelligence, Big Data

Mechatronics, Computer Science, Industrial Design,
Civil Engineering Mechanical Engineering, Chemical
Science Software Development, Engineering
Aviation, Engineering

Computer Science, Engineering

Computer Science, Information Technology,
Information Security

Technology Management, Agribusiness Management,
Agriculture Economics, IP Management

Science Communication, Development Communication,
Development Studies, Agriculture Extension, Extension
Education



Organizational capability development. To promote an innovation culture
towards meaningful R&D, leaders of the organization, particularly the top management
are expected to be at the helm of innovation and change. As indicators of readiness for
Agriculture 4.0, leaders are expected to have futures thinking and foresight skills and
competences that would charter the long-term, medium-term, and short-term plans and

activities of the organization.

Another variable or indicator of readiness identified in the study, Agriculture 4.0
strategies and plans should be integrated in the short, medium, and long-term plans of
HEls. However, as revealed in the assessment, this is an important readiness indicator
that many R&D organizations have not yet been able to implement, with many still at
level 2 of readiness. Organizational strategies should include the strategic
communications plan, which should be based on the current level of awareness and
knowledge of Agriculture 4.0. Organizational communication is an important component
of organizational development, particularly in the 4IR environment characterized by

dynamic shifts and changes (Jasifska & Jasinski, 2019).

On the other hand, to address the gaps in intergenerational knowledge transfer,
mentoring and coaching programs are needed to be explicitly stated in the organizational
processes (Ruptié, 2018). Data-driven succession plans that outline reskilling and

upskilling of human resources and addressing talent gaps should be well-laid out.


Another important readiness variable identified in the study that leads to policy is
the strengthening of the organization’s social capital. As mentioned by Leron and
Baconguis (2022), social capital looks at building people and networks with shared
norms, values and understandings to facilitate cooperation within or among teams and
groups. In the study, potential adopters, organizations with similar interests, and

professional organizations are some forms of social capital that need to be fortified.

In Agriculture 4.0, HEIs have a significant role to play considering their
fundamental functions of instruction, research, and extension. As revealed in this study,
education institutions need to ensure that their academic programs are updated and
responsive to the demands of society, reflective of the functionalist theory of education.
The passage of the Republic Act 11899 of 2022 otherwise known as "Second
Congressional Commission on Education (EDCOM II) Act," provides the backdrop to
reviewing and assessing the education curriculum to address the demands and challenges
of the Fourth Industrial Revolution, including reforms to education that will promote
development of 21st century skills, including creativity, communication, collaboration,

social skills, leadership, and initiative, among others.

For HEIs, this entails offering new academic programs such as graduate courses in
data analytics, blockchain, and robotics; and reviewing of current offerings to ensure that

these are aligned with Agriculture 4.0 practices and disciplines. Similarly, as discussed in


the Agriculture 4.0 readiness model it is essential that the academe equip students with
the necessary digital skills and soft skills necessary to thrive in the 4IR. Ellahi et al.
(2019) proposed a curriculum matrix that focuses on five technologies of the 4IR, the
“upcoming generations” need to learn how skills and knowledge on navigating through
IT infrastructures namely cloud computing, big data, artificial intelligence, and
augmented reality. On the other hand, a Challenge-Based Learning model suggested by
Villata-Perdomo et al. (2019) that will help provide that environment for soft-skills
training that includes collaboration, communication, planning and problem-solving.
Following this approach, current teaching practices such as internships, co-op education,
or practicum in organizations and private sector could be enhanced for on-the-ground
experience, while strengthening the industry-academe partnerships. By strengthening this
partnership, the gap between what the employers need and what the universities produce

is effectively addressed.

Smart operations will be one of the cornerstones of the organization’s readiness to
Agriculture 4.0, with frontier technologies like loT, cloud data management, big data and
Al to promote data sharing, interoperability, as well as cyber security. At seen in the
assessment, this is one of the lowest rated of the indictors of readiness that need to be

urgently addressed by each organization in the AANR R&D community.

Lastly, one of R&D organizations’ unique propositions is its Technology

Management component that will systematically ensure that the products and services of


R&D activities are upscaled and commercialized, but more importantly, reach the

farmers and fisherfolks who are the main beneficiaries of R&D activities.

Individual Capacity Development: Developing W-shaped researchers,
scientists, and engineers. The Fourth Industrial Revolution in general has a profound
impact on labor. The complex nature calls for reskilling and upskilling efforts to sustain
employability of individuals. As discussed in this study, human capital investments
towards Agriculture 4.0 readiness focus on developing 21" Century literacy which
transcends beyond technical skills but also includes social and personal skills (Maisiri et
al., 2019). There are various competency models that have been presented in literature
and the W-shaped professional competencies proposed by Jones et al. (2020) is emergent
and closely related to this study. The W- shaped 4IR Competency Model composed of
four sets of expertise, skills, and attitudes, namely human literacy, digital fluency, hyper-
learning, and systems and design thinking (Jones et al., 2020). These skillsets, which
have been identified in our study as human capital requirements are expected to help
improve employability and address the technological unemployment issue that is

expected of the technological revolution.

Human literacy focuses on skillsets that are beyond the comprehension of AI,
computers and machines, with empathy as a key component. Communication and
collaboration are still considered essential because empathy cannot be conveyed without

the two (Jones et al., 2020). Digital fluency captures the salient skillset of EU’s Digcomp


Framework that enhances a persons’ ability to manage digital data, information, and
content (Vuorikari et al., 2022). On the other hand, hyper-learning is seen to be closely
related to the concept of lifelong learning. Lifelong learning according to the
International Labor Organization (ILO, 2003) encompasses all learning activities
undertaken throughout life for the development of competencies and qualifications. It
follows the “learning from cradle to grave concept” of Faure Report’s lifelong education
(Faure et al., 1972), and the OECD broad description of lifelong learning (2001), which
includes what people learn across their entire lifespan. While the same perspective is
offered by hyper-learning, the pace and dynamic nature of learning is also considered in
such skill set. Lastly, systems & design thinking includes the critical thinking skills and
creativity, among other personal skills that will help a professional develop a more

holistic approach to Agriculture 4.0.

Given the foregoing, the following policy framework is proposed following the

capacity development framework, and the readiness variables mentioned in the study:


—_ }

ENABLING ENVIRONMENT FOR AGRICULTURE 4.0 |

STRATEGIES AND SKILLS SMART SOCIAL RESOURCES
DEVELOPMENT OPERATIONS CAPITAL ALLOCATION
Plans and Strategies Data Adopters Budget for
| Communications Plan Interoperability LGU acquisition,
| Social Capital IT Security Private Sector maintenance
Resource Allocation Risk Mgt Plan Int'l Partners and

sustainability

INDIVIDUAL SKILLS AND COMPETENCIES LEADERSHIP COMPETENCIES
Digital Skills Foresight
Social Skills Futures Thinking

Personal Skills

Figure 20. Policy Framework for Agriculture 4.0

Summary and Conclusion

Based on the agriculture 4.0 readiness model that was developed, the agriculture
R&D community in the Philippines is at its early levels of readiness, implying that there

is significant room for growth and improvement particularly on the five readiness


dimensions. From a human capital theory lens, investments to education and training will

enable individuals and organizations to thrive within the Agriculture 4.0 environment.

Policy frameworks in support of Agriculture 4.0 are already in place, albeit still in
their infancy stages. This includes Pagtanaw 2050 which reflects the significant
outcomes and impact of the Agriculture 4.0 in the social, economic, and environmental
dimensions of development. As such, strategic human capital investments are
recommended to be integrated in the STHRDP of the DOST, operationalized through
scholarship programs such as the ASTHRDP and ERDT. Moreover, the passage of RA
11899 of 2022 or the Edcom II Act, enables education institutions to re-assess their
current academic programs and teaching approaches to effectively respond to the

demands of the Fourth Industrial Revolution.

Apart from these macro-level policy frameworks, HEIs as R&D organizations also
must integrate Agriculture 4.0 strategies in their organizational plans and programs. This
includes allocating considerable financial resources to acquire, upgrade and maintain the
needed facilities and equipment. Support to human resource development programs such
as mentoring, coaching, trainings and incentives that will help reskill and upskill should

be also in place.


CHAPTER 8

SUMMARY, CONCLUSIONS, AND RECOMMENDATIONS

Summary

The motivation for this study focuses on the requirements for human capital
development to effectively respond to the demands of Agriculture 4.0. For this to be
achieved, the study developed the Agriculture 4.0 readiness model within the context of
the Philippine Agriculture R&D organizations through an exploratory sequential mixed

methods research design.

Expounded by the theory of institutional isomorphism, the disruptive nature of
technological breakthroughs coupled with globalization are continuously influencing the
practices of societies and organizations towards a certain level of homogenization
explained by the concept of institutional isomorphism. Di Maggio and Powel (1983)
introduced the said institutional theory which argues that organizational models, once
institutionalized, will cause like institutions to become more alike. Various pressures
prompt organizations to revisit their goals or develop new practices based on the

demands of the environment and like organizations.


Following such emic perspective that recognizes foremost the socio-cultural
setting, a definition and characteristic of Agriculture 4.0 within the context of the
Philippine Research and Development sector was drawn through desk research, RT
Delphi technique and KII. Agriculture 4.0 in the Philippines is thus defined as the range
of concepts and technologies of IR 4.0 used to enhance and develop agriculture
innovations and systems across the agri-food value chain that will improve agriculture
productivity, environmental sustainability, food and nutrition, and income. Frontier
technologies include biotechnology, sensors and remote sensing technologies, AI and
machine learning, advance genomics and gene editing, nanotechnology, 3D printing and
additive manufacturing, Unmanned Aerial Vehicles or drones, Internet of Things, Big

data, robotics, and automation, and blockchain.

After defining and characterizing Agriculture 4.0 in the Philippine setting, the
researcher proceeded with identifying the readiness dimensions of Agriculture 4.0 which
informs the readiness model. Five readiness dimensions were established namely human
capital, organizational leadership, strategies and skills development, smart operations,
and technology management. A total of 58 indicators were established through this
qualitative phase which was then analyzed for internal consistency and reliability through
Cronbach’s alpha. Based on the values of the test, all items were above the 0.70

threshold.


The said model was tested in the field through a self-assessment survey
administered among the crops and livestock partner organizations of DOST-PCAARRD
through the R&D Consortia mechanism. After collecting the data from the field, the
study used Confirmatory Factor Analysis (CFA) and Structural Equation Modeling
(SEM) to establish associations between and among the latent or unobservable and
observable readiness variables and overall, validate the Agriculture 4.0 readiness model
developed. Considering the multi-level nature of the assessment tool, a second order
factor analysis (CFA) was done prior to the validation of the structural model. Construct
validity and convergent validity were performed through the SEM program SPSS Amos.
After deleting several items and performing modification index, the CFI, TL], RMSEA
and chisq/df of the model achieved the cut-off rates indicating the model fit. Convergent
validity was done by computing for the Average Variance Estimates (AVE) and
Composite Reliability (CR), and resulted to values higher than the 0.45 and 0.6 cut-off
marks, respectively. The regression coefficients of the five dimensions and the
observable items were also found to be significantly related to agriculture readiness,
which indicated that the model developed is a statistically significant indicator of

Agriculture 4.0 readiness.

The final model was then used to evaluate the readiness of the 135 sample R&D
organizations and revealed that Agriculture 4.0 is already being done by the various
organizations. As a whole, the R&D community is still in the early stages of Agriculture

4.0, with level 2 (conceptualization) readiness. Human capital dimension showed higher


readiness level, along with organizational leadership. However, strategies and smart

operations have relatively lower readiness levels which need more attention.

From a human capital theory lens, investments to education and training will enable

individuals and organizations to thrive within the Agriculture 4.0 environment.

Policy frameworks in support of Agriculture 4.0 are already in place, albeit still in
their infancy stages. This includes the Pagtanaw 2050 which reflects the significant
outcomes and impact of the Agriculture 4.0 in the social, economic, and environmental
dimensions of development. As such, integrating strategic human capital investments is
recommended for the STHRDP of the DOST, operationalized through scholarship
programs such as the ASTHRDP and ERDT. Moreover, the passage of RA 11899 of
2022 or the Edcom II Act, education institutions are given the opportunity to re-assess
their current academic programs and teaching approaches to effectively respond to the

demands of the Fourth Industrial Revolution.

Apart from this macro-level policy frameworks, HEIs as R&D organizations also
need to ensure that Agriculture 4.0 strategies are integrated in their organizational plans
and programs. This includes allocating considerable financial resources to acquire,
upgrade and maintain the needed facilities and equipment. Support to human resource
development programs such as mentoring, coaching, trainings and incentives that will

help reskill and upskill should be also in place.


Conclusion

The global village is already within the so-called fourth industrial (4IR) revolution
characterized by technologies that are blurring the boundaries of the physical, digital, and
biological spheres. This technologically-driven era is already causing both positive and
negative disruptions on economic, socio-cultural, political and environmental dimensions

of development.

As we move towards the early years of the fourth industrial revolution, the
agriculture sector is given the opportunity to leverage of 4IR frontier technologies and
transition into Agri 4.0, characterized by efficient and technology-based approaches that
improve farm productivity, increase food production, and farmer income including
developing more value adding food products and services. However, access to
technology would entail increasing Research and Development (R&D) investments to
improve farmers’ productivity and human capital including a more strategic utilization of

the various limited resources of the AANR.

While there are already pockets of Agri 4.0 programs and activities being done all
over the country, a more holistic approach is needed to fully maximize the very limited
resources and address the challenges of the digital divide, as well as technological

unemployment that may arise. In order to do this, a readiness assessment is a critical first


step for R&D community that will assess the current state and the gap to the intended

goal.

The readiness model developed here shows that the members of the Philippine
R&D community are still within the second or third levels of readiness. Thus, many
organizations are aware of nuances of Agriculture 4.0, but much more has to be done to
make organizations fully prepared to harness the benefits, as well as address the risks and

perils of the technological revolution.

Based on the qualitative and quantitative research integral of the study, Agriculture
4.0 readiness in the Philippines is dependent upon several variables, namely human
capital, organizational leadership, strategies, smart operations and technology
management. Accordingly, capability development that revolves around these dimensions
and their indicators should be explored by individuals and organizations in order to

survive the waves of technological transformation.

Agriculture 4.0 is a development concern that entails a multi-disciplinary and trans-
disciplinary approaches- this emphasizes the improvement of soft skills to facilitate
collaboration and communication across technical and social science disciplines. It also
emphasizes soft-skills that are beyond the intellectual reach of artificial intelligence.
Accordingly, empathy, collaboration and communication, systems and designs thinking,

as well as lifelong learning mind-set are needed aside from digital literacy skills and


competencies. On the other hand, foresight and futures-thinking skills are needed by

leaders for them to push the organization towards Agriculture 4.0.

Human capital development entails both reskilling and upskilling of technical and
social sciences. Technical or natural sciences will cover the education and training
requirements for frontier technologies, while social sciences are needed to promote
responsible rural innovation, science communication and technology management.
Towards this end, there is a need for W-shaped professionals that are equipped with
competencies on human literacy, digital fluency, hyper-learning, and systems and design

thinking.

Based on the readiness assessment conducted, organizations need to integrate
Agriculture 4.0 strategies into their organizational plan and strategies in order to sustain
the positive gains in human capital development. This includes allocating considerable
resources to meet human capital and technological requirements of the organization.
Resources towards acquisition of technologies should be accompanied by providing
enough resources that will maintain and even upgrade these facilities and equipment in

the coming years.


Organizational planning and human capital development need to consider
intergenerational knowledge transfer through coaching and mentoring to address talents

gaps particularly in highly specialized skills and competencies.

On the other hand, data sharing and interoperability within the organization as well
as its partner organizations must be maximized in coming up with science-based and
data-driven strategies and activities. Accordingly, efforts must be put in place to ensure

that data shared and stored are secured from threats.

Lastly, with agriculture R&D cutting across the entire agri-food value chain,
organizations need to consider technology management as an inevitable component of the
R&D nexus and that products and services of the R&D efforts must be commercialized
and scaled-up. Considering this, strong collaboration with adopters of technology,
particularly farmers, fisherfolks and agri-entrepreneurs need to be put in place; and
avenues to showcase such products should be made an integral component of every R&D
organization. Accordingly, strong IP policies and guidelines must also be in place that
will not just prepare the organization for Agriculture 4.0, but also empower researchers

and scientists to benefit from the products of their research.


This study contributes to the growing body of knowledge in development studies
by establishing that Agricuture 4.0 readiness is a function of several variables that include
human capital (21st Century digital, technical and soft skills); organizational leadership
characterized by foresight and futures thinking; organizational strategies towards building
that innovation culture in the organization; smart operations that looks into
interoperability of data and information but at the same time ensuring security and
privacy thereof; and technology management which focus on ensuring the establishment
of adopters, primarily farmers, fisherfolks and agri entrepreneurs for products and

services ready for scaling up and commercialization.

On the practical application, the readiness assessment identified the human capital
investments and other organizational strategies that can be prioritized by organizations
and individuals such as specializations for graduate studies, higher order thinking skills to
reskill and upskill the workforce especially that agriculture modernization and STI R&D

are highlighted in the PDP, DOST’s HNRDA, and EdCom 2.

Recommendations for Future Research

This study developed the readiness model for Agriculture 4.0 within the context of
the R&D community, particularly among those organizations involved in crops and

livestock research and development. Considering that there are only a few research


activities conducted on readiness and maturity assessments in the Philippines, there are

several areas for future research.

The dimensions and indicators for readiness that were identified were tailor-fit for
the R&D community. However, the said model can also be fitted or tested with other
stakeholders and players within the agriculture R&D. Considering that the Agriculture
4.0 covers the entire value-chain that also considers various key players and stakeholders,
readiness assessments and studies may also be done with the other stakeholders,
including agri-entrepreneurs, local government units particularly with the implementation
of the Mandanas-Garcia Supreme Court Ruling, or the farmers and fisherfolks which are

most vulnerable to high technology.

The readiness model developed was pursued in a meso-level assessment, readiness
assessments for Agriculture 4.0 can also be conducted on a micro-level that would
evaluate an individual’s readiness towards Agriculture 4.0 or Industry 4.0. As the study
identified the human capital readiness variables vis-a-vis the organization, another study
can look at assessing the digital literacy readiness of the workforce, focusing on both

digital skills and soft-skills and competencies.

Another area for future education and development research would be in
assessing the willingness of the youth to enroll in agriculture and agri-related courses.
Much has been said about how Agriculture 4.0’s technological nature is assumed to

attract more youth back in agriculture studies, and eventually address the ageing


population of the agriculture sector. Such a study can strengthen this notion, and at the
same time identify education approaches and reforms that will further address the

declining enrollments, among others.


LITERATURE CITED

ADB. (2017). ASEAN 4.0: What does the Fourth Industrial Revolution mean for
regional economic integration. https://doi.org/10.22617/TCS179126-2

Akunyumu, S., Fugar, F. D. K., Adinyira, E., & Danku, J. C. (2021). A review of
models for assessing readiness of construction organisations to innovate. In
Construction Innovation (Vol. 21, Issue 2, pp. 279-299). Emerald Group
Holdings Ltd. https://doi.org/10.1108/CI-01-2020-0014

Aldaba, R. M. (2017). Philippine Inclusive Innovation Industrial Strategy Propelling
Jobs, Investments, and Shared Prosperity for All. DTI Policy Briefs. (No. 05;
2017).

ASEAN. (2017). Study on the State of S&T Development in ASEAN.
https://docs.google.com/document/d/1_C3yNKnj6YSBjpuTaeT7m-
Pf£TEzdZULx/edit#

ASEAN. (2021a). Consolidated Strategy on the Fourth Industrial Revolution for
ASEAN.

ASEAN. (2021b). Consolidated Strategy on the Fourth Industrial Revolution for
ASEAN.

Awang, Z. (2015). SEM made simple: A gentle approach to learning Structural
Equation Modeling. MPWS Rich Publication.

Baconguis, R. T. (2022). Agricultural Technology: Why Does the Level of
Agricultural Production Remain Low Despite Increased Investments in
Research and Extension? PIDS Discussion Paper Series (2022-06).

Balisacan, A. M., & Hill, H. (2003). The Philippine Economy: Development,
Policies, and Challenges. Oxford University Press.
https://doi.org/10.1093/0195158989.001.0001

Baron, R. A., & Markman, G. D. (2000). Beyond social capital: How social skills
can enhance entrepreneurs’ success.
Https://Doi.Org/10.5465/Ame.2000.2909843, 14(1), 106-114.
https://doi.org/10.5465/AME.2000.2909843

Beiderbeck, D., Frevel, N., von der Gracht, H. A., Schmidt, S. L., & Schweitzer, V.
M. (2021). Preparing, conducting, and analyzing Delphi surveys: Cross-


disciplinary practices, new directions, and advancements. MethodsX, 8.
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.MEX.2021.101401

Bigliardi, B., Bottani, E., & Casella, G. (2020). Enabling technologies, application
areas and impact of industry 4.0: A bibliographic analysis. Procedia
Manufacturing, 42, 322-326. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.promfg.2020.02.086

Bonneau, V., Copigneaux, B., Probst, L., & Pedersen, B. (2017). Industry 4.0 in
agriculture: Focus on IoT aspects. Digital Transformation Monitor.

Briones, R. M. (2021). Philippine agriculture: Current state, challenges, and ways
forward. PIDS Policy Notes.

Britton, J., & Vignoles, A. (2018). Education production functions. In G. Johnes, J.
Johnes, T. Agasisti, & L. Lépez-Torres (Eds.), Handbook of contemporary
education economics (pp. 246-271).

Brown, E., Ebora, R., & Decena, F. L. C. (2018). The Current State, Challenges and
Plans for Philippine Agriculture. 59th Meeting of NPOs.

Brown, M. B., Brown, C. M. B., & Nepomuceno, R. A. (2020). Nanotechnology in
the Philippines. In Intellectual Property Issues in Nanotechnology. CRC Press.
https://doi.org/10.1201/9781003052104-21

Brown, T. (2006). Confirmatory Factor Analysis for Applied Research (D. Kenney,
Ed.). The Guilford Press.

Bryman, A., & Bell, E. (2011). Business Research methods (3rd ed.). Oxford
University Press.

Bujang, M. A., Omar, E. D., & Baharum, N. A. (2018). A Review on Sample Size
Determination for Cronbach’s Alpha Test: A Simple Guide for Researchers.
The Malaysian Journal of Medical Sciences : MJMS, 25(6), 85.
https://doi.org/10.21315/MJMS2018.25.6.9

Campos, C. (2019, September 12). The Future of Farming 4.0: The digitalisation of
agriculture. OECD Forum.

Caoili, O. (1980). Science Policy in the Philippines: The education and training of
scientists and engineers.

Chang, J.-H., & Huynh, P. (2016). ASEAN in Transformation: The future of jobs at
risk of automation.


Chi, C. (2022, July 28). Bill creating EDCOM II lapses into law. The Philippine Star.
https://www.philstar.com/headlines/2022/07/28/2 198530/bill-creating-edcom-
ii-lapses-law

Chuang, J. H., Wang, J. H., & Liou, Y. C. (2020). Farmers’ knowledge, attitude, and
adoption of smart agriculture technology in Taiwan. International Journal of
Environmental Research and Public Health, 17(19), 1-8.
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph1 7197236

Cinar, Z. M., Zeeshan, Q., & Korhan, O. (2021). A Framework for Industry 4.0
Readiness and Maturity of Smart Manufacturing Enterprises: A Case Study.
Sustainability, 13(12), 6659. https://doi.org/10.3390/su13126659

Coble, K. H., Mishra, A. K., Ferrell, S., & Griffin, T. (2018). Big data in agriculture:
A challenge for the future. Applied Economic Perspectives and Policy, 40(1),
79-96. https://doi.org/10.1093/AEPP/PPX056

Comell University, INSEAD, & WIPO. (2019). The Global Innovation Index 2019 :
Creating Healthy Lives - The Future of Medical Innovation. World Intellectual
Property Organization.

Cororaton, C. B. (1999). Rates of Return to R&D Investment in the Philippines,
PIDS Discussion Paper Series, No. 1999-24.
https://www.econstor.eu/handle/10419/187410

Corpuz, P. (2018). Philippine Agricultural Biotechnology Situation and Outlook.

CreSnar, R., Potoéan, V., & Nedelko, Z. (2020a). Speeding up the implementation of
industry 4.0 with management tools: Empirical investigations in
manufacturing organizations. Sensors (Switzerland), 20(12), 1-25.
https://doi.org/10.3390/s20123469

Cregnar, R., Potogan, V., & Nedelko, Z. (2020b). Speeding Up the Implementation
of Industry 4.0 with Management Tools: Empirical Investigations in
Manufacturing Organizations. Sensors, 20(12), 3469.
https://doi.org/10.3390/s20123469

Creswell, J., & Plano Clark, V. (2018). Designing and Conducting Mixed Methods
Research (3rd ed.). SAGE Publications, Inc.

Crisostomo, J. L. B., & Dizon, J. R. C. (2021). 3D Printing Applications in
Agriculture, Food Processing, and Environmental Protection and Monitoring.
Advance Sustainable Science, Engineering and Technology, 3(2), 0210201.
https://doi.org/10.26877/asset.v3i2.9627


Cuong, N. (2020, June 19). A Vietnamese perspective on the evolution of Industry
4.0. Vietnam Investment Review.

DA. (2022). National Agriculture and Fisheries Modernization and Industrialization
Plan 2021-2030: Transforming the Philippine Food System Together.

da Silveira, F., Lermen, F. H., & Amaral, F. G. (2021). An overview of agriculture
4.0 development: Systematic review of descriptions, technologies, barriers,
advantages, and disadvantages. Computers and Electronics in Agriculture,
189, 106405. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compag.2021.106405

Dadios, E. P., Culaba, A. B., Ramon, J., Albert, G., Paqueo, V. B., Orbeta, A. C.,
Serafica, R. B., Bandala, A. A., Carlos, J., & Bairan, A. C. (2018a). Preparing
the Philippines for the Fourth Industrial Revolution: A Scoping Study. In
DISCUSSION PAPER SERIES. https://www.pids.gov.ph

Dadios, E. P., Culaba, A. B., Ramon, J., Albert, G., Paqueo, V. B., Orbeta, A. C.,
Serafica, R. B., Bandala, A. A., Carlos, J., & Bairan, A. C. (2018b). Preparing
the Philippines for the Fourth Industrial Revolution: A Scoping Study. In
DISCUSSION PAPER SERIES. https://www.pids.gov.ph

David, C. C. (2003). Agriculture. In A. B. Balisacan & H. Hill (Eds.), The
Philippine. Economy: Development, Policies and Challenges. Oxford
University Press.

de Clercq, M., Vats, A., & Biel, A. (2018). Agriculture 4.0: The future of farming
technology.

Dedehayir, O., & Steinert, M. (2016). The hype cycle model: A review and future
directions. Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 108, 28-41.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2016.04.005

Demeter, K., Losonci, D., & Racz, B.-G. (2018). Assessing Industry 4.0 readiness: a
multi-country industry level analysis. 25th Annual EurOMA Conference, 1—
10. https://www.researchgate.net/publication/330872573

Dethier, J. J., & Effenberger, A. (2012). Agriculture and development: A brief
review of the literature. Economic Systems, 36(2), 175-205.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecosys.201 1.09.003

DICT. (2019). E-Government Masterplan 2022.
Diem, H. H., & Do, T. T. T. (2020). Prospects for Agriculture 4.0 in Developing

Countries: Case Studies from Vietnam. In Structural Changes of Agriculture in
the CLMTV Countries and their Socio-Economic Impacts (pp. 102-116).


https://ec.europa.eu/info/news/european-union-funds-digital-research-and-
innovation-

Dimaggio, P. J., & Powell, W. W. (1983). The Iron Cage Revisited: Institutional
Isomorphism and Collective Rationality in Organizational Fields. In Source:
American Sociological Review (Vol. 48, Issue 2).

DiMaggio, P. J., & Powell, W. W. (1983). The Iron Cage Revisited: Institutional
Isomorphism and Collective Rationality in Organizational Fields. American
Sociological Review, 48(2), 147. https://doi.org/10.2307/2095101

Domingo, S. N., Joy, A., & Manejar, A. (2021). Modern Biotechnology Application
and Regulation in the Philippines: Issues and Prospects. Discussion Paper
Series 2021-45. https://www.pids.gov.ph

DOST. (2020). DOST Administrative Order 18 Series of 2020. In Guidelines for the
Implementation of the Accelerated R&D Program for Capacity Building of
Research and Development Institutions and Industrial Competitiveness of the
Science for Change (S4C) Program. Department of Science and Technology.

DOST. (2021). AI ProgramsTechnology.

DOST-PCAARRD. (2021, October 13). Updated Harmonized National Research and
Development Agenda. Updated Harmonized National Research and
Development Agenda

DOST-SEI. (2018). Science and Technology Human Resource Development Plan
2017-2022. 1.

Drost, E. A. (2011). Validity and Reliability in Social Science Research. Education
Research and Perspectives, 38(1), 105-124.

DTI. (n.d.). National Artificial Intelligence Strategy of the Philippines. Retrieved
January 14, 2023, from
https://innovate.dti.gov.ph/resources/roadmaps/artificial-intelligence/

Eastwood, C. R., Edwards, J. P., & Turner, J. A. (2021). Anticipating alternative
trajectories for responsible Agriculture 4.0 innovation in livestock systems.
Animal, 15, 100296. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.animal.2021.100296

Ebora, R. v. (2022, May 3). Supporting the Sustainability of Agricultural Innovation
Systems. FFTC Agricultural Policy Platform (FFTC-AP).
https://ap. fftc.org.tw/article/3042


Edmonds, W. A., & Kennedy, T. D. (2020). Exploratory-Sequential Approach. An
Applied Guide to Research Designs: Quantitative, Qualitative, and Mixed
Methods, 201-207. https://doi.org/10.4135/9781071802779.N18

Elangovan, N. (2015). Isomorphic pressures of Cluster Institutions on ERP adoption:
A study in SME cluster of Indian knitwear industry. Journal of Enterprise
Resource Planning Studies, 1-24. https://doi.org/10.5171/2015.860631

Ersoz, F., Merdin, D., & Ersoz, T. (2018). Research of Industry 4.0 Awareness: A
Case Study of Turkey. Economics and Business, 32(1), 247-263.
https://doi.org/10.2478/eb-2018-0019

Esguerra, E. (2020). Automation, gigs, and other labor market tales: The Philippines
in the Fourth Industrial Revolution. The Philippine Review of Economics,
56(1 & 2), 187-218. https://doi.org/10.37907/10erp9102jd

Espaldon, M. Victoria. O., Mendoza, H., Quiray, A., & Dorado, M. (2018). Using
Digital Technology in Enhancing Climate Resilience of Philippine
Agriculture: The SARAI-Enhanced Monitoring System. In P. E. Sajise, R. D.
Lasco, M. C. H. Cadiz, & R. B. Bantayan (Eds.), Policy Enabling
Environment for Climat Change Adaptation: Some Experiences in Southeast
Asia (pp. 137-154). SEARCA.

European Commission. (2020). Skills for Industry. Curriculum Guidelines 4.0:
Future-proof education and training for manufacturing in Europe.
https://doi.org/10.2826/356798

FAO. (2017). The future of food and agriculture - Trends and Challenges.

Fathian, M., Akhavan, P., Hoorali, M., & Jafari, M. (2007). Application of Delphi
technique for development of E-readiness assessment model: a study on small
and medium enterprises of Iran. Information Resources Management
Association Conference (IRMA2007), 632-638.
http://ssrn.com/abstract=2 188229

Faure, E., Herrera, F., Kaddoura, A.R., Lopes, H., Petrovski, A.V., Rahnema, M., &
Ward, F.C. 1972. Learning to be: The world of education today and tomorrow.
International Commission on the Development of Education, UNESCO. 313p.

Fink-Hafner, D., Dagen, T., DouSak, M., Novak, M., & Hafner-Fink, M. (2019).
Delphi method: Strengths and Weaknesses. Advances in Methodology and
Statistics, 16(2). https://doi.org/10.51936/fcfm6982

Fleming, A., Jakku, E., Fielke, S., Taylor, B. M., Lacey, J., Terhorst, A., & Stitzlein,
C. (2021). Foresighting Australian digital agricultural futures: Applying


responsible innovation thinking to anticipate research and development impact
under different scenarios. Agricultural Systems, 190.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agsy.2021.103120

Fletcher, A. J., & Marchildon, G. P. (2014). Using the Delphi Method for
Qualitative, Participatory Action Research in Health Leadership. International
Journal of Qualitative Methods, 13(1), 1-18.
https://doi.org/10.1177/160940691401300101

Frey, C. B., & Osborne, M. A. (2017). The future of employment: How susceptible
are jobs to computerisation? Technological Forecasting and Social Change,
114. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2016.08.019

Gay, D., Ng, L., Cheng, H. W., Vergara, S., Ernst, E., Tobin, S., Milasi, S., Pin-
Heiro, V., Kraft, C., Women, U. N., Fernandez, A., Renner, S., Roig, M.,
Jimenez, M., Perry, J., Mukherjee, S., Roehrl, R. A., & Freire, C. (2017). The
impact of the technological revolution on labour markets and income
distribution.

Giannarou, L., & Zervas, E. (2014). Using Delphi technique to build consensus in
practice. Journal of Business Science and Applied Management, 9(2).

Gnatzy, T., Warth, J., von der Gracht, H., & Darkow, I. L. (2011). Validating an
innovative real-time Delphi approach - A methodological comparison between
real-time and conventional Delphi studies. Technological Forecasting and
Social Change, 78(9), 1681-1694.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.201 1.04.006

Golinelli, D., Boetto, E., Carullo, G., Nuzzolese, A. G., Landini, M. P., & Fantini, M.
P. (2020). Adoption of Digital Technologies in Health Care During the
COVID-19 Pandemic: Systematic Review of Early Scientific Literature.
Journal of Medical Internet Research, 22(11). https://doi.org/10.2196/22280

Gordon, T., & Pease, A. (2006). RT Delphi: An efficient, “round-less” almost real
time Delphi method. Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 73(4),
321-333. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2005.09.005

Gregorio, G. B., & Ancog, R. C. (2020). Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic on
Agriculture Production in Southeast Asia: Reinforcing Transformative Change
in Agricultural Food Systems.

Grufman, N., & Lyons, S. (2020). Exploring industry 4.0 A readiness assessment for
SMEs. https://doi.org/10.13140/RG.2.2.12170.08647


Habibi, A., Sarafrazi, A., & Izadyar, S. (2014a). Delphi Technique Theoretical
Framework in Qualitative. International Journal of Engineering Science, 3(4),
8-13.
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/272177606_Delphi_Technique_The
oretical_Framework_in_Qualitative

Habibi, A., Sarafrazi, A., & Izadyar, S. (2014b). Delphi Technique Theoretical
Framework in Qualitative Research. The International Journal Of Engineering
And Science (IJES) ||, 3(4), 8-13. www.theijes.com

Habito, C. F., & Briones, R. M. (2005, June 27). Philippine Agriculture over the
Years: Performance, Policies and Pitfalls. Policies to Strengthen Productivity
in the Philippines.

Hidayatno, A., Destyanto, A. R., & Hulu, C. A. (2019). Industry 4.0 Technology
Implementation Impact to Industrial Sustainable Energy in Indonesia: A
Model Conceptualization. Energy Procedia, 156.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.egypro.2018.11.133

Hizam-Hanafiah, M., Soomro, M. A., & Abdullah, N. L. (2020). Industry 4.0
readiness models: A systematic literature review of model dimensions. In
Information (Switzerland) (Vol. 11, Issue 7, pp. 1-13). MDPI AG.
https://doi.org/10.3390/infol 1070364

HRSA. (2011). Readiness Assessment and Developing Project Aims.

Hsu, C.-C., & Sandford, B. A. (2019). The Delphi Technique: Making Sense of
Consensus. Practical Assessment, Research, and Evaluation, 12(1), 10.
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.7275/pdz9-th90

Hu, L., & Bentler, P. M. (1999). Cutoff criteria for fit indexes in covariance structure
analysis: Conventional criteria versus new alternatives. Structural Equation
Modeling: A Multidisciplinary Journal, 6(1), 1-55.
https://doi.org/10.1080/10705519909540118

Hussein, S., Maarop, N., Azaliah, N., & Bakar, A. (2018). A Delphi Technique as a
Method to Obtain Consensus in Validation of EA Readiness Assessment
Model. Open International Journal of Informatics, 6(1).
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/333824860

ILO. (2020). COVID-19 labour market impact in the Philippines Assessment and
national policy responses. www. ilo.org/publns.

Jagannathan, S., & Geronimo, D. (2021). Reaping the Benefits of Industry 4.0
through Skills Development in High-Growth Industries in Southeast Asia:


Insights from Cambodia, Indonesia, the Philippines, and Viet Nam.
https://doi.org/10.22617/SPR200328

Jasinska, K., & Jasifiski, B. (2019). Conditions of a Corporate Communication in the
Industry 4.0: Case Study. IBIMA Business Review, Vol. 2019 (2019).
https://doi.org/10.5171/2019.177793

Javaid, M., Haleem, A., Singh, R. P., & Suman, R. (2022). Enhancing smart farming
through the applications of Agriculture 4.0 technologies. International Journal
of Intelligent Networks, 3, 150-164.
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.1JIN.2022.09.004

Jeyaraj, A., & Zadeh, A. (2020). Institutional Isomorphism in Organizational
Cybersecurity: A Text Analytics Approach. Journal of Organizational
Computing and Electronic Commerce, 30(4), 361-380.
https://doi.org/10.1080/10919392.2020.1776033

Jones, B., Pilot, A., van Eijl, P., & Lappia, J. (2020). The W-shaped model of
professional competencies for the Fourth Industrial Revolution and its
relevance to honors programs. Journal of the European Honors Council, 4(1),
1-16. https://doi.org/10.31378/jehe.123

K. Zervoudi, E. (2020). Fourth Industrial Revolution: Opportunities, Challenges, and
Proposed Policies. In Industrial Robotics - New Paradigms. IntechOpen.
https://doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.90412

Karr, J., Loh, K., & San Andres, E. A. (2020). COVID-19, 4IR and the Future of
Work. Policy Brief (No. 34).

Kemp, S. (2022). Digital 2022: The Philippines. [online] Datareportal available at
https://datareportal.com/reports/digital-2022-philippines.

Kim, J., & Park, C.-Y. (2020). EDUCATION, SKILL TRAINING, AND
LIFELONG LEARNING IN THE ERA OF TECHNOLOGICAL
REVOLUTION. https://doi.org/10.22617/WPS200008-2

Kim, J., Torneo, A. R., & Yang, S.-B. (2019). Philippine Readiness for the 4th
Industrial Revolution: A case study. Asia-Pacific Social Science Review , 1,
139-153.

Klerkx, L., Jakku, E., & Labarthe, P. (2019). A review of social science on digital
agriculture, smart farming and agriculture 4.0: New contributions and a future
research agenda. In NJAS - Wageningen Journal of Life Sciences (Vols. 90—
91). Elsevier B.V. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.njas.2019.100315


Klerkx, L., & Rose, D. (2020). Dealing with the game-changing technologies of
Agriculture 4.0_ How do we manage diversity and responsibility in food
system transition pathways? | Elsevier Enhanced Reader. Global Food
Security, 24.
https://reader.elsevier.com/reader/sd/pii/S221 1912419301 804?token=E84C5A
8DA6ECAF7C26E4C81 138B441D2A621DC7DODFC04C3FCE21D9F25298
41B401F6ADB796F4CC3DC00C8B8977836E2&originRegion=us-east-
1&originCreation=202 10728071013

Knekta, E., Runyon, C., & Eddy, S. (2019). One Size Doesn’t Fit All: Using Factor
Analysis to Gather Validity Evidence When Using Surveys in Your Research.
CBE—Life Sciences Education, 18(1), rm1. https://doi.org/10.1187/cbe.18-
04-0064

Kohpaiboon, A. (2020, April). Thailand 4.0 and its challenges. East Asia Forum:
Economics, Politics and Public Policy in East Asia and the Pacific.

Kontinen, T., & Onali, A. (2017). Strengthening Institutional Isomorphism in
Development NGOs? Program Mechanisms in an Organizational Intervention.
SAGE Open, 7(1), 215824401668872.
https://doi.org/10.1177/2158244016688725

Kwok, C.-P. (1996). Making Sense of Organizational Isomorphism: The Case of
ISO 9000 in Hong Kong Industries. The Chinese University of Hong Kong.

Lee, M. H., Yun, J. H. J., Pyka, A., Won, D. K., Kodama, F., Schiuma, G., Park, H.
S., Jeon, J., Park, K. B., Jung, K. H., Yan, M. R., Lee, S. Y., & Zhao, X.
(2018). How to respond to the Fourth Industrial Revolution, or the second
information technology revolution? Dynamic new combinations between
technology, market, and society through open innovation. Journal of Open
Innovation: Technology, Market, and Complexity, 4(3).
https://doi.org/10.3390/joitmce4030021

Leron, P. J. G., & Baconguis, R. dT. (2022). Elements of Innovation Culture
Influencing Individual Research and Development (R&amp;D) Performance
in Public Higher Education Institutions in the Philippines. Asia-Pacific Journal
of Management Research and Innovation, 2319510X2211356.
https://doi.org/10.1177/2319510X221135662

Lichtblau, K., Stich, V., Bertenrath, R., Blum, M., Bleider, M., Millack, A., Schmitt,
K., Schmitz, E., & Schréter, M. (n.d.). INDUSTRIE 4.0 READINESS.

Lichtblau, K., Stich, V., Bertenrath, R., Blum, M., Bleider, M., Millack, A., Schmitt,
K., Schmitz, E., & Schréter, M. (2015). Industrie 4.0 Readiness.


Liu, Y., Ma, X., Shu, L., Hancke, G. P., & Abu-Mahfouz, A. M. (2021). From
Industry 4.0 to Agriculture 4.0: Current Status, Enabling Technologies, and
Research Challenges. IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, 17(6).
https://doi.org/10.1109/TII.2020.3003910

Lubang, S. A.-F. A. (2020, January 30). Promises and challenges of gene editing
discussed in a forum. DOST-PCAARRD News.
http://www.pcaarrd.dost.gov.ph/home/portal/index.php/quick-information-
dispatch/3609-promises-and-challenges-of-gene-editing-discussed-in-a-forum

Maisiri, W., Darwish, H., & van Dyk, L. (2019). An Investigation of Industry 4.0
Skills Requirements. South African Journal of Industrial Engineering, 30(3).
https://doi.org/10.7166/30-3-2230

Maisiri, W., & van Dyk, L. (2019). Industry 4.0 readiness assessment for South
African industries. South African Journal of Industrial Engineering, 30(3),
134-148. https://doi.org/10.7166/30-3-2231

Manda, M. I., & ben Dhaou, S. (2019, April 3). Responding to the challenges and
opportunities in the 4th Industrial revolution in developing countries.
Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Theory and Practice of
Electronic Governance. https://doi.org/10.1145/3326365.3326398

McCampbell, M., Schumann, C., & Klerkx, L. (2022). Good intentions in complex
realities: Challenges for designing responsibly in digital agriculture in
low-income countries. Sociologia Ruralis, 62(2), 279-304.
https://doi.org/10.1111/soru.12359

Menon, J., & Fink, A. (2019). The Fourth Industrial Revolution and Its Implications
for Regional Economic Integration in ASEAN. Journal of Asian Economic
Integration, 1(1), 32-47. https://doi.org/10.1177/263 1684618821566

Merriam, S. B., & Tisdell, E. J. (2016). Qualitative research: a guide to design and
implementation (4th Edition). John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

MITI. (n.d.). Industry 4ward Readiness Assessment.
Mohamad, N., & Sihes, A. J. (2021). Confirmatory Factor Analysis (CFA) of
Teachers’ Skills Competency Construct on Values Inculcation in History

Teaching and Learning in the 21st Century. Innovative Teaching and Learning
Journal, 5(2), 72-84.

Mojica-Sevilla, F. (2021). Agricultural Biotechnology Annual.


Mouazen, A. M., Alexandridis, T., Buddenbaum, H., Cohen, Y., Moshou, D., Mulla,
D., Nawar, S., & Sudduth, K. A. (2020). Monitoring. In Agricultural Internet
of Things and Decision Support for Precision Smart Farming (pp. 35-138).
Elsevier. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-818373-1.00002-0

Miuhl, D. D., & de Oliveira, L. (2022). A bibliometric and thematic approach to
agriculture 4.0. Heliyon, 8(5).
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.HELIYON.2022.E09369

Nagsamy, A., & Sivan, R. (2019). Industry 4.0 Competence Model for Malaysia
Industry4WRD. 33rd International Business Information and Management
Association IBIMA Conference.

Nankervis, A., Connell, J., Cameron, R., Montague, A., & Prikshat, V. (2021). 'Are
we there yet?’ Australian HR professionals and the Fourth Industrial
Revolution. Asia Pacific Journal of Human Resources, 59(1), 3-19.
https://doi.org/10.1111/1744-7941.12245

NAST. (2021). Pagtanaw 2050: The Philippine Foresight on Science, Technology,
and Innovation.

NEDA. (n.d.). Ambisyon natin 2040. “Data Files.” Retrieved January 12, 2023, from
https://2040.neda.gov.ph/

NEDA. (2017). The Philippine Development Plan 2017-2022. www.neda.gov.ph

NEDA. (2023). Philippine Development Plan 2023-2028.
https://pdp.neda.gov.ph/philippine-development-plan-2023-2028/

Nielsen, J. (2006, November 19). Digital Divide: The 3 Stages.
Https://Www.Nngroup.Com/Articles/Digital-Divide-the-Three-Stages/.

OECD (2001). Lifelong Learning for All: Policy Directions. CERI, Paris.

Oliveira, L. F. P., Moreira, A. P., & Silva, M. F. (2021). Advances in Agriculture
Robotics: A State-of-the-Art Review and Challenges Ahead. Robotics 2021,
Vol. 10., 10(2), 52. https://doi.org/10.3390/ROBOTICS 10020052

Pal, A., & Ojha, A. K. (2017). Institutional Isomorphism due to the Influence of
Information Systems and Its Strategic Position. Proceedings of the 2017 ACM
SIGMIS Conference on Computers and People Research, 147-154.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3084381.3084395

Pangandaman, H. K.., Ali, N. D., Hope, J., Lambayong, C., Liza, M., & Ergas, G.
(2019). Philippine Higher Education Vis-A-Vis Education 4.0: A Scoping


Review. International Journal of Advanced Research and Publication 3(3): 65-
69.

Paolo, J., Stephanie, F., Flores, R., Canare, T., Caboverde Benjur, C. E., Borja, E., &
Monterola, C. (2019). Mapping Philippine Workers at Risk of Automation in
the Fourth Industrial Revolution. https://ssrn.com/abstract=3366809

Patton, M. Q. (1999). Enhancing the quality and credibility of qualitative analysis.
Health Services Research, 34(5 Pt 2), 1189.
/pmc/articles/PMC 1089059/?report=abstract

Pavlov, G., Maydeu-Olivares, A., & Shi, D. (2021). Using the Standardized Root
Mean Squared Residual (SRMR) to Assess Exact Fit in Structural Equation
Models. Educational and Psychological Measurement, 81(1), 110-130.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0013 164420926231

PCIC. 2021. PCIC pursues digitalization of processes amid COVID-19 pandemic.
(2021, August 31). [online] Philippine Crop Insurance Corporation. Available
at https://pcic.gov.ph/pcic-pursues-digitalization-of-processes-amid-covid-19-
pandemic/

Pew Research Center. (2018). Artificial Intelligence and the future of humans (Vol.
10). www.pewresearch.org.

Phakiti, A. (2018). Confirmatory Factor Analysis and Structural Equation Modeling.
In A. Phakiti, P. de Costa, L. Plonsky, & S. Starfield (Eds.), The Palgrave
Handbook of Applied Linguistics Research Methodology. Palgrave Macmillan
London.

Pianta, M. (2019). THE CHALLENGE OF DIGITALIZATION FOR FIRMS IN
DEVELOPING COUNTRIES.

PIDS. (n.d.). PH gov’t support to R&D, inadequate—experts.
Https://Www.Pids.Gov.Ph/Press-Releases/419.

Quayson, M., Bai, C., & Osei, V. (2020). Digital Inclusion for Resilient Post-
COVID-19 Supply Chains: Smallholder Farmer Perspectives. IEEE
Engineering Management Review, 48(3), 104-110.
https://doi.org/10.1109/EMR.2020.3006259

Ragnedda, M., & Kreitem, H. (2018). The three levels of digital divide in east EU
countries. Journal of Russian Media and Journalism Studies, 1(4), 5-26.
https://doi.org/10.30547/worldofmedia.4.2018.1


Rainie, L., & Anderson, J. (2017). The Future of Jobs and Jobs Training. Pew
Research Center.

Rasool, H., & Rasool, F. (n.d.). Readiness of the South African Metal.

Reyes, C. M., Tabuga, A. D., Asis, R. D., & Datu, M. B. G. (2012). Poverty and
Agriculture in the Philippines: Trends in Income Poverty and Distribution.
http://www.pids.gov.ph

Roodt, J. H., & Koen, H. (2020). A Review of Hurdles to Adopting Industry 4.0 in
Developing Countries. 30th Annual INCOSE International Symposium, 1079-
1092.

Rupéié, N. (2018). Intergenerational learning and knowledge transfer — challenges
and opportunities. Learning Organization, 25(2), 135-142.
https://doi.org/10.1108/TLO-11-2017-0117/FULL/PDF

Saiz-Rubio, V., & Rovira-Mas, F. (2020). From smart farming towards agriculture
5.0: A review on crop data management. In Agronomy (Vol. 10, Issue 2).
MDPI AG. https://doi.org/10.3390/agronomy 10020207

San Juan, A. E. (2022). PHL’s 8-rung dip in innovation index most alarming —
IPOPHL. Good governance Philippines.
hups: businessmirror.com.ph: 2022 10.03. phls-8-rung-dip-in-innovation-
-ipophl

indea-most-alarmi

Sanchez, P. B., Fernando-Corpuz, L. M., & Aguila, D. N. S. (2022, August 22).
Enhancing Agricultural Productivity through Nanotechnology | FFTC
Agricultural Policy Platform (FFTC-AP). FFTC Agricultural Policy Platform.
https://ap.fftc.org.tw/article/3 174

Santos Valle, S., & Kienzle, J. (2020). Agriculture 4.0 - Agricultural robotics and
automated equipment for sustainable crop production. Integrated Crop
Management, 24.

Sarmento, R. P., & Costa, V. (2019). Confirmatory Factor Analysis -- A Case study.
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1905.05598

Schumacher, A., Erol, S., & Sihn, W. (2016). A Maturity Model for Assessing
Industry 4.0 Readiness and Maturity of Manufacturing Enterprises. Procedia
CIRP, 52, 161-166. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.PROCIR.2016.07.040

Schwab, K. (2016). The Fourth Industrial Revolution. www.weforum.org


Serraj, R., & Pingali, P. (2020). Digital Innovation for promoting Agriculture 4.0 in
the Near East and North Africa (World Scientific Series in Grand Public
Policy Challenges of the 21st Century, Vol. 02). World Scientific.
https://doi.org/10.1142/11212

Shalini, S., Singla, A., Goyal, M., Kaur, V., & Kumar, P. (2018). Omics in
Agriculture: Applications, Challenges and Future Perspectives. In P. Kumar,
S. Kumar, S. Kumar, & R. C. Yadav (Eds.), Crop Improvement for
Sustainability (pp. 343-356).
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/325390380_Omics_in_Agriculture_
Applications_Challenges_and_Future_Perspectives

Sobrosa Neto, R. de C., Sobrosa Maia, J., de Silva Neiva, S., Scalia, M. D., & de
Andrade Guerra, J. B. S. O. (2020). The fourth industrial revolution and the
coronavirus: a new era catalyzed by a virus. Research in Globalization, 2.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resglo.2020.100024

Sony, M., & Naik, S. (2019). Key ingredients for evaluating Industry 4.0 readiness
for organizations: a literature review. Benchmarking: An International Journal,
27(7). https://doi.org/10.1108/BIJ-09-2018-0284

Sponchioni G, Vezzoni M, Bacchetti A, Pavesi M, & Renga F. (2019). The 4.0
revolution in agriculture: a multi-perspective definition.
https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/The-4.0-revolution-in-
agriculture%3A-a-definition-Sponchioni-
Vezzoni/fd80425a43 | 56fc3c06e0df6db5d9fd7262ae8b0

Stads, G.-J., Faylon, P. S., & Buendia, L. J. (2007a). Key trends in agricultural R&D
investments in the Philippines. http://www.asti.cgiar.org.

Stads, G.-J., Faylon, P. S., & Buendia, L. J. (2007b). Key trends in agricultural R&D
investments in the Philippines. http://www.asti.cgiar.org.

Steinke, J., van Etten, J., Miiller, A., Ortiz-Crespo, B., van de Gevel, J., Silvestri, S.,
& Priebe, J. (2020). Tapping the full potential of the digital revolution for
agricultural extension: an emerging innovation agenda Tapping the full
potential of the digital revolution for agricultural extension: an emerging
innovation agenda. International Journal of Agricultural Sustainability.
https://doi.org/10.1080/14735903.2020.1738754

Sy, P. A. (2022). Developing an AI Governance Framework for the Philippines: a
Report of Preliminary Stakeholder Consultations and Review of the Literature.
ai-ph.org/devframe


Tallada, A. (2019, August 14). Precision Agriculture for Rice Production in the
Philippines | FFTC Agricultural Policy Platform (FFTC-AP). FFTC Policy
Articles. https://ap.fftc.org.tw/article/1416

Taylor, E. (2020). We Agree, Don’t We? The Delphi Method for Health
Environments Research. HERD: Health Environments Research & Design
Journal, 13(1), 11-23. https://doi.org/10.1177/19375867 19887709

Teixeira, P. N. (2014). Gary Becker’s early work on human capital — collaborations
and distinctiveness. IZA Journal of Labor Economics, 3(1), 1-20.
https://doi.org/10.1186/S40172-014-0012-2/METRICS

TESDA. (2020). From seeds to satellites: Revolutionizing Philippine agriculture with
smart farming. Labor Market Intelligence Report.

Trendov, N. M., Varas, S., & Zeng, M. (2019). Digital Technologies in agriculture
and rural areas: A Briefing paper.

Trevelyan, E. G., & Robinson, P. N. (2015). Delphi methodology in health research:
how to do it? European Journal of Integrative Medicine, 7(4), 423-428.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eujim.2015.07.002

UNCTAD. (n.d.). Harnessing frontier technologies for sustainable development.
UNDG. (2017). UNDAF Companion Guidance: Capacity Development.

UNESCAP. (2018). Frontier technologies for sustainable development in Asia and
the Pacific.

UNIDO. (2020). Digital Transformation & Industrial Recovery.
https://www.unido.org/our-focus-building-better-future/digital-transformation-
innovation-and-industrial-recovery

United Nations Industrial Development Organization. (2019). Bracing for the New
Industrial Revolution: Elements of a Strategic Response Discussion paper.

van Dijk, J. A. G. M. (2006). Digital divide research, achievements and
shortcomings. Poetics, 34(4—5), 221-235.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.poetic.2006.05.004

van Dijk, J. A. G. M. (2012). The evolution of the digital divide: The digital divide
turns to inequality of skills and usage. Digital Enlightenment Yearbook 2012,
57-75. https://doi.org/10.3233/978-1-61499-057-4-57


Varndell, W., Fry, M., & Elliott, D. (2021). Applying real-time Delphi methods:
development of a pain management survey in emergency nursing. BMC
Nursing, 20(149). https://doi.org/10.1186/s12912-021-00661-9

Vax, S., Farkas, M., Russinova, Z., Mueser, K. T., & Drainoni, M. L. (2021).
Enhancing organizational readiness for implementation: constructing a
typology of readiness-development strategies using a modified Delphi process.
Implementation Science, 16(1). https://doi.org/10.1186/s13012-021-01132-0

Venegas, J. A., Maulas, E. L., Gomez, R. F., Grace, M., Vinzon, V., & David, G. D.
(2022). Development of 3D-Printed Agricultural Drone (Ardufarmer).
https://doi.org/10.4028/p-6q6pt5

von Minchhausen, S., & Haring, A. M. (2012). Lifelong learning for farmers:
Enhancing competitiveness, knowledge transfer and innovation in the eastern
German state of Brandenburg. Studies in Agricultural Economics, 114(2), 86—
92. https://doi.org/10.7896/j.1217

Vuorikari, R., Kluzer, S., & Punie, Y. (2022). DigComp 2.2: The Digital
Competence Framework for Citizens - With new examples of knowledge,
skills and attitudes. https://doi.org/10.2760/115376 (online)

WEF. (2017). Realizing Human Potential in the Fourth Industrial Revolution: An
Agenda for Leaders to Shape the Future of Education, Gender, and Work. In
White paper.

WEF. (2018a). The Future of Jobs Report 2018.

WEF. (2018b). Readiness for the Future of Production Report 2018. World
Economic Forum. 266p.

WEF. (2020). The Future of Jobs Report 2020.

Whitehead, D., & Day, J. (2013). Mixed-methods research. In Z. Schneider, D.
Whitehead, G. Lobiondo-wood, & J. Haber (Eds.), Nursing and Midwifery
Research: Methods and appraisal for evidence-based practice (Sth ed., pp.
263-284). Elsevier.
https://www.academia.edu/25502076/Whitehead_D_and_Day_J_2016_Mixed
_methods_research_In_Nursing_and_Midwifery_Research_Methods_and_Ap
praisal_for_Evidence_Based_Practice_Sth_edn_Schneider_Z_Whitehead_D_
LoBiondo_Wood_G_and_Haber_J_Elsevier_Mosby_Marrickville_Sydney_pp

237_251

Wilson, P. (2017). DiD the LuDDites Get it RiGht? AutomAtion AnD the LAbouR
mARket. The STudenT Economic Review, 25-31.


World Bank. (2020). Transforming Philippine Agriculture during Covid-19 and
beyond. https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/34012

World Bank Group. (2019). Systematic Country Diagnostic of the Philippines :
Realizing the Filipino Dream for 2040.
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/32646

World Economic Forum. (2020). Unlocking Technology for the Global Goals.

Xia, Y., & Yang, Y. (2019). RMSEA, CFI, and TLI in structural equation modeling
with ordered categorical data: The story they tell depends on the estimation
methods. Behavior Research Methods, 51(1), 409-428.
https://doi.org/10.3758/s13428-018-1055-2

Xu, J., Gu, B., & Tian, G. (2022). Review of agricultural loT technology. Artificial
Intelligence in Agriculture, 6, 10-22.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aiia.2022.01.001

Xu, M., David, J. M., & Kim, S. H. (2018). The fourth industrial revolution:
Opportunities and challenges. International Journal of Financial Research,
9(2), 90-95. https://doi.org/10.5430/ijfr.v9n2p90

Zhai, Z., Martinez, J. F., Beltran, V., & Martinez, N. L. (2020). Decision support
systems for agriculture 4.0: Survey and challenges. Computers and Electronics
in Agriculture, 170, 105256. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.COMPAG.2020.105256
