Consumer Acceptability and Perceptions for Brown Rice Among Household Heads in Selected Barangays in Caloocan City

Joyce Loesterli B. Velasco

University of the Philippines Manila

Master of Science in Public Health (Nutrition)

May 2018

ABSTRACT
This study aimed to determine the consumer acceptability and perceptions for
brown rice among household heads in selected barangays in Caloocan City. The
study employed a multimethod design utilizing quantitative and qualitative
phases. The quantitative phase included a face-to-face interview (survey) on the
basic sociodemographic and economic profiles of the household heads, self-
administered knowledge assessment, and consumer acceptability test of the
sensory attributes of brown rice. The qualitative phase included the conduct of
focus group discussions (FGDs) discussing major themes that affect brown rice
consumption among Filipinos. A total of 584, 104, and 176 respondents
participated in the survey, consumer acceptability test, and FGDs, respectively.
This research has been reviewed and approved by the UP Manila Research Ethics
Board (UPMREB) - Ethics Review Panel via expedited review on 20 January 2017 with study protocol code: UPMREB 2016-403-01. The study revealed that the acceptability of brown rice was lower as compared to
white rice, with significant mean differences in the consumer acceptability of the
sensory attributes and the overall acceptability of brown rice (p<0.0001).
Knowledge scores on the nutritional properties of brown rice and its attributes were
low, with mean score of 53.7 percent. When the different covariates were tested
for significance, it was revealed that price, color and appearance, and taste were
all associated with the overall acceptability of brown rice among consumers.
Specifically, the odds of acceptability of brown rice were 11 times higher if the consumer liked the color and appearance of rice (OR= 10.76, 95%CI: 2.50; 46.27), 20 times higher if the consumer liked the taste of rice (OR= 19.80; 95%CI: 2.99;
131.15), and 10 times higher when price was acceptable to the consumer (OR=
21.29; 95%CI: 3.87; 117.25). On the other hand, other factors associated with the
acceptability of brown rice as based on the qualitative FGDs were awareness of
the nutritional properties of brown rice, availability of brown rice in local wet
markets, familiarity with brown rice, and the acceptability of brown rice to other family members, among others

Keywords: brown rice, consumer acceptability, FGDs

CHAPTER I
INTRODUCTION

A. Background of the Study

Rice is a staple food in many parts of the world especially across Asia
(Rohman et al., 2014). It is synonymous with food and nutrition security throughout
Asia and rice production is one of the most important economic activities in the
world. In 2010, rice production totaled to 696 million metric tons (MMT) (GRISP,
2013). Current global milled rice utilization is at 480 million metric tons per annum,

with over 85 percent for human consumption (Muthayya et al., 2014),

In Asian countries, at least 30 percent of caloric intake comes from rice
(GRiSP, 2013). The latest National Nutrition Survey (NNS) in 2014 conducted by
the Food and Nutrition Research Institute of the Department of Science and
Technology (FNRI-DOST) in the Philippines showed that cereal and cereal
products (majority of which is rice) constitutes 40.3 percent of the daily household
consumption. Furthermore, at least 1 cup and 2 % tablespoons (220 g) of rice is
eaten by Filipinos per meal at the individual level (FNRI-DOST, 2014). It can
therefore be concluded that rice plays an important role in the diet of Filipinos.
However, majority of consumers still prefer white rice, with the consumption and
preference for brown rice and other whole grain foods remaining at relatively lower

levels compared to their milled counterparts (Pabuayon and Quilloy, 2011)

Rice preferences vary from country to country and across cultures (Galawat

and Yabe, 2010). Since the advent of modern milling technologies which produces

al

well-polished rice or white rice, the affinity for brown rice reduced drastically.
Today, the most commonly consumed type of rice is white rice, which has a whiter
texture and longer shelf-life compared to brown rice. Production of brown rice
involves minimal milling and processing as compared to white rice. In brown rice,
only the hull is removed and the bran layer is retained which gives it its
characteristic brown color wherein in white rice, the bran layer is removed to
produce polished grains. When rice is milled, an average of 60 percent of the
nutrient content is lost since majority of these can be found in the bran layer
(Danquah and Egyir, 2014). Brown rice is a good source of dietary fiber, along with
other nutrients such as thiamin, niacin, phosphorus and calcium in addition to

carbohydrates (FNRI-DOST, 2011).

Due to the reduced nutrient content, consumption of white rice has been
shown to be associated with risk factors for non-communicable diseases (NCDs)
such as an increase in body mass index (BMI) in duplicate homogeneous groups
studied by Kim et al. (2012) (group 1 OR=1.16, 95% Cl: 1.04, 1.30; and group 2
OR=1.19, 95% Cl: 1.06, 1.33), which is an indicator for overnutrition. Consumption
of white rice has also been found to be associated with NCDs such as type 2
diabetes mellitus (T2DM), coronary heart disease, and ischemic stroke. In a meta-
analysis on the association of white rice consumption and the risk of T2DM, the
random effects model summarizing the comparisons suggested a positive
association (pooled RR=1.27, 95% Cl: 1.04, 1.54) between white rice consumption
and the risk of T2DM (Hu et al., 2012). Regular white rice consumption has also

been associated with coronary heart diseases (HR=1.80, 95% Cl: 1.01, 3.17) and


ischemic stroke (adjusted OR=2.73, 95% Cl: 1.31, 5.69), among others (Yu et al.,

2013; Liang et al., 2013).

B. Statement of the Problem

This study aimed to answer the research problem: “What is the consumer

acceptability and perceptions for brown rice among household heads in selected

barangays in Caloocan City?”

Sub-problems include the following:

1.

What is the level of acceptability of cooked brown rice among household
heads?
What is the difference in the level of acceptability of brown rice as compared

to white rice among household heads?

. What is the level of knowledge on the nutritional properties and attributes of

brown rice among household heads?

Are the following factors associated with the acceptability of brown rice

among household heads:

a. Attributes of brown rice (sensory attributes, cost, ease of preparation);

b. Individual characteristics (knowledge on the nutritional properties of
brown rice, customs/tradition, health consciousness), and

c. Household characteristics (household income, household size, daily
food expenditure)?

What are the consumer perceptions for brown rice among household

heads?

ho

C. Objectives of the Study

The general objective of the study was to determine the consumer acceptability

and perceptions for brown rice among household heads in selected barangays in

Caloocan City

Specifically, the study aimed to:


determine the level of acceptability of cooked brown rice among household

heads;

. compare the level of acceptability of brown rice and white rice among

household heads;

. determine the level of knowledge on the nutritional properties and attributes

of brown rice among household heads;

. determine if the following factors are associated with the acceptability of

brown rice among household heads:

a. Attributes of brown rice (sensory attributes, cost, ease of preparation);

b. Individual characteristics (knowledge on the nutritional properties of
brown rice, customs/tradition, health consciousness); and

c. Household characteristics (household income, household size, daily

food expenditure)

. determine the consumer perceptions for brown rice among household

heads.

D. Significance of the Study

Brown rice consumption has been promoted in the Philippines to help
alleviate the increasing rate of overnutrition and increasing prevalence of NCDs in
the early 2000s. Despite the different promotional activities conducted, such as the
National Brown Rice Day set by the Department of Agriculture (DA), and other
public and private initiatives, brown rice consumption is still minimal among
Filipinos. Average monthly consumption was 6.75 kilograms but majority of the
brown rice consumers did not use brown rice exclusively (Pabuayon and Quilloy,
2011). Local studies on ascertaining the factors affecting brown rice consumption
are not available. While the health benefits of the consumption of brown rice have
already been established, understanding the underlying social, behavioral,
cultural, economic and other factors affecting brown rice consumption is vital.

Significance for the different benefactors are enumerated below.

For the policy makers. This study would help establish baseline data on
acceptability of brown rice among the consumers. It will further aid in
drafting policies and ordinances targeting promotion of healthy food choices
among consumers. Promotion of the consumption of healthier food choices
such as brown rice may be made more specific to target different
sociocultural determinants in the population which prevents its
consumption. Allocation of funds may become more effective since target
populations and age groups may be characterized more deeply and actions

may be made more specific to these populations.

In

For the researchers. Agencies that aim to develop brown rice to increase
its acceptability can use the data to target specific attributes of brown rice
which makes it less acceptable than white rice. Blind spots on the lack of
local and current acceptability studies may be filled in by the study and

direction of research may be more clearly defined.

For health professionals. Promotion of brown rice may help the
consumers become more aware on healthy food choices wherein balance,
variety, and moderation are also taken into consideration. Promotion of
healthier behavior, such as choosing brown rice over white rice, would
eventually lead to the regular consumption of healthy food items that may
help prevent diseases in the future. This would in turn help alleviate the
double burden of malnutrition of the country. Furthermore, since brown rice
has higher fiber and nutrient content, it can also help alleviate overnutrition
and NCDs. Decreased prevalence and risk for NCDs may divert funds for
other health problems of the society. On the other hand, due to its high
satiety value, brown rice can also extend fullness and therefore target
hunger in the population with limited resources. Furthermore, its high
nutritional value can help prevent specific micronutrient deficiencies which
are also usual in the indigent populations. This may help in finally
decreasing the prevalence of undernutrition in the country, in which nutrition

funds are highly allocated.

roy

For the consumers. Brown rice has been proven to have protective and
preventive effects from NCDs, which is a growing concern in the Philippines,
and also in most developing and developed countries today. Due to its high
fiber content and high satiety effects, brown rice may also help prevent
hunger among marginalized individuals. The promotion of the consumption
of healthier food alternatives, such as brown rice, would help the consumers
become more aware of the benefits of choosing healthy foods and eating in

moderation, thus enhancing their behavior towards healthy diet in the future.

CHAPTER Il
THEORETICAL BACKGROUND

A. Review of Related Literature
2.1. Rice

Rice (Oryza sativa) is a dietary staple food and one of the most important
cereal crops, especially for people in Asia (Rohman et al., 2014). Thousands of
rice varieties are farmed and rice is closely associated with food and nutrition
security for a vast majority of populations living in the developing world (Muthayya
et al., 2014). Rice production is one of the most important economic activities

globally and in 2010, rice production totaled 696 million tons (GRiSP, 2013).

Production of rice involves three major phases: pre-planting, growth, and
postproduction (Figure 2.1). The pre-planting stage involves choosing rice variety
to be planted, preparation of the crop calendar and land preparation. The second
stage, growth, is the stage where rice is planted, grown, and other extrinsic factors
such as weeds and pests are managed. Finally, post-production involves

harvesting and post-harvest activities to prepare the product for the market.

loo

Postproduction

s

Figure 2.1 Step-by-step production of rice (IRRI, 2016)

Terms used in the milling of rice (Figure 2.2):

Rough rice. Also called paddy rice, is the individual rice kernels in their natural,

unprocessed state.

Hull. Also called husk; is the outer covering of a fruit or seed, in this instance, the

outer covering of the rice kernel.

Brown rice. Also called un-milled, under-polished, or raw rice; is a form of rice in
its unprocessed state wherein only the hull is removed and the bran layer is
retained.

Bran. Bran is the hard outer layer of the cereal grain where most nutrients are

found.

Milled rice. Also called polished, well-milled or white rice, is the most common form
of rice at the present wherein the bran layer is removed to produce its final white

or polished form.

oH eS

Rough rice Brown rice White rice

Hull Bran

Figure 2.2 The milling process of rice

The final process in the postproduction stage is milling and processing in
which rough rice undergoes to produce the most commonly sold type of rice in the
market, which is white rice. Milling is a crucial step in the post-production of rice.
The basic objective of a rice milling system is to remove the husk and the bran
layers, and produce an edible, white rice kernel that is sufficiently milled and free
of impurities (IRRI, 2016). The milling stage determines the type of rice (white rice
or brown rice) that will be sold in the market. Milling white rice removes 38 percent
of the husk compared to milling brown rice which only removes 28 percent
(Karunungan, 2015). Therefore, there is a ten percent higher milling recovery in
brown rice compared to white rice, meaning that higher yield can be expected from
brown rice production due to both the retention of the bran layer and the prevention

of damaging the grain due to milling processes.

The by-products of milling and processing includes the husk and bran layer
which are utilized for other purposes. Rice husks are usually used as bedding

materials, and as source of energy. In the modern rice milling industry, rice husks


are increasingly being used as a fuel source for grain drying and parboiling, and
for electricity generation (IRRI, 2016). On the other hand, because of the high
nutritive value and oil content of the bran layer, it is commonly used as binder for
animal feeds, vegetable oil for human consumption or as waxes for cosmetics
(IRRI, 2016). However, in the developing countries, rice bran is underutilized due

to a lack of suitable stabilization techniques (IRRI, 2016).

2.1.1. Brown rice

Brown rice or “pinawa’ in Filipino is the original form of rice consumed by
Filipinos even before the 1950s, but the advent of modern technologies for
milling resulted in lower consumption of brown rice and brown rice being
regarded as dirty rice (ARF, 2001). Despite its dirty appearance, brown rice is
healthier compared to white rice since the bran layer is conserved. The bran
layer contains most of the nutrients and fatty acids of the rice grain. Therefore,
the distinctive characteristic of brown rice is not its brown color, but the
unpolished feature. Thus, any variety of rice can be called brown rice, as long

as it only underwent minimal milling and processing

Due to its nutritional value, brown rice has been utilized in several
intervention studies, the most prominent is the Bataan Rice Enrichment Project
in 1952, which recommends the use of brown rice, due to its high nutritional
content (especially B-vitamin content), for the cure of beriberi in the Philippines
(Quiogue, 1952). The bran layer of rice is also the material used for the

production of “Tiki Tiki", an anti-beriberi drug avaitable until the present.

Brown rice contains higher amounts of nutrients and fiber compared to white
tice. When rice is milled, an average of 60 percent (Figure 2.3) of the nutrient
content is lost since majority of these nutrients can be found in the bran layer.
Based from the data in the 1997 Philippine Food Composition Tables (FCT),
brown rice contains higher nutrient and fiber content compared to white rice
(Table 2.1). Furthermore, in the study by Juliano in 2013, it was revealed that
local varieties of brown rice contain higher antioxidant content, specifically
Vitamin E, as compared to white rice (Table 2.2).

im

of £ ¢

Figure 2.3 Percent milling losses of vitamins and minerals (Muthayya et al., 2014)

Table 2.1 Nutritional composition of milled and brown rice (FNRI-DOST, 1997)

Food Composition per 100 Rice, Well-milled (Bigas, Rice, un-milled

grams edible por maputi)
Energy, kcal 356.00
Protein, g 7.40
Fat.g 0.50
Carbohydrate, g 80.40
Crude Fiber (Dietary Fiber), g (2.80)
Ash, 9 0.60
Calcium, mg 27.00
Phosphorus. mg 185.00
Iron, mg 1.00
Total Vitamin A, meg 0.00
Thiamin, mg 0.10
Riboflavin, mg 0.05
Niacin, mg 2.80
Ascorbic Acid, mg 0.00

Table 2.2 Content of a-tocopherol (Vit. E), total tocols and y-oryzanol of Philippine rice

varieties (Juliano, 2013)

Brown Rice Milled Rice
Antioxidant (mg/100 g)
NSIC RC160 NSIC R146 NSIC Re146
@-Tocopherol 0.08-0.38, 0.15-0.19 0.005-0.04
Total tocols 0.76-1.57 0.82-1.19 0.13-0.42
y-Oryzanol 70-93 59:88 0.46-1.51


2.1.2. Local availability of brown rice

Brown rice costs less to produce since minimal processing is necessary in
its production. However, the low demand and constraints of brown rice (i.e.,
shorter shelf life due to higher fat content) make it more expensive compared
to white rice. Brown rice is only popular among well-informed, middle-class

professionals, but not the vast majority of Filipinos (Santiaguel, 2013).

Based from the study by Pabuayon and Quilloy in 2011 on the brown rice
market chains in Luzon, Philippines, there are only ten major producers of
brown rice in the country, and Nueva Ecija is the main producer based from the
volume of production. The annual output of the ten producers was
approximately 397 metric tons only. The geographical flow of brown rice largely
depends on the volume of production and the consumer demand. The study
of brown rice market chains in Luzon also concluded that brown rice reached
consumers through retailers such as super/hypermarkets and
specialized/health shops, which limits the availability of brown rice in local
markets and stores. Since prices at supermarkets are higher, consumers are
better off with the relatively cheaper brown rice they get from their present

sources (Pabuayon and Quilloy, 2011)

2.1.3. Allergic reactions to brown rice
Despite the higher nutritional quality of brown rice. the retention of the bran
layer translates to higher chances of having allergic components. Various

proteins (albumins, amylase/trypsin inhibitors, profilin, and glyoxalase) are


responsible for brown rice allergic reactions (Steinman, 2012). Although not
usual, several cases of brown rice allergy have been reported especially where
rice consumption is high. Rice allergy is more common in infants and children
since the gastrointestinal tract is still at the early stages of development. Brown
rice allergy through ingestion is not common as compared to inhalation, but
several symptoms of allergic reactions to brown rice ingestion include
abdominal cramping and similar pain, nausea, and vomiting (Steinman, 2012).
Brown rice also contains lectins. Lectins may attach themselves to components
of various cells, such as the cells that line the wall of the intestines and may
result to a variety of problems, including allergic reactions (Zimmermann,

2013)

2.2. Rice consumption

Rice consumption is highest in Asia, but the consumption outside Asia has
increased recently (Rohman et al., 2014). In Asian countries, at least 30 percent
of the caloric intake comes from rice (Figure 2.4). However, the most common type
of rice consumed is white rice, which is relatively less healthy than brown rice.
Locally, the latest NNS results showed that a total of 40.3 percent of the daily
household consumption comes from cereals and cereal products, majority of which
is rice (Table 2.3 and Figure 2.5). The important role of rice in the diet of Filipinos
and other rice-consuming countries cannot be undermined and therefore,
promoting healthier forms of rice may determine the nutritional status of the

consumers.

Figure 2.4 Percentage of calories consumed from rice (GRISP, 2013)

Table 2.3 Mean one-d food intake of Filipinos (FNRI-DOST, 2014)
Food Group Grams (a) Percent (%)
Cereal and Cereal Products, 36 703
Vegetables 114 13.3
Fish and Products 108 127 -
Meat and Products 66 17
Mik and Mik Products 46 54 -
- Fruits Ce ee
Miscellaneous 34 at
~~ Routtry Z 33 390
7 "Eggs 16 9
Fats and Oils 18 18
"Starchy Roots and Tubes (iti 4600
Sugar and Syrups 12 4
Dried Beans, Nuts and Seeds 9 41
Total 8559 100.0%


1 cup & 2 1/2 Tbsp.
Boiled Rice 220g

2 matchbox
Fried Fish 42g

1/2 cup Boiled
Vegetables 59g

Figure 2.5 Usual meal intake of a Filipino individual (FNRI-DOST, 2014)

2.3. Rice consumption and disease

The milling of rice removes most of its nutrients including its dietary fiber
content. Due to this, white rice consumption has been associated with NCDs and
their risk factors such as T2DM; obesity or high body mass index (BMI); coronary
heart disease (CHD); and ischemic stroke (Hu et al., 2012; Kim et al., 2012; Yu et

al., 2013; Liang et al., 2013).

2.3.1. Obesity

White rice consumption has been found to be associated with obesity in a
cross-sectional study by Kim et al. (2012) among South Korean adults. The
results revealed that a diet of white rice and “kimchi” (caloric intake coming
mostly from white rice and kimchi) was positively associated with the risk of
obesity in the two similar groups (group 1 OR=1.16, 95% Cl: 1.04, 1.30; group
2 OR=1.19, 95% Cl: 1.06, 1.33).

2.3.2. Type 2 diabetes mellitus

Hu et al. (2012) conducted a meta-analysis to determine the association of
white rice consumption with the risk of T2DM which included seven prospective
cohort studies from Western and Asian countries. Pooled data suggest that
white rice consumption is associated with an elevated risk of T2DM (pooled
RR=1.27, 95% Cl: 1.04, 1.54). This association is stronger and significant only
for Asian (Chinese and Japanese) populations (pooled RR=1.55, 95% Cl: 1.20,
2.01) as compared to Western populations (pooled RR=1.12, 95% Cl: 0.94,
1.33), suggesting a relationship between rice intake and ethnicity. The dose-
Tesponse analysis showed that consumption of one serving per day of white
rice was associated with an 11 percent increase in risk of diabetes in the overall

population.

2.3.3. Cardiovascular diseases

Several studies have been conducted to ascertain the association of white
rice consumption and cardiovascular diseases and its risk factors. In a
prospective cohort study among Chinese adults, results revealed that diets with
higher calories coming from white rice have an association with CHD risk
(pooled HR=1.80, 95% Cl: 1.01, 3.17) (Yu et al., 2013). Another study among
Southern Chinese adults revealed that the increasing the consumption of
cooked rice was associated with higher risk of ischemic stroke (adjusted
OR=2.73, 95% Cl: 1.31, 5.69) (Liang et al., 2009). Conflicting results were
presented in a cross-sectional study by Khosravi-Boroujeni et al. (2013), which

revealed that there is no statistical difference in biomarkers of cardiovascular


diseases among males who were regular rice consumers (consumes white rice
7-14 times/week) and those who were not (consumes white rice less seven

times/week).

2.3.4. Brown rice consumption and disease

The major health benefit of brown rice besides its B-vitamin and vitamin E
content is its high dietary fiber content. While consumption of white rice is
closely linked to NCD risk factors, consumption of brown rice has been found

to be associated with decreased risk for NCDs.

In a randomized cross-over clinical trial by Kazemzadeh et al. (2013) among
overweight and obese adult Iranian women, substituting brown rice for white
tice for six weeks improved anthropometric characteristics showing reduction
in weight (mean difference=1.2kg, 95% Cl: 0.69, 1.96; p-value=0.001), waist
circumference (mean difference=2.38cm, 95% Cl: 0.51, 4.25; p-value=0.014),
hip circumference (mean difference=2.98cm, 95% Cl: 1.55, 4.44; p-
value<0.001), and BMI (mean difference=0.52kg/m?, 95% Cl: 0.26, 0.78; p-
value<0.001). Furthermore, inflammatory markers for heart disease (hsCRP
levels) decreased markedly in the brown rice group as compared to the white
rice group (mean difference=0.98mg/L, 95% Cl: 0.23, 1.73; p-value=0.012)

(Kazemzadeh et al., 2013).

In another randomized cross-over clinical trial (Mohan et al., 2014) among
Indian adults, replacement of white rice with brown rice in two meals per day

(breakfast and lunch) for five days resulted in a significantly lower glycemic


response (percent difference= -19.8, 95% Cl: -32.8, -6.7; p-value=0.004)
Better insulin response was also observed after brown rice consumption
compared to after white rice consumption (percent difference= -57, 95%

Cl: -84, -30; p-value=0.0001) (Mohan et al., 2014).

Local clinical trial among adult Filipinos with T2DM who consumed one cup
of brown rice per meal daily for eight weeks showed statistically significant
teduction in fasting blood sugar (FBS), random blood sugar (RBS), and BMI

from pre-test to post-test (p-values<0.05) (Gomez, 2015).

Despite these statistical associations, conflicting findings were revealed in
an intervention trial by Brownlee et al. (2010) and Zhang et al. (2011). In the
46-week randomized controlled trial in two groups (British adults) with different
amounts of whole grains, no evidence of changes on biomarkers of
cardiovascular health were observed in those who were given whole grains
compared to the control after the trial (p-values>0.05) (Brownlee et al., 2010).
On the other hand, in a randomized dietary intervention trial by Zhang et al.
(2011) among Chinese adults with T2DM, results showed no sufficient
evidence of differences in anthropometric and biochemical markers for T2DM

after substituting white rice with brown rice for 16 weeks (p-values>0.05).

Table 2.4 Summary matrix for the association of white rice and brown rice consumption

with disease
Study Study Pop Research Major Findings Limitations
Kim, J; etal. 10,089 Gross- White rice and kimchi Results does not show
South sectional, pattern were positively causal relationship
2012 Korean Tationally- associated with the risk
adults aged representative of obesity in two groups Only 1-day 24-hour recall
19 years surveys after adjustments for was used (prone to error
or older confounders (group 1__since it cannot ascertain
OR=1.16, 95%CI: 1.04, usual intake)
1.30; group 2 OR=1.19,
98%CI: 1.06, 1.33) Statistical analysis did
not adjust for
A dietary pattern socioeconomic variables
‘consuming only white rice which may be a possible
and kimchi without other confounder
food groups is not
recommendable and
further emphasizes
diversification in food
consumption.
Hu, EA; et al. 352, 384 Meta-analysis Pooled data suggest that Limited number of
non-diabetic of prospective higher white rice studies included
2012 Asian and cohort studies consumption is
Western associated with elevated Unable to evaluate the
adults aged risk of developing type 2. effects of substituting
26-87 years diabetes in comparison _ brown rice for white rice
with lower intake levels
(228, 869 (pooled RR=1 27, 95%C! Measurement error with
American 1.04, 1.54), regards to the use of
and FFO
Australian: Asians have significantly
123, 479 ‘stronger association
Japanese (pooled RR=1.55, 95%Cl

and Chinese)

1.20, 2.01) compared to
Westerns (pooled
RR=1.12, 95%CI: 0.94,
1.33), suggesting a
relationship between rice
intake and ethnicity,

The dose-response
analysis showed that
each serving per day of
white rice consumption
was associated with an
11% increase in risk of
diabetes in the overall
population.

Research

Study Study Pop Design Major Findings Limitations
7s, D, etal "B54 Tospective ligher white rice mall number of cases
women, 40- cohort studies consumption (caloric
2013 70 years; conducted in contribution of white rice Cannot entirely separate
urban to total daily caloric effect of carbohydrates
52,512 men, communities intake) showed a and white rice from other
40-74 years of Shanghai, _ significant associ nutrients and food due to
China with risk of developing their correlation
CHD in both men and
women (HR=1.80, 95%CI: | Measurement errors,
1.01, 3.17). when using FFQ
Liang, W, 374 cases Case control __The results provide Non-probability sampling
etal and 464 study evidence of a positive _used (volunteers)
controls association between
2010 habitual rice food Stroke incidence was
consumption and the risk self-reported which may
of ischemic stroke in lead to recall bias
Chinese adults (adjusted
OR=2.73, 95%CI: 1.31,
5.69),
Khosravi- 3,006 Iranian Cross- There was no significant _ Cross-sectional study
Boroujeni, H; men, 19 sectional study association between cannot identify causality
etal years and regular white rice of disease
older consumption and risk
2013 factors of Wide range of age may
cardiovascular cause biased results
diseases, such as fasting
blood sugar and serum Use of FFQ may lead to
lipid profiles. underestimation of
So ___ refined grain intakes
40 Randomized Brown rice replacement in Unequal attrition rate
overweight or cross-over the diet as a staple food among the treatment and
obese clinical trial can be useful to control groups
2014 women aged improve reduction in
18-50 weight (mean ‘Small amount of brown
years old difference=1.2kg, 95% Cl: rice consumed

0.69, 1.96; p-
value=0.001), waist
circumference (mean
difference=2.38cm, 95%
Ch: 0.51, 4.25: p-
value=0.014), hi
circumfe

(mean

difference=2.98cm, 95%
Cl: 1.55, 4.44: p-
value<0.001), and BMI
(mean
difference=0.52kg/m2.
95% Cl: 0.26, 0.78; p-
value=<0.001), and

difference=0.98mg/L. 95%
Ch: 0.23, 1.73:

Intake of experimental
food and other food items
remains on the discretion
of the subject


Study ‘Study Pop Major Findings Limitations
p-value=( )
significantly, among over
weight and obese female
adults,
Mohan, Viet 15Asian- Randomized The study showed that Non-probability sampling
al. Indian, 25- cross-over trial replacing white rice as a used
45 staple with brown rice
2014 years resulted ina significant Results were not
reduction in glycemic adjusted for sex and
Fesponse (difference- _other possible
19.8%, 95%CI: -32.8.- confounders
6.7; p-value=0.004) and
fasting serum insulin Short intervention period
levels (difference -57%,
95%CI: -84%. -30%: p-
Z value=0.0001).
Gomez, EC 24diabetic Clinical trial Those who were given Non-probability sampling
subjects, 25- brown rice showed used
2015 40 years old, statistically significant
Filipino decrease in FBS, RBS,
body weight and BMI
from pre-test to week 3, 5,
7 and post-test (p-
values<0.05)
The effects of brown rice
is significant as early as
Z week 3. __ ~
Brownlee, 1A, 266 Randomized, An increase in whole- Non-probability sampling
etal. overweight or controlled grain consumption fora used
obese dietary 16-week period did not
2010 Participants, intervention _ significantly affect any Non-matching of
18-65 years study of the biomarkers of samples
British cardiovascular health
(p-values>0.05) Insufficient duration of
the intervention
Restricted whole grain
food products
Did not control intake of
other food items such as
spreads and mik
Zhang, Get 202 Parallel, ‘Substituting brown rice for Non-probability sampling
al. participants randomized. _—white rice did not lead to. used
with 16-wk substantial
2011 metabolic dietary improvements in Limited number from
syndrome intervention metabolic risk factors sample used to collect GI
trial (p-values>0.05) data

Short-term intervention
period


2.4. Consumer acceptability of brown rice

Studies on the consumer acceptability of brown rice are limited and
comparison products are often varied, depending on locally available and
traditionally consumed products. This includes locally produced white rice, other
rice varieties and other cereals such as corn. Background of the panel members
also vary, with some studies having trained panelists and some having untrained
panelists. All of the studies concerning the acceptability of brown rice used
convenience sampling to attain the required population. Majority of the studies, on
the other hand, have small sample sizes which could have affected the results of

the study.

The results of the quantitative studies (Table 2.5) revealed that brown rice
is generally acceptable based on color and appearance, texture, taste, and overall
quality. However, ratings for brown rice were substantially lower than those of the
other carbohydrate sources such as white rice and majority of the studies showed
that white rice is still more preferred compared to brown rice (Sareepuang et al.,
2008; Sudha et al., 2013; Ebuehi and Oyewole, 2007; Muhihi et al., 2013; Shobana

et al., 2011; Monge-Rojas et al., 2014).

Table 2.5 Summary matrix for the sensory evaluation of brown rice

Study Tae Study Pop Major Findings Limitations
Sareepuang Thailand Discriminatory The mean scores of color, Small sample
.Ketal and odor, texture, andtaste of | size

Khao Dawk Mali105 communicative brown rice were between
2008 (KDML 105) from value panel of 6.2 to 7.0 points out of 9.0
northeast Thailand 50 people (no _ points.
age and profile
indicated) Overall acceptability of
brown rice was 6.84
ee Points.

Sudha. V,et India 82 fice The majority of participants Small sample

al consumers, were willing to switchto size
Locally produced equal slum and brown rice if the cost was.

2013 Bapatia (BPT) non-slum; affordable. Discriminatory
variety rice healthy panelists
specifically Eighty-seven percent of
produced for the men expressed willingness
study since unmilled to switch to brown rice
tice is not available while 38 percent of women

‘expressed willingness.
Eighty-two percent of those
who did not buy rice for
their family expressed their
willingness to switch to
brown rice, 43 percent of
those bought the family's
rice indicated willingness.
Those who disliked brown
rice were less likely to be
willing to switch to brown
tice.

The mean scores for color
and appearance, texture,
and taste of brown rice
were between 4.6 to 4.7
points out of 7 points.
Overall acceptability of
brown rice was 4.9 points.

Ebuehi, Nigeria 20 untrained Sensory evaluation results Limited sample _

OAT: and taste panelists showed color. aroma, taste, size

Oyewole, Ofada, a local and and texture was between

AC indigenous rice 5.3 to 6.1 points out of 9.0
cultivated in the points.

2007 south west of
Nigeria , and aroso, Overall acceptability of
a foreign and brown rice was 5.6 points.
imported rice.


Setting, Rice

Study ‘Samples ‘Study Pop Major Findings imitations
a
Thailand —
Muhihi, A; et Tanzania, semi- 44 overweight — Customsytradition is the Non-probability
al. urban region and obese most important factor sampling used
adults (40-65 affecting food choice
2013 Brown rice from years) Results are significantly ‘Small sample
local vendors in higher in men than women. size
Morogoro
Women rated the taste of
other grains significantly
higher than brown rice.
Overall, brown rice was
rated favorably in terms of
smell, taste, color.
appearance, texture,
hardness, shine and
configuration. The score
was between 6 to 8 points
out of 10 points.
Shobana, S;_ Chennai, India Trained Sensory evaluation by Population not
etal panelists trained panelists revealed specified,
Bapatla (BPT) rice that with the given health panelists are
2011 from Chennai, India benefits of brown rice, the trained so
sensory attributes of brown awareness is
tice is as acceptable as already high
‘other samples of rice with
higher degree of polishing
Mean scores for the
different attributes were
between 5.3 to 9.5 points
out of 12 points.
Monge- Costa Rica 98 participants Plain brown rice was given _Non-probability
Rojas, R; et 40-65 years _the lowest mean score sampling used
al. Sample variety not —_ and healthy compared to white rice and
indicated (volunteers beans.
2014 from two urban

and two rural
communities)

Acceptability scores range
from 4.76 to 5.29 points
out of 9 points.

Overall acceptability was
5.16 points out of 9


2.5. Consumer perceptions for rice

2.5.1. Elements of perception

Perception is the process of selecting, organizing, and interpreting
sensations into a meaningful whole (Hanna and Mozniak; 2013). The
development of perception led to a deeper understanding of human nature
resulting in viewing perception in a more holistic approach involving not only
using the five senses as basis but other elements as well. The elements of
perception according to Schiffman and Kanuk (2010) includes sensation,

absolute threshold, differential threshold, and subliminal perception.

Sensation is defined as the responses of a person's sensory receptors to
environmental stimuli and the transmission of this information to the brain via
the nervous system (Hanna and Mozniak; 2013). This includes the acquisition
of sensory information through the sense organs such as the eyes, ears,
mouth, nose, and skin. Individuals tend to rely more on visual cues and only
resort to the other senses when vision is unavailable (e.g., in the dark). During
food consumption, the brain receives different sensory inputs and the
information from physiologically distinct sensory modes is integrated in the final

sensory perception

Absolute threshold, on the other hand, is the lowest level at which an
individual can experience a sensation (Schiffman and Kanuk; 2010)
Introduction of new products using novel advertisements stimulate the absolute

threshold of an individual and therefore creates more impact compared to using

conventional methods. Consumers can allocate mental capacity to a stimulus

either planned, involuntary or spontaneous.

Differential threshold or just noticeable difference is the minimal difference
that can be detected between two similar stimuli (Schiffman and Kanuk, 2010).
The stronger the initial stimulus, the greater the additional intensity needed for
the second stimulus to be perceived as different. Negative aspects of the
product should not be readily discernible while positive changes should be

made more distinct so as to attract the attention of consumers.

Lastly, subliminal perceptions are stimuli that are too weak or too brief to be
consciously seen or heard (Schiffman and Kanuk, 2010). Despite some
evidence that subliminal stimuli may influence affective reactions, extensive
research has shown no evidence that subliminal advertising can cause

behavior changes

The perceived quality and price also influences consumer perceptions.
Perceived quality depends on intrinsic cues which concern the physical
characteristics of the product (color and appearance, taste, odor) while extrinsic
cues are aspects not part of the product but which define the quality of the
product such as brand name, reputation of manufacturer, and product source.
After assessing the perceived quality of a product, perceived price should
reflect the value of item. Reference prices are used as a basis for comparison

in judging the likeliness to buy the product.

Another factor affecting consumer perception is the perceived risk. This
refers to the degree of uncertainty perceived by the consumer as to the
consequences (outcome) of a specific purchase decision (Schiffman and
Kanuk, 2010). This does not only involve functional risk but also includes
physical, financial, social, psychological and time risks. In order to address this,
information on the product should be provided to the consumers along with
building of good reputation both of the product and the manufacturer to ensure

credibility of the product's function to the consumer.

2.5.2. Factors affecting acceptability of brown rice

Consumer preferences for rice vary from country to country (Galawat and
Yabe, 2010). Consumer response to a given food is mainly defined by: 1) a
sensory component, related with the sensory properties of the product; 2) an
affective component, responsible for positive or negative response towards a
product, 3) a cognitive component, coming from the knowledge and opinions
about a product; and 4) a behavioral component, involving intentions or actions,
defining how willing a consumer is to do something in certain situations (Costell
et al., 2010). The sensory component reflects an individual's sensory
perception of the product; the affective component summarizes the general
response a person has to a product: the cognitive component is related to the
information that a person has about a product and to his/her attitudes and
beliefs, while the behavioral component is related to an action or intention and
reflects the person's intentions about his/her future behavior (Costell et al.,

2010).

Several studies have ascertained several factors affecting acceptability of
rice which include attributes of brown rice (sensory attributes, cost, ease of
preparation), individual characteristics (knowledge of the nutritional properties
of brown rice, customs/tradition, health consciousness of an individual,
consumer perception), and household characteristics (household income,

household size, monthly expenditure on food) (Table 2.6).

2.5.2.1. Attributes of brown rice

2.5.2.1.1. Consumer acceptability of the sensory attributes of rice

In most acceptability studies, sensory attributes ultimately determine
the acceptability of brown rice. As discussed earlier, several studies showed
that brown rice was generally acceptable but ratings for brown rice were
substantially lower as compared to other common carbohydrate sources
(ie. sorghum, wheat, and others) (Sareepuang et al., 2008; Sudha et al.,
2013; Ebuehi and Oyewole, 2007; Muhihi et al., 2013; Shobana et al., 2011;
Monge-Rojas et al, 2014). Primary characteristics of brown rice not
acceptable to the respondents in different studies include appearance
(Sudha et al., 2013) and taste (Danso-Abbeam et al., 2012; Danquah and
Egyir, 2014). Focus group discussions (FGDs) also revealed that major
barriers in the consumption of brown rice is its different texture and ‘nutty’

flavor (Monge-Rojas et al., 2014; Phan et al. 2010; Kumar et al. 2011)

2.5.2.1.2. Cost of brown rice

In the study by Sudha et al. (2013), majority (92.4%) the participants
were willing to switch to brown rice if the cost was affordable. Several FGDs
conducted in different populations have also revealed that cost of brown

tice affects its acceptability and the consumers’ food choices.

2.5.2.1.3. Ease of preparation

Several qualitative studies have revealed that ease of preparation is
a major factor affecting acceptability of rice (Phan et al., 2010). In most
FGDs conducted determining factors affecting rice choices, ease of
preparation affects acceptability of brown rice as stated by the participants.
Despite this, less than half of the respondents in the study by Muhihi et al.

(2013) regarded ease of preparation as a factor affecting their food choices.

2.5.2.2. Individual characteristics

2.5.2.2.1. Knowledge on the nutritional properties of brown rice

A contributing factor to the low acceptability of brown rice is the lack
of familiarity and promotion of the nutritive value of brown rice (Danquah et
al., 2014; Zhang et al., 2010; Kumar et al., 2011). Limited awareness of the
nutritional properties of brown rice resulted to lower acceptability scores
among Indian respondents (mean scores for sensory attributes=4.6-4.7
points out of 7 points, overall acceptability=4.9 points out of 7 points) (Sudha
et al., 2013). In contrast, higher knowledge on the nutritional properties of
brown rice resulted in higher sensory evaluation scores as exhibited in the

study by Shobana et al. (2011) which revealed a higher consumer rating for


the overall acceptability for brown rice (mean scores for sensory attributes=
5.3-9.5 points out of 12 points, overall acceptability=8.8-9.4 out of 12 points)
given that the panelists were more knowledgeable on the nutritional
properties and health benefits of brown rice since most had come from the

food sciences background.

These findings were supported by the FGD conducted by Kumar et
al. (2011) which stated that apart from color, size, texture, and habit,
another major barrier to the acceptance of brown rice was poor awareness
about its attributes and its nutritive properties. In contrast, in the FGD
conducted by Phan et al. (2010) among Vietnamese and American adults,
it was revealed that majority of the participants were aware that brown rice

contains better nutritional value compared to white rice.

2.5.2.2.2. Customsstradition

Tradition and history also play a major role in the perception of brown
rice, for example, Vietnamese participants regarded brown rice negatively
due to its association with a period of poverty in Vietnam (Phan et al., 2012;
Kumar et al. 2011). Participants from the studies by Kumar et al. (2011) and
Zhang et al. (2010) stated that until all household members were willing to
accept any of these new varieties of brown rice, it would be difficult to give
up the highly polished rice that people were used to eating. Similarly,
majority of the respondents from the study by Muhihi et al. (2013) regarded
customsitradition as a significant factor affecting their food choices. Similar

results were presented by Kumar et al. (2011) from FGDs conducted among


Indian adults which included traditional practices as a major deterrent in the

consumption of brown rice.

2.5.2.2.3. Health consciousness

Health consciousness directly affect acceptability and consumption
of brown rice. In several FGDs, it was revealed that self-proclaimed health
conscious individuals tend to have higher acceptability scores compared to
those who did not deem themselves as health conscious (Muhihi et al.,

2013).

2.5.2.2.4. Consumer perceptions

Consumer perception was directly associated with acceptability of
brown rice as revealed in several FGDs conducted in different populations

(Zhang et al., 2010; Phan et al., 2010; Kumar et al., 2011).

2.5.2.3. Household characteristics

2.5.2.3.1. Household income

Household income was not found to be associated with brown rice
acceptability (p=0.648) in the study by Danso-Abbeam et al. (2012) but
contrasting results were presented by Danquah and Egyir (2014) which
revealed that the attributes of brown rice (price, color, taste, nutritional
value, texture), attributes of white rice (taste, color, nutritional value), and
socioeconomic characteristics of the respondent (income) are statistically
significant in explaining the share of brown rice to total rice consumption

using the Tobit regression model (p-value<0.0000).

2.5.2.3.2. Household size
In the study by Danso-Abbeam et al. (2012), it has been found out

that household size has a positive relationship with preference for rice

(p<0.0001)

2.5.2.3.3. Monthly food expenditure
The study by Danso-Abbeam et al. (2012) has also revealed that the
consumer's monthly expenditure on food had significant positive effects on

their preference for rice (p-value<0.0001).

Table 2.6 Summary matrix for the studies on factors affecting acceptability of rice

Study Study Pop ae Major Findings Limitations
Galawal, F, 136 urban,  Face-to- Consumer perception for quality rice Cannot establish
Yabe.M © 80rural. face is highly associated with standard causality

interviews ng (abilty to pay) and per
2010 capita consumption of rice. Limited training
of surveyors

Consumers had the ability to pay
more and the mean willingness to
pay exceeds the maximum bidding
value at BS2.00 while the current
Price of local rice is BS1.20

It is observed that urban consumers
prefer rice which has white, purple,
long, non-glutinous, aromatic and
organic attributes. Meanwhile, rural
consumers prefer rice which has
white, glutinous, sweet and organic
attributes.

This study also reveals that there is
an increase in health awareness
among Brunei consumers as health
and food safety are priorities when
choosing food.

Is

Study Study Pop [oaiee Major Findings Limitations
janso- T TOSS" The key variables that significant jere are
Abbeam,G; respondents sectional __ influence consumer's preference for _ significantly
et al. (2014) study local rice were: age, household size, more female
‘sex, taste and consumer's monthly respondents
expenditure on food. ‘compared to
male
The results indicate a positive and respondents
significant relationship between
consumer preference for rice and
gender.
‘Age of respondents was found to
have a significant negative
relationship with consumer's
preference for rice.
Household size had a positive
relationship with preference for rice
Consumer's monthly expenditure on
food had significant positive effects on
preference for rice.
The taste of rice was also found to
exhibit positive significant influence
- _ ____onconsumer preference for rice
Zhang, G: et 32 FGD Health, taste, texture, appearance, Convenience
al participants cost, tradition were the main factors sampling
mostly influencing brown rice
2010 middle- consumption. Sample was not
aged, representative of
educated, Taste rather than nutritional value _the target
and ultimately determined purchasing population
employed decisions.

After tasting, several participants
indicated that they would include
brown rice in their daily diet if the
‘same quality of brown rice used in
the study was available.

Many participants had no prior
awareness of brown rice, and only a
few had tried it previously. Very few
Participants knew about its nutritional
value.

Participants thought that brown rice
would have to be acceptable to all
family members to be viable, as

Study Study Pop icon Major Findings Limitations

Well as providing more detalled
information on nutritional value and
health benefits is important.

‘Ahmad 33 adults Exploratory The more affluent the consumers, Used
Hanis, IAH; (focus group study the greater attention they will pay to convenience
etal discussion) the quality of foods. sampling
2012 205 Food safety was the most important
respondents attribute for rice.
in the
survey, 18 Malaysian consumers prefer regular
years and ‘or normal rice compared to fragrant
above and brown rice due to the price of
both fragrant and brown rice as well
as familiarity and lack of
promotions.
Danquah, 300 Cross- The attributes of brown rice (price. Purposive
1B; and Fespondents sectional__color, taste, nutritional value, texture), sampling used
Eoyir, IS survey attributes of white rice (taste, color,
nutritional value), and
2014 ‘socioeconomic characteristics of

the respondent (income) are
significant in explaining the share of
_brown rice to total rice consumption

Phan. TXU, 16 FGD Both consumer groups expressed Convenience
et al Caucasian- awareness that brown rice sampling used
Americans, contains more nutritional value
2012 18-64 years, (eg. vitamins and fiber) than white Results are
12 recently rice based on the
migrated opinion of the
Vietnamese, Vietnamese participants had respondents
18-44 years negative perceptions about brown —_only and may
rice because they associated it with a not be a
period of poverty in Vietnamese representative of
history. the response of
the general
While Caucasian-American population

Participants were ready to
compromise cost and taste for health Different age

benefits, Vietnamese participants groups for the
insisted on taste and texture as two groups may
preference for rice also bias the
_ _ 7 answers
FGD The major factors affecting the Limited age
al overweight acceptability of brown rice are group of
adults tradition, color, taste, texture, respondents
2011 convenience, status symbol, habit,

awareness, and sex

Study Study Pop cont Major Findings Limitations

TTT Oooo Gasncrally, ration Srctated the
specific form of rice that people ate.

Others maintained that they had
neither the time nor inclination to think
about good nutritive or balanced
diets, what mattered most were taste
and convenience.

Participants believed that until
household members were willing
to accept any of these vz ies of
brown rice, it would be difficult to
give up the highly polished rice that
people were used to eating,

Young people were considered to be
the most difficult group to change,
whereas older people, particularly
those with health concerns or those
otherwise motivated to improve their
health, would be more willing to
accept varieties of brown rice

Although the general consensus was
that getting people to accept this rice
would be difficult, some participants
suggested that endorsement from
health professionals and the
government could be a potentially
effective strategy to encourage
consumption of brown rice.

‘According to participants, apart from
color, size, texture and habit. another
major barrier to the acceptance of
brown rice was poor awareness about
it and its nutritive properties.

‘Some participants across slum and
non-slum groups, women more So
than men, indicated both interest and
willingness to adopt eating these

ies of brown rice.


Apmis 24) 40} pasn romeuiey jenjdeouog 9°z @snBi4

Poo) Uo ayrupuadka A\IUOW,
araeven aucomo [J ro ms pauasnon

ee)
saceveransory [—]

swomauey esomeuag [—]

‘awoau plouasnoH,
30 w0I9 J0 1509

‘201 umaug jo saryadosd
reuonuanu aun jo apamouy

uonduinsuco 301
umo.n spiemo SapniiTy

‘Du. umaiq jo sanaime Ksosuas,

‘suondaosed sawinsu0d


The acceptability of brown rice is influenced by several factors such as
attributes of brown rice (sensory attributes, cost, ease of preparation), individual
characteristics (knowledge of the nutritional properties of brown tice,
customs/tradition, health consciousness of an individual), and household
characteristics (household income, household size, monthly expenditure on food)
as well as consumer perceptions (Figure 2.6). All these factors were ascertained
in the study quantitatively except for the consumer perceptions which was purely

qualitative and was not analyzed for association with the outcome.

Due to the inherent relationship of the outcome variable to forming a
behavior, the conceptual framework for this study was guided by the Theory of
Planned Behavior. The Theory of Planned Behavior suggests that behavior is
dependent on one’s intention to perform the behavior. Intention is determined by
an individual's attitude (beliefs and values about the outcome of the behavior) and
subjective norms (beliefs about what other people think the person should do or
general social pressure, and motivations to comply with the behavior) (Morris et
al., 2012). Based from the literature review, attitudes towards brown rice
consumption are influenced by the sensory attributes of brown rice, knowledge on
the nutritional properties of brown rice, and an individual's consumer perception.
Subjective norms include customsf/tradition, health consciousness, and ease of
preparation, which are influenced by extrinsic factors aside from individual

reasons.

Behavior is also determined by an individual's perceived behavioral control,
defined as an individual's perceptions of their ability or feelings of self-efficacy to
perform behavior (Morris et al., 2012). Perceived behavioral control is influenced
by the capacity of the consumer to perform the behavior which is influenced by the
socioeconomic characteristics such as household income, household size,

monthly expenditure on food, as well as the cost of brown rice

C. Operational definition of variables

Acceptability of brown rice (Outcome): Defined as the experience
characterized by an overall positive (e.g., approach in a pleasant) attitude or
response. This was measured by doing a sensory evaluation of different brown
tice samples (using a self-administered form) and asking the respondent to rate
the overall acceptability of brown rice a 9-point Hedonic scale (with “1” as ‘Dislike
extremely’ and "9" as ‘Like extremely’). The ratings of the panelists were
categorized as ‘Low acceptability’ for those with ratings between “1 — Dislike
extremely” to “5 — Neither like nor dislike”, and ‘High acceptability’ for those with
ratings between “6 — Like slightly” and “9 - Like extremely” for use in the logistic

regression analysis (Figure 2.7)

BO e®¢

DO) &) we

} 2 3 Dike 4 ‘ © Like 7 Tike 8 the 9 Tike
Dike | Dhlthe — moderately Distthe Neither | slightly, moderately. very. extremely
eatremely very Mighty Uke por | much
i } much, . _ dhthe | . .
Low acceptabitty High acceptabiity

Figure 2.7 Classification of the acceptability of brown rice based from the consumer
acceptability test

Consumer acceptability of the sensory attributes of brown rice (Exposure):
Refers to the acceptability of the physical characteristics of cooked brown rice such
as appearance, odor, taste, and texture. This was measured using a sensory
evaluation of different brown rice samples (self-administered) and asking the
respondent to rate the acceptability of the attributes using a 9-point Hedonic scale
(with “1” as ‘Dislike extremely’ and “9” as ‘Like extremely’). Acceptability of the
sensory attributes of brown rice was coded and analyzed as mean acceptability
scores. For the logistic regression analysis, consumer acceptability scores for the
sensory attributes were categorized as ‘Low acceptability’ for those with ratings
between “1 — Dislike extremely” to “5 — Neither like nor dislike", and ‘High
acceptability’ for those with ratings between “6 — Like slightly” and “9 — Like
extremely” (Table 2.7)

Table 2.7 Classification of the Hedonic ratings of the panelists for the consumer
acceptability of the sensory attributes of brown rice

Level of Acceptability Hedonic Rating
High level of acceptability 6-9 points
Low level of acceptability 1-5 points

Level of knowledge (Exposure): The proficiency of the individual on the basic
information on the nutritional properties, health benefits and attributes of brown
rice. An in-depth 15-item test questionnaire on the knowledge assessment was
self-administered by the respondents after the face-to-face interview (Form 1,

Appendix 3). Level of knowledge remained as a quantitative variable and was used


for analysis as percentage scores for the overall correct answers of the

respondents and percentage scores for each individual question.

Customs/tradition (Exposure): The environment of the respondent indicating the
decisions of the household members with regards brown rice consumption as well
as past experiences on brown rice. This was measured through a face-to-face
interview using Form 1 (Appendix 3) and included three questions such as
previous experience in tasting brown rice, willingness to substitute white rice with
brown rice, and negative experiences in eating brown rice. Customs/tradition was
categorized as supportive if answered at least two positive response on the three
questions under customs/tradition (e.g. ‘Yes’ to having previous experience in
tasting brown rice and willingness to substitute white rice with brown rice; and
answered ‘No’ to having negative experiences in eating brown rice), otherwise,

customs/tradition was classified as inhibitive (Table 2.8).

Table 2.8 Classification of the customs/tradition of the household heads with regards to

brown rice
Customs/tradition Classification Positive Answers
Supportive More than 2

Inhibitive Less than 2

Health consciousness (Exposure): Health consciousness is the self-declared
level of concem on health and nutrition of the respondent. This was asked during
the face-to-face interview and the respondent was categorized as ‘Health

conscious’ if answered ‘1 — Very Health Conscious’ or ‘2 — Health Consious’ to

question number 14 in Form 1 (Appendix 3), otherwise, the response was

classified as ‘Not health conscious’ (Table 2.9).

Table 2.9 Classification of the self-declared health consciousness of the household heads

Classification of Health Consciousness Answer

1 Very Health Conscious
2— Health Conscious

3— Neither

Not Health Conscious 4— Not Health Conscious

5 — Very Health Unconscious

Health Conscious

Ease of preparation (Exposure): Refers to the acceptability of brown rice to the
respondents based on the length of cooking time. This was measured by using a
self-administered questionnaire included in the sensory evaluation part wherein
the respondents were asked to rate the acceptability of brown rice based on ease
of preparation. Ratings were from 1 to 10, with 1 being the highest. Ratings for
ease of preparation were categorized as ‘Low acceptability’ for those with ratings
between 6 to 10, and ‘High acceptability’ for those with ratings between 1-5, for

utilization in the logistic regression analysis (Table 2.10).

Table 2.10 Classification of the acceptability of the ease of preparation of brown rice

among household heads

Level of Acceptability of the Ease of

Preparation Score
High level of acceptability 1-5 points
Low level of acceptability 6-10 points

Cost of brown rice (Exposure): Refers the affordability of the current price of

brown rice per kilogram in the market among the respondents. This was measured


by using a self-administered questionnaire included in the sensory evaluation part
wherein the respondents were asked to rate the affordability of brown rice based
on its current cost (R 60.00 to ® 80.00) (Form 3, see Appendix 3). Ratings were
from 1 to 10, with 1 being the highest. Ratings for cost were categorized as ‘Low
acceptability’ for those with ratings between 6 to 10, and ‘High acceptability’ for
those with ratings between 1-5, for utilization in the logistic regression analysis

(Table 2.11).

Table 2.11 Classification of the acceptability of the cost of brown rice among household

heads
1 of Acceptability of the Cost Score
High level of acceptability 1-5 points
Low level of acceptability 6-10 points

Monthly household income. Refers to the measure of the combined incomes of
all individuals sharing a place of residence. This includes all forms of income such
as salaries and wages, pensions, and profit from businesses. Monthly household
income was classified after data encoding into ‘0’ for monthly household income
lesser than or equal to PhP10,000 and ‘1’ for more than PhP 10,000, for use in the

analysis (Table 2.12)

Table 2.12 Classification of the monthly household income of the sampled household

heads
Classification Monthly Household Income (PhP)
° Less than or equal to 10,000
1 More than 10.000

ie

Household size. The total number of members present in the family living under
a single roof (PSA, 2003), Household size was classified into ‘0’ for households
with less than or equal to five members and ‘1’ for those with more than five

members, for use in the analysis (Table 2.13).

Table 2.13 Classification of the household size of the sampled household heads.

Classification Household Size
0 Less than or equal to 5
1 More than 5

Monthly food expenditure. Refers to the expenses or disbursements made by
the household purely for food consumption of the household members. Monthly
food expenditure was classified into ‘0’ for expenditures less than or equal to
PhP5,000 and ‘1’ for expenditures more than PhP5,000, for use in the analysis

(Table 2.14)

Table 2.14 Classification of the monthly food expenditure of the households

Class Monthly Food Expenditure (PhP)
t) Less than or equal to 5,000
1 More than 5,000


Consumer perceptions. The positive or negative impression of an individual to a
specific food item based on previous experience, knowledge, tradition, and other
facts. Consumer perception was measured by using FGDs among two groups of
individuals — those who participated in the consumer acceptability test (SE Group)
and those who did not (NSE Group). Discussions were recorded verbatim and
were encoded and reported based on major classification of answers using the
FGD Guide Questions adapted from Phan et al., 2012 and Monge-Rojas et al.,
2014. Data obtained during the FGDs remained qualitative and was presented

separately from the quantitative data.

Major discussion points on the FGD on brown rice:
Typical meal. The type and combination of food items consumed by the
participants on a regular basis. Participants were asked what comes into mind

when the term ‘meal’ is mentioned.

Factors considered when buying food. This refers to the different parameters
taken into consideration by the buyer in the purchase of food for consumption

of the entire household.

Consumer perceptions for rice. The positive or negative impression of an
individual to rice and rice products. Participants were asked what comes to

mind when the term ‘rice’ is mentioned.

Typically consumed type of rice. This refers to the usual type and variety of rice

consumed by the household. Participants enumerated the most common

variety of rice consumed by the household and provided reasons for choosing

this type of rice.

Consumer perceptions for brown rice. The positive or negative impression of
an individual to brown rice as based on previous knowledge, tradition, and other
attributes of brown rice. Participants were asked of their opinion on brown rice
based from personal experiences and acquired knowledge as well as based

from their social interactions.

Factors affecting acceptability of brown rice. This refers to the different

parameters which plays a role in the acceptability of brown rice among the

participants and their household members.

Willingness to switch to brown rice. The level of willingness to change the usual
type of rice consumed by the household with brown rice. All FGD participants
were asked of their willingness to switch to brown rice if mentioned that there
were several studies which showed that brown rice is beneficial to the health.
On the other hand, the FGD SE group were also asked their level of willingness
to switch to brown rice given that they have already tried brown rice during the

consumer acceptability test.

Ways to convince others to eat brown rice. These are the different statements

which can be used to persuade other individuals to taste or consume brown
tice. Participants were asked what would be the most effective convincing

characteristics for other individuals to try brown rice.

People who can incorporate brown rice in daily meals. This refers to the groups

of people who can consume brown rice on a regular basis. Participants were
asked what groups or characteristics of people can and will regularly consume

brown rice.

Suggestions to improve brown rice. These are major recommendations from
participants on the ways to improve brown rice to increase its acceptability
among consumers. Participants were asked to enumerate the different
characteristics of brown rice which should be improved which can help increase

its acceptability among consumers.

CHAPTER Ill
METHODOLOGY
A. Study Design
The study employed a multi-method study design utilizing two separate
study phases for quantitative and qualitative data collection. Phase | was the
quantitative phase and included the face-to-face interviews (survey) and the
consumer acceptability of brown rice while Phase II was the qualitative phase and

included the FGD on the consumer perceptions for brown rice.

The data collection utilized a cross-sectional study design which
ascertained all variables (exposure and outcome) at a single point in time, during
Phase | of the study. The use of this type of study design allowed the collection of
data on the different exposures which can affect the consumer acceptability of
brown rice (outcome). Also, it maximized the resources and schedule, giving time
to conduct Phase I (and its subphases) and Phase II of the study at the same day
which prevented loss to follow up or attrition. Despite controlling this, the sample
size computed for the study allowed for 20 percent non-response. Even though the
study design has its advantages, causality still cannot be established. The study
can only conclude if the enumerated factors were associated with the outcome

(consumer acceptability of rice)

B. Study Phases

Phase |: Survey and Sensory Evaluation

Sub phase 1: Survey. |Information on the socio-demographic characteristics and
level of knowledge of the respondents were ascertained. Data on the socio-
demographic characteristics were obtained using a structured questionnaire (Form
1) by face-to-face interview with the respondents while the knowledge assessment

(Form 2) was self-administered.

Sub phase 2: Consumer Acceptability of Brown Rice. After the survey, consumer
acceptability of the sensory attributes and overall acceptability of brown rice was
ascertained through sensory evaluation among a subsample of the respondents.
The acceptability was measured using a self-administered questionnaire which
utilized a 9-point Hedonic scale with “1” as ‘Dislike extremely’ and “9" as ‘Like

extremely’

Phase Il: Focus group discussions

For the respondents who completed Phase |, FGD groups were formed from
those who have underwent the consumer acceptability test (SE group) and those
who did not (NSE Group) (see Data Collection Procedure). For each barangay,
one SE and one NSE group were formed for the FGDs. Overall, a total of 16 FGD
groups were formed in which FGDs were conducted which was aimed to delve
more deeply on the consumer perceptions for brown rice of the households.
Answers were recorded verbatim and were classified based on the major

classifications found on the FGD Guide Questions (Appendix 7) such as typical


meal, factors considered when buying food, consumer perceptions for rice,
typically consumed type of rice, consumer perceptions for brown rice, factors
affecting acceptability of brown rice, willingness to switch to brown rice, ways to
convince others to eat brown rice, people who can incorporate brown rice in daily

meals and suggestions to improve brown rice.

Study Setting
Caloocan is located at the northern
Che part of the National Capital Region (NCR)
catoo (Figure 3.1). It is divided into two
Pd geographic locations: South Caloocan,
| zal with an area of 1,362.50 hectares and
Honita
ey METRO ¢ North Caloocan, with an area of 3,970.90
MANILA
hectares. South Caloocan is bounded on
the north-northwest by Valenzuela,
ey Malabon and Navotas; on the east by
CAVITE

Figure 3.1 Map of Caloocan City and. Quezon City; and on the south by the City

surrounding areas
of Manila. North Caloocan is bounded on

the north-northwest by the province of Bulacan; on the south-southeast by Quezon

City; and southwest by Valenzuela

Caloocan is an urban first-class city based on income. Majority of the land
area is used for residential purposes with some used for commercial purposes.

There is a total of 188 barangays with a population of 1.48 million people in 2010


This population accounted for 12.56 percent of the population in the NCR with a
growth rate of 2.37 percent growth rate. Caloocan city is the third largest city in the

Philippines.

In 2013, local health data on the ten causes of mortality among residents of
Caloocan City included NCDs and complications of NCDs such as cardiovascular
diseases (CVDs) and other heart diseases, myocardial infarction, multi-organ
failure, hypertension and renal disease (pooled rate: 160/100,000 population)
(CHO, 2014). Data on the leading causes of morbidity is not available among adult
residents of Caloocan City. Majority of nutrition programs in Caloocan are focused
‘on children and mothers, with minimal attention provided for improving nutrition
among adults. In 2013, only 0.79 percent of the city’s budget has been allocated
for mobilizing adults in Caloocan with projects under the Healthy Lifestyle Program
which includes “Hataw Exercise” (exercise campaign) and provision of free fasting

blood sugar (FBS) tests

D. Sampling Technique
Sample Size Determination

This was computed using the OpenEpi website (http:/www.openepi.com).
The sample size was computed assuming 80 percent power, 95 percent level of
confidence, and has been adjusted for 20 percent non-response (buffer). Sample

size was computed for specific objective numbers 1 and 4.

Objective 1. To determine the level of acceptability of cooked brown rice among
household heads

Based from a previous study by Heinemann et al. (2006), which indicated
that a total of 33.2 percent of the population who tasted brown rice ranked it as
desirable (like very much and like moderately). The computed sample size for
objective 1 was 341. Adjusting for 20 percent non-response rate, the minimum

ssample size for this objective was 410 respondents.

Objective 4. To determine if the sensory attributes of brown rice are associated
with its the acceptability among household heads

Based from a sensory evaluation study by Muhihi et al. (2013) which
indicated that 34 percent of the population's post-tasting acceptability was
influenced by the sensory attributes of rice. Also, the result of a previous study by
Zhang et al. (2010) indicated that a total of 72 percent of the population's pre-
tasting acceptability was influenced by the sensory attributes of rice would result
to a very low sample size, a value of 50 percent for those unexposed with outcome
was assumed for the purpose of this study. The computed sample size for
objective 4: Sensory attributes was 308. Adjusting for 20 percent non-response

rate, the minimum sample size for this objective was 370 respondents

Objective 4. To determine if the cost_of brown rice is associated with its
acceptability among household heads

Based from a previous study by Muhihi et al. (2013) which indicated that a
total of 38 percent of the population's post-tasting acceptability was influenced by

the cost of rice. Also, since there were no previous studies associating cost and


acceptability among individuals who have not tasted brown rice, a value of 50
percent for those unexposed with outcome was assumed for the purpose of this
study. The computed sample size for objective 4: cost was 528. Adjusting for 20
percent non-response rate, the minimum sample size for this objective was 634

respondents.

Objective 4. To determine if the ease of preparation of brown rice is associated
with its acceptability among household heads

Based from a previous study by Muhihi et al. (2013) which indicated that a
total of 21 percent of the population's post-tasting acceptability was influenced by
the ease of preparation of rice. Also, since there were no previous studies
associating ease of preparation and acceptability among individuals who have not
tasted brown rice, a value of 35 percent for those unexposed with outcome was
assumed for the purpose of this study. The computed sample size for objective 4:
ease of preparation was 318. Adjusting for 20 percent non-response rate, the

minimum sample size for this objective was 382 respondents.

Objective 4. To determine if the knowledge on the nutritional properties of brown
tice is associated with its acceptability among household heads

Based from a previous study by Heinemann et al. (2006) which indicated
that a total of 71.7 percent of the population's acceptability were influenced by the
knowledge on the nutritional properties of brown rice. Also, since there were no
previous studies associating knowledge on the nutritional property of brown rice
and acceptability among individuals who have not tasted brown rice, a value of 50

percent for those unexposed with outcome was assumed for the purpose of this


study. The computed sample size for objective 4: knowledge on the nutritional
properties of brown rice was 160. Adjusting for 20 percent non-response rate, the
minimum sample size for this objective was 192 respondents.

Objective 4. To determine if customs/traditions is associated with its acceptability
among household heads

Based from a previous study by Muhihi et al. (2013) which indicated that a
total of 41 percent of the population's post-tasting acceptability were influenced by
their customs/traditions. Furthermore, based from a previous study by Zhang et al.
(2010) which indicated that a total of 22 percent of the population's pre-tasting
acceptability were influenced by their customs/traditions. The computed sample
size for objective 4: customs/traditions was 190. Adjusting for 20 percent non-
response rate, the minimum sample size for this objective was 228 respondents

Objective 4. To determine if health consciousness is associated with its
acceptability among household heads

Based from a previous study by Muhihi et al. (2013) which indicated that a
total of 36 percent of the population's post-tasting acceptability were influenced by
their health consciousness. Also, since there were no previous studies associating
health consciousness and acceptability of brown rice among individuals who have
not tasted brown rice, a value of 50 percent for those unexposed with outcome
was assumed for the purpose of this study. The computed sample size for
objective 4: customs/traditions was 388. Adjusting for 20 percent non-response

rate, the minimum sample size for this objective was 466 respondents.

Table 3.1 Summary of the sample size calculations for Objectives 1 and 4 using

OpenEpi

Objective Computed Sample Butter (#20%) Total
Objective 1: Level of Acceptability 341 69 410
Objective 4: Sensory Attributes 308 62 370
Objective 4: Cost 528 106 634
Objective 4: Ease of Preparation 318 64 382
Objective 4: Knowledge 160 32 192
Objective 4: Customs/Traditions 190 38 228
Objective 4: Health Consciousness 388 78 466

Based from the sample size calculation from the two objectives, the highest
computed sample size was for objective number 4 (cost) which was 634
respondents. Although a target of 634 respondents was computed for
ascertaining the outcome and the exposure variables, logistical and financial
barriers hindered conducting the consumer acceptability test (which was the
source of data for the outcome) among the targeted sample size. Therefore,
exposure variables were obtained, achieving the target sample size of 634, but the
outcome variable (overall acceptability of brown rice) was only obtained in the

subsample of 104 sensory panelists.

Sampling Design (Figure 3.2)

The quantitative part of the study utilized multi-level stratified simple random
sampling. Caloocan City was stratified to its geographical location (North and
South Caloocan). The list of barangays per stratum was obtained from the
sociodemographic data of Caloocan City (Caloocan City, 2014). In South
Caloocan, barangays included in the random sampling were Barangays 1 to 164
while for North Caloocan, Barangays 165 to 188 (except Barangay 177, since it
was utilized for the pre- and pilot testing) were included. Simple random sampling
via Fishbowl method was used to determine the participating barangays for North

and South Caloocan. A total of four barangays per stratified location was obtained

In each participating barangay, the list of registered voters was obtained
from the barangay records and simple random sampling was used to ascertain 380
households from the barangays in North Caloocan (95 households per each
barangay) and 256 households from the barangays in South Caloocan (64
households per each barangay). With the assistance from the barangay officials.
chosen households were visited individually and household members were asked
to determine their household head based on the definition below. If multiple
individuals were chosen in a single household via random sampling, only the
chosen household head was included in the study. Substitution for duplications
were not done since the sample size computation already accounted for 20 percent

non-response.

Household (Sampling population): Refers to an aggregate of persons, generally
but not necessarily bound by ties of kinship, who live together under the same roof
and eat together or share in common the household food (PSA, 2003). A person

who lives alone is also considered a separate household.

Household heads (Elementary unit): Refers to the person who manages the
food preparations including, but not limited to, purchasing and preparing the food.
The household head is the one who has authority over the decisions of the
household members when it comes to food consumption and whose opinion on
food consumption has the greatest impact in the decision of the household

members.

The study was explained to each household head verbally and through the
Informed Consent Form (ICF) (Appendix 2) by the data collectors and were asked
for their informed consent without the presence of the barangay officials to prevent

coercion or unwilling participation in the study.

For the consumer acceptability test, a subsample of eligible respondents
from Phase | was ascertained by simple random sampling. In sensory evaluation
or consumer acceptability tests, a minimum sample size of 100 subjects is enough
to determine a difference of about 0.4 standard deviations with minimal chance of
missing true differences as compared to using smaller sample sizes (20 to 50)
(Lawless and Heymann, 2010). Therefore, for the consumer acceptability
conducted in this study, a subsample of 100 subjects was targeted. The number
of respondents sampled for the consumer acceptability test per stratified location


was proportional to the total number of households in North and South Caloocan.
A total of 59 North Caloocan household heads (a total of 15 panelists per
barangay) and 41 South Caloocan household heads (a total of 11 panelists per
barangay) were selected for the consumer acceptability test. The procedures for
subphase II or the consumer acceptability phase was again verbally explained to
the sampled population prior to the actual conduct of Phase II. Participants were
allowed to back out at this phase of the study, but substitution was made to achieve

the target 100 participants for the consumer acceptability test.

After Phase |, the respondents were asked if they were willing to participate
in the FGD. Due to the time consumed for the FGD, each FGD group consist of
only six to 13 members. Also, the initial proposal to homogenize (based on
nutritional status, age, and sex) the FGD groups was not accomplished due to
logistical barriers. Since the target sample size was high, computation of the BMI
was not accomplished at the end of Phase |, also, barangays chosen for
participation were geographically distant from each other, making it difficult to
transport respondents with similar characteristics from one barangay to another.
Hence, only willingness to participate in the FGDs became the sole inclusion
criteria for the FGD groups. For each barangay, two groups were formed (SE and
NSE group). Respondents for Phase | were not coerced to join the FGD and
provision of meals after the FGD was not mentioned to the respondents to prevent

influencing their decision to participate.

A total of 584 respondents (92.1% response rate) participated in the survey
and knowledge assessment, 104 panelists for the consumer acceptability test, and
146 participants for the FGDs (76 participants for the NSE Group and 70

participants for the SE Group).

Although a target of 634 respondents was computed for ascertaining the
outcome and the exposure variables, logistical and financial barriers hindered
conducting the consumer acceptability test (which was the source of data for the
outcome) among the targeted sample size. Therefore, exposure variables were
obtained, achieving the target sample size of 634, but the outcome variable (overall
acceptability of brown rice) was only obtained in the subsample of 104 sensory

panelists

188 Barangays in Caloocan City
(Total number of households: 3

“Serenfea Random Somping

‘North Caloocan
(Households: 205,055)

South Caloocan
(Households: 140,592)

4 Southern barangays

‘Simple Random Somping

4 Northern barangays

‘Simple Rondom Somping

95 Households per barangay

Elementary unit

‘65 Households per barangay

Sampling unit
Phase | Survey and Sensory
Evaluanon

Household heads

Simple Random Somptng

59 Household head panelists

“41 Household head panelist
(1S panelists per barangay)

(11 panelists per barangay)

Sensory Evaluanon Subsample

Figure 3.2 Sampling design utilized in the study

E. Data Collection Procedure

3.1. Preparation
3.1.1. Validity testing of data collection instruments

Construct, content, and face validity of the questionnaires were

tested by consulting individuals who specialize in brown rice research and
development. This included four researchers from the Department of
Science and Technology (DOST) who were asked to review the
questionnaires and provide inputs as to its relevance, applicability, and
comprehensiveness in the local context. Major comments from the validity
testing included using the Filipino translation of Form 2 and ICF, changing
the choices of answer for the willingness and health consciousness


question in Form 1 (from ‘Yes/No’ to range of 1-5), conctruct and content
changes in Form 1, Form 2, and Form 3. Validity testing was conducted
prior to pretesting and data collection and comments and suggestions from

the consultation were incorporated prior to the start of the study.

3.1.2, Manpower and data collection instruments

All data collection procedures were done by the study proponent and
data collectors in coordination with the barangay officials. Four additional
manpower were hired for the purpose of the study especially for the survey
and consumer acceptability phase. The study proponent was previously
trained in face-to-face interview to obtain sociodemographic and economic
data and anthropometric measurements (height and weight). The study
proponent trained the data collectors on proper face-to-face interview
procedures to prevent leading questions and incomplete or inappropriate
answers. Data collectors were also trained in anthropometric
measurements using a bathroom scale and tape measure. For the specific

terms of reference of the data collectors, see Appendix 4

For the sensory evalutation, procedures were followed according to
Lawless and Heymann (2010). The study proponent trained the data
collectors on proper set-up of the consumer acceptability test area,
preparation of the rice samples, randomization of the individual samples,
and other important protocols for the consumer acceptability test. A mock

consumer acceptability test was conducted to test the knowledge of the data


collectors on the processes involved in the consumer acceptability test and

to adjust the processes accordingly.

Lastly, for the FGD, the study proponent trained the Field
Coordinator on actual FGD procedures as guided by the FGD Guide
Questions (Appendix 7). Since the study proponent was not present during
majority of the data collection schedule, the FGD was conducted by the
Field Coordinator in all sample barangays except the first barangay (in
which the study proponent conducted the FGD). One of the hired data
collector have previous experience in the conduct of FGDs in qualitative

research which aided in standardizing the processes for the FGDs.

Several data collection instruments were used in the study. This
included the ICF, Form 1: Subject Profile, Form 2: Knowledge Assessment.
and Form 3: Sensory Evaluation. The ICF was read and the processes of
the study was explained to the sampled household heads prior to the
conduct of the face-to-face interview. Household heads were given ample
time to decide in the participation in the study, and questions were still
entertained even if the survey, knowledge assessment, consumer
acceptability test, and FGDs were already ongoing. Household heads who
agreed to participate in the study were asked to sign the ICF wherein a
duplicate copy was retained for their reference. The subject profile of the
household heads (Form 1, see Appendix 3) was collected through face-to-

face interview. Knowledge assessment form (Form 2, see Appendix 3) was


self-administered for most of the respondents, however, some respondents
requested the questionnaire to be administered through face-to-face
interview due to their difficulty in reading the questionnaires or due to being
more comfortable in a face-to-face interview rather than the test being self-
administered. The consumer acceptability form (Form 3, see Appendix 3)
was self-administered during the consumer acceptability test in the
barangay hall/consumer acceptability test venue. This form included the
question on the acceptability of cost and ease of preparation of brown rice.
Forms 1 to 3 originally used the English language as a medium but Form 2
and the ICF were translated to Filipino. Although the translated versions
were used as based on the comments during the validity testing, the English

version of Form 2 and the ICF were still retained for reference.

The FGD was conducted using a topic guide adapted from Phan et
al. (2012) and Monge-Rojas et al. (2014) (see Appendix 7). Participants of
the FGD were asked questions on the major concepts for consumer
perceptions on brown rice such as typical meal, factors considered when
buying food, consumer perceptions for rice, typically consumed type of rice,
consumer perceptions for brown rice, factors affecting acceptability of
brown rice, willingness to switch to brown rice, ways to convince others to
eat brown rice, people who can incorporate brown rice in daily meals and
suggestions to improve brown rice. All questionnaires were pre-tested and
pilot tested prior to the conduct of the actual data collection, for the

standardization of procedures

ig

3.1.3. Pretesting

Questionnaires were pretested in a barangay in Caloocan which was
not chosen for participation in the study (Barangay 177). Pretesting involved
answering the questionnaires as well as conducting an open forum to obtain
the comments of the participants regarding the adequacy and relevance of
the questionnaires in the local context. Generally, minimal revisions were
commented in the questionnaire (revisions include enlarging the size of
text), but no major revisions were incorporated in the questionnaire prior to
the pilot testing and actual data collection. Revised questionnaires were
then pilot tested in another set of respondents in the same barangay. Pilot
testing involved undergoing all the phases to check the feasibility of the
processes indicated from the study proposal. Processes were standardized
with the data collectors during the pilot testing for implementation in all

sampled barangays for the actual data collection.

3.1.4. Coordination

The study was coordinated with the City Nutrition Action Office for
permission for ethical clearance. After the approval of the proposal from the
panel and the ethical review board, the study was coordinated directly to
the barangays chosen for participation, as recommended at the city level
The coordination oriented the barangay officials on the data collection
procedures, the target participants and the significance of the study for

Caloocan City. The benefits of the study for the residents in Caloocan City


were also emphasized. Households were then chosen for participation in
the study through random sampling of the list of registered voters in the
barangays. Households were asked who they see as household heads and
the determined household heads were oriented verbally and through the
ICF prior to agreement of participating in the study. Household heads were
provided transportation to and from the data collection site (especially for
the consumer acceptability test and FGDs) to prevent incurring additional

expenses on the part of the respondent.

3.2. Phase 1: Survey and Consumer Acceptability Test
3.2.1. Sub phase 1: Survey

After the agreement between the household head and the study
proponent, a face-to-face interview, which took at most 20 minutes, on basic
subject information was done among all sampled household heads using
Form 1: Subject Profile. The respondents were given ample time to answer
each question. Height and weight of the respondents were also ascertained
using a tape measure and a bathroom scale. Specific processes on
determining the height and weight is explained by Gibson (2005). After the
face-to-face interview, the respondents were asked to self-administer the
knowledge assessment form and were given ample amount of time to do
so. However, several respondents requested to conduct the knowledge
assessment through face-to-face interview due to their difficulty in reading
the questionnaires or due to being more comfortable in face-to-face
interview rather than the test being self-administered. Form 2 was translated


to Filipino and was used for all respondents (as commented during the
validity testing, in which the translated version was more appropriate to be
used during the study). After answering, the forms were checked for

completeness before moving on to another respondent.

3.2.2. Sub phase 2: Sensory Evaluation

Sensory evaluation or the consumer acceptability test was done as
previously described by Lawless and Heymann (2010). The consumer
acceptability test was aimed to accomplish one to two barangays per day
at strictly set schedules between 9 to 11 in the morning and 2 to 4 in the
afternoon. Each panelist was able to finish the evaluation in a maximum of
30 minutes from start of evaluation. Detailed procedures are explained

below.

3.2.2.1. Panelist

A subsample (n = 104) of the household heads served as the
panelists for the study. For the purpose of the study, the panelists
were not trained or pre-oriented on the nutritional properties of brown
rice and other facts about brown rice. A total of 104 participants were
chosen by random sampling per each stratified location (see
Sampling Technique). Pregnant/actating individuals, persons with
allergy to brown rice, and individuals with altered taste due to
medication or special diet were excluded from the consumer

acceptability test.

3.2.2.2. Sample

A total of four samples were used in the study: Sample A -
Brown Rice (supermarket), Sample B - Brown Rice (supermarket),
Sample C - Brown Rice (local wet market) and Control Sample D -
(Sinandomeng variety). All the rice samples used in the study are
available in major supermarkets and wet markets in Caloocan. Brand
names of the samples used were not disclosed to prevent

association of the study to major brand players in the rice industry

Rice samples were cooked in four separate rice cookers in the
barangay hall/consumer acceptability room prior to the start of the
consumer acceptability test. Brown rice samples were cooked in a
tice cooker with a 1:2 rice and water ratio, while the control was
cooked with a 1:1 rice and water ratio. A total of 200g raw rice was
cooked per batch per sample to produce 400g cooked rice. Cooked
samples were placed in individual plastic cups (with approximately
20g each), labeled using a random three-digit number, and was used
for consumer acceptability test immediately with a maximum holding
period of 60 minutes from cooking time. Serving temperature was
maintained at more than or equal to 50°C. Placement of the samples

on the tray was randomized per panelist.

3.2.2.3. Test setup

Panelists were accompanied by the data collectors from place
of residence to the consumer acceptability test area. A waiting area
was provided in a location near the barangay hall/ consumer
acceptability test area. The panelists were asked to wait in this area
prior to their turn simultaneous with a verbal orientation on the
consumer acceptability test procedure, proper filling up of forms,
proper decorum during consumer acceptability test, and other

important details.

All the samples, four spoons, the consumer acceptability test
forms (one for each sample, and the form for the acceptability of the
cost and ease of preparation. A total of seven forms including the
instruction page), water and pencil were placed in a tray and were
given to the panelists. Water was provided and the panelists were
asked to rinse their mouth before and after testing of each sample.
The panelists were asked to rate the rice samples based on color
and appearance, odor, taste, texture, and overall acceptability using
a 9-point Hedonic scale with “1" representing ‘Dislike extremely’ and
“9” representing ‘Like extremely’. Trays were removed from the booth
right after the evaluation of the panelist, before a new panelist was

asked to enter the evaluation area.

3.2.2.4. Test area

A temporary consumer acceptability test area was created in
the barangay hall/consumer acceptability test area for the use in the
study. The consumer acceptability test venue was chosen and
inspected prior to actual data collection to check the appropriateness
facilities. In majority of the barangays, the consumer acceptability
test was conducted in the barangay hall. However, if the barangay
hall was not available, not appropriate, or did not contain the
necessary requirements for a consumer acceptability test area, a

function room near the barangay hall was rented.

Four booths for evaluation with a size of 1 m by 1 m by size
were created. Panelists were not allowed to wander in the consumer
acceptability test area before, during or after the consumer
acceptability test. It was ensured in the setup that the panelists were
not able to see each other. The data collectors observed the
consumer acceptability test to prevent the panelists from
communicating and for assuring that the procedures were carried out
well. It was ensured that the evaluation area was well-lighted
(fluorescent lighting equivalent to daylight), well-ventilated, and with

no extraneous odors present.

The preparation area was located on an adjacent room in the

barangay hall/consumer acceptability test area. This housed four


different rice cookers for the samples and the utensils and other

paraphernalia used by the panelists.

3.2.2.5. Test run or pilot testing

To test the flow of the procedures for Phase |, a test run or
pilot testing was done among ten individuals (equivalent to one batch
of panelists) of Barangay 177, a barangay with similar characteristics
to the sampled barangays but was not included in the sampling. All
the procedures from the face-to-face interviews to the consumer
acceptability test were conducted to simulate actual data collection
procedure. After the test run, the participants were gathered to gain
comments on the processes involved and suggestions for

improvement.

3.3. Phase Il: Focus Group Discussion

The FGDs were done after the consumer acceptability test (for the SE
Group) and after the survey and knowledge assessment (for the NSE Group). As
mentioned before, the initial proposal to homogenize (based on nutritional status,
age, and sex) the FGD groups was not accomplished due to logistical barriers.
Since the target sample size was high, computation of the BMI was not
accomplished at the end of Phase |, barangays chosen for participation were
geographically distant from each other, making it difficult to transport respondents.
with similar characteristics from one barangay to another. Hence, only willingness
to participate in the FGDs became the sole inclusion criteria for the FGD groups.
For each barangay, two groups were formed (SE and NSE group). Respondents
for Phase | were not coerced to join the FGD and provision of meals after the FGD
was not mentioned to the respondents to prevent influencing their decision to

participate.

A total of 16 groups with six to 13 members per group (Table 3.2) were
asked to participate in the study (eight groups for SE and eight groups for NSE).
Topics discussed include typical meal, factors considered when buying food,
consumer perceptions for rice, typically consumed type of rice, consumer
perceptions for brown rice, factors affecting acceptability of brown rice, willingness
to switch to brown rice, ways to convince others to eat brown rice, people who can
incorporate brown rice in daily meals and suggestions to improve brown rice. FGDs
were recorded verbatim. The FGDs lasted for about 30 to 45 minutes, depending

on the level of participation of the FGD participants. Results of the FGDs were
7)

presented based on the most usual and noteworthy statements of the participants,

which may support the results of the quantitative phase.

Table 3.2 Categorization of the small groups for the FGDs

Group 1 (SE group) Group 2 (NSE group)
Barangay 1 (North Caloocan) Barangay 1 (North Caloocan)
Barangay 2 (North Caloocan) Barangay 2 (North Caloocan)
Barangay 3 (South Caloocan) Barangay 3 (South Caloocan)
Barangay 4 (South Caloocan) Barangay 4 (South Caloocan)
Barangay 5 (South Caloocan) Barangay 5 (South Caloocan)
Barangay 6 (South Caloocan) Barangay 6 (South Caloocan)
Barangay 7 (North Caloocan) Barangay 7 (North CalooEn)
Barangay 8 (North Caloocan) Barangay 8 (North Caloocan)

F. Data Processing and Analysis

Data cleaning and editing were done right after each data collection day.
Each form was checked for completeness and afterwards, data were encoded
using Microsoft Office Excel 2013. As a guide to the coding and encoding process,
a coding manual was developed by the study proponent (see Appendix 5). This
helped in the standardization of answers for coding and as well as for the
categorization of variables. Data encoding was done by the study proponent while
data validation was done twice (first by the Field Coordinator then by the Study
Proponent) to ensure the correctness of the data. Raw data were categorized as

guided by the Operational Definition of the variables and the Coding Manual (see

Operational Definition of Terms and Coding Manual). Data were analyzed using

Stata Software version 12 and were presented in appropriate graphs and tables.

Descriptive statistics were used to summarize the socioeconomic and
demographic profiles of the household heads. For the qualitative variables
(nominal and ordinal) in Form 1 (Subject Profile), frequencies and proportions were
computed while for the quantitative variables in the ratio scale, the mean and

standard deviation were computed.

In the consumer acceptability test of different attributes of brown rice, mean
Hedonic ratings were presented per attribute for each sample. Differences of the
mean ratings of the brown rice samples from the control for the different sensory

attributes were ascertained using Dunnett's test using a=0.05.

Multiple binary logistic regression analysis was used to determine the
factors associated with overall acceptability of rice. Overall acceptability (outcome)
was categorized after data processing which came up with binary values which
was then used for logistic regression. Stepwise logistic regression was run for each
covariate until the final logit model was obtained. Level of significance was set at

a = 0.05 for ail the statistical tests.

Table 3.3 Objectives, methods and tools of data collection utilized in the study

etl Method of Data Tools of Data ‘Analysis
Road Collection Collection
7 Determine the level of
Consumer Descriptive
ae orid tousehond hoods acceptability test Gaus) statistics
2. Compare the difference in One-way
the level of acceptability of Consumer roms ANOVA,
brown rice to white rice among acceptability test Dunnett's
household heads Test
3. Determine the level of Sel-administered aaa
knowledge on the nutritional knowledge Form 2. Knowledge pagar
properties of brown rice among assessment Assessment .
household heads questions paces
4, Determine if the following
factors associated with the
acceptability of brown rice
among household heads:
a. Attributes of brown rice
(sensory attributes, cost, Form 1. Subject Profile
ease of preparation); 7 Form 2. Knowledge
‘ace-to-face Multiple
properties of brown rice, LL! Evaluation of Brown _—@9"ession
customs/tradition, health Rice
consciousness); and
c. Household characteristics
(household income,
household size, daily food
expenditure) a
Not
5. Determine the consumer applicable
Perceptions for brown rice beth FGD Topic Guide since FGDs
among household heads are

_ qualitative!
General objective: To
determine the consumer
acceptability and perceptions
for brown rice among
household heads in selected

barangays in Caloocan City

Analysis of results from Objectives 1-4

‘FGDs were encoded verbatim and several qualitative statements encompassing the recurring answers of
the respondents were included in the presentation of results and the discussion

G. Scope and Delimitations of the Study

The study employed a multi-method study design utilizing two separate
study phases for quantitative and qualitative data collection. The study was
conducted in a single urban area which is Caloocan City. Participants for the study
were delimited to household heads of selected barangays in Caloocan City, which
were only those who are listed as current registered voters in the barangays. Also,
the study utilized questionnaires developed by the study proponent and for the
consumer acceptability, the 9-point Hedonic scale was used to ascertain
acceptability, since it was the most common and recommended scale for
consumer acceptability tests. Exposure variables used in the study are delimited
to the attributes of brown rice (sensory attributes, cost, ease of preparation);
individual characteristics (knowledge on the nutritional properties of brown rice,
customs/tradition, health consciousness); and household characteristics

(household income, household size, daily food expenditure).

H. Ethical Considerations
This research has been reviewed and approved by the UP Manila Research
Ethics Board (UPMREB) - Ethics Review Panel via expedited review on 20

January 2017 with study protocol code: UPMREB 2016-403-01 (Appendix 1).

The study was explained both through verbal and written form (ICF).
including possible risks of allergic reactions to brown rice consumption such as
diarrhea, flatulence or a bloated feeling, abdominal pain, and nausea. While the

possibility of allergies is uncommon especially in adults, the participants were still


made aware of the possibility. It was also explained that the data collected will help
to understand and improve the factors associated with acceptability of brown rice
among households and that there may not be any benefit to participants or the
society at this stage of the research, but future generations are likely to benefit
from the results of this study. Also, participants in the consumer acceptability test
phase would have the chance to taste brown rice and appreciate its sensory
characteristics thus widening the horizon of the participants to include brown rice

in their daily diets and consequently better their health by doing so.

The participants were given ample time to decide after the orientation. The
‘study proponent was the one who asked the prospective participants if they were
willing to take part in the study, without the presence of any barangay official
Inquiries regarding the study were entertained during the orientation and before
signing the informed consent form. After agreement to the study, the ICF was
obtained from the participants and counterchecked for completeness. Inquiries
were still entertained even after the signing of the consent form within the duration
of the study. The collected ICFs were filed and are kept securely in a locked cabinet
for counterchecking in the future. A duplicate copy of the ICF was also provided to

the household head for their reference.

The participants will not be identified individually in any publication
Confidential participant information including the pre-assessments done will be
made available to the participants and the project team upon request. Anonymity

was ensured by providing an alphanumeric code for the households. If it is

vad

necessary to identify the participant because of safety and regulatory reasons,
agreement between the participant, proponent, and other individuals concerned
shall be needed on maintaining the confidentiality of the participant to any outside

parties.

A participant may dropout from the study due to any personal and health
reasons without any consequences and/or fees. Appropriate documentation of the
reasons for not participating or completing the study was maintained by the project
team. Participants were provided transportation to and from the data collection site,
thus, no compensatory allowance was provided for the entire duration of the study.
However, incentives, in the form of food packs or meals, were still provided for

those who completed participated in the consumer acceptability test and FGDs.

This study was funded by government and academic institutions such
Department of Science and Technology-Science Education Institute (DOST-SE!)
and the UP Manila National Graduate Office for the Health Sciences (UPM-
NGOHS). The principal investigator did not seek any funding and do not have any
personal relationship with private institutions, people, and organizations that could

inappropriately influence or bias the content of the paper.

CHAPTER IV

RESULTS

A. Phase |: Results of the Survey and consumer acceptability test

For Phase | of the study, a total of 584 respondents participated in the survey
(subject profile and knowledge assessment) wherein 346 are from North Caloocan
and 238 are from South Caloocan. For the consumer acceptability test, a total of 104
out of the 584 participated wherein 60 are from North Caloocan and 44 are from South

Caloocan.

Demographic Characteristics of Household Heads

The result of the survey is summarized in Table 4.1. Out of the 584
respondents, a total of 67.1 percent were females with mean age of 42.3 years old.
More than half (59.6%) of the respondents had normal body mass index (BMI) based
from the WHO Classification but significant percentage of the sample were
overnourished (24.7% were overweight and 8.6% were obese). More than half of the
respondents were married (67.8%) with nuclear family types (71.8%). Mean
household size mirrored the city data at an average of five members per household
Household heads were mostly high school graduates (39.0%) while some were

college undergraduates (19.0%).

Table 4.1 Demographic characteristics of sampled household heads, Caloocan City,

2018 (n=584)

Frequency (%)
Sex 192 (32.9)
392 (67.1)
Age in years (mean + SD) 42.3 + 13.7
Weight (kg) 586+ 11.3
Anthropometric Measurements. Height (m) 1.6 40.10
(mean + SD)
Body Mass Index (BMI) in
kgm 237444
Underweight 42 (7.2)
Nutritional Status based on the Normal 348 (59.6)
WHO Classification* Overweight 4144 (24.7)
Obese 50 (8.6)
Single 110 (18.8)
Married 396 (67.8)
Marital stat Separated 1322)
amar sraus Widow 46 (7.9)
Single parent 9(1.5)
Others 10 (1.7)
Fi Nuclear 419 (71.8)
vanity ee Extended 165 (28.3)
~ Less than or equal to 5 ~ 379 (64.9)
pied Sze) _ Greater than 5 205 (35.1)
No education 0 (0.0)
Elementary undergraduate 18 (3.1)
Elementary graduate 39 (6.7)
High school undergraduate 54 (9.3)
Highest educational attainment of the
household head High school graduate 228 (39.0)
College undergraduate 111 (19.0)
College graduate 92 (15.8)
Vocational course graduate 42 (7.2)

“WHO Classification (in kg/m?) Underweight <18 5, Normal 16 5-24 9, Overweight-25 0-29 9, Obese >300

Socioeconomic Characteristics of Sample Households and Household Heads
For the socioeconomic characteristics of the households (Table 4.2), only an
average of two household members were earning for the household. Mean estimated
monthly household income was at PhP21,293.5, of this income, an average of
PhP8,266.2 was allocated for food expenditure of the household members. Average

rice expenditure was at PhP72.5 per day.

Table 4.2 Socioeconomic characteristics of sampled household heads, Caloocan City.

2018 (n=584)
Socioeconomic Characteristics Mean + SD
Mean number of earning family members 20412
Mean estimated monthly income in PhP 21,2935 + 1,6002.3
Mean monthly food expenditure in PhP 8,266.2 + 4,727.6
Mean daily expenditure for rice in PhP 72.5 +569

Customs and Traditions

For the customs and traditions (Table 4.3), more than half of the respondents
(60.6%) had already tasted brown rice in the past. Similarly, 345 respondents (59.1%)
were willing to substitute white rice with brown rice while only 42 respondents (7.2%)
had negative experiences in eating brown rice. Negative experiences in brown rice
consumption was identified as a factor affecting acceptability of brown rice in the study
by Phan et al. in 2012 wherein Vietnamese respondents associate brown rice with a
period of poverty in Vietnam, with brown rice being one of the primary food item during
the period of poverty. Among the respondents, negative experiences in the

consumption of brown rice primarily involved having allergies or diarrhea when brown


rice was consumed in the past. Summarizing the answers under customs/tradition
(tasted brown rice in the past, willingness to switch to brown rice, and negative
experiences on brown rice), a total of 447 (76.54%) had supportive customs/tradition

which can improve the acceptability of brown rice.

Table 4.3 Customs/traditions of sampled household heads, Caloocan City, 2018 (n=584)

Frequency (%) of Frequency (%)
Customs/Traditions Positive (+) of Negative (-)
Response Response
Have tasted brown rice in the past 354 (60.6) 230 (39.4)
Willingness to substitute white rice with brown rice 345 (59.1) 239 (40.9)
Do not have negative experiences in eating brown rice 542 (92.8) 42 (7.2)

Health Consciousness

Respondents were asked of their level of perceived health consciousness.
Majority (56.9%) of the respondents were self-perceived health conscious (answered
‘Very Health Conscious’ and ‘Health Conscious’ in the question “How do you perceive
yourself in terms of health consciousness?”) while the rest (43.2%) answered
‘Neither’, ‘Not Health Conscious’ and ‘Very Health Unconscious’ to the health

consciousness question.

Consumer Acceptability of Brown Rice

The study utilized three different samples of brown rice and one control (white
tice) for the consumer acceptability test. Comparison of the samples revealed that
sample A has the lowest ratings for the different attributes of brown rice while the
control (sample D) has the highest mean Hedonic rating. Among the brown rice
samples, sample C was the most acceptable, followed by sample B, and lastly, sample

A. The summary of the results of the consumer acceptability test are presented in

Table 4.6.

Table 4.4 Comparison of the consumer acceptability of the different varieties
of brown rice of consumer acceptability test panelists, Caloocan

City, 2018 (n=104)*

Attribute
A
Color and
Appearance 49413
Odor 46415
Taste 46416
Texture AT+14
Overall
Acceptability ec)

"Mean scores + SD based on a S-pomnt Hedonic scale with

2Control sample (white rice)

Testing for the difference of the acceptability means for the sensory
attributes (color and appearance, odor, taste, texture, and overall acceptability) of
the brown rice samples (sample A, B and C) as compared to white rice (Sample
D), it was revealed that the means of the consumer acceptability test ratings for

brown rice samples were all statistically different as compared to white rice as

5.2414

5.0413


‘Sample




a)

based from Dunnett's Test at p-value<0.0001

bo


76+14
77+10


‘extremely and "Sas Like extremely

Knowledge Characteristics of Household Heads

The knowledge assessment consisted of a 15-point self-administered
questionnaire administered to the respondents after the face-to-face interview (Form
1). Questions were based on the nutritional facts and attributes of brown rice based
from pertinent literature as discussed in the previous chapters (see Theoretical
Background). Mean score was 53.7 percent with minimum and maximum scores of

zero and 93.3 percent, respectively (Table 4.5).

Table 4.5 Mean percentage and range of score for the knowledge assessment on
brown rice among sampled household heads. Caloocan City. 2018

(n=584)
Mean (%) + SD Minimum (%) Maximum (%)
53.7 +189 00 93.3

When looked into the specific questions asked (Table 4.6), highest frequency
of correct answers were in the following questions: (1) Brown rice has higher
nutritional content (vitamins and minerals) compared to white rice (82.7%); (2) Brown
rice is generally regarded as a low-glycemic food, with beneficial effects on blood
sugar control (79.1%); (3) Regular brown rice consumption helps prevent vitamin B
deficiencies such as beriberi (73.6%); and (4) Consumption of brown rice does not

affect an individual's cholesterol levels positively (70.2%).

On the other hand, questions with lowest frequencies of correct answers

included the following questions: (1) Brown rice is a good source of protein (9.6%); (2)


White rice and brown rice grains comes from different rice plant sources (21.8%); and
(3) A cup of cooked brown rice have a different caloric content compared to white rice

(25.7%).

Table 4.6 Frequency of correct answers for the 15 knowledge assessment questions among

sampled household heads, Caloocan City, 2018 (n=584)

‘ Frequency of
Cnt Correct (2%)

Brown rice has higher nutritional content (vitamins and minerals)

compared to white rice. 483 (82.7)

Brown rice is generally regarded as a low-glycemic food, with beneficial entre

effects on blood sugar control.

Regular brown rice consumption helps prevent vitamin B deficiencies

such as beriberi fame
‘Consumption of brown rice does not affect an individual's cholesterol

410 (70.2)
levels positively
Allergic reactions to brown rice are common. 407 (69.7)

Regular brown rice consumption leads to an increase in weight and

_development of lifestyle diseases Ces)
Brown rice is strictly not allowed for consumption in persons with type 2

378 (64.7)
diabetes mellitus.
‘Consumption of rice has been found to be related to obesity, therefore,
all types of rice (white rice, brown rice) are unhealthy and should not be 371 (63.5)
consumed.
Brown rice impairs the absorption of iron and zinc and therefore should 339 (58.1)

not be consumed regularly

Sources of antioxidants, which helps prevent diseases, include only 278 (476)

vegetables and fruits and not rice.

Brown rice only serves as an energy source since itis rich in
carbohydrates.

All types of rice have comparable dietary fiber contents. 216 (37.0)

‘A cup of cooked brown rice has a different caloric content compared to

white rice. 180 (28.7)
" White rice and brown rice grains comes from different rice plant Pa)
sources,

Brown rice is a good source of protein 56 (9.6)


Factors Affecting Acceptability of Brown Rice

Prevalence of the outcome (low and high acceptability of brown rice) as cross-
tabulated with the covariates are summarized in Table 4.7. High acceptability of the
sensory attributes and cost of brown rice yielded high acceptability of the outcome.
Specifically, high acceptability of the sensory attributes of brown rice such as color
and appearance, odor, taste, and texture resulted to higher frequency of respondents
rating the outcome (overall acceptability of brown rice) as acceptable at 87.0 percent,
94.9 percent, 93.0 percent, and 94.7 percent, respectively. Finally, high acceptability
of the cost yielded high number of the respondents rating brown rice as acceptable at

73.5 percent

Table 4.7 Prevalence of high and low acceptability of brown rice based on
covariates among sampled household heads, Caloocan City, 2018

(n=104)

Covariates Frequency (%)

Low Acceptability High Acceptability

Total

Frequency (%) Frequency

(%)

‘Color and Appearance.

Low Acceptability 39 (78.0) 11 (22.0) 50 (100.0)
High Acceptability 7(13.0)_ __47 (87.0) 54 (100.0)
Odor
Low Acceptability 44 (67.7) 21 (32.3) 65 (100.0)
High Acceptability 2(5.1) 37 (94.9) 39 (100.0)
Taste
Low Acceptability 43 (70.5) 18 (29.5) 61 (100.0)
__High Acceptability _ 37.9) 40 (93.0) 43 (100.0)
Texture
Low Acceptability 44 (66.7) 22 (33.3) 66 (100.0)
High Acceptability 2 (5.3) 36 (94.7) 38 (100.0)
Knowledge Le
Customs/Tradition
Inhibitive 13 (41.9) 18 (58.1) 31 (100.0)
__ Supportive 33.(45.2) 40(548) 7310.0).
Health Consciousness
Health conscious 22 (45.8) 26 (54.2) 48 (100.0)
Not health conscious 24 (42.9) 32(57.1) 56 (100.0)
Ease of Preparation
Low Acceptability 9 (50.0) 9 (50.0) 18 (100.0)
High Acceptability ___ 37 (43.0) 49 (57.0) __ 86 (100.0) _
Cost
Low Acceptability 28 (77.8) 8 (22.2) ‘36 (100.0)
High Acceptability 18 (26.5) 50 (73.5) 68 (100.0) __
Monthly Household Income
Less than or equal to 9 (37.5) 15 (62.5) 24 (100.0)
PhP10,000
More than PhP10,000 37(46.2) 43 (53.8) 80 (100.0)
Household Size
Less than or equal to 5 31 (43.7) 40 (56.3) 71 (100.0)
MorethanS _ 15 (45.5) 18 (54.5) 33. (100.0)
Monthly Food Expenditure
Less than or equal to 8 (38.1) 13 (61.9) 21 (100.0)
PhP5,000
More than PhP5,000 38 (45.8) 45 (54.2) 83 (100.0)

The crude logistic regression (Table 4.8) analysis revealed that color and
appearance, odor, taste, texture, and cost of brown rice were significant determinants
of the acceptability of brown rice with p-values<0.0001.

Table 4.8 Crude associations between the consumer acceptability of brown rice
and the covariates among sampled household heads, Caloocan City,

2018 (n=104)

‘Crude Odds Ratio

coon (95% Confidence Interval) pavalue
Color and Appearance ween 0.000
Odor a em 0.000
Taste CEH 0.000
Texture -_ a ae 0.000
Knowledge - 10 0.257
= Preparation —_ ree 0.589
cot 7 3 ae 2) 0.000
es oot vaso

eS

Despite the significance of some factors when crude logistic regression was
used, the result of the multiple binary logistic regression (Table 4.9) found that the
factors associated with the overall acceptability of brown rice were the following: color
and appearance, taste, and price. Controlling for the other effects of the other
variables, the odds of acceptability of brown rice were 11 times higher if the consumer
liked the color and appearance of rice (AOR = 10.8, 95%CI: 2.50; 46.27), 20 times
higher if the consumer liked the taste of rice (AOR = 19.80; 95%CI: 2.99; 131.15), and
10 times higher when price was acceptable to the consumer (OR = 21.29; 95%CI:
3.87; 117.25).

Table 4.9 Associations between the acceptability of brown rice and the Color and
Appearance, Taste, and Cost among sampled household heads

Caloocan City, 2018 (n=104)

Crude Odds Ratio enlusted cds)

Factor Earch p-value ce p-value
Color and Appearance a re Py 0.0000 a aaa 5 0.001
Gute 3 AEs 2) Oy 3 pail 3) 000

B. Phase I: Consumer Perceptions for Brown Rice: Results of the Focus-Group

The FGDs were done after the consumer acceptability test (for the SE Group)
and after the survey and knowledge assessment (for the NSE Group). As mentioned
before, the initial proposal to homogenize (based on nutritional status, age, and sex)
the FGD groups was not accomplished due to logistical barriers. Since the target
sample size was high, computation of the BMI was not accomplished at the end of
Phase |, barangays chosen for participation were geographically distant from each
other, making it difficult to transport respondents with similar characteristics from one
barangay to another. Hence, only willingness to participate in the FGDs became the
sole inclusion criteria for the FGD groups. For each barangay, two groups were formed
(SE and NSE group). Respondents for Phase | were not coerced to join the FGD and
provision of meals after the FGD was not mentioned to the respondents to prevent

influencing their decision to participate

A total of 146 respondents participated in the FGDs forming 16 groups. These
groups comprised two FGD groups per barangay (SE and NSE). The characteristics
of the FGD participants are shown in Table 4.10. Further, the verbatim transcript of

the FGDs is found in Appendix 9.

For the NSE group, majority were females (64.47%) with a mean age of 43.75
years. A total of 51 (67.11%) had normal nutritional status while 25 (32.88%) were

overweight. Overall, a total of eight NSE groups were formed for the FGDs (one per

barangay) with a total number of 76 participants, each group ranging in size from six

to 12 people.

On the other hand, for the SE group, majority were also females (65.7%) with
a mean age of 42.0 years. A total of 50 (71.4%) had normal nutritional status while 20
(28.6%) were overweight. Overall, a total of eight SE groups were also formed for the
FGDs (one per barangay) with a total number of 70 participants, each group ranging

in size from six to 13 people.

Table 4.10 Sociodemographic characteristics of FGD participants for the NSE and SE Groups

composed of household heads, Caloocan City, 2018 (n=146)

= ia NSE SE Group
Characteristics of FGD Participants Frequency (%) Frequency (%)
5 Male 27 (35.5) 24 (34.3)
ex
Female 49 (64.5) 46 (65.7)
‘Age in years (mean + SD) 43.8+140 46 (65.7)
oo Normal 51671) «50 (71.4)
Nutritional Status Overweight 25(328) 20286)
No education 0 (0.0) 0 (00)
Elementary
undergraduate 10.3) 228)
Elementary graduate 8 (10.5) 4(5.7)
Highest educational High schoo! 7 (9.2) 8 (11.4)
attainment of the undergraduate
household head High school graduate 31 (408) 29 (41.4)
College undergraduate 12,(15.8) 13 (18.6)
College graduate 12 (15.8) 9(12.9)
Vocational course
_ ____ graduate _ __ 568) may
Single 12 (158) 17 (24.3)
Married 55 (72.4) 44 (62.9)
Separated 2 (26) 1(1.4)
Marital status reels nae) ann)
Single parent 1(1.3) 1(1.4)
Others 0 (0.0) 0 (0.0)

The results of the FGDs are presented in the subsequent paragraphs based on
significant statements on the major discussion points based from the FGD guide
questions adapted from Phan et al., 2012 and Monge-Rojas et al., 2014 (Appendix 7)
— typical meal, factors considered when buying food, consumer perceptions for rice,
typically consumed type of rice, consumer perceptions for brown rice, factors affecting
acceptability of brown rice, willingness to switch to brown rice, ways to convince others.
to eat brown rice, people who can incorporate brown rice in daily meals and
suggestions to improve brown rice. Qualitative statements were chosen by the study
proponent based on recurring answers of the participants. A list of selected qualitative

statements are found in Appendix 8.

Typical Meal

Generally, the typical meal consumed by majority of the participants are rice-
based complemented with home-cooked dishes ("lutong bahay”) such as “sinigang”
(sour pork stew), “adobo” (pork with soy sauce and vinegar), “nilaga” (pork/beef stew),
and “kare-kare” (peanut-based stew). Several participants mentioned preference for
meat — fish, chicken, pork — while some also mentioned preference for vegetables.
The term meal is usually associated with lunch and dinner but is also sometimes
associated with other food items such as bread, junk foods, juice/soft drinks, fruits,
and milk. A specific participant answered that when meal is mentioned, | think of a
complete meal, which includes fruits, chicken, vegetables with rice. Other participants
also mentioned fondness for pasta and other fast food items such as fries, burger, and
chicken with rice. Specifically, a participant mentioned we always prefer flavorful

dishes and not settle with average taste or quality. Several participants with children


or those who live with children particularly mentioned frequent consumption of fried
foods (usually processed foods such as hotdog and longganisa) because of the food
preferences of the children, specifically stating that we usually eat processed foods

such as hotdog and longganisa, due to the food preference of the children.

Factors Considered When Buying Food

Participants were asked of the factors considered when choosing or buying
food. Majority of the participants answered price as one of the priority considerations
when buying food due to increasing prices in the market at the current time.
Specifically, one participant responded that they prioritize price to make ends meet.
Also, most participants mentioned that they budget their incomes wisely but we do not
compromise the quality of food they [children] eat. Through proper budgeting and
choices, we can obtain cheap food which is also tasty. Several mentioned that price
dictates the food they will eat and that chosen food should be cheap or can be
accommodated in their budget since they are still allocating budget for other expenses
‘such as utilities, gas, education of children, and others. Next to price, nutrient content
of foods was also a consideration especially among those with NCDs such as diabetes
and hypertension. Participants with NCDs and those who live with family members
with NCDs tend to choose healthy foods and take into consideration the foods not
allowed to the patient. A participant mentioned that they consider healthy foods,
however, we also take into consideration our budget. Ultimately, nutritional value is
not considered alone but always partnered with other characteristics such as price
and taste. Also, majority of the participants considered taste as one of the primary
factors considered when buying food since they want to obtain satisfaction with their


meal. However, taste is not the sole factor considered as the participants always ties
taste with price or affordability, mentioning that foods they buy should be both tasty
and cheap. Other factors considered by the participants when choosing or buying food

are appearance, texture, freshness or quality, and ease of preparation.

Consumer Perceptions for Rice

When rice is mentioned, majority of the participants associate it with white rice
which have good taste, odor, and texture. Rice was also associated as part of a mea!
that is, always partnered with viand may it be a complicated dish (home-cooked
dishes) or just a simple dish (fried foods). Several participants were knowledgeable
that rice is composed of carbohydrates and that it is healthy in regulated amounts but
can cause weight gain and high blood sugar in excess. Some participants also
associate rice with satiety, that when mentioning rice, they think of the fullness after a
meal. Specifically, a participant mentioned that rice can easily make you full
Sometimes, eating too much rice have an effect on the blood sugar levels. Further,
when you enjoy eating rice meals, your cholesterol levels tend to increase due to
overconsumption of other food items. As a counterargument, another respondent
remarked that Filipinos would not survive without the consumption of rice. | think rice
is good for the health especially when eaten in moderation. If we do not eat rice, we
will not have enough energy to go on through the day. In contrast, some associate it
with hunger, that when rice is mentioned, they think that it is time for eating and that
they are already hungry, specifically saying that / fee! hunger when rice is mentioned
! always associate rice with mealtimes that is why when rice is mentioned | think that

itis time to eat

Typically Consumed Type of Rice

Commonly consumed type of rice at home were different varieties of white rice
such as National Food Authority (NFA), Jasmine, Dinorado, Maharlika, Angelica,
Sinandomeng, and Milagrosa. Reasons for choosing this type of rice is primarily due
to affordability and availability, specifically mentioning that we buy any type as long as.
it's white, while another stated that we choose cheap rice so that we have more budget
for other food items. Several mentioned that of the varieties of rice in the market, only
white rice have wide range to choose from both in terms of quality and price and that
white rice has the cheapest and most affordable variety. Brown rice is seldom seen
by the participants, especially in wet markets and this was seen as a hindrance in the
consumption of brown rice. Also, participants opt to choose rice which is tasty, have
good odor, soft when cooked, easy to prepare, and complements the taste of the
viand. A participant also mentioned not buying brown rice because their household
members were not familiar with brown rice and majority of the participants agreed that
white rice was chosen since it has been customary to consume white rice since their
childhood days. Lastly, participants choose rice which is acceptable to other family
members (children, spouse, and others) since it would be difficult to prepare separate

types of rice when one family member dislikes a specific type of rice.

Consumer Perceptions for Brown Rice

Consumer perceptions for brown rice varies from one person to another.
Several participants mentioned that brown rice was generally acceptable in terms of
taste and texture especially those belonging to the SE group. A general comment
would be that brown rice is acceptable when we tasted it moments ago but from what


| know, brown rice is expensive that is why we don't buy that type of rice. Still, many
participants deemed brown rice as inferior to white rice due to its taste and texture as
well as it does not complement the flavor of the viand partnered to it (bland taste).
Specifically a participant from the SE group mentioned that when / tasted brown rice,
the texture is rough and | do not like the odor of two out of the three samples. | also
do not like the taste. In my opinion, white rice is better. Furthermore, majority of the
participants finds brown rice unacceptable due to its high price as compared to white
tice and that its affordability was one of the determining factors in its acceptability,
even though many participants were aware of its nutrient content and health benefits.
Still, many participants associate brown rice to people with NCDs such as diabetes.
Several mentioned that the quality of brown rice does not match its price and that they
will continue to purchase white rice even if they know that brown rice is healthy.
Several participants were also not aware of brown rice or have not tasted brown rice

previously, limiting their opinions and acceptability of brown rice.

Factors Affecting Acceptability of Brown Rice

According to the participants, price was one of the major determining factor in
the acceptability of brown rice. Price limits the capacity of the participants to purchase
brown rice which leads to not tasting or trying brown rice and eventually, not including
brown rice in their daily meals. Participants mentioned that many were still not familiar
with brown rice in general and that many were still not aware of the health benefits of
brown rice. A participant mentioned that some people are not aware of brown rice.
Also, | think brown rice is not different from white rice, only more expensive. On the
other hand, for those familiar with brown rice, they associate it with NCDs and people


of the upper class, stating that only those who have high socioeconomic status can
purchase brown rice. Also, availability in the local wet markets is another factor
affecting acceptability. Participants mentioned that brown rice is only available in
supermarkets and not in wet markets, and since majority of the participants buy their
food in the wet markets, they are not able to purchase brown rice. An overall remark
would be that many people only know white rice. In the market, white rice have a lot
of varieties, some expensive some are not, for brown rice, it is only expensive and we
do not have a lot of choices. Apart from affordability, familiarity, and availability, taste
is another factor considered by the participants in choosing brown rice. Brown rice is
deemed inferior to white rice primarily due to its color (which some participants
perceives as dirty), texture (rough), and taste (bland). A participant particularly
mentioned that / do not mind eating brown rice especially since it is healthy, except
for its price. However, white rice is tastier than brown rice. Although some participants
mentioned that brown rice was acceptable, several participants still mentioned that it
is bland and it does not complement the viand well, making it unacceptable. Other
factors affecting the acceptability of rice include ease of preparation and acceptance
of household members especially among children. The factors affecting the
acceptability of brown rice enumerated by the participants shows that acceptability is
not a result of a single factor but of several interrelated factors affecting the

purchasing, cooking, tasting, and regular consumption of brown rice.

Willingness to Switch to Brown Rice

Participants were asked of their willingness to switch to brown rice when stated
that there are studies saying that brown rice is healthier as compared to white rice.
Decisions of the participants for switching to brown rice were diverse — some were
willing to switch conditionally, some were not willing, while some were still undecided.
Willingness to switch to brown rice was dictated by the major barriers affecting
acceptability of brown rice such as taste, affordability, and acceptance of other
household members. Some participants were willing to switch to brown rice if the price
is lower but several mentioned that they were willing to switch but they will not
consume brown rice on a regular basis due to its high price. They suggested eating
brown rice twice or thrice a week or mixing white rice with brown rice to lessen its cost.
A remarkable qualitative statement would be that we are willing to eat brown rice but
due to its high price, we cannot accommodate it in our budget. In one kilo of brown
rice, we can already buy two kilos of white rice. It is not practical to buy brown rice.
But if we have a choice, we will choose brown rice because it is healthier. But due to
its impracticality, we will not choose it and we will opt for other nutritious foods that are
affordable such as vegetables. We can plant vegetables or we can get it cheaply,
against buying expensive rice where you are left with nothing to buy other food items.
Generally, willingness to switch to brown rice completely is still a long and tedious
process due to the major barriers in the acceptability of brown rice which limits the

participants’ capacity to consume brown rice.

For the SE group, an additional question on the willingness to switch to brown

rice especially after tasting brown rice was asked. Several participants affirmed their


willingness to switch to brown but only after their household members also accept the
taste and also when the price of brown rice levels with white rice. Some were
undecided, claiming that we cannot decide now because | have not yet considered
our budget at home, and | am still not sure if my family would like brown rice. \n this
case, willingness to switch to brown rice is not only affected by taste alone but also of
several other factors such as price, acceptance of the family, and availability which

makes the participants hesitant to change to brown rice.

Ways to Convince Others to Eat Brown Rice

Primary convincing factors for brown rice was its health benefits (Say that
brown rice is good for the health even though it is expensive) although several
participants agreed that it was difficult to convince other people to eat brown rice when
they, themselves, were not convinced in consuming brown rice. Some participants
mentioned that brown rice was as good as white rice especially when consumers get
familiar with its taste. This can be facilitated by reducing its market price. Research on
the health benefits of brown rice, specifically the detailed nutrients which can be
obtained from eating brown rice may also help others consume brown rice (Also inform
the people that brown rice is healthy and what specific nutrients can it provide since
that's what they are paying for). Also, some participants mentioned that a convincing
statement depends on the age, sex, health consciousness and state of health (with
NCDs or without) of the person being convinced. Statements should be targeted
based on similar characteristics and values of groups of individuals being convinced,
for example, stating the health benefits for health conscious individuals and those with

NCDs.

People who can Incorporate Brown Rice in Daily Meals

When asked which group of people can incorporate brown rice in their daily
meals, majority of the participants mentioned only those with high income or
socioeconomic status, health conscious, individuals with NCDs, and elderly people
can incorporate brown rice in their daily meals primarily due to their capacity to buy
and their need for additional nutrients. A participant mentioned that she thinks that
those who are middle to upper class, can eat brown rice every day. In contrast, another
participant mentioned that brown rice can be consumed by normal people (middle
class citizens) if the price is reduced. Some participants also stated that only those
who likes the taste of brown rice can regularly consume brown rice but normal (or the
general public) can also consume brown rice regularly, provided that the market price

of brown rice is low or at the same level with white rice.

Suggestions to Improve Brown Rice

Suggestions to improve brown rice would be to conduct a massive information
campaign for the consumers to know the health benefits of brown rice, provide free
samples to consumers or let the consumers try brown rice so that they can know the
taste of brown rice, improve the taste of brown rice particularly the flavor, lower the
price of brown rice in the market to the same price of white rice varieties, and to make
it available in local wet markets and not only in supermarkets. Specifically, a
participant mentioned that people should also be given the chance to try brown rice
since there are still many who have not tasted it and do not plan to taste or try it due
to its price. Maybe if they will know the taste, it will be acceptable to them along with
the reduction of its price. However, most participants remarked that the price should


be reduced because even if they know that itis healthy, if they do not have the capacity

to buy it, then they will still not consume it regularly.

CHAPTER V
DISCUSSION

This study aimed to determine the consumer acceptability and perceptions for
brown rice among household heads in selected barangays in Caloocan City. Also,
the study ascertained the level of knowledge of the respondents with regards to the
nutritional properties and attributes of brown rice. Furthermore, the significant factors
associated with the consumer acceptability of brown rice were ascertained using
multiple binary logistic regression. The study achieved these objectives through
quantitative and qualitative data collection (Phase |: Survey and Consumer

Acceptability Test; and Phase II: FGDs) from the household heads in Caloocan City.

Rice is a dietary staple food and one of the most important cereal crops,
especially for people in Asia (Rohman et al., 2014). In the Philippines, rice is
customarily part of a meal. During the 2013 NNS, it was revealed that cereal and
cereal products (majority of which is rice) constitute 40.3 % of the mean one-day per
capita food intake of Filipinos (FNRI-DOST, 2014). However, the most commonly
consumed type of rice is still white rice, the regular consumption of which, is
associated with NCDs and their risk factors such as T2DM, obesity or high BMI, CHD,
and ischemic stroke (Hu et al., 2012; Kim et al., 2012; Yu et al., 2013; Liang et al.,
2013). Regular brown rice consumption in Asia, specifically in the Philippines, is stil
low due to several factors affecting its acceptability such as the attributes of brown
rice (sensory attributes, cost, ease of preparation), individual characteristics

(knowledge on the nutritional properties of brown rice, customs/tradition, health


consciousness), and household characteristics (household income, household size,

daily food expenditure).

Subject Profile

Generally, a majority of the households deem females as their household
heads (67.1 %), indicating the important role of women in food purchasing and
preparation. A majority of the household heads had normal nutritional status (59.6 %),
but significant percentage of the respondents were overweight (24.7 %) and obese
(8.6 %). Nutritional status influences food choices and specifically, the acceptability of
brown rice. It also affects the knowledge on the nutritional properties of brown rice,

health consciousness, and consumer perceptions for brown rice.

Mean household income was at PhP 21,293.5 while mean monthly food
expenditure was at PhP 8,266.2. This implies that almost half of the mean monthly
household income was allocated for food, with the mean daily expenditure for rice at
PhP 72.5, which is equivalent to two kilos of rice per day. Food choices are affected
by the purchasing power of an individual or a household. Results of previous studies
were contrasting, indicating that household income was not associated with brown
rice acceptability (Danso-Abbeam et al., 2012) and also highlighting that household
income has significant effects on the acceptability of brown rice (Danquah and Egyir

2014)

Majority of the respondents had supportive customsj/traditions with regards to
brown rice (76.5 %). Tradition, experience, and history play a major role in the
perception of brown rice, for example, Vietnamese participants regarded brown rice


negatively due to its association with a period of poverty in Vietnam (Phan et al., 2012;
Kumar et al., 2011). Participants from the studies by Kumar et al. (2011) and Zhang
et al. (2010) stated that until all household members were willing to accept any of
these varieties of brown rice, it would be difficult to give up the highly polished rice

that people were used to eating.

Lastly, more than half of the respondents (56.9 %) were health conscious.
Health consciousness directly affects acceptability and consumption of brown rice. In
several FGDs, it was revealed that self-proclaimed health conscious individuals tend
to have higher acceptability scores compared to those who did not deem themselves

as health conscious (Muhihi et al., 2013)

Consumer Acceptability Test

Since brown rice is being promoted as a healthier alternative for white rice,
several quantitative and qualitative studies have been conducted to ascertain the
acceptability of brown rice both in Asian and in Western populations. However, all
previous studies utilized convenience sampling with small sample sizes among trained
or untrained panelists which would have affected the results of the study. For this
study, among untrained panelists, the overall acceptability of brown rice (using three
samples) was comparatively lower as compared to white rice (control). For the
different attributes of rice such as color and appearance, odor, taste, and texture, the
mean Hedonic ratings for brown rice ranged from 4.6 to 6.1 points, which are relatively
lower as compared to white rice (7.2 to 7.7 points). Furthermore, the overall

acceptability of brown rice was lower at 5.0, 5.2, and 6.0 points for Samples A, B, and


C, respectively, which were also relatively lower as compared to white rice (7.7 points)
Sensory attributes and the overall acceptability of brown rice were significantly lower

(in all three samples) when compared to white rice using Dunnett's test.

The results of this study mirrored the results of other studies conducted in
several countries, which revealed that brown rice was generally acceptable but ratings
for brown rice were significantly lower compared to other carbohydrate sources such
as white rice. Additionally, a number of the studies showed that white rice is still more
preferred by the consumers as compared to brown rice (Sareepuang et al., 2008;
Sudha et al., 2013; Ebuehi and Oyewole 2007; Muhihi et al., 2013; Shobana et al.,

2011; Monge-Rojas et al., 2014).

For this study, the use of untrained panelists implicates the general
acceptability of brown rice in an unbiased population, which could reflect the actual
acceptability of brown rice at the individual level. However, the lack of inclusion and
exclusion criteria limited the results of the study since some respondents were not
familiar or have not encountered brown rice in the past, thereby affecting their answers
in Phase | and Phase Il. Also, previous exposure or experience to brown rice may also
bias the ratings of the panelists during the consumer acceptability test. Aside from
these, several cultural factors may have affected the scores of the respondents that

were not taken into consideration during the data collection.

With regards to the samples used, the samples were obtained from the

supermarket and local wet market. Although the study proponent has ensured that all


samples were produced or processed at the same time, several extrinsic and intrinsic
factors may have affected the quality of the rice. Specifically, rice from supermarkets
has undergone different processing and packaging procedures while the sample from
the local wet market was directly sourced from the rice millers. Also, the level of bran
(or the polishing degree) of the brown rice was not ascertained in the study, which
may have affected the acceptability. The higher acceptability of Sample C may be
explained by its freshness, amylose level, or the degree of polishing, which were not

ascertained in the study.

Although several studies have ascertained the acceptability of rice, the conduct
of consumer acceptability tests using rice alone may not capture the actual
acceptability of rice. This is due to the fact that rice is not consumed alone but is
always partnered with viands or other food items. The use of rice alone in this study
may not have ascertained the actual acceptability since panelists were not able to
determine the sensory attributes of brown rice when partnered with a viand. In the
study by Sudha et al. (2013), the rice samples were partnered with “sambar", which is
a gravy dish made from lentils and vegetables cooked in a spicy tamarind sauce. This
may be effective in determining the actual acceptability of brown rice, however, since
the Philippine cuisine is very much varied, several considerations are still needed
before settling with the use of a specific type of viand. Also, different cultural factors
regarding rice may have affected the ratings since some value the quality of rice more

than the viand while others value the quality of the viand as compared to rice.

Knowledge on the Nutritional Properties and Attributes of Brown Rice

Several qualitative and quantitative studies have found out that a contributing
factor to the low acceptability of brown rice is the lack of familiarity and promotion of
the nutritive value of brown rice (Danquah et al., 2014; Zhang et al., 2010; Kumar et
al., 2011). In the current study, the mean knowledge test score was 53.7 percent with
a minimum score of 0.0 percent and a maximum score of 93.3 percent. Majority of the
respondents were familiar that brown rice is more nutritious (i.e., contains more
vitamins and minerals) as compared to white rice. Also, respondents were familiar that
brown rice has beneficial effects on blood sugar control, cholesterol levels, and vitamin
B deficiency. However, a majority of the respondents were not familiar that brown rice
is not a good source of protein, that brown rice and white rice may come from the
same plant source, and that a cup of brown rice and white rice have the same caloric

content.

Although it cannot be concluded that the respondents have limited knowledge
or awareness on the nutritional properties or attributes of brown rice, the low scores
for some questions may be a factor in the acceptability of brown rice in the population.
Limited awareness of the nutritional properties of brown rice resulted in lower
acceptability scores among Indian respondents (Sudha et al., 2013). In contrast,
higher knowledge on the nutritional properties of brown rice resulted in higher
consumer acceptability scores as exhibited in the study by Shobana et al. (2011).
which revealed a higher consumer rating for the overall acceptability for brown rice

given that the panelists were more knowledgeable on the nutritional properties and

IS

health benefits of brown rice since most have come from the food sciences
background.

These findings were also supported by the qualitative studies (FGDs)
conducted by Kumar et al. (2011), which stated that apart from color, size, texture,
and habit, another major barrier to the acceptance of brown rice was poor awareness
about it and its nutritive properties. In contrast, the FGD conducted by Phan et al.
(2010) among Vietnamese and American adults revealed that majority of the
participants were aware that brown rice contains more nutritional value compared to

white rice.

Despite having an effect on the acceptability of brown rice, knowledge and
awareness are still affected by different cultural and social factors, which may

determine the level of knowledge and awareness of an individual

Factors Affecting Acceptability of Brown Rice

The food choice process is complex, dynamic and situational, and the value
assigned to each food is defined by a personal food system (Commors et al., 2001).
The results of this study showed that household heads in Caloocan City define their
personal food system primarily based on three values: color and appearance, taste,
and cost of rice, which were all significant factors influencing the consumer

acceptability of brown rice.

Crude associations revealed that the sensory attributes (color, appearance,
odor, taste, and texture) and the cost of brown rice were significantly associated with
the acceptability of brown rice. This is in line with several studies conducted in other


countries indicating that attributes of brown rice (sensory attributes, cost, ease of
preparation), individual characteristics (knowledge of the nutritional properties of
brown rice, customsj/tradition, health consciousness of an individual, consumer
perception), and household characteristics (household income, household size,
monthly expenditure on food) utlimatedly determine the acceptance of consumers of
a food product, specifically brown rice (Zhang et al., 2010; Ahmad Hanis et al., 2012;

Danquah and Egyir 2014; Phan et al., 2012; Kumar et al., 2011).

On the other hand, determination of binary associations using multiple logistic
regression analysis revealed that color and appearance, taste, and price were
associated with the consumer acceptability of brown rice. Specifically, the odds of
acceptability of brown rice was 11 times higher if the consumer likes the color and
appearance of rice (OR = 10.76, 95 %CI: 2.50; 46.27), 20 times higher if the consumer
likes the taste of rice (OR = 19.80; 95 %CI: 2.99; 131.15), and ten times higher when
price is acceptable to the consumer (OR = 21.29; 95 %CI: 3.87; 117.25). This is
supported by a study conducted in China, which revealed the same associations
indicating that taste, texture, appearance, and cost were the main factors influencing
brown rice consumption (Zhang et al., 2012). Other studies conducted in Egypt and
India also supported this finding, indicating that sensory attributes ultimately determine

the acceptability of brown rice (Danquah and Egyir 2014; Kumar et al. 2011).

Although the study attempted to enumerate and determine alll significant factors
associated with the consumer acceptability of brown rice, there are still many other

cultural, behavioral and social factors that were not ascertained in this study. The


intensive review of related literature resulted in a list of all covariates associated with
the consumer acceptability of brown rice, but there may be other literatures that
enumerate several other factors. The behavioral nature of this study implicates that
despite the results, there are still other behavioral factors which should be taken into
consideration before generalizing the results. Also, confounders were not controlled
in this study, which could have an effect on the overall consumer acceptability of brown

rice and can also be associated with the different covariates.

Also, although a target of 634 respondents was computed for ascertaining the
outcome and the exposure variables, logistical and financial barriers hindered
conducting the consumer acceptability test (which was the source of data for the
outcome) among the targeted sample size. Therefore, exposure variables were
obtained, achieving the target sample size of 634, but the outcome variable (overall
acceptability of brown rice) was only obtained in the subsample of 104 sensory
panelists. This may be the possible reason for the wide Cl range in the factors

associated with consumer acceptability of brown rice

Sensory Attributes of Brown Rice

Preference of rice varies from country to country. In this study, it was found
that the sensory attributes of brown rice (color and appearance, odor, taste, and
texture) were all significantly associated with the consumer acceptability of brown
rice based on crude association, and that color and appearance and taste were
both significantly associated with the consumer acceptability of brown rice.
Among others, this revealed that household heads in Caloocan City value the
appearance and taste of rice, while also taking into consideration the other


sensory attributes. High acceptability of color and appearance consequently
resulted to the higher overall acceptability of brown rice. In other studies, similar
results were observed, indicating that appearance (Sudha et al., 2013) and taste
(Danso-Abbeam et al., 2012; Danquah and Egyir 2014) were the most prioritized

characteristics of brown rice affecting the overall consumer acceptability.

Brown rice is generally regarded as dirty, due to its color, and along with the
proliferation of the market with white rice, resulted in lower consumption of brown
rice (ARF, 2001). Also, brown rice has a characteristic nutty flavor, which is
considered as a major barrier to its consumption since a majority of rice eaters
eat rice in partnership with other food items. Therefore, rice should complement

other food items and not overpower their flavor.

Cost

Cost is another emerging barrier to the consumption of brown rice. The cost
was significantly associated with brown consumption among household heads in
Caloocan City, indicating that a higher cost acceptability resulted in a higher
overall consumer acceptability of rice. In the study by Sudha et al. (2013), a
majority of the participants were willing to switch to brown rice if the cost was
affordable. Several FGDs conducted in different populations have also revealed

that cost of brown rice affects its acceptability and the consumers’ food choices.

Consumer Perceptions for Brown Rice

The results of the FGDs supported the results of Phase | of this study. Based
‘on the FGDs, many participants deem brown rice as inferior to white rice due to its
taste and texture. Additionally, it does not complement the flavors of the viand
partnered to it (i.e., bland taste). Also, a majority of the participants finds brown rice
unacceptable due to its high price as compared to white rice and that its affordability
is one of the determining factors in its acceptability, even though many participants
are aware of its nutrient content and health benefits. Specifically, a participant
mentioned that brown rice is acceptable when we tasted it moments ago but from what
| know, brown rice is expensive that is why we don't buy that type of rice. Another
participant mentioned that we do not mind eating brown rice especially since it is
healthy, except for its price. However, white rice is tastier than brown rice. Although
only the sensory attributes of brown rice and its price were found to be significantly
associated with its acceptability, another factor seen as a barrier in the acceptance of
brown rice is its availability in the local markets. A participant particularly mentioned
that many people only know white rice. In the market, white rice have a lot of varieties,
some expensive some are not, for brown rice, it is only expensive and we do not have
a lot of choices. This factor is closely related to the price of rice, in which participants
specified that brown rice is only available in supermarkets and is, therefore, more
expensive as compared to white rice, which is available not only in local wet markets

but also in small stores in their locality.

Although the study by Kumar et al. (2011) in India mentioned that poor
awareness about brown rice and its nutritive properties was a major barrier in the


consumption of brown rice, participants for the FGD generally knew that brown rice is
healthy, however, they still recommended information campaign on the specific
nutrients, which can be obtained from brown rice. To support this, a participant
specifically responded that some people are not aware of brown rice. Also, | think
brown rice is not different from white rice, only more expensive. Despite several
factors enumerated, which inhibit the consumption of rice, price or affordability is still
the major concern. Among consumers in India, white rice is associated with higher
socioeconomic status (Sudha et al., 2013), which is opposite to the perception of
Filipinos with white rice. In the Philippines, white rice is cheaper compared with other
varieties of rice and FGD participants even associates white rice with affordability. On
the other hand, associating brown rice as the choice of those with higher
socioeconomic status (with participants mentioning that only those who are middle to
upper class, can eat brown rice every day) leads to a conclusion that only those who

have a high socioeconomic status can incorporate brown rice in their daily meals.

Majority of the FGD participants mentioned that white rice is the customary type
of rice and switching to brown rice may be difficult due to its taste and price. Generally,
willingness to switch to brown rice completely is still a long and tedious process due
to the major barriers in the acceptability of brown rice that limits the participants’
capacity to consume brown rice. Suggestions to improve brown rice includes massive
information campaign for the consumers to know the health benefits of brown rice,
provision of free samples to consumers or let the consumers try brown rice so that
they can know the taste of brown rice, improve the taste of brown rice particularly the
flavor, lower the price of brown rice in the market to the same price of white rice


varieties, and make it available in local wet markets and not only in supermarkets.
Despite this, as stated by Kumar et al. (2013), the change in the types of rice
consumed is likely to be met with resistance and will require continued reinforcement

of positive messages aimed at enhancing people's acceptance of brown rice.

IN

CHAPTER VI
CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS,

Summary

This study aimed to determine the consumer acceptability and perceptions for
brown rice among household heads in selected barangays in Caloocan City. The
study revealed that the acceptability of brown rice was lower as compared to white
rice, with significant mean differences in the consumer acceptability of the sensory
attributes and the overall acceptability of brown rice (p-vaue<0.0001). Knowledge
scores on the nutritional properties of brown rice and its attributes were low, with mean

percentage scores of 53.7 percent.

When the different covariates were tested for significance, it was revealed that
price, color and appearance, and taste dictated the overall acceptability of brown rice
among consumers. Specifically, the odds of acceptability of brown rice is 11 times
higher if the consumer likes the color and appearance of rice (OR: 10.76, 95%Cl: 2.50;
46.27), 20 times higher if the consumer likes the taste of rice (OR: 19.80; 95%CI: 2.99;
131.15), and 10 times higher when price is acceptable to the consumer (OR: 21.29;

95%CI: 3.87; 117.25).

On the other hand, other factors associated with the acceptability of brown rice
as based on the qualitative FGDs were awareness of the nutritional properties of
brown rice, availability of brown rice in local wet markets, familiarity with brown rice,

and the acceptability of brown rice to other family members, among others.

jn

Conclusion

The emerging problem of overnutrition is affected by several factors, primarily
by food habits. In the Philippines, rice is customarily part of a meal. During the 2013
NNS, it was revealed that cereal and cereal products (including rice) constitutes 40.3
percent of the mean one-day per capita food intake of Filipinos (FNRI-DOST, 2014).
However, the most commonly consumed type of rice is still white rice, which is
associated with NCDs and their risk factors such as T2DM; obesity or high BMI; CHD;
and ischemic stroke (Hu et al., 2012; Kim et al., 2012; Yu et al., 2013; Liang et al.,
2013). Brown rice consumption in Asia is still relatively low due to the low acceptability

of this this type of rice among the population.

Preference for rice vary from country to country and across cultures. The
current study revealed that household heads in Caloocan City still prefer white rice as
compared to brown rice. Brown rice received lower Hedonic ratings at 4.6 to 6.1 points
as compared to white rice at 7.2 to 7.7 points in terms of color and appearance, odor,
taste, and texture. Furthermore, the overall acceptability of brown rice was lower at
5.0, 5.2, and 6.0 points for Samples A, B, and C, respectively; which were also
relatively lower as compared to white rice (7.7 points). Sensory attributes and the
overall acceptability of brown rice were significantly lower (in all three samples) when

compared to white rice using Dunnett's Test.

Acceptability of brown rice is determined by several factors. Since local studies
on the acceptability of brown rice are limited, the study provided significant data that

shows that brown rice is still less acceptable as compared to white rice when mean


Hedonic ratings are considered. This study revealed that several factors such as color
and appearance, taste and cost of brown rice were all significantly associated with the

overall consumer acceptability of brown rice.

In conclusion, this study provided concrete factors which affects the
acceptability of rice. Apart from the quantitative significant findings, qualitative data
from the FGDs revealed several other factors associated with the acceptability of
brown rice. Major determining factor in the consumption of brown rice based on the
qualitative FGDs was the awareness of the nutritional properties of brown rice,
availability of brown rice in local wet markets, familiarity with brown rice, taste of brown
rice and the acceptability of brown rice to other family members, among others.
Despite the numerous factors tested for association in this study, there may still be
other significant factors which may play a significant role in the acceptability of brown

rice.

Recommendations

For future researches, it should be noted that this study has only been
conducted in a single urban city in the Philippines. Results of this study may not be
generalizeable outside Caloocan City and may need further regional and national
research studies in which the data can be applied to the entire population. Also,
several unknown factors may also have an effect in the consumer acceptability of
brown rice and it would be vital to determine these factors. Food preference is a
complex process and the consumer acceptability of rice may be a result of various

interrelated factors.

IN

Brown tice is less acceptable as compared to white rice, as revealed by this
study. Also, knowledge levels on the nutritional propertis and attibutes of brown rice
were also found to be relatively low in this study. Therefore, several interventions may
be done to promote brown rice along with the promotion of healthy diets among
households across all age groups. Several studies have revealed that consumption of
brown rice is associated with better nutritional outcomes but the principles of a healthy
diet should always be taken into consideration when consuming a meal. This involves
balance, variety, and moderation, indicating that any excess in consumption will

eventually lead to diseases, no matter how healthy the food item is.

loo

REFERENCES

Asia Rice Foundation. (2001). Brown rice: Beyond the color. Los Bafios : The Asia
Rice Foundation.

Brownlee, IA; et al. (2010). Markers of cardiovascular risk are not changed by
increased whole-grain intake: the WHOLEheart study, a randomised, controlled
dietary intervention. Br J Nutr, 125-134.

Caloocan City Health Office. (2014). Caloocan City Sociodemographic Data.
Caloocan City: Caloocan City Hall

Costell, E; et al. (2010). Food acceptance: The role of consumer perception and
attitudes. Unpublished.

Connors, M. et al. (2001) Managing values in personal food systems. Appetite. 1385-
1401.

Danquah, |.; et al. (2014). Factors that Influence Household Demand for Locally
Produced Brown Rice in Ghana. Journal of Economics and Sustainable
Development.

Danso-Abbeam, G; et al. (2014) Determinants of consumer preference for local rice
in Tamale Metropolis, Ghana. /nternational Journal of Education and Social
Science.

Ebuehi, O. and AC Oyewole. (2007). Effect of cooking and soaking on physical
characteristics, nutrient composition and sensory evaluation of indigenous and
foreign rice varieties in Nigeria. African Journal of Biotechnology, 1016-1020.

FNRI-DOST. (1997). The Food Composition Tables. Taguig : FNRI-DOST.

FNRI-DOST. (2011). Annual Report 2011: S&T Solutions to food and nutrition
security. Taguig: Food and Nutrition Research Institute.

FNRI-DOST. (2014). 8th National Nutrition Survey. Taguig: Food and Nutrition
Research Institute.

Galawat, F. and M. Yabe. (2010). Assessing Consumer's Preference for Local Rice in
Brunei: An Application of Choice Model . J. /ssaas.

Gibson, R. (2005). Principles of Nutritional Assessment 2nd edition. New York: Oxford
University Press.

lo

|

Gomez, E. (2015). Effects of Brown Rice (Oryza Sativa) in the Dietary Management
of Patients with Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus. British Medical Journal.

GRiSP. (2013). Rice Almanac 4th ed. Los Bajos : International Rice Research
Institute.

Gubat, MJG; et al. (2015). Satiety responses and changes in ghrelin levels with intake
of brown rice and white rice in Filipino adults. Unpublished.

Hanis, A.; et al. (2012). Consumers’ demand and willingness to pay for rice attributes
in Malaysia. International Food Research Journal , 363-369.

Hanna, M and R Mozniak. (2013). Consumer behavior: An applied approach 4!”
edition. USA : Prentice Hall.

Heinemann, RJ; et al. (2006). A study on the acceptability and consumer attitude
towards parboiled rice. International Journal of Food Science and Technology,
627-634.

Hu, EA; et al. (2012). White rice consumption and risk of type 2 diabetes: Meta-
analysis and systematic review. BMJ.

IRRI. (2016) Step-by-step production of rice. Rice Knowledge Bank. Retrieved 15
March 2016 from
http://www. knowledgebank irri.org/stepbystepproduction?tmpl=componentcatego
ry&print=1

Juliano, B. (2013). Discussion Paper on Brown Rice.

Karunungan, J. (2015) Why shifting to brown rice matters. Rappler. Retrieved 18
March 2016 from http:/Awww.rappler.com/move-ph/issues/hunger/94421-shifting-
brown-rice-matters.

Kazemzadeh, M; et al. (2014). Effect of brown rice consumption on inflammatory
marker and cardiovascular risk factors among overweight and obese non-
menopausal female adults. Int J Prev Med, 478-488.

Khosravi-Boroujeni, H; et al. (2013). White rice consumption and CVD tisk factors
among Iranian population. J Health Popul Nutr, 252-261

Kim, J; et al. (2012). A rice-based traditional dietary pattern is associated with obesity
in Korean adults. J Acad Nutr Diet, 246-253.

Kumar, S.; et al. (2011). Perceptions about Varieties of Brown Rice: A Qualitative
Study from Souther India. Journal of the American Dietetic Association

IS

Lawless, H., & Heymann, H. (2010). Sensory Evaluation of Food: Principles and
Practices Second Edition. London: Springer Science+Business Media, LLC.

Liang, W; et al. (2010). White rice-based food consumption and ischemic stroke risk:
A case-control study in Southern China. Journal of Stroke and Cerebrovascular
Diseases, 480-484.

Mohan, V.; et al. (2014). Effect of Brown Rice, White Rice, and Brown Rice with
Legumes on Blood Glucose and Insulin Responses in Overweight Asian Indians:
A Randomized Controlled Trial. Diabetes Technology & Therapeutics.

Monge-Rojas, R.; et al. (2014). Influence of sensory and cultural perceptions of white
rice, brown rice and beans by Costa Rican adults in their dietary choices. Appetite

Morris, J; et al. (2012) Forestry, sustainable behaviours and behaviour change —
sefting the scene: Summary Report. UK : The Research Agency of the Forestry
Commission.

Muhihi, A.; et al. (2013). Consumption and acceptability of whole grain staples for
lowering markers of diabetes risk among overweight and obese Tanzanian adults.
Globalization and Health.

Muthayya, S.; et al. (2014). An overview of global rice production, supply, trade, and
consumption. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences.

Pabuayon, IM and AJA Quilloy. (2011). Brown rice market chain and marketing
practices, Luzon, Philippines. Philipp Agric Scientist, 54-65

Phan, T.; et al. (2012). Brown rice: Cultural effects on consumer perceptions and
beliefs. Summer Program in Sensory Evaluation

Philippine Statistics Authority (2003, July). Philippine Statistics Authority. Retrieved
from Notes on the Official Poverty Statistics in the Philippines:
http:/www.nscb.gov.ph/technotes/poverty/concept.asp

Philippine Statistics Authority (2003). Population Glossary of Terms. Retrieved from
Official Concepts and Definitions for Statistical Purposes.
http:/Inap.psa.gov.ph/glossary/popn.asp

Quiogue, ES. (1952). The rice enrichment project in Bataan. Philippines. American
Journal of Public Health, 1086-1094

Rohman, A.; et al. (2014). Rice in health and nutrition. International Food Research
Joumal , 13-24.

Santiaguel, AF. (2013). Nourishing a nation. Rice Today.

Sareepuang, K.; et al. (2008). Effect of Soaking Temperature on Physical, Chemical
and Cooking Properties of Parboiled Fragrant Rice. World Journal of Agricultural
Sciences, 409-415.

Schiffman, LG and LL Kanuk. (2010). Consumer behavior 10" edition. USA : Pearson
Education, Inc.

Shobana, S.; et al. (2011). Nutritional and sensory profile of two Indian rice varieties
with different degrees of polishing. International Journal of Food Sciences and
Nutrition.

Steinman, H. (2012). Rice. _— Retrieved += from ~—-ThermoScientific:
http:/Awww. phadia.com/en/Products/Allergytestingproducts/

Sudha, V.; et al. (2013). Consumer Acceptance and Preference Study [CAPS] on
Brown and Under Milled Indian Rice Varieties in Chennai, India. J Am Coll Nutr ,
50-57.

WHO. (2015, January). Obesity and overweight. Retrieved from World Health
Organization: http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs31 1/en/

Yu, D; et al. (2013). Dietary carbohydrates, refined grains, glycemic load, and risk of
coronary heart disease in Chinese adults. Am J Epidemiol, 1542-1549.

Zhang, G.; et al. (2010). Substituting Brown Rice for White Rice to Lower Diabetes
Risk: A Focus-Group Study in Chinese Adults . Journal of the American Dietetic
Association.

Zhang, G.; et al. (2011). Substituting White Rice with Brown Rice for 16 Weeks Did
Not Substantially Affect Metabolic Risk Factors in Middle-Aged Chinese Men and
Women with Diabetes or a High Risk for Diabetes. The Journal of Nutrition.

Zimmermann, D. (2013, August 16). Allergic Reactions to Brown Rice. Retrieved from
Livestrong.com: _http:/Awww.livestrong.com/article/545565-allergic-reactions-to-
brown-rice
