The Nutritional Value, Phytochemical Components and Acceptability of Rice (Oryza sativa L.) Flakes Made from Pigmented and Non-Pigmented Rice at Soft Dough and Hard Dough Stages

MARIA ROSSA AGATHA JUNSAY ERMINO

UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES LOS BAÑOS

Master of Science in Applied Nutrition

DECEMBER 2015

ABSTRACT

Rice flakes of two varieties of pigmented and two varieties of non-pigmented rice harvested at soft dough and hard dough stages were observed for their nutritional value, phytochemical components and sensory characteristics and acceptability. There was a significant reduction (p < 0.05) in the proximate composition, mineral contents, carbohydrate profile and phytochemical components when raw grains were processed
into rice flakes. On the other hand, the low amylose and total dietary fiber contents of rice
flakes from different varieties at soft dough and hard dough suggest higher glycemic
index. In terms of color, aroma, flavor and appearance, Malagkit Songsong was the most
preferred over other varieties. For texture, no significant difference was observed. In
general, Malagkit Songsong variety of rice flakes was the most acceptable regardless of
dough stage. Based on their nutrient contribution to the recommended energy and
nutrient intake for Filipinos (% RENI), rice flakes made from all varieties are a source of energy, protein and zinc.

INTRODUCTION

When it comes to choosing a healthy food, nutritional value is prioritized. The
nutritional value of a food defines the quantity and quality of energy. vitamins, minerals
and phytochemicals that are found in foods. Rice (Oryza sativa L.) is known as the
fundamental principal food for the majority of the world’s human population. There are
several types of rice around the world which are categorized on the basis of color
pigmentation like white rice, brown rice, red rice and black rice. On the other hand, rice
can also be classified as aromatic and non-aromatic rice on the basis of aroma. The
protein, vitamins, minerals and trace amount of oil in the outer layers of rice grains are
thought to create the fragrant notes of brown rice. Rice possesses a large variety of
valuable nutrients and is considered as one of the major energy crops in the world. It
provides half of the calorie requirements, one-third of protein intake and more than one-
fifth of the calories consumed by an individual on a worldwide scale. Several compounds
with antioxidant activity have been identified in rice including phenolic compounds.
tocopherols, tocotrienols and ¥-oryzanol (Iqbal et al. 2005). Among these, phenolic
compounds are considered as one of the most important secondary metabolite in plants

All plant-based foods have phenols, which affect their appearance, taste, odor, and

oxidative ability. Phenolic compounds have antioxidant properties and can protect against
degenerative diseases (e.g. heart disease and cancer) in which reactive oxygen species
(e.g. superoxide anion, hydroxyl radicals and peroxy radicals) are involved. The phenolic
compounds are mainly associated with the pericarp in rice which then may contribute to
the reduction of these compounds in the grain during the milling process. Furthermore,
grains with darker pericarp color such as red rice and black rice contain higher amounts
of polyphenols.

In Asia, specifically, rice has been the most important staple food not only as table
rice but also in the form of other rice-based products. Rice remains Asia's most important
crop, as it continues to be the single largest source of calories for the majority of
consumers who are poor. Over 90 percent of the world’s rice is produced and consumed
in the Asian region by six countries (China, India, Indonesia, Bangladesh, Vietnam and
Japan) comprising 80% of the world’s production and consumption (FAO 2004).
However, rice consumption in Asia is declining rapidly as a consequence of the region's
economic growth, rising disposable income and associated lifestyle changes. Rice is
consumed mainly as milled boiled rice in the Philippines. According to Bureau of
Agricultural Statistics (BAS), Filipinos’ per capita consumption has decreased to about
11% from 128 kg per person per year in 2008 to 114.26 kg in 2012. The findings of BAS
pose a threat to the rice sufficiency goals of the government in the Philippines caused by
the growing rice consumption and population. According to the 2006 Family Income and
Expenditure Survey (FIES), ordinary rice was consumed by approximately 15 million

families at an average of 463 kg per family per year or 8.9 kg a week, while the average

consumption by about 4.1 million families consuming special was 329 kg per family

annually or 6.3 kg a week.

The average 10 diet is based on rice and basically served during breakfast, lunch
and dinner. Moreover. even when it comes to meryenda or snacks, rice is the Filipinos’
staple food. Rice can be processed into flour, oil, flakes, noodles and other forms to
serve as main ingredient for many popular rice-based food products worldwide. These
rice-based products have become popular in many Asian countries, particularly in the
form of snack items. These ready-to-eat snack items include rice crackers, pop rice,
ampaw, rice flakes or pinipig and other rice-derived products. Rice flakes or pinipig is

common in the Philippines. It is immature glutinous rice that is harvested and pounded

into light green flakes. The white pinipig on the other hand, is made from mature gi

s
soaked in water. It is a nutritious and protein-rich ingredient in preparing rice-based
convenience food products like cookies, bibingka, polvoron and a cheap ingredient for
halo-halo. Rice flakes can be eaten raw but it can also be eaten boiled or mixed with
fresh grated coconut or other ingredients.

The damage to health, physical growth and brain development of children affected by
chronic undernutrition—stunting in the first two years—is often irreversible, impairing
them for life and leaving them with lower chances of finishing school and becoming
highly-productive adults (UNICEF 2015). In the Philippines, large numbers of Filipino
children are undernourished; 3.6 million of children 0-59 months are underweight and 4
million are stunted. Another problem is the result of vitamin and mineral deficiencies

known as micronutrient deficiency. Deficiencies of fat-soluble vitamins, iron and zinc in


particular, and water-soluble vitamins and minerals have great impact on the physical,

mental and cognitive development of an individual.

Prevalence of anemia in the Philippines remained a significant public health problem
between 2003 and 2008, imposing a large impact on children and pregnant women. The
manifestations of having micronutrient deficiencies become less visible and usually begin
to show when the condition is severe and has already led to serious health problems
justifying the description “hidden hunger”. Thus, malnutrition has been a serious problem
in developing countries, mostly in South Africa and Southeast Asia including the
Philippines where rice is the staple food. Nowadays, there is a growing interest in
developing high-quality and specialty rice varieties and it would be significant to search
for such beneficial varieties which could have high potential in providing micronutrients,
particularly iron and zinc, and antioxidant substances for the improvement of health.
Along with these is the formulation of rice-based snack foods using the said varieties in

order to alleviate micronutrient deficiencies and improve the health among the

nutritionally-at-risk age groups.

Objectives of the Study

The primary objective of the study was to evaluate the nutritional value,

phytochemical components and acceptability of rice flakes or pinipig made from two

varieties of pigmented and two varieties of non-pigmented rice harvested at soft dough

and hard dough stages. Specifically, it aimed to:

measure the proximate composition (moisture, total ash, crude protein, crude
fiber, crude fat and nitrogen free extract), mineral content (iron, zine and
calcium), beta-carotene contents and carbohydrate profile (amylose and starch
contents) of the raw rice grain and its rice flakes;

measure the antioxidant activity and phytochemical components, namely:
phenols, tannins, flavonoids, saponins and alkaloids in raw rice grain and rice
flakes;

measure the dietary fiber content of rice flakes:

measure the glycemic index of rice flakes: and

evaluate the sensory attributes and acceptability of the rice flakes.

Date and Place of the Study

The study was conducted from June 2015 to August 2015 at the Bio-Assay
Laboratory. Institute of Human Nutrition and Food (IHNF), University of the Philippines

Los Bafios (UPLB), Laguna.

Scope and Limitation of the Study

Only four varieties, two pigmented (one waxy and non-waxy type) and two non-
pigmented (one waxy and non-waxy) rice common in the market, all harvested at soft
dough and hard dough stages, were used in the study. Only iron, zinc, calcium from
among the minerals were analyzed. Beta-carotene was obtained to reflect the vitamin A

content.

REVIEW OF RELATED LITERATURE

Rice (Oryza sativa L.)

Rice Composition and Classification

Rice (Oryza sativa L.) is the most important cereal crop for human consumption. It is
cultivated on an estimated 3% of the world’s agricultural land, and serves as a primary
source of calories for over half the world’s population. About 20 species of the genus
Oryza are recognized, but nearly all cultivated rice is O. sativa L. (Juliano 1993). It is
generally considered a semi-aquatic annual grass plant. Rice is grown in over 100
countries on every continent except Antarctica,

These plants typically grow in a tuft (clump) of upright culms (stems) up to 2 meters
or more tall, with long, flat leaf blades. The flowers grow on broad, open terminal
panicles (branched clusters). The oblong spikelets, which each contain a single flower
(that develops into a single kernel of grain), are sparse along the stem rather than forming
dense clusters. The harvested kernel, known as a rice paddy (rice grain), is enveloped in a
hull or husk that is removed during milling. Brown rice consists of the outer layers of
pericarp, seed-coat and nucellus; the germ or embryo; and the endosperm. The
endosperm, the inner part of the grain, contains mostly starch and 6 to 10 % protein. The
bran is more diverse in its composition and contains protein, lipids, fiber. vitamins, and

minerals. The major vitamins present in the rice bran are vitamin E (a-tocopherol) and

the B-vitamins (thiamin, riboflavin and niacin). The mineral fraction is mainly composed

of phosphorus, potassium, and magnesium (Frei et al. 2003). The two outermost cell

layers (the subaleurone layer) are rich in protein and lipid and have smaller amyloplasts
and compound starch granules than the inner endosperm. It consists of the aleurone layer
and the endosperm proper, consisting of the subaleurone layer and the starchy or inner
endosperm. The aleurone layer encloses the embryo. The aleurone layer varies from one
to five cell layers; it is thicker at the dorsal than at the ventral side and thicker in short-

grain than in long-grain rices. The aleurone and embryo cells are rich in protein bodies,

containing globoids or phytate bodies, and in lipid bodies.

— Petcare
Seed coat
‘Noceltes
neurone ayer
Severe)
Bey pEndosponm
‘ensocporm }

swtio pS
iowmao {_

Fig. 1. Longitudinal section of a grain of rice (Juliano 1993).

Rice has hundreds of cultivars with different grain color, size and shape. The three
subspecies of rice include indica, japonica and javanica. The latter species is cultivated in
Indonesia, in the rice terraces of the Philippines and in Madagascar. Japonica is cultivated
in Japan and in other temperate and semi-temperate regions. Indica is the most abundant

rice species and can be mostly found in the rest of rice-growing countries.


There are over 120, 000 varieties of rice and they are classified into long grain,
medium grain and short grain. The International Rice Research Institute (IRRI) uses the
following scale for size: extra-long, >7.50 mm; long, 6.61 to 7.50 mm; medium, 5.51 to
6.60 mm; and short, <5.50 mm. Grain shape is characterized based on length-to-width
ratio: slender, >3.0; medium, 2.1 to 3.0; bold 1.1 to 2.0; and round, <1.0. The Codex
Alimentarius Commission (1990) committee proposed the following classification of
milled rice based on length-to-width ratio; long grain, <3.1; medium grain, 2.1 to 3.0; and
short grain, <2.0. Long-grain rice contains less amylopectin than short-grain cultivars.
Thai Jasmine rice is long-grain and relatively less sticky. Mochi rice (Japanese) and
sticky rice (Chinese) are generally short-grain. Chinese people use sticky rice, which is
properly known as “glutinous rice” (which does not contain dietary gluten), to make
Zongzi. Indian rice cultivars include long-grained and aromatic Basmati grown in the
North, long and medium-grained Patna rice and short-grained Masoori, Rice in East India
and South India is usually prepared by parboiling wherein the rice is boiled in large pans
immediately after harvesting and before removing the husk. It is then dried and the husk
removed later. Coarser rice is usually used for this procedure and it helps retain the
natural vitamins and kill any fungi or other contaminants.

Rice is also classified as waxy/glutinous/malagkit or non-waxy, which is commonly
known as ordinary rice. Waxy (glutinous) rice differs from non-waxy (non-glutinous) rice
principally in having almost no amylose in its starch which is essentially entirely
amylopectin (Vidal et al. n.d). The waxy or malagkit is used for special functions or
preparations. such as suman and other kakanin, while the ordinary rice is the kind that

humans consume every meal (Claudio et al. 2006). The maturity stage of the grain is also

u
divided into four stages: the milky grain stage followed by dough grain stage then the
yellow-ripe grain stage and lastly, the mature grain stage wherein the rice is harvested.

Upon maturity, the grains turn yellow or brownish yellow.

Rice Growth and Development

Rice is generally grown in fields that are flooded for part of the growing season—
whether from irrigation (the majority of cultivation), rainfed or floodplain systems—
which help reduce competition from other plants, among other benefits. Some upland
varieties can be grown without flooding, but they account for only 4% of rice cultivated
worldwide. Depending on the variety and environmental conditions, rice plant takes 3-6
months to grow from seeds to mature plants. They undergo three agronomic stages of
development: vegetative, reproductive and ripening or maturation. The vegetative growth
stage is characterized by active tillering, a gradual increase in plant height and leaf
emergence at regular intervals. Typically, the number of days vegetative stage takes place
is between 55 and 85 days: however. it still varies depending on the variety of rice. The
early vegetative phase begins when the seed germinates into seedling and ends at
tillering. Seed germination occurs when the seed coat has imbibed adequate water,
becoming soft and elastic. During this stage, seminal roots and up to five leaves develop.
As the seeding continues to grow, two more leaves develop. Leaves develop at the rate of
one every 3-4 days during the early stage. The late vegetative phase starts when tillering
begins which extends from the appearance of the first tiller until the maximum number of

tillers is reached. The end of the vegetative phase signals the lengthening of stem during

late tillering stage just before panicle initiation about 52 days after sowing. The visible
elongation of lower internodes may begin considerably earlier than the reproductive
phase or at about the same time. The reproductive stage usually lasts approximately 30
days in most varieties. The reproductive stage is characterized by culm elongation, a
decline in tiller number, booting, emergence of the flag leaf, heading and flowering. The
“booting” stage which is the bulging of the leaf stem that conceals the developing
panicle, is usually the first sign that the rice plant is getting ready to enter its reproductive
phase. The tip of the developing panicle emerges from the stem and continues to grow.
The “heading” stage occurs when the panicle is fully visible. Flowering begins a day after
heading is completed and can continue for about seven days. On the other hand, grain
filling and ripening or maturation stage follows ovary fertilization and is characterized by
grain growth, which usually takes 30 days. During this period, the grain increases in size
and weight as the starch and sugars are translocated from the culms and leaf sheaths
where they have accumulated, the grain changes color from green to gold or straw color
at maturity and leaves of the rice plant begin to senesce. This period is highly affected by
temperature wherein rainy days or low temperature lengthen the ripening phase while
sunny and warm days shorten it. This stage can be subdivided into different steps in the
ripening process: milk stage, soft dough stage, hard dough stage and maturity. These
terms are primarily based on the texture and color of the growing grains. During the milk
stage, the developing starch grains in the kernel are soft and the interior of the kernel is
filled with white liquid resembling milk. At soft dough stage, the starch in the grain is
beginning to become firm but is still soft. The whole grain is firm during hard dough

stage and almost ready for harvest. The moisture content during this stage is still above

22 %. Lastly, at maturity stage, the whole grain is hard and ready for harvest. This stage
is reached at 20-22 % moisture. As the grain ripens, the leaves become senescent and turn
yellowish in an ascending order. The non-functioning leaves and culm tissues are termed
dead straw. In some varieties, the culms and upper leaves may remain green when the
grains are fully ripe. Under favorable growth conditions, new tillers may grow from the
stubble of the harvested plants. The second and subsequent harvests from the crop are

called the first and second ratoon crops, respectively.


Naked Eye Upon Siting Stem
Most Active Gain Filling
Starch Accumulation Stops
Moisture Lows

‘Seed Food Depleted, Plant Dependent on Roots and Leaves
ag Taerng

Coleoptie und Radice Development

—

Piz: cas ¢é 28 83
gpa 3 4 i:ei: gi
cae 4 aug a2
g 3 2
:
3 a
[ea] 0m roe T 3010 46
[Pere Days* Days* Days*
race | sracen stace
vecetarive | nertopucrive | GRA FILLING & MATURATION

*Uncr warm contons use the wer nurbsr of days and ot ol condos use he larger numberof days

“anable tne = Oto 25 cays (Sependent upon vane)

Fig. 2. Development stages of the rice plant (Moldenhauer et al. n.d.).


Nutritional Quality of Rice and Rice Products

The nutrient composition of rice is influenced by variety, rice soil and environment.
Most of the available carbohydrates, such as starch, are found in the endosperm of the
rice grain. Available carbohydrates, mainly starch, are higher in milled rice than in brown
rice. Milled rice mainly consists of starch with a few other carbohydrates, including free
sugars and non-starch polysaccharides. The hull is composed of a small amount of starch
and mostly non-starch polysaccharides such as cellulose and hemicellulose. The bran and
germ, on the other hand, are comprised mainly of non-starch polysaccharides such as

cellulose and hemicellulose and partly of free sugars as well as a small amount of starch.

Starch

Starch is the major constituent of milled rice at about 90 % of the dry matter. Starch
exists as the main component of cereals and tubers. However, among the cereal starches,
rice granules are the smallest. In manufactured and processed foods, it provides the
desired consistency and viscosity in products such as cornstarch pudding, sauces, pie
fillings and gravies. Starch is a polymer of D-glucose linked a-1-4 and usually consists of
an essentially linear fraction, amylose, and a branched fraction, amylopectin (Juliano
1993), Starch in non-glutinous rice is composed of 15-30 % amylose and 70-85 %
amylopectin, while starch in glutinous rice contains less than 5% amylose and consists
mostly of amylopectin. In amylose. the glucose units are linked through the C1 of one

glucose unit to the C4 of the next glucose unit with the ring oxygen all on the same side.

The amylose molecule is one long linear chain of glucose units and consists of up to
17,000 linearly arranged glucose units. On the other hand, in amylopectin, besides the C1
to C4 linkages there is branching C1 to C6 linkages which results to a highly branched
dense molecule. Amylopectin is the major polymer in most starches representing 70-85
% in non-waxy starches and up to 100 % in waxy varieties. The starch properties of
pasting and gel formation after gelatinization are determined by the amylose-amylopectin

content of the starch granules.

Dietary Fiber

Cereals grains are important sources of digestible and unavailable carbohydrates.
‘Among the cereals. rice has the lowest dietary fiber content while wheat has the highest
total dietary fiber content. The dietary fiber content in cooked rice is lost by milling and
polishing accounting for 0.3% (OECD 2004). Dietary fiber is the edible parts of plants or
analogous carbohydrates that are resistant to digestion and absorption in the human small
intestine with complete or partial fermentation in the large intestine. Some of its
beneficial effects include the reduction of cardiovascular and diverticulitis diseases,
blood cholesterol, diabetes and colon cancer. In addition to nutritional effects, dietary
fiber has functional properties such as water binding capacity (WBC) and fat binding
capacity (FBC) (Fadaei & Salehifar 2012). Rice contained 0.7-19.2 % total dietary fiber.
Removal of the husk, corresponding to about 80 % extraction rate, decreased the dietary
fiber content to 2.9 %. The soluble-fiber fraction was less than 1.0 % at all extraction

rates. The main dietary fiber components in the most refined rice were glucose and uronic

acids. In rice flour, including the husk, there were also appreciable amounts of xylose
(Nyman et al. 1983).

Total protein content in rice is calculated by multiplying total nitrogen content by the
rice specific Kjeldahl! conversion factor of 5.95, which is based on the nitrogen content of
glutelin, the major protein in rice. Rice proteins are classified by their solubility in
albumin (soluble in pure water), globulin (soluble in salt-water), prolamin (soluble in
alcohol), and glutelin (soluble in aqueous alkaline solution). Albumin and globulin have a
balanced composition of amino acids and are found mostly in the outer layer of brown
rice, and less in the inner layer of milled rice. Prolamin and glutelin, on the other hand,
are considered to be the storage proteins of rice, and exist in the outer layer and the inside
of milled rice. Endosperm (milled rice) protein consists of several fractions comprising
15 % albumin (water soluble) plus globulin (salt soluble), 5-8 % prolamin (alcohol
soluble) and the rest glutelin (alkali soluble) (Juliano 1993). Rice bran proteins are richer
in albumin than endosperm proteins and are found as distinct protein bodies containing
globoids in the aleurone layer and the germ. Furthermore, the amino acid profile of rice
shows that glutamic and aspartic acids are the major amino acids present in rice, while

lysine is the limiting al

10 acid (FAO 2004). Rice has a more complete balance of amino
acids compared to those of other major cereals, such as wheat and corn, due to its higher
content of lysine and sulphur-containing amino acids. The protein content of rice
fluctuates according to the variety grown and can also be affected by growing conditions
such as early or late maturing, soil fertility and water stress. The soil types and ambient
temperature during ripening and growth duration are some of the environmental factors

that increase protein content. Protein content tends to increase with wider spacing or in

borders and in response to high N fertilizer application, especially at flowering. Short
growth duration and cloudy weather during grain development, as occurs in the wet
season, may increase protein content. Stresses such as drought, salinity, alkalinity, high
or low temperature, diseases or pests may also be a factor in increased protein content of
the rice grain.

Most of the rice lipids are neutral. They are triglycerides in which glycerol is esterified

with three fatty acids, primarily oleic, linoleic and palmitic. Among these fatty acids,

palmitic and linoleic acids make up a large proportion, and oleic acid makes up a lesser
amount. Fatty acid composition is dependent on the growing season and the eco-
geographical varieties. The amount of palmitic acid in rice is found in this order of
cultivated rice: Indian > Chinese > Japanese > Javanese (OECD 2004). Rice also contains
lipid-conjugates like acylsterolglycoside and sterolglycoside, glycolipids, such as
cerebroside, and phospholipids, such as_—_—phosphatidylcholine and
phosphatidylethanolamine. The lipid or fat content of rice is mainly in the bran fraction
(20 % dry basis), specifically as lipid bodies or spherosomes in the aleurone layer and
bran; however, 1.5-1.7 % is present in milled rice, mainly as non-starch lipids. Essential
fatty acids in rice oil are about 29-42 % linoleic acid and 0.8-1.0 % linolenic acid
(aiswal 1983).

The mineral content of the grain is affected by the mineral content of the soil and of
the irrigation water. Among the inorganic elements contained in rice, silicon is dominant
in paddy rice. In brown and milled rice, phosphorus is principal but comparable amounts
of potassium, magnesium and silicon are also found. Minerals are unevenly distributed in

a brown rice grain which tends to decrease toward the endosperm, providing it lesser

minerals than germ and the outer bran layer fractions. Furthermore, vitamins mainly exist

in the endosperm and bran layer, thus milled rice contains less vitan

's compared with
brown rice. Rice is a good source of thiamine (vitamin B1), riboflavin (vitamin B2) and
niacin (vitamin B3). The high thiamine content in specific rice varieties could be useful

in treating vitamin B1 deficiencies such as muscle weakness and neuritis.

Minerals

Iron

Iron is an essential nutrient, vital to many of the cell’s activities, but it poses a
problem for millions of people. Some people either do not eat enough iron-containing
foods to support their health optimally or absorbs so much iron that it threatens their
health. Most of the iron in the human body is present in hemoglobin, a protein that
consists of an iron-containing compound, heme, attached to a protein, globin.
Hemoglobin carries oxygen to the tissues so that oxidation reactions can take place in the
cells. Iron is also a constituent of many enzymes that are required for the breakdown of
glucose and fatty acids for energy. Iron absorption depends in part on its dietary source.
Iron occurs in two forms in foods: as heme iron, which is found only in foods derived
from the flesh of animals, such as meats, poultry and fish and as non-heme iron, which is
found in both plant-derived and animal-derived foods. On average, heme iron represents

about 10 % of the iron a person consumes in a day. About 25 % of heme iron and 17 % of

non-heme iron is absorbed, depending on dietary factors and the body’s iron stores. The
best sources of iron include lean red meat, oysters, salmon, tuna, liver, dried beans, dried
fruits and eggs. Iron absorption involves two special proteins. One is the ferritin which
receives iron from food and enables it to store in the mucosal cells of the small intestine.
Transferrin, on the other hand, transports the iron to the rest of the body. These two
proteins allow the body to control the absorption either to use or to excrete iron,
depending on the body's status.

In developing countries. instances of iron deficiency anemia (IDA) are higher. In the
USA, despite food fortification, iron deficiency is on the rise in certain population
groups, particularly women, children and the elderly. Iron deficiency at critical times of
growth and development can result in premature births, low birth weight babies, delayed
growth and development, delayed normal infant activity and movement. Iron deficiency
can result in poor memory or poor cognitive skills (mental function) and can result in
poor performance in school, work, and in military or recreational activities. Lower IQs
have been linked to iron deficiency occurring during critical periods of growth. Based on
the Philippines’ National Nutrition Survey of 2008. Iron Deficiency Anemia affects 19 %

of the national population. IDA

highest among infants (56%), followed by pregnant
women (43%) and the elderly (33%). A diet insufficient in bioavailable iron and blood
loss is the major cause of iron deficiency worldwide. Failure to determine the primary
cause of iron deficiency can cause significant delay in the final diagnosis of some
diseases. Causes of iron deficiency may be classified as those due to excessive blood loss
from gastrointestinal tract, menorthagia, major surgeries or others. Inadequate intake of

iron may also be one of the factors of iron deficiency wherein vegetarians have greater

risk of acquiring this disease. Moreover, some drugs can cause iron deficiency due to
failure in absorbing iron. Iron can be absorbed in the ferrous state much more readily than
in the ferric state. Prolonged iron depletion inhibits cells to carry enough oxygen in the
body, resulting in the alteration of energy metabolism which results to over fatigue,

weakness, shortness of breath, pallor and apathy. An improved intake of bioavailable iron

can prevent the long-term consequence of nutritional

\n deficiency.

Since rice is the main staple food for more than half of the global population,
improving the iron content and bioavailability in rice is an effective way to alleviate iron
deficiency. As with vitamins, minerals are chiefly located in the bran of the rice grain.
Therefore, rice contributes significantly to the iron supply if it is eaten as brown rice.
Analysis done on a number of rice samples under greenhouse conditions showed that
local varieties had an iron content up to 2.5 times higher than that of the common high-
yielding varieties. Consequently, the most commonly grown landraces high-yielding
varieties were at the lowest end of the scale with an average iron content of 10 mg/kg
while the highest value cited was 26 mg/kg. Generally, iron content tends to be higher in
aromatic and colored rice varieties compared to colorless and ordinary rice. This was
further supported by a study about Chinese red long-grain variety which reportedly had a
content of 64 mg/kg.

The bioavailability of ingested iron depends very much on the intake level and is

higher in iron-deficient diets. Phytate and polyphenols found in plant foods are some of
the main inhibitors of iron absorption. The negative effect of phytate on iron absorption
has been shown to be dose dependent and starts at very low concentrations of 2-10

mg/meal. Food processing and preparation methods, which include milling, heat

treatment, soaking, germination, and fermentation, can be used to remove or degrade
phytate to a varying extent. The addition of exogenous phytase or its activation during
food processing, or the addition to a meal just before human consumption, has been
shown to improve iron absorption significantly (Hurrell and Egli et al. 2010). The
inhibiting effect of polyphenols on iron absorption has been shown in various amounts in
plant foods and beverages such as vegetables, fruit, some cereals and legumes, tea,
coffee, and wine. In cereals and legumes, polyphenols add to the inhibitory effect of
phytate, as was shown in a study that compared high and low polyphenol sorghum. After
complete phytate degradation, iron absorption from low-polyphenol sorghum increased
significantly, whereas iron absorption from high-polyphenol sorghum was not improved

(Hurrell and Egli et al. 2010).

Zine

Zine functions in our body for growth and development and assists for proper immune
function. It supports the work of numerous proteins in the body, such as the
metalloenzymes, which are involved in a variety of metabolic processes, including the
regulation of gene expression. In addition, zinc stabilizes cell membranes, helping to
strengthen their defense against free-radical attacks. Zine interacts with platelets in blood
clotting, affects thyroid hormone function, and influences behavior and learning
performance. It is needed to produce the active form of vitamin A (retinal) in visual
pigments and the retinol-binding protein that transports vitamin A. Zinc is essential to

normal taste perception, wound healing and fetal development. Little is known about the

magnitude of zinc deficiency in the Filipino population. The result of the National
Nutrition Survey of 2008 showed that the prevalence of zine deficiency was 21.6 and
20.6 %, for infants and pre-schoolers. The prevalence among pregnant women was 21.5
%. Prevalence of zinc deficiency was highest among the elderly males at 33.6 % while it
was 24.5 % among the elderly females, The prevalence of zinc deficiency was of high
magnitude at equal or more than 20 % among the selected population groups. Of all the
population groups included in the study, prevalence of zinc deficiency was highest
among the elderly.

Zine deficiency is related to inadequate intake or absorption of zinc from the diet,
although excess losses of zinc during diarrhea may also contribute (Gibson 1994). It is a
well-documented global health problem, affecting nearly half of the world population,
particularly in developing countries, where high proportion of cereal crops, such as rice
and wheat, are consumed as a staple food. The reliance on cereal-based food induce zinc
deficiency-related health problems, such as impairments in physical growth, immune
system and brain function. Among the cereals, rice-being one of the leading staple crops

for half of the world’s population— is the main source of zine for humans. However,

e
is a poor source of metabolizable zinc due to its inherently low zinc content and zine
bioavailability.

Rice is the major source of intake of micro-nutrients such as zinc, iron, calcium,
selenium and vitamins for Asian people especially those who live in the urban
countryside. As with iron, most of the zine present in the rice grain is located in the outer
layers. Aside from the limited contents of iron and zinc in rice, the loss of minerals

during rice milling is high. In addition, rice contains phytic acid (PA), the most important

anti- nutritional factor impeding availability of divalent minerals. It forms complexes
with mineral ions, such as iron, zinc and calcium, and ultimately affects their

bioavailability.

Calcium

Calcium is the most abundant mineral in the body. It is required for the normal
development and maintenance of the skeleton as well as for the proper functioning of
neuromuscular and cardiac function. The remaining 99% of the body's calcium supply is
stored in the bones and teeth where it supports their structure and function. The calcium
in the bones and teeth plays two roles. First, it provides a rigid frame in the integral part
of the bone structure that holds the body upright and serves as attachment points for
muscles, making motion possible. Second, it serves as a calcium bank, offering a readily
available source of the mineral to the body fluids should a drop in blood calcium occur.
On the contrary, the remaining 1% of the body’s calcium circulates in the extracellular
and intracellular fluids and its presence is vital to life. Many of its action, help maintain
normal blood pressure. The extracellular calcium participates in the blood clotting while
intracellular fluids bind to proteins within the cell and activates them. These proteins also
participate in the regulation of muscle contractions. the transmission of nerve impulses.
the secretion of hormones and the activation of some enzyme reactions. A low calcium
intake during the growing years limits the bones* ability to reach their optimal mass and
density. All adults lose bone as they grow older, beginning between the ages of 30 and

40. As this happens, bone reach the point of causing fractures under common, everyday

stresses, the condition is known as osteoporosis. The body sends no signals saying bones
are losing their calcium unlike other diseases with symptoms such as pain, shortness of
breath, tiredness and the like. To protect bone loss, eating calcium-rich foods during
adolescent stage is recommended.

Calcium is found predominantly in milk and milk-based products, with smaller
amounts in bony fish, legumes and certain nuts, fortified soy beverages and breakfast
cereals. The content of calcium is of equal or greater importance than bioavailability for
natural food sources. The efficiency of calcium absorption varies across foods as calcium
may be poorly absorbed from foods rich in oxalic acid (e.g. spinach, rhubarb, beans) or
phytic acid (e.g. seeds, nuts, grains, certain raw beans and soy isolates), Absorption from
soy milk can be, but is not always, as high as that from milk, Compared to milk, calcium

absorption from dried beans is about 50 % and from spinach, 10 % (NRV 2006).

Glycemic Index

The increased prevalence of overconsumption and inactivity associated with an
unhealthy lifestyle comes with the increased chronic diseases and their associated
metabolic disorders. This has resulted in continued interest in both diet and lifestyle
modifications in prevention and treatment of diseases. One of the dietary approaches that
may have relevance is the glycemic index (Gl), a physiological classification of the
available carbohydrate content in foods. Both low glycemic index and glycemic load
(GL) diets appear protective against chronic diseases. especially those that relate to

obesity, such as type 2 diabetes and heart diseases. The glycemic index is determined by

comparing the postprandial glycemic response of a food with the postprandial glycemic
response to the same amount of available carbohydrate from a standard food in the same
individual (Esfahani et al. 2009). Generally, 50 grams of available carbohydrates from a
single food is tested together with the same quantity of carbohydrate from a reference
food, which is either pure glucose or white bread. The average change in blood sugar
levels over the next two hours, compared to the change in blood sugar levels after
consuming the reference food, is the glycemic index value of that particular food. The
blood sugar response of the reference food is given a value of 100 and all other foods are
compared to this value.

‘The glycemic index of a certain food or meal is determined primarily by the nature of
the carbohydrate consumed and by other dietary factors that affect nutrient digestibility or
insulin secretion. In general, most refined starchy foods have a high glycemic index

whereas non-starchy vegetables, fruits and legumes tend to have a low glycemic index.

Foods containing carbohydrates that are quickly digested have the highest glycemic
index, since the blood sugar response is fast and high. On the other hand, slowly digested
carbohydrates have a low glycemic index, since they release glucose gradually into the
bloodstream. Glycemic index values are grouped into three categories: High GI with 70

or higher, intermediate G! with 56-69 and low GI with 0 to 55. Several factors that affect

the glycemic index of a food include the cooking methods and processing methods, type

of starch, sugar, fat and acidity. During cooking, water and heat expand the starch
granules to varying degrees. Foods containing starch that has gelatinized to a certain
point are more easily digested and therefore have higher Gls than foods containing starch

granules that are less gelatinized. As per the processing method, grinding, rolling or

milling starchy foods reduces particle size and makes it easier for water to be absorbed
and digestive enzymes to attach the food. Processing facilitates the removal of the fibrous
outer coat of the grain that slows down the access of digestive enzymes to the starch
inside. Finely milled flours generally have a high Gl. Coarse, stone-ground flours have
larger-sized particles and lower Gls (Brand-Miller et al. 2003). On the other hand,
amylose and amylopectin have different effects on Gl. Amylose molecules are harder to
digest than amylopectin molecules. Legumes and basmati rice, for example, have a
higher ratio of amylose to amylopectin and therefore have a lower G1 compared to that of
higher amylopectin foods. The type of sugar in a food also affects Gl. Sucrose, which is
made up of glucose and fructose, has a lower GI than glucose because half of the sucrose
molecule is made up of fructose, a type of sugar that elicits a very small blood sugar
response. Meanwhile, fat increases the time it takes for food to leave the stomach and
enter the intestine. By slowing the rate that carbohydrates are digested in the intestine,
fat-containing foods may temper the rise in blood sugar and yield a lower GI than similar
foods without fat. Acid in food slows down stomach emptying, which slows the rate that
carbohydrates are digested. Increasing the acidity in a meal can lower its GI and the

blood sugar response.

Antioxidant Activity

Fruits and vegetables are the major source of dietary antioxidants and contain a
significant level of biologically active components that provide health benefits to people.

These antioxidants are phytochemicals, vitamins and other nutrients that protect the


body's cells from damage caused by free radicals. Antioxidants are substances that, when

present at much lower concentrations than an oxidizable substrate, significantly delay or
prevent its oxidation (Goldberg 1994). Essential antioxidants like vitamins are readily
provided in the diet. These vitamins are identified to be the major lipid-soluble
antioxidant that breaks the chain of free radical of polyunsaturated fatty acids.
Antioxidant vitamins may prevent or protect against cancer, cardiovascular disease,
asthma, pulmonary function problems, diabetes and weight loss. These may also protect
eye-sight, help protect the brain, and promote gastrointestinal health. It has the property
of neutralizing free radicals before they can attack healthy cells which is primarily the
cause of loss of function in the body. This helps prevent free radical damage that were
related in some diseases such as cancer and heart ailments. The antioxidant content of
LDL influences its susceptibility to oxidation. When LDL was exposed to a copper-
mediated oxidation system, vitamin E in the outer phospholipids layer of the LDL was
the first to be washed out, followed by carotenoids such as lycopene and beta-carotene.
LDL oxidation is delayed if vitamin C is present in the external medium, apparently
because vitamin C regenerates vitamin E, increasing the vitamin E content of LDL by
dietary supplementation inhibited oxidation of LDL to atherogenic form (Goldberg
1994), Phenolics essentially represent a host of natural antioxidants used as
nutraceuticals, and found in apples, green tea, and red wine for their enormous ability to
combat cancer. Phenolics are also thought to prevent heart ailments to an appreciable
degree and sometimes also serve as anti-inflammatory agents. In some fruits and

vegetables, phenolics and polyphenolics are responsible for their antioxidant activity

content. Phenolic antioxidants function as terminators of free radicals by rapid donation

of hydrogen atom to radicals.

Phytochemicals

Functional foods, give a positive effect on health beyond the value of basic nutrition
and this comes from different phytochemicals. Phytochemicals are well-known for
protecting plants, but recent studies showed that they can also be used to protect humans
from diseases. Although phytochemicals are not essential nutrients and are not required
by the human body to sustain life, they have important properties to prevent or to fight
some common diseases. In general, phytochemicals are plant chemicals that protect plant
cells from environmental hazards such as pollution, stress, drought, ultraviolet light
exposure and pathogenic attacks. Dietary phytochemicals are found in fruits, vegetables,
legumes, whole grains, nuts, seeds, fungi, herbs and spices. Phytochemicals accumulate
in different parts of the plants, such as in the roots, stems, leaves, flowers, fruits or seeds.
The pigment molecules in many phytochemicals are often concentrated in the outer layers
of the various plant tissues, the levels of which vary from plant to plant depending on the
variety, processing, cooking and growing conditions. These compounds are known as
secondary plant metabolites and have biological properties. Findings of studies suggest
that phytochemicals may reduce the risk of coronary heart disease by preventing the
oxidation of low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol, reducing the synthesis or
absorption of cholesterol, normalizing blood pressure and clotting and improving arterial

elasticity. Phytochemicals may detoxify substances that cause cancer by neutralizing free

radicals, inhibiting enzymes that activate carcinogens and activating enzymes that
detoxify carcinogens. These compounds are also promoted for the prevention and
treatment of diabetes, high blood pressure and macular degeneration. Table 3 shows the

bioactive and disease-preventing phytochemicals present in plants.

Table 1. Bioactive phytochemicals in plants.
‘CLASSIFICATION MAIN GROUPS OF BIOLOGICAL
COMPOUNDS FUNCTION
NSA Cellulose, hemicellulose, Water holding capacity,
(Non-starch gums, mucilages, pectins, delay in nutrient absorption,
polysaccharides) lignins binding toxins and bile
acids
“Antibacterial and Terpenoids, alkaloids, Inhibitors of
Antifungal phenolics microorganisms, reduce the
risk of fungal infection
Antioxidants Polyphenolic compounds, Oxygen free radical
flavonoids,carotenoids, quenching, inhibition of
tocopherols, ascorbic acid _lipid peroxidation
‘Anticancer Carotenoids, polyphenols, Inhibitors of tumor,
curcumine, Flavonoids inhibited development of
lung cancer, anti-metastatic
activity
Detoxifying Agents Reductive acids, Inhibitors of procarcinogen
tocopherols, phenols, activation inducers of drug
indoles, aromatic binding of carcinogens,
isothiocyanates, coumarins, inhibitors of
flavones, carotenoids, tumourogenesis

retinoids, cyanates,
phytosterols

Others Alkaloids, terpenoids, Neuropharmacological
volatile flavor compounds, —_ agents, anti- oxidants,

biogenic amines cancer chemoprevention

‘Souree: Saxena etal. 2015


Polyphenols

Phenolics, phenols or polyphenolics (or polyphenol extracts) are widespread groups of
substances in flowering plants occurring in all vegetative organs, as well as in flowers
and fruits, vegetables, cereals, grains and seeds. It basically possesses an aromatic ring
bearing one or more hydroxyl groups and their structure ranges from simple phenolic
molecule to a complex high-molecular weight polymer. The quantity and quality of the
polyphenols present in plant foods depends on the plant genetics and cultivar, soil
composition and growing conditions, maturity state and postharvest conditions (Ozcan et
al. 2014). Phenolic compounds are mostly found in both edible and non-edible plants and
these have been verified to have several biological effects. The most important role may
be in plant defense against pathogens and herbivore predators, and are thus applied in the
control of human pathogenic infections. Apart from being responsible for the color (e.g.
yellow, orange, red and blue pigments), taste and flavor (e.g. vanillin and eugenol) of
foods, one of the major polyphenol characteristics is radical-scavenging capacity
involved in antioxidant properties and the ability to interact with proteins. In plants,
phenolics are mostly synthesized from phenylalanine via the action of phenylalanine
ammonia lyase (PAL). They are classified into (i) phenolic acids and (ii) flavonoid
polyphenolics (flavonones, flavones, xanthones and catechins) and (iii) non-flavonoid

polyphenolics.


Phenolic Acids

Phenolic acids consist of two subgroups: the benzoic acid and cinnamic acid
derivatives (Walter & Marchesan 2011). With a C6-C1 structure (an aromatic ring linked
toa carbon atom). the benzoic acid derivatives include p-hidroxybenzoic, protocatechuic,
vanillic, gallic and syringic acids. The cinnamic acid derivatives, with a C6-C3 structure
(an aromatic ring linked to a three-carbon chain), include caffeic, ferulic, p-coumaric and
sinapic acids (Walter & Marchesan 2011). These acids may be in the free form, in the
form of soluble conjugates or in the insoluble bound form. Bound phenolic acids are
typically involved in the structure of the cell wall, doing the cross-linking of lignin
components, with effects on the growth of the cell wall, its mechanical properties and
degradability (Walter & Marchesan 2011). Free phenolic acids, on the other hand, are
located in the outer layer of the pericarp and extracted using organic solvents while
bound phenolic acids are esterified to cell walls; acid or base hydrolysis is required to
release these bound compounds from the cell matrix. According to the study of Dykes
and Rooney (2007), the phenolic acids reported in cereals occur both in free and bound
forms. Phenolic acid levels among cereals vary while brans concentrate in these

compounds are threefold (Table 4).

Table 2. Phenolic acids content in cereal grains.


SAMPLE AMOUNT (ng/e)

Whole grains:
Barley 450-1346
Finger Millet 612
Foxtail Millet 3907
Maize 601
Oat 472
Pearl Millet 1478
Rice 197-376
Rye 1362-1366
Sorghum 385-746
Wheat 1342

Brans:
Oat 651
Rye 4190
Wheat, 4527

Source: Dykes and Rooney. 2007

Flavonoids

Flavonoids are the most abundant polyphenols in human diets, accounting for over

half of the 8,000 naturally occurring phenolic compounds found mainly in blackberries,

black currant, blueberries, grape, strawberries, cherries, plums, cranberry, pomegranate

and raspberry (Ozcan et al. 2014). These are compounds with a C6-C3-C6 skeleton that

consists of two aromatic rings joined by a three-carbon link which include anthocyanins

and anthoxanthins, which were further divided into several catergories such as flavanols,

flavones, flavanones and flavonols. More than 5,000 flavonoids have been identified in

nature, In most cereals, flavonoids are located in the pericarp wherein sorghum accounts
the widest variety of flavonoids present (Dykes & Rooney 2007).

Anthocyanidins are water-soluble pigments responsible for the majority of the red,
pink, purple and blue colors in plants, acting as attraction for the animals for pollination
and seed dispersal. Generally, the anthocyanidins are bound to glycosides, which are
called anthocyanins (Walter & Marchesan 2011). These compounds are the major
flavonoids studied in cereals. The six common anthocyanidins in nature are cyanidin,
delphinidin, malvinidin, pelargonidin, petunidin and peonidin which were found in the
pericarp of pigmented varieties of barley, maize, rice, rye and wheat (Dykes & Rooney
2007). Other flavonoids found in fruits and vegetables are also found in cereals. The
flavone apigenin is found in parsley and celery as well as in millet, oat and sorghum.

Flavanones are also found in citrus, sorghum and oats.

Flavonoids have antioxidant, anticancer, anti-allergic, anti-inflammatory, anti-
carcinogenic and gastro-protective properties. Their benefits include maintenance of
brain function and heart health; they also neutralize free radicals and bolster cellular
antioxidant defenses. The capacity of flavonoids to act as antioxidant depends upon their
molecular structure. The position of hydroxyl groups and other features in the chemical
structure of flavonoids are important for their antioxidant and free radical scavenging
activities, Also, the free radical scavenging properties and chelators of metal ions may
protect tissues against free oxygen radicals and lipid peroxidation. On the other hand,
flavonoids such as luteolin and cathechins, are better antioxidants than the nutrients

antioxidants such as vitamin C. vitamin E and B-carotene (Saxena et al. 2013)


Tannins

Tannins are astringent, bitter plant polyphenols that either bind and precipitate or
shrink proteins, This astringency in tannins causes the dry and pucker feeling in the
mouth following the consumption of red wine, strong tea or an unripened fruit (Ashok &
Upadhyaya 2012). Tannins are widely distributed all over the plant kingdom. However,

the percentage of tannins present in the plants vari

;. These compounds are acidic in
reaction and attributed to the presence of phenolics or carboxylic group. They form
complexes with proteins, carbohydrates, gelatin and alkaloids. Tannins are divided into
hydrolysable tannins and condensed tannins. Upon hydrolysis, hydrolysable tannins
produce gallic acid and ellagic acid; and depending on the type of acid produced, the
hydrolysable tannins are called gallotannins or egallitannins. On the other hand, heating
turn hydrolysable tannins to form pyrogallic acid. Condensed tannins, also known as
proanthocyanidins, are polymers of polyhydroxyflavan-3-ol monomers. Tannins are used
as antiseptic and this activity is due to presence of the phenolic group. In addition, these
compounds may have anticarcinogenic, cardiovascular, gastroprotective, anti-ulcerogenic
and cholesterol-lowering properties and may also promote urinary tract health (Dykes &

Rooney 2007).

Saponins

The term saponin is derived from Saponaria vaccaria (Quillaja saponaria), a plant that

abounds in saponins and was once used as soap. Saponins therefore possess ‘soaplike"

behavior in water, i.e, they produce foam. On hydrolysis, an aglycone is produced, which
is called sapogenin. There are two types of sapogenin: steroidal and triterpenoidal.
Usually, the sugar is attached at C-3 in saponins because in most sapogenins there is a
hydroxyl group at C-3. Quillaja saponaria is known to contain toxic glycosides quillajic

acid and the sapogenin senegin.

Quillajic acid is strenutatory and senegin is toxic.
Senegin is also present in Polygala senega. Saponins are regarded as high molecular
weight compounds wherein a sugar molecule is combined with triterpene or steroid
aglycone. There are two major groups of saponins: steroid saponins and triterpene
saponins. Saponins are soluble in water and insoluble in ether, and like glycosides on
hydrolysis, they give aglycones. Saponins are extremely poisonous, as they cause
hemolysis of blood and are known to cause cattle poisoning, They possess a bitter and
acrid taste besides causing irritation to mucous membranes. They are mostly amorphous
in nature, soluble in alcohol and water, but insoluble in non-polar organic solvents like
benzene and n-hexane. Saponins are also important therapeutically as they are shown to
have hypolipidemic and anticancer activity. Saponins are also necessary for activity of
cardiac glycosides. The two major types of steroidal sapogenin are diosgenin and
hecogenin. Steroidal saponins are used in the commercial production of sex hormones for

clinical use.

Alkaloids

The name alkaloids derives from the “alkaline” and it was used to describe any

nitrogen-containing base (Saxena et al. 2013). These are naturally synthesis by a large

numbers of organisms, including animals, plants, bacteria and fungi. Alkaloids are the
largest group of secondary chemical constituents made largely of ammonia compounds
comprising basically of nitrogen bases synthesized from amino acid building blocks with
various radicals replacing one or more of the hydrogen atoms in the peptide ring, most
containing oxygen. The compounds have basic properties and are alkaline in reaction,

turning red litmus paper blue. Typically, the 1°, 2° or 3° amines contribute to the basi

ry

of the alkaloid. The degree of basicity varies considerably, depending on the structure of
the molecule, and presence and location of the functional groups (Doughari n.d.). The
solutions of alkaloids are intensely bitter. More than 12,000 alkaloids are known to exist
in about 20 % of plant species and only few have been exploited for medicinal purposes.
These compounds are significant for the protecting and survival of plant to ensure their
survival against microorganisms (antibacterial and antifungal activities), insects and
herbivores (feeding deterrens) and also against other plants by means of allelopathically
active chemicals (Saxena et al. 2013). Alkaloids have many pharmacological activities
including antihypertensive effects (many indole alkaloids), antiarrhythmic effect
(quinidine, spareien), antimalarial activity (quinine), andanticancer actions (dimeric
indoles, vincristine, vinblastine). Some alkaloids such as caffeine, nicotine and morphine
have stimulant property and they are used as the analgesic while quinine is used as the

antimalarial drug.


Rice Processing and Effects on Nutritive Value

Rice processing is a combination of several operations to convert paddy rice into well-
milled silky-white rice, which has superior cooking quality attributes. The majority of
consumers prefer well-milled rice with little or no bran remaining on the endosperm.

However,

has also been reported that consumer preferences vary from region to region.
For instance, the Japanese like well-milled sticky rice while Americans prefer semi-
milled long grain or brown rice, whereas people in the Indian sub-continent prefer well-
milled parboiled rice. Rice properties are known to be dependent on the variety of rice,
methods of cultivation, processing and cooking conditions.

Dehulling and milling process removes the outer part of paddy rice (hull and bran) to
make it edible. Dehulling of rough rice to brown rice can be carried out either manually
(hand pounding) or mechanically. The mechanical processing of the rice grain usually
comprises two steps: first, the hull is removed from the grain to obtain brown rice, which
is the least processed edible form of rice. The rice grain is further processed by
additionally removing the bran layer from the endosperm to obtain milled rice. Before
milling, unhusked rice may be parboiled (steamed or boiled after soaking) to soften the
husk. Rice is soaked in warm water (56°C) for 4-5 hours before being steamed under
pressure, dried and milled. The process increases the total and head yield of the rice and
decreases the loss of nutrients during processing. This process enables some of the water-
soluble B vitamins located in the bran to move into the endosperm, along with the oil.

Although, cooking and parboi

ing rice reduces its protein digestibility by 10-15 %, there

is a corresponding increase in the biological value, leading to an unchanged net protein

utilization value. Parboiling treatment induces various physicochemical changes in paddy
rice which play an important role in the subsequent storage, milling, cooking and eating
qualities. Although the parboiling treatment helps in retaining some of the nutrients, a
considerable amount of energy and labor is consumed only to reduce breakage loss
during milling and increased head rice recovery (whole kernels after milling). On the
other hand, the rice milling process involves cleaning, hulling and post-hulling
processing (whitening, polishing and grading), the combination of which will produce
several rice by-products such as husk, rice germ and rice bran. Rice is classified by
degrees of milling which are characterized as paddy rice or rough rice, whole grain
(brown) rice and white rice. Paddy rice is completely unprocessed, indigestible and is not
fit for human consumption as it includes the hard fibrous hull. Whole grain (brown) rice
has the hull removed, leaving the bran layer intact. On the other hand, white rice is the
endosperm of the kernel with the hull, bran and germ removed. An ideal milling process
will yield 20 % husk, 8-12 % bran depending on the milling degree and 68-72 % milled
rice or white rice, depending on the variety (Mohd Esa et al. 2013). The transformation of
paddy rice to white rice gives a good appearance and provides the best quality of grain
for human consumption. Milled rice is the predominant form found in today's market
Commercial milling is done depending on the consumer's preferences and because the
bran contains up to 20 % lipids. making it susceptible to rancidity. Moreover, high

humidity in the atmosphere during milling improves the yield of head rice. Increasing the

moisture content of the grain to 14-16 % by steam vapor prior to milling also improves
the head rice yield and its taste, since 14-16 % is the critical moisture content range for

crack susceptibility of most rice varieties (Juliano 1993).


Losses in nutritive value of rice occur in the fields, especially during harvesting,
storage, transport, processing and by improper drying or milling. The degree of milling
and polishing determines the amount of nutrients removed. Husked rice has high content
of vitamin B while polished rice has little or none. The vitamin B and iron are found
primarily in the germ and bran layers and are therefore removed in the milling process.
The loss in milling is often due to the miuse of machinery which often leads to high
breakage of kernels. Losses in polishing are 29 % of the protein, 79 % of the fat and 67%
of the iron (Abbas et al. 2011). The proteins, fats, vitamins and minerals in rice are
present in greater quantities in the germ and outer layer than in the starchy endosperm.
The removal of the protecting pericarp also facilitates the extraction of the soluble
substances from the aleurone layer during washing immediately before cooking the grain.
Parboiled milled rice showed 18% ash enrichment in comparison with milled rice, and
has higher contents of potassium and phosphorus. Lower contents of manganese, calcium
and zinc were observed in parboiled rice, even though the contents of other nutritionally

important elements were basically similar to milled rice (Rohman et al. 2014).

Rice in the Philippines and Its Popular Varieties

Oryza sativa is grown over a wide spectrum of location and growing conditions in

latitudes from 53°North to 35*South. This dist

ution shows the tremendous diversity in

O. sativa vari

ies and their adaptability to a wide range of climate, soils and moisture
conditions. Varieties differ in morphological and physiological traits, in resistance or

tolerance to diseases and pests and their response to adverse environmental factors

(PCARRD 1983). Despite the numerous cultivars produced by homeland climate and
preferences, rice in the Philippines is also a melting pot of many varieties from abroad
(de Leon 2005). Among the successful cultured varieties were Ramai from Cantho,
Saigon, Vietnam introduced in 1919; Kra Suey from Thailand and Malagkit Songsong, a
glutinous or sticky variety from China, both introduced in 1920s; Peta from Indonesia
and introduced in 1930; Seraup Kechil 36 and Seraup Besar 15, both from Malaysia and
introduced in 1936; and Fortuna from the USA introduced into the country after the
Second World War.

Of the endemic traditional varieties, on the other hand, the more popular names
include Elon-elon which was grown in 1914; Apostol and Milagrosa in 1915; Wagwag in
1936; Buenavista or Kasungsong in 1939; and some products of cross-breeding
developed late 1930s. Among the traditional rice varieties mentioned, Apostol, Azucena,
Binirhen, Delhlinla, Elon-elon, Fortuna, Kasungsong, Macan I, Macaraniag, Magsanaya,
Makapilay Pusa, Milagrosa, Milbuen, Milfor, Milketan, Palawan, Raminad Strain 3,
Seraup Besar 15 and Wagwag were reported to have very good to excellent table
qualities, These traditional rice varieties provide low but dependable yields under
minimal input and management practice. Most were tolerant to variations in water level
and competed reasonably well with weeds. These were also insect and disease resistant
and possessed excellent cooking and eating qualities besides being aromatic.

Based on the survey of the Rice Program of the Department of Agriculture in 2002,
the top 10 most frequently grown varieties by the farmers were PSB Rc82, PSB Rel8,
PSB Rc80, PSB Rc78, PSB Re28, IR64, PSB Rc74, PSB Rc64, PSB Rcl4, and IR60.

The IR64 has remained as the standard variety for grain and eating quality since 1985. It

replaced the well-known variety C4-63G from University of the Philippines College of
Agriculture (UPCA) which was released in 1968. In 2004, Roferos et al. studied the
comparison of grain quality of IR64 with other commercial varieties known until 2002.
The study employed the physico-chemical characteristics and physical attributes of the
grains. The findings suggested that there are many varieties very similar to IR64,
including those that farmers prefer to grow. These include PSB Re78, PSB Rc|8, PSB
Rc80, PSB, Rc54, PSB Rc64, PSB Rc!4 and PSB Rc72H or Mestizo | hybrid.

Nowadays, in order to enhance rice consumption, breeders have tried to develop
various kinds of new rice varieties. Aside from white rice, pigmented rice is also part of
the Filipino meal, particularly in the uplands of the northern part of the country.
Pigmented rice is distinguished by the rice grain having red brown or dark purple color in
its covering. It is considered as enriched rice because of its taste and health benefits due
to the presence of color pigments (Bulatao et al. 2012). It is classified as rice, which
contains pigments in the aleurone layer of rice grains that have been reported to have a
mixture of anthocyanin compounds that belong to the family of flavonoids. Anthocyanin
is the main substance of phenolic compounds found in pigmented rice. The phenolic
compounds have been found as a major active component for antioxidation. These
phytochemicals can act as radical scavenger, proxide decomposer, singlet oxygen
quencher, enzyme inhibitor and metal chelating agents and are used to inhibit the

formation of cell-damaging free radicals in the body.


Rice Flakes (Pinipig) Processing

Pinipig is a type of parboiled rice prepared by soaking, steaming, hammering or
flaking and drying the matured palay. Paddy is soaked in water for 2-3 days to soften the
kernel followed by boiling water for a few minutes and the water is drained off. The
paddy is heated in a shallow earthen vessel or sand in iron pan until the husks break open.
It is pounded by a wooden pestle which flattens the kernel and removes the husk. The
husk is separated by winnowing. Flaked rice is thin, papery and off white. Generally, the
variety of rice used is the waxy or glutinous type. Rice flakes are common in Asian
countries where they were usually eaten and prepared as snack food. It has been claimed
as a good source of protein, fats and carbohydrates. Table 1 shows the nutritional

composition of pinipig (per 100 grams edible portion).


Table 3. Nutritional composition of pinipig (per 100 grams edible portion).

MUTRIENTSRNDTENEROGT AMOUNT per 100 grams EDIBLE

PORTION (EP)

Water (g) 148
Energy (kcal) 340
Protein (g) 43
Fat (g) 1.0
Carbohydrates (g) 785
Crude Fiber (Dietary Fiber in grams) 09
Ash (g) 14
Calcium (mg) 26
Phosphorus (ing) 223
Iron (mg) 21
Retinol (ig) 0

B-carotene (11g) 10
Total Vitamin A (yg) 2

Thiamin (mg) 0.24
Riboflavin (mg) 0.05
Niacin (mg) 44
Ascorbic Acid (mg) 0

‘Source: Food

mposition Table (1997)

In the traditional method of producing rice flakes, the activities of paddy cleaning,
soaking, roasting and flaking in the mortar are followed. The traditional rice flaking
process consists of steeping rough rice in cold or warm water; toasting the steeped grain,
usually hot in sand, about 250 °C to parboil for 40-60 seconds; then flaking with a
wooden mortar and pestle, an edge runner or flaking rollers. In the improved process, the
parboiled rice is surface-dried with a vacuum and then tempered prior to toasting
(Faigmane 2002). The yield of good quality flakes is around 80 %, process loss and

wastage are about 10% and the 10 % balance is bran which is used by cattlefeed

producers. The detailed process commonly used in making rice flakes in most Asian

countries is given in Table 2.

Table 4. Rice flakes production.

PROCESS DESCRIPTION MACHINE/TOOL

Soaking Soak the paddy for 8-12 Big clay pot
hours to increase its
moisture to the desired

level
Heating Heat soaked in paddy using Metallic pot, stove
hot sand as heat transfer
media
Stirring Constantly stir the paddy- Bamboo stick
sand mixture for uniform
heating
Flaking Flaten the treated paddy Food pounder, mortar and
pestle, rice flaking machine
Cleaning Separate the flattened rice __ Winnowing basket
from husk and sand
Drying Sun-dry the rice flakes Mat/floor
Packaging Pack in small plastic bags __ Plastic bags
Sealing Seal the plastic bags to Electric sealer

make then air tight

Souree: ESCAP (2007)

The other method of making pinipig is when the rice is harvested between the milky
and dough stage when the grain is still green. This is called the soft dough stage wherein
the palay is harvested two weeks before or when the flowering head or panicle starts to

bend or when its tip starts to yellow. The grains are roasted, pounded and winnowed

while still hot to remove the hulls. The product pinipig is still green compared to brown
pinipig made from matured palay grain. The pinipig made from immature palay grain is

called “ubas” in some of the rural areas in the Philippines (Hurtada 1995).

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Rice Samples and Rice flakes Processing

Palay grains were harvested from two varieties of pigmented rice namely, Ballatinao
(waxy type) and Malagaya Tapol (non-waxy type) and two varieties of non-pigmented
rice namely, Malagkit Songsong (waxy type) and IR64 (non-waxy type) at the soft dough
and hard dough stages, at 110 and 123 days from seeding, respectively. These varieties of
rice were obtained from the International Rice Research Institute in Los Bafios, Laguna.
The rice samples were processed at one of the producers of rice flakes in Biftan, Laguna

using the following steps (Figure 3).

Cleaning

v

Soaking

(overnight)

Roasting
(250°C for 1 minute.)

passed 3-4 times)

v

Winnowing

Fig. 3. Schematic diagram of the preparation of rice flakes.


Rice Sample Analyses Procedures

The raw rice grain and the rice flakes samples were subjected to chemical analyses,
sensory evaluation and acceptability test as shown in Figure 4. The proximate
composition, mineral content, carbohydrate profile, total dietary fiber, antioxidant
activity and phytochemical component analyses followed the procedures as described in
Association of Official Analytical Chemist (AOAC 1990) and Gofii et al. (1997) for the

In vitro kinetic of starch digestion (Glycemic Index) (Appendix B).

Non-pigmented Pigmented
L L
{ Ll f 1
Malagkit Songsong TR 64 Ballatinao Malagaya Tapol
(waxy) (non-waxy) (waxy) (non-waxy)
Tai-dough | [ard dough al foo Todough Naar] Fase | ae
tage” | [sane ager" || tage | [stage sage ase sage
T J

I I 1

Chemical Analyses Sensory

a {_ Evaluation

C

Proximate Analysis ‘Antioxidant Tek
(oisture, Total Ash, Crude ‘Activity Appoerance
Protein, Crude Fat and Phytochemical rome
Nitrogen Free Extract) | | Components (Total Flavor
Mineral Content (ron, Phenols, Texture
Zinc and Calcium) Anthocyaniin,
Beta-Carotene Content | | Flavonoids. Tannins,
Carbohydrate Profile Saponins and
(Starch. Amylose end Akalowds
Amylopectin:
Total Dietary Fiber
Glycemic Index

Fig. 4. Schematic diagram of sample analysis.


Sensory Evaluation and Acceptability Tests

A panel of 30 mothers (30 to 60 years old) were asked to evaluate the sensory
attributes of rice flakes samples using a Descriptive Hedonic Scaling Method (Appendix
E). The rice flakes prepared from two varieties of pigmented and two varieties of non-
pigmented rice harvested at soft dough and hard dough stages were evaluated for their
sensory characteristics such as color, aroma, flavor, texture, appearance and for their

acceptability. The general acceptability of rice flakes were also evaluated.

‘Computation of Nutritional Value by RENI

The energy, protein, iron, zinc and calcium contents of the rice flakes samples were
computed for their contribution to the Recommended Energy and Nutrient Intake (%

RENI) using the formula:

% RENI = nutrient content of food per 100g x 100
RENI for age

The Recommended Energy and Nutrient Intake (RENI) is the dietary standard
commonly used in the Philippines and it represents the Nutrient Reference Values
(NRV). According to CODEX Alimentarius (2007), for a food to be considered a
“source” of protein and dietary fiber, it should be >10 % of NRV per 100 grams while to

be considered as a “high source” it should be >20 %. On the contrary, for a food to be

considered a “source” for vitamins, minerals and energy, it should be >15 % of NRV per

100 grams and >30 % of NRV per 100 grams to be considered as a “high source”.

Statistical Analysis

The One-way analysis of Variance (ANOVA) was used for the statistical analyses of
values obtained. When values turned out to be significant, Tukey's Test was used to
locate significant differences at 5% level of significance. Results of the sensory
evaluation were subjected to non-parametric One-way analysis of Variance (ANOVA) to
identify the differences among the varieties in terms of color, aroma, general appearance,

texture, flavor and general acceptability.

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Proximate Composition of Rice Grain and Rice flakes Samples

Moisture Content

The moisture content plays a significant role in determining the shelf life. Rice yield is
usually reported as rough rice or paddy at 14 % moisture. During maturity, fresh weight
decreases due to water loss from 58 to 20 % (Smith & Dilday 2003). The results
obtained for proximate composition of different rice varieties harvested at soft and hard
dough stages is presented in Table 5. At soft dough stage, the moisture content of four
rice grain samples was significantly higher when compared to rice flakes while for the
hard dough stage. moisture content of rice grain samples was lower than their rice flakes.
However, Malagkit Songsong variety showed a significant increase (Table 5). This is
because the moisture content decreases as rice grains mature. Aside from this, in making
rice flakes, rice is soaked, roasted and flattened. Soaking the rice grains overnight allows
water diffusion into the grains and allows for conversion of hydrogen bonding among
starch micelles into hydrogen bonding with water, resulting in higher moisture content of
the rice flakes at hard dough stage (Faigmane 2002).

Table 6 further shows that the rice flakes at soft dough stage contained significantly
higher moisture content than hard dough stage, regardless of varieties. This may be

attributed to the higher moisture content of rice grain samples at the soft dough stage and

the soaking process involved in the rice flakes making. On the other hand, rice varieties

have no significant effects on the moisture content of the rice flakes (Table 7).


ayn Bursn (50 o>) dup R2y WIS JOU BFE UUIIOD UI SsOND] PUES ay Busey SUED oy
usiuo>ainisiows 20 wa9x3siseq up 39/3 Se pasoudxo 238 SOnIeA
8eis yop prey — Ht sere WBnop Yos — GS SE-UOW — MAN -SHER = Ae

WEOTNNGS vISOTSTHS nODO=OFT WOOT eOrO= He VFO=OOS 080=898 p100=S01 00morl xeOO=Sy HDO=TSS I
ELO= 866 GPELESUOS SFOFHSL MOOHISI GOCO= CDE @LI=CSE SOFIE 6TV=TSS GPIOTI sOO=9S1 ACO=TT 610=10S ED
Cau) lode, extSeRyy

HI9O=S9OS SIF TVES 26007160 TOO=LGO GGLO=GTT GOD=KLE ANT O=VS STOFOS9 xHOMOr! ZOO=IDT <OO=9Er uOD=ess — HHL

atrO= 916 KOFI sHO0=L60 MOO=COT TORT aitorerr S0O=O0OT SOO=HLT HOOHIST HOOHLSE MCORSEIT emp
Quonmeme
penaudig
USOF SIE ST =69E8 L10=08T slg 0-H aO=KS 9CO=LI ASDORTIT A9OO=SSS OOF HOF oH
seror ict sICO= ETE uTOFOrE s980=5¢¢ WEO=EES QAO=NS mCOOTECT s1DO=ET xEOORSE MHOREFS ED
CW)
SCOR 6G AIFO=EOOS =IOD=OC1 6O=OT —TO=IOE HOHE THOSE sAEO=ESD PIOO=EIT 000-501 woOFus soOFO9 — wHRE
UPTHSELL pOEORSU GONE HCOOFOTL ATT EOL'E HTONSSr ME9OSES —MTORSTOL QMLO=SEL MODTUFT aOO=LOE «oom FOL — ae
(ay SuosBuog wysereyy
pamaudrduox
GH as a as a as a as a as a oS naws
sia

(OSHLVACAHOMEVD — (OH) AIMLTGAYD — (OW) AVETGIID — (OH NTALONA TAN —_« HSV TVIOL () THALSION

“geS02Y 9911 slot pue sa|dures uresB 2914 Jo uontsodusod ayewixodd °S 2I92L


Total Ash

Ash content depends on handling, climate and geographic location of the rice crop
(Garcia et al. 2012). Total ash determines the level of mineral element present in the
food material. As the rice grain samples were processed into rice flakes, the total ash
content decreased significantly for all the rice varieties except for IR64 (Table 5). The
removal of bran layers from the exterior of the grain through mechanical processing and
heating involved in rice flakes making may affect the lowering of ash contents. When
minerals in the organic matter are heated they are converted into organic compounds that
compose the ash. With continuous heating, some of the mineral elements may be partly
loss as volatile compounds, which then contribute to the reduction of ash content (Jacobs
1972). Moreover, losses of minerals occurs not so much through chemical reaction but
more on physical removal such as trimming, peeling and coring (Hurtada 1995).

There are no significant changes observed at the dough stages for all the varieties in
terms of the total ash content except for Malagaya Tapol, which decreased significantly
from 1.49 to 1.08 % (Table 6). Table 7 shows that there are no significant differences in

terms of varieties on the total ash content of rice flakes.


p
1 Bnop yos aS Seen-toU = AN “Sew —

oy

sSSOFIIES BOTS GQOO=O6FT @DO=SFI WOCO=HTT TO=OLT s6FO=ODS WSOTSPS ADO=S01 HDO=GrI MOORE <OOFKEE on

sede

xI90=6908 ISTH IES s600=K60 HOO=LS0 6TOHLST SCORE LO=NE aTOFO5D TOOL COOFIDT 6OO=9EF 0068S — oeanesty

pomoudig

MLSO=(S18 GAST=O0ES WLLO=ORL MOO=SLT MIEOR HET aGLO=SEZ WLO=GOS COTO SOO=ITE SOOFEIT S60=89¢ OTHE CNHs

wi

SEO ORG pIFOF EOE s1O0=0Ft 400 SOFIE ALOTHPY HORSE MORES MOOFELE OOFSDT O=LLS wLOOFOLg — SeosEEES

cl a cH cd oH e oH. a cH a cH GS hanes
CO SILVACAHOGUVD Ge) NIM AGAUD _ CN LVAGGIUD _ CO NITION TG _ OHS THIOL (6) AUALSTONN

-4q80B01S Bop prey pue yBnop Yos amp ve sayeY 2011 Jo uoN|sodwos ayewKorY “9 2198)



Crude Protein

The protein content of rice varies and often subjected to changes according to the
variety grown, growing conditions, soil fertility and water stress. Generally, rice is a poor

source of protein, but it is super

1 because it contains an essential amino acid, lysine (the
first limiting amino acid) which is important for child's growth (Thongbam et al. 2012).

The crude protein content decreased significantly from rice grain samples to rice flakes

However, only Malagkit Songsong and Ballatinao at soft dough stage and IR64 varieties
showed significant values (Table 5). Proteins, fats, vitamins and minerals are present in
greater quantities in the germ and outer layer than in the starchy endosperm. Specifically,
rice bran proteins have richer albumin than endosperm proteins and are found as distinct
protein bodies containing globoids in the aleurone layer and the germ. Heat treatment
applied in rice flakes making, such as toasting, destroys the amino acids found in the
aleurone layer of rice grains. Lysine is very sensitive to thermal degradation through
reaction of its epsilon-amino group through formation of lysinoalanine or Maillard
reaction with reducing sugars. Juliano (1985) reported that stack burning or yellowing,
popping, extrusion cooking and puffing significantly reduced the lysine content of
protein.

Table 6 further reveals that as the rice grain matures, i.e., soft to hard dough stage, no
significant changes are observed on the crude protein content of rice flakes except for
Ballatinao variety, which significantly increased from 6.90 to 8.56 %. Nonetheless, no
significant differences are observed among the varieties in the crude protein content

(Table 7).


Soyo,

nen isoo>)d

MN AEN Me

20L'0 ¥ C1'E8 {OOF ar 3170 F861 SIOF HER wWlFSTl 00 F 18E (A\N) lode] exeaeyey)

ATL FSU TE 90'0 F060 STO F EOE TO FELL ILOFIST 800 F 1S (Ay) oeuneyeg

pououBig

IT1F8L7S MOF SLT «= SSOFORT «= BTOFBEL =—SO0FTT'I 0096 _ (MN) 993

BEOFTLOL —«SUOFSTI «= BUOFECE EOF ORL 000 F ITT (BOOFETI ——(M) RUostu0s uyBereW

powiauStd-woy

(%) (%) (%) veg apna (%) (USVI, (%) 4MISTOW alawvs

sorespiyoqrey —soqig apna (%) 7PM wuayorgapniy —_(% a) 2amist “

“enSN

UA WaLaJIP Woy Sayey 2911 Jo UON|SodWoD a}eWIIXOLd “Z 2QEL


Crude Fat

The fat content of rice is mainly in the bran fraction, specifically as lipid bodies or
spherosomes in the aleurone layer and bran (Juliano 1993). Rice fats are commonly
denoted as oil or rice bran oil due to their liquid consistency at room temperature mainly
caused by the high proportion of unsaturated fatty acids at approximately 80 %. Table 5
further shows that there are no significant changes observed for all varieties of rice grain
samples when processed into rice flakes, except for Malagaya Tapol at soft dough stage.
Likewise, crude fat content decreased as heat treatment is applied. The high temperature
of toasting during processing of rice flakes may destroy most of the aleurone layer and
the bran of the rice grains.

Crude fat content shows no significant changes on the dough stages of rice flakes
(Table 6). Moreover, it is observed that all waxy varieties in the study revealed a higher
fat content compared to the non-waxy varieties (Table 7). Malagkit Songsong and
Ballatinao, both a waxy variety, had the highest fat content at 3.33 % and 3.03 %
respectively. Thongbam et al, (2012) reported that indica type of rice (high amylose) has

low lipid content compared to japonica type (low amylose).

Crude Fiber

Crude fiber is the residue of plant materials remaining after solvent extraction

followed by digestion with acid and alkali. This component has little food value but

provide the bulk necessary for proper peristaltic action in the intestinal tract. The

determination of crude fiber is useful in evaluation the efficiency of milling and
separating bran from the starchy endosperm (Fernando 2013). As the rice grain samples
were processed into rice flakes, the crude fiber content decreased significantly for
Malagkit Songsong and IR64 at the hard dough stage and Ballatinao and Malagaya Tapol
at the soft dough stage (Table 5). According to FAO (1998), an increased temperature
leads to a breakage of weak bonds between polysaccharide chains and glycosidic linkages

in the dietary fiber polysaccharides. Furthermore, depolymerization of the fiber results in

solubilization of the fiber. Other factors that may affect the dietary fiber content are
leakage into the processing water and formation of Maillard reaction products, thus
adding to lignin content and formation of resistant starch fractions.

On the contrary, no significant changes were shown at the dough stages for all the
varieties (Table 6). IR64 variety had the highest crude fiber content at 1.78 % followed
by Malagaya Tapol at 1.48 % while the lowest crude fiber content was observed in

Malagkit Songsong and Ballatinao at 1.25 and 0.90 %. respectively (Table 7).

Nitrogen Free Extract

Rice is the main source of carbohydrates for more than one third of the people in the
world. Carbohydrate content is high in all varieties (>70%) and hence can thus be
considered a good source of carbohydrate. As illustrated in Tables 5, 6 and 7,
carbohydrate content exhibited a significant increase for Ballatinao and Malagaya Tapol
at the soft dough stage and IR64 varieties when rice grain samples were processed into

tice flakes (Table 5). On the other hand, no significant changes were observed at the

dough stages except for Ballatinao which decreased significantly from 83.62 to 80.83 %
as the grains matured (Table 6). Similarly, no significant differences were shown among
the varieties. Malagaya Tapol had the highest at 83.13 % while Malagkit Songsong had

the lowest at 79.72 % (Table 7).


Mineral Contents of Rice and Rice Flakes

Vitamins and minerals are chiefly located in the bran of the rice grain. Processing
apparently affected the mineral contents of the rice flakes. Values for iron, zinc and
calcium content for all rice grain samples and rice flakes are presented in Tables 8, 9 and
10. Generally, a decrease in the iron and zinc contents were exhibited by all the rice
grain samples when processed into rice flakes (Table 8). This reduction in the iron and
zine contents may be attributed to leaching of iron and zinc ions to the soaking medium
during the soaking process. Correspondingly, mechanical processing such as rolling and
flattening of rice flakes allow the breaking of pericarp on the outside of the grain which
then further removes the rice bran leading to lower iron and zinc contents. Ziarati and
Azizi (2013) reported that the removal of husk layer during dehusking and polishing
substantially reduces the mineral nutrient value of rice grain. Manganese and copper are
mainly located in the hull while iron and zinc are located in the bran. Ziarati and Azizi
(2013) then revealed that polishing reduces the mineral nutrient value of rice grains as
only 2 % of the total manganese, 6 % of the total iron and zinc and 1 % of copper
remained in polished rice. Also, the high temperature during roasting causes loss of
volatile compounds contributing to the content reduction for most of the minerals.

Except for Malagkit Songsong and Ballatinao varieties at soft dough stage, all of the
samples exhibited no significant changes on the calcium content when rice grain samples

were processed into rice flakes (Table 8). The significant decrease in the calcium content

of rice flakes for the Malagkit Songsong and Ballatinao varieties implies the

susceptibility of calcium into leaching, especially when subjected to high temperature.

Table 8. Mineral contents of rice grain samples and their rice flakes**.


IRON ZINC CALCIUM
SAMPLE* (mg/100g) (mmg/100g) (mmg/100g)

SD HD SD HD SD HD
‘Non-pigmented
Malagkit
Songsong (W)
Grain 1174002 1.194008 1534007 —1.6640.08 — 12.3942.33" 10.384 2.09"
Flakes 0612001 0612003 0822001 081002 7.374058 — 804+ 1.01"
IR64 (NW)
Grain 08420014 08500 1.192001 1310.02 7.704233 9380.58"
Flakes 0470.02 0.49005" 0,780.03" 0.780.038" 6.7040.58" 9.05 + 0.00"
Pigmented
Ballatinao (W)
Grain 1430.0 1.392002 1.762008" 1.760.058! 13.40 £2.10" 9.72-20.58"
Flakes 08540011 0,890.05" 0.94003 0.91 £0.05 —8.38£0.58 —9.05 + 0.00"
Malagaya Tapol
(Nw)
Grain 1394 00% 1332008 1.6420.02% —1.3840.04 9.05 40.00" 9.72.2 0.58"
Flakes 0700.02 0.77003 0870.01 0.86 +0.02 7.714058 8.044 0.00"

TW waxy, NW non-wany, SD soft dough stage. 11D —hard dough sage

‘Means having the same leters within column are not signicantly: different a p (<0 05) using Tukey

In terms of dough stages, no significant changes were observed for the iron, zinc and

calcium contents of rice flakes for all rice varieties, except for the iron content of

Malagaya Tapol which increased significantly from 0.70 to 0.77 mg/100g as the rice

grains matured (Table 9).


Table 9. Mineral contents of rice flakes at the soft dough and hard dough stages**.

IRON ZINC CALCIUM
SAMPLE* (mg/100g) (mg/100g) (mmg/100g)

sD HD sD HD sD HD

‘Non-pigmented

Latest 0.61 £0.03 0610.01 0.822001" 0.812002" 7.37058" 7,711.54”
‘Songsong (W)
IR64(NW) 0.47 40.02 0.4940.05* 0.784003 0.78 +0.05¢ —6.7020.58" 8044 1.01"
Pigmented

Ballatinao(W) 0.85 0.01 0.89+0.0S* 0.94£0.0 0.91 0.05 8,380.58" 9.05 0.00"

Malagaya 0.70 + 0.02" 86 +002 7,71 £0.58 8.04 +0,00"

There are significant differences shown on the iron content of rice flakes among

varieties (Table 10). Ballatinao, a pigmented variety, had the highest iron content at 0.87
mg/100g followed by Malagaya Tapol and Malagkit Songsong at 0.74 mg/100g and 0.61
mg/100g. IR64, a non-pigmented variety, had the lowest at 0.48 mg/100g. Likewise,
significant differences were observed within pigmented varieties on the zinc content of
rice flakes. However, no significant differences were observed within the non-pigmented
varieties. The highly pigmented Ballatinao variety had the highest zinc content at 0.93
mg/100g followed by Malagaya Tapol at 0.87 mg/100g. For the non-pigmented varieties,

Malagkit Songsong had 0.82 mg/100g while IR 64 had the lowest at 0.78 mg/100g.


Table 10. Mineral contents of rice flakes from different varieties**.

: IRON ZINC CALCIUM
SOMELE (mg/100g) (mg/100g) (mg/100g)
Malagkit Songsong (W) 0.61 + 0.02° 0.82 + 0.02° 7.54 + 1.06"
IR64 (NW) 0.48 + 0.04% 0.78 + 0.04° 7.37 £0.80"
Pigmented
Ballatinao (W) 0.87 + 0.03" 0.93 + 0.047 8.72 £0.29"
Malagaya Tapol (NW) 0.74 + 0.03" 0.87 + 0.02° 7.88 £0.29"
TW waxy, NW=nonnany

** Means having the same letters thin column are not significantly dierent at p (<0 05) using Tukey

Beta-carotene

Beta-carotene is the most effective vitamin A precursor of all carotenoids and can play
an important role in diets lacking animal products. Beta-carotene contents for all rice
grain samples and rice flakes at soft dough and hard dough stages were presented in
Tables 11, 12 and 13. Table 11 showed no significant changes in the beta-carotene
content when rice grain samples were processed into rice flakes except for Malagaya
Tapol at the hard dough stage which decreased significantly from 0.48 mg/100g to 0.41
mg/100g. Similarly, no significant changes were shown on the dough stages among the

varieties except for IR 64 (Table 12).


Table 11. Beta-carotene content of rice grain samples and their rice flakes**

BETA-CAROTENE

SAMPLE* (mg/100g)
sD HD

Non-pigmented
Malagkit Songsong (W)

Grain 0.33 £0.01 0.31 + 0.00%

Flakes 0.31 + 0.02° 0.27 + 0.00
IR 64 (NW)

Grain 0.32 + 0.02° 0.27+0.01"

Flakes 0.29 + 0.00° 0.26 + 0.02%
Pigmented
Ballatinao (W)

Grain 0.65 + 0.03° 0.62 + 0.08"

Flakes 0.61 + 0.03" 0.58 + 0.01"
Malagaya Tapol (NW)

Grain 0.46 £0.01" 0.48+0.01°

Flakes 0.43 £0.01" 0.41 0.01"
TW = waxy, NW non-wany, SD soll dough stage, HD Tard dough sage

+» Means having the same letters within column ate not sigaticantly dierent at p (<0 05) Tukey

Table 12. Beta-carotene content of rice flakes at the soft dough and hard dough stages**

BETA-CAROTENE

SAMPLE* (mg/100g)
sD HD

‘Non-pigmented

Malagkit Songsong (W) 0.31 +£0.02 0.27 + 0.00"
R64 (NW) 0.29 + 0.00° 0.26 + 0.02"
Pigmented

Ballatinao (W) 0.61 + 0.03" 0.58 0.01"
Malagaya Tapol (NW) 0.43 + 0.01" 0.41 + 0.01%

TW= waxy, NW non-wagy, SD soll dough stage, 1D — hard dough stage
++ Means having the same letters within row ae not siginicanty diferent at p (<0 05) using Tukey


On the other hand, no significant differences were observed within the non-pigmented
varieties while significant differences were observed within the pigmented varieties
(Table 13). Ballatinao contained the highest beta-carotene content at 0.60 mg/100g.
followed by Malagaya Tapol at 0.42 mg/100g, Malagkit Songsong at 0.29 mg/100g while
IR64 at 0,28 mg/100g. Some traces of provitamin A may be present in the bran fraction
of rice and higher levels of beta-carotene were found only in pigmented rice varieties
Similarly, Lamberts and Delcour (2008) found that in screening of colored rice varieties,
ie, black/purple. and non-colored rice varieties for beta-carotene, indicated that
black/purple cultivars had higher beta-carotene levels at 0.08 g/g than the non-colored

rice cultivars at 0.01 wg/g.

Table 13. Beta-carotene content of rice flakes from different varieties**.

SAMPLE* BETA-CAROTENE

(me/100g)
‘Non-pigmented
Malagkit Songsong (W) 0.29 + 0.01°
IR64 (NW) 0.28 + 0.01°
Pigmented
Ballatinao (W) 0.60 + 0.02"
Malagaya Tapol (NW) 0.42 £0.01"

= waxy, NW = non-wany
+ Means having the same letters with column are not signicantly different at p (<0.05) Tukey


Carbohydrates Profile of Rice and

ice Flakes

Starch properties are an important factor in determining the grain quality. Starch can
differ widely in its composition: amylose consists of linearly linked glucose molecules
and amylopectin which is composed of glucose molecules with branched links. All rice

grain samples decreased when processed into rice flakes. However, among the varieties,

only Ballatinao showed the significant decrease (Table 14). Gelatinization or any other

treatment that destroys the granular structure of starch increases the susceptibility of
starch to enzyme action (Sailaja 1992). If starch is subjected to dry heat such as toasting,
it breaks down to form dextrins, partially hydrolyzed starches that are prepared by dry
roasting starch. Application of heat in this process reduces the larger starch molecules
into smaller dextrin molecules corresponding to increase in reducing sugar. Sailaja (1992)
reported a five-fold increase in reducing sugar (maltose) content consistent with starch
hydrolysis was observed after popping and flaking of sorghum, indicating that some
degradation of starch had occurred in these processes.

The amylose content is the most important criterion of grain quality and is an indicator
of amylose/amylopectin ratio. Correspondingly. the amylose content of rice grain
samples decreased significantly when processed into rice flakes, except for Malagkit
‘Songsong and Ballatinao varieties at soft dough stage (Table 14). During cooking of the

starch granule, the amylose leaches out into the cooking water and the amylopectin

remains ide the gelatinized starch (Juliano 1993), Starch when cooked and cooled
involves rearrangement of amylose and amylopectin chains or the so-called

retrogradation which leads to increase in crystalline nature (B-type) of starch granules

and decrease in starch digestibility (Deepa et al. 2010). Retrogradation of amylose is a
more rapid process, occurring immediately, while cooling, but amylopectin requires

longer time, hence storage conditions are an important factor affecting this process.

Table 14. Carbohydrate profile of rice grain samples and their rice flakes**.

STARCH AMYLOSE
" ° AMYLOPECTIN (%)
SAMPLE* Ch) ()
sD HD sD HD sp HD

‘Non-pigmented
Malagkit
Songsong (W)
Grain 86.972 1046 85.15 £448 8OBEOST™ — 8.522009 78.IEASH — 76,6344 54
Flakes 815241061 — 70.61 £1.05* 4.224086 5,390.29 77.302 11.17 65.22 1.28"
IR64 (NW)
Grain 89092481 8545.43.28" 23.926.10" 22374071 65.1713 63.0943.52"

BEABES9IT — 76.364 16.59 15.10 40.78 15.764 161 73384637 60.61 + 18.03"
Ballatinao (W)
Grain 787921549" 855444546 B68 E0.6IX —BAGLO.IS TOILE 1.8 — 76,994 1.68"
Flakes 62.73£3.96" 59.704 16.59 1.904058 2562041" 60.82 44.50° 57.142 15.91%
Malagaya Tapol (NW)
Grain 82.124 740% —76.55412.29 24,334.10" 21.994039 57.79.4795" 62.562 4.18"
Flakes T1S249.1 65.14.67" 13.6347.98 17.61 £0.76" 57.884 10.03" 47.55 +5.29"

TW waxy, NW non-navy, SD son dough s
‘Waxy (1-2% amslose), very low (2.9% amslose, low (10-20% aims lose).

eID — hard dough sage

*+* Means having the same Tetirs suthin column are not significantly different a p(=0 05) Tukey

In terms of dough stages, no

intermediate (20-25% amylose, hgh (25-30% ammlose)

ignificant changes were observed for starch and

amylopectin contents of the rice flakes (Table 15). Likewise, no significant changes were

shown for amylose content, except for Malagaya Tapol which significantly increased

from 13.63 to 17.61 % as the rice grains matured. The increased amylose percentages

were observed for vari

us plant species as a function of the age of the tissue. BeMiller
and Whistler (2009) stated that percentage of amylose increased from 23 to 27% in IRB

cultivar, 4 to 39 days post-pollination to maturity,

Table 15. Carbohydrate profile of rice flakes at the soft dough and hard dough stages**.

STARCH AMYLOSE AMYLOPECTIN (%)

SAMPLE* (%) (%)

sD HD SD HD sD HD
‘Non-pigmented
beer 81.524 10.6 70.61£1.05"  4222086% 5.390.298" 7730117 65.224 1.28"
IR64 (NW) BEAR+5.9I? — 76,364 16.59" 15.10 £0.78 15.76 1.61% —73.3846.37° 60.61 + 18.03"
Pigmented
(Wy? 2.734396 59.702 1659 1992058" — 2560.41 GORD=ASO 57.142 159°
Malaga, n1s2e910® 65152467* 13634798 17612078 s7aRe 100% 47552529

TW= waxy, NW=non-wany, SD so” dough stage, HD— hard dough stage
‘Waxy (1-2¥% amylose). very low (2-99 amylose, low (10-20% amylose), snermedtate (20-25% amylose) high (25-30% amylose)
+ Means having the same letters within cox ate not signaiantly different at p (<0 05) Tukey

Furthermore, Table 16 reveals that Malagkit Songsong and Ballatinao, both waxy
type, had lower amylose content at 4.81 and 2.23 % than the non-waxy type varieties,
IR64 and Malagaya Tapol at 15.43 and 15.62 %. Nevertheless, no significant differences

were obtained in terms of starch and amylopectin contents for all the varieties.


Table 16. Carbohydrate profile of rice flakes from different varieties**.

. STARCH AMYLOSE — AMYLOPECTIN
SAMPLE: %~ % (%)

‘Non-pigmented

Malagkit Songsong(W) 76.07 + 5.83° 4.81 £0.58" 71.26 + 6.23"

IR 64 (NW) 82.42 £11.25" 15.43 + 1.20° 67.00 + 12.2"

Pigmented

Ballatinao (W) 61.22 # 10.28° 2.23 £0.48" 58.99 + 6.07"

Malagaya Tapol (NW) 68.34 + 6.89" 15.62 4.37° 52.72 + 7.66"

= waxy. NW non-waxy, SD— soft dough stage, HD—Tard dough sage
‘Waxy (1-2% amylose). very low (2-9% amylose) low (10-20% amylose, intermediate (20-25% amylose), high (25-30% amylose)
Means having the same leters wathun column are no significantly different at p (<0 05) using Tukey

Total Dietary Fiber

Accumulating ¢

‘nces show that the increased intake of dietary fiber can have
beneficial effects in humans. Some claimed benefits of high fiber diet are prevention and
alleviation of maladies such as cardiovascular diseases, diabetes, diverticulosis and colon
cancer (Azizah and Zainon 2007). Results show that there were no significant changes
obtained at the dough stages of pigmented varieties in the total dietary fiber content of
rice flakes (Table 17). However, for the non-pigmented varieties, Malagkit Songsong and
IR64 rice flakes increased significantly from 1.01 to 1.20 % and 1.14 to 1.17 % as the

rice grains matured.


Table 17. Total dietary fiber content of rice flakes at the soft dough and hard dough
stages**.

TOTAL DIETARY FIBER

SAMPLE* (%)
sD HD

‘Non-pigmented

Malagkit Songsong (W) 1.01 + 0.00% 1.20 + 0.02°
IR64 (NW) 1.14 £0.01 1,170.01
Pigmented

Ballatinao (W) 1.03 + 0.01" 1.06 + 0.02°
Malagaya Tapol (NW) 1.04 + 0.01% 1.06 +0.02°

TW waxy, NW—ron-waxy, SD ~ soll dough stage, 1D —Pard dough stage
+ Means having the same leters within row are not sigicanly different at p (<0 05) using Tukey

Among all the rice varieties, non-pigmented varieties, Malagkit Songsong and IR64
had relatively higher dietary fiber contents at 1.11 and 1.16 % respectively, in contrast to
pigmented varieties, Ballatinao and Malagaya Tapol both had 1.05 % (Table 18). Rice
exhibits the lowest dietary fiber content among cereals (Juliano, 1993). Between white
(endosperm) and pigmented rice, the latter contains lower amount of dietary fiber (FNRI

1997).

n

Table 18. Total dietary fiber content of rice flakes from different varieties**.

SAMPLE* TOTAL DIETARY FIBER

(%)
Non-pigmented varieties
Malagkit Songsong (W) 1110.01
IR64 (NW) 1.16 £0017
Pigmented varieties
Ballatinao (W) 1.05 + 0.02"
Malagaya Tapol (NW) 1,05 + 0.02"

TW waxy, NW—non-waxy, SD soll dough stage, HD —hard dough stage
"Means having the same leters within column are not signficantly dierent at p (<0 05) Tukey

Glycemic Index

Nowadays, people are aware of the alterations in the blood glucose levels or the
glycemic index after consuming carbohydrate-rich food. Thus, consumption of whole
grain diet has received considerable attention due to its health benefits in chronic diseases
such as cardiovascular disease, type 2 diabetes, cancer and gastrointestinal disorder. Rice
is the most important cereal crop that can easily be digested, producing high glycemic
index and low colonic fermentation. /n vitro method for measuring the rate of hydrolysis,
of starch has been suggested as an inexpensive and less time consuming method
compared to measuring Jn vivo starch hydrolysis (Deepa et al. 2010). Jn vitro rates of
hydrolysis have been reported to be closely correlated in rice postprandial glucose and
insulin responses,

White bread was used as the reference food in this study, showing a digestion value of

74.6 % at 180 minutes (Figure 5). This value resembles that reported by Gofii et al.

(1997) with 76.1% digestion value at 180 minutes. Nonetheless, differences in the
digestion value could be explained, according to Gofii et al. (1997), by the different
methodologies used such as the inclusion of pepsin in the hydrolysis and the use of an
unrestricted system. Hydrolysis curve of rice flakes from each rice variety and dough
stages are presented in Figure 5. In vitro starch digestion in the waxy varieties is higher
than the non-waxy varieties, regardless of dough stages. The starch hydrolyzed for the
first 30 minutes were higher in Malagkit Songsong and Ballatinao at 66 % as compared
to IR64 and Malagaya Tapol at 61 and 59 %, respectively. Similarly, the starch
hydrolyzed was 68 % in 180 minutes for Malagkit Songsong and Ballatinao, and 61 % in
180 minutes for IR64 and Malagaya Tapol varieties. All varieties exhibited a plateau at

approximately 60 minutes of hydrolysis.







Total Starch Hydrolysis (%)



> Malagkit songsong (50)
2 1R65 (50)
= Balatinao (50)
—— Malagaya Topo! (50)
——Malagkit Songsong (HO)
IRs (HO)
Ballatinao (HD)
Malagaya Tapol HO)

White Bread

0 30 60 90 120 150 180

Time (min)

Fig. 5. Starch hydrolysis curves for rice flakes from different varieties
harvested at soft dough and hard dough stages (0-120 min).


Table 19 further reveals that a higher rate of starch hydrolysis rate at the hard dough

stage was obtained than at the soft dough stage for all the varieties. Equilibrium

concentration (Coo), which demonstrates the extent of starch hydrolysis when curve

reaches a plateau, exhibited a range between 62.05 and 79.41 %. The waxy varieties had

relatively higher equilibrium concentration (Coo) than the non-waxy varieties. Malagkit

Songsong had an equilibrium concentration at 70.41 and 71.29 % at soft dough and hard

dough stages and Ballatinao at 69.86 and 72.87 %, respectively. IR64 had 63.97 and
65.88 % equilibrium concentration at soft dough and hard dough stages while Malagaya
Tapol had 62.05 and 66.58 %. Kinetic constant (k), which is another hydrolysis
parameter, showed the same value for all the varieties at 0.03.

Differences in starch digestibility have been attributed to various factors including
amylose/amylopectin ratio. The rice flakes in the study made from all rice varieties have
amylose content ranging from 2.23 to 15.62 %, which were classified as very low to low
amylose. The amylose content of the rice flakes influences the glycemic index (Gl) value
where rice flakes that are low in amylose had higher Gl value. Higher rate of digestion
occurs after consuming low amylose rice flakes and may lead to inability of amylopectin
molecules to form complexes with compounds such as fatty acids, thus increasing
accessibility for a-amylase to the molecules and resulting in easy and quick digestibility
Geevetha et al. 2014).

According to Jenkins et al. (2002), foods with Gl of < 55, 56-59 and > 70 are
classified as low, intermediate and high Gl, respectively. Table 19 shows that white bread
as the reference sample has an estimated Gl of 95.67, which is classified as high Gl. As
for all the rice flakes, their estimated Gl ranged from 82.92 to 90.87, which were also

classified as high GI.


(55-0) nor 165-95) 21Epa

U3tH PET OR 27678 (AWN) lode eAeBepeW
uStH 91806 25988 (am) oeunejeg,
sanauiea paquauldig,
StH PILss ap ee°p8 (MN) PUI
U3IH 29 LP'68 29 S0'68 (ay) BuosBu0g wydele
sanaisen payuauiaid-uon,
qu dH as as
alawvs
WONLIYISSELD PUE TDA
“(001 =19) peasq auym 01 paredwoo se sajdures ay Jo uonesyyisse}> (1D) Xapu W945 “OZ a1geL
So Busn (50,0214 ve wosayrp 2 Suny S094 oe
gs Nenu MAN ANE
PET'9R 27678 Peers 2082 100 2385°99 Psoz9o PsLz Press (MN) Ode | eXeserey
41806 95988 = GHI'ES = hIGB. «EOD ALRTL««498GD =a 1099 (ay) ovuneyreg
j9UeA porUoUl
Pless PEEKS Poles PRT 1S 00 2 88°s9 PP LOED P8079 2P E709 (MN) pou
29 Lr Os 29 S068. 29 69°06 24 L868 00 rare qiroL ger Lo 2g $599 (MW) Buosduog wysereW
‘salalsen paquets
PL9'S6 P E6101 £00 Pires eoe'se eosg
dH as dH as dH as dH as
1H ™ x OH «FI TdWVS

*4xSa8e1s YBnop prey pue YSnop yos ayy 1e saxeY 9911 Jo (1D) Xapul

129415 pareusnsy pur (IH)

xepu] SISKOIpAH (4) 1UEISUOD onAULy| (cop) UONENUSSUO wNLIquINbg *(0644) IU OG Te SISKIOIpAY YOIEIS [BIOL “61 >IGEL


60 Glycemic Index

&
FE
Fe 50

wAmylose

30 Dietary Fiber

Sample

Fig. 6. Glycemic index, amylose content and total dietary fiber of rice flakes at soft
dough (SD) and hard dough (HD) stages.

Apart from the amylose content, high dietary fiber was believed to reduce the blood
glucose response, thus lowering the GI value of a food. The comparison between the GI,
amylose content and total dietary fiber obtained for all the varieties are presented in
Figure 6. All varieties exhibiting lower dietary fiber content ranging from 1.01 to 1.20%
tend to have higher GI. Dietary fiber is the undigested and unabsorbed carbohydrates in
the diet that may be fermented in the large intestines. Starchy foods with a high amylose
and high dietary fiber content have been shown to exhibit a slow rate of digestibility.
Dietary fiber traps nutrients, delaying transit through the gastrointestinal tract which leads

to slower glucose absorption. Moreover, the beneficial effects of dietary fiber in rice

flakes are nullified when rice grains are subjected to mechanical processing such as
pounding or flattening. Fiber contents were mostly located in the bran layer and these
processes facilitate the removal of bran layer in the rice grains. In the study conducted by
Deepa et al. (2010) showed that the whole grain flours are hydrolyzed at the same rate as

polished grain flour.

Antioxidant Activity and Phytochemical Components of Rice and Rice Flakes

Phytochemicals are non-nutritive plant compounds that play a protective or disease
preventive role in the body of humans. These compounds are not required by the human
body for sustaining life but are necessary for a healthy body (Siddiq 2012).
Phytochemical compounds are naturally occurring compounds that are responsible for the
color, flavor and odor of plant foods (Webb 2013).

The antioxidant activity and phytochemical component of all rice varieties at soft
dough and hard dough stages were studied. The concept of the total antioxidant capacity.
which describes the ability to differentiate food antioxidants in scavenging preformed
free radicals, has been suggested as a tool for investigating the health effects of
antioxidant-rich foods (Sompong et al. 2011). The total antioxidant capacity was
expressed as % lipid peroxidation wherein the lower the % lipid peroxidation, the higher
its antioxidant activity. Generally, higher antioxidant activity is exhibited by pigmented

varieties compared to non-pigmented varieties.


Table 21 shows that no significant differences on the antioxidant activity was
observed when rice grain samples were processed into rice flakes except for IR64 and
Ballatinao varieties at soft dough stage. The antioxidant activity was greatly reduced
when processed into rice flakes at 85.46 % to 77.22 % for IR 64 and 42.75 % to 33.18 %
for Ballatinao variety. This implies that heating and mechanical processing during rice

flakes making destroys antioxidant present in the grain, particularly in the bran layer.

Table 21. Antioxidant activity of rice grain samples and their rice flakes**.

ANTIOXIDANT ACTIVITY
SAMPLE* (% LP)!
sD HD
‘Non-pigmented
Malagkit Songsong (W)
Grain 85.22 40.29" 85.1040.41°
Flakes 84.11 £0.50" 84.02 40.19"
IR 64 (NW)
Grain 85.46 + 0.58° 84.53 + 0.48°
Flakes 77.224 0.08" 82.25 + 1.04?
Pigmented
Ballatinao (W)
Grain 42.75 # 2.22° 42.57 £4.86"
Flakes 33.18 & 2.28° 37.92 + 4.08"
Malagaya Tapol (NW)
Grain 40.95 + 3.63% 40.92 2.15"
Flakes 37.56 + 1.86% 40.62 4 1.17"
‘Fine higher he Seip peroxdaon (UP) the Tower the antodatwe acti
#W= waxy NW nontay, SD ~ soft dough stage, HD ~ hard dough stage
‘+ Means having ah same leters with como are not siniany deen tp (<0 05) using Tukey

The pigmented varieties, Ballatinao and Malagaya Tapol exhibited a higher

antioxidant activity at 35.55 and 39 % lipid peroxidation while Malagkit Songsong and

IR64 had lower antioxidant activity at 84.07 and 79.74 % lipid peroxidation, respectively
(Table 22). This may be attributed to the anthocyanidin pigments present in pigmented
rice varieties. Ballatinao and Malagaya Tapol both exhibited higher anthocyanidin
content at 1.27 and 1.25 mg/100g than Malagkit Songsong and IR64. It could be said that
the darker the pigmentation, the higher is the antioxidant activity. Moongngarm et al
(2012) reported that the total antioxidant capacity of rice germ of black rice was highest,
followed by that of rice germ from red rice; the lowest total antioxidant activity was

found in all fractions from white rice.

Table 22. Antioxidant activity of rice flakes from different varieties**.

ANTIOXIDANT ACTIVITY

SAMPLE: (Co LPY
‘Non-pigmented
Malagkit Songsong (W) 84.074 0.35"
IR64 (NW) 79.74 + 0.55*
Pigmented
Ballatinao (W) 35.55 + 3.18°
Malagaya Tapol (NW) 39.00 + 1.52°

Tipe peroudation (LP)
3D ~ soft dough stage, HD ~hard dough stage
ters wath column are not significantly different at p (<0 05) using Tukey

The total phenolic content of rice grain samples decreased significantly when
processed into rice flakes for pigmented varieties, while no significant changes at all was
observed for the non-pigmented varieties (Table 24), Ballatinao significantly decrease at

the soft dough stage by 1.03 to 0.91 % while at the hard dough stage by 1.03 to 0.90 %.

On the other hand, Malagaya Tapol at the soft dough stage decreased significantly by
1.00 to 0.89 % and by 1.01 to 0.88 % decreased at the hard dough stage. For the
anthocyanidin content, no significant changes were obtained when rice grain samples
were processed into rice flakes for all varieties. Flavonoids content for Ballatinao
decreased significantly at the soft dough stage by 1.43 to 1.01 % and by 1.45 to 1.09 % at
the hard dough stage. Malagaya Tapol showed significant decrease at soft dough stage by
1.53 to 0.83 % and by 1.45 to 1.28 % at the hard dough satge. Tannins content of rice
grain samples and rice flakes showed no significant changes at the soft dough stage
However, tannin contents decreased significantly at the hard dough stage for all rice
varieties. The saponins contents were observed to be very low for all varieties of rice and
exhibited a significant decrease when processed into rice flakes for all pigmented
varieties at the soft dough stage. Lastly, alkaloid was not present in all varieties (Table

23).


Nutritional Value

The nutritional value of food is important when considering overall nutrition and

health. These values depend on the quality of a food that is digested and absorbed and the

amounts of essential nutrients (protein, fat, carbohydrate, minerals and vitamins) that it
contains. The nutritional value of rice flakes made from different varieties of rice
harvested at soft dough and hard dough stage was computed for its % RENI
(Recommended Energy Nutrient Intake) contribution for energy, protein, iron, zinc,
calcium, vitamin A and dietary fiber. RENI was the Nutrient Reference Values (NRV)
used since it is the dietary standard most commonly used in the Philippines. For a food to
be considered a “source” of dietary fiber and protein. a >10 % of NRV per 100 grams
should be present while a “a high source” should be >20 % of NRV per 100 grams. On
the other hand, for vitamins, minerals and energy, food to be considered a “source”
should be > 15% of NRV per 100 grams while > 30% of NRV per 100 grams is
considered as a “high source”.

Rice flakes made from all varieties, regardless of maturity, are high sources of energy
from 6 months to 5 years old and sources of energy for 6 years above. This suggests that
rice flakes can be used as rice-based snack items for children and also for adults.
Likewise, these rice flakes can also be considered as a high source of protein for 6
months to 5 years old and a source for 6 years old and above (Tables 28, 29, 30 and 31).
These can also be considered as a source of dietary fiber for children aged | year old to 9

years old (Table 32).

Table 33, 34, 35 and 36 presented the RENI contribution (% RENI) for iron, zinc and
calcium of rice flakes at the soft dough and hard dough stages. Rice flakes from all
varieties either at the soft dough and hard dough stage are a source of zinc for children
aged 6 months to 9 years old. Zinc plays an important role for growth and development
and assists proper immune function in the body. The importance of zinc in growth,
development and cognitive function in children must be considered. Thus, healthy
alternative snacks made from rice flakes can be a possible strategy to prevent and
overcome zinc deficiencies.
As for their iron and calcium contribution, neither of the two are sources for all the

rice flakes. Likewise, rice flakes are not considered a source of vitamin A (Table 37).


4I9PL LET 9NHT «LEST BIL (LG CL'PT COL «TD LLCOPST NGL SADA OLX
eIOPL LET OSEZ—aPLTLE BTL = 9LS POET —eHL'LL. «7 _~—IL_~—OIDT.«ObIZ SHEA 69-09
e19PL LET TEOZ —-HONTST BITE = 9H SEOZ ~—wEL'ST, = Z]_—L_~—COLBT. OTH SABA GS-OS
elOPL LET IEOZ = HHNTST—ABITIL = LH SLOT — ELSE, «TL COLBT. “OCH SHEA GP-OF
sIOpL LET «= sBHT OSE | WBITIT = 94 ZL ePO'ST «ZL (OEHT. OST SHEAA G7-6T

Inpy
s6Cb1 = #EO'TL, «SNOT TTL LSE O'S +6991 SoZ] 19 EL O8ZZ_-OLOE S4BAA SI-OT
OST DNL HOST s90'PL OZ eBNIT © PSLT ONT LS 79 OLIZ—OOLZ_-«-S4PAA ST-ET

26061 waZPOZ BIG] = SEPT «LOST. wZI'9T—wZZO1 ss B8BI Oh Eh 0861 0907 S4PAA ZI-OT
aeBZ0E weLT6T—e¥€B'ST eefL'ET s0GET wal EZ OBST — LET 6Z_—«OE_=—OLPI. 0091 SAEAK 6-9
velB'1h  eel66E —eePIOE  es€T'8Z — eelE SIE weIZOL — eOI'BZ IZ ZT_—CODTI.«COSEL «SABA SE
esS0 1S eeBL BP eeBT IP eeLOLE 69LOF aa SBE welC ly e90'RE LI 8106 ODD. SEMA TT
anfS8S —aeSOIS —nelTZ09 eebL'TS ee 9 oe DLOP —neZP 09 vel BTS ST LI 0D OTL SOW TIO

a Ww a Ww a Ww a Ww a Ww ada WwW
(%) (%) (%) (%) (3) (1e>4) ay
NIGLOUd ADUING NIGLOUd ADWING NIGLOUd = ADWANA
(aH) (as) =
sayey ao14 Suos8u0g sy80)oyy sayey a911 SuosSuog ny8oppy +A NVA INTE

‘sures QQ 49d saeis
ynop prey pue YBnop Yyos 12 sayey 2911 SuosBu0g yBoyopy Jo urioid pue ABs9U9 JO (INTY %) UOLINgiNUOD [NIU BZ 19L.


S671 STIL xSO'SZ BOT = SBT. «BS aST'STOL'OL «= 7D IL_OPST 0961 SHBAK OL
sSOTL STIL #9GET «LORI SB'OT BH s90PZ = OTB «ZL COLDT.OPIZS4¥aK 69-09
S671 STIL = #E9OZ POTS. «SBD, BH'H Sw IL'0Z 00 ZD_—IL_— OLB. (ORT S4EAK GS-05
sSOTl STIL £970Z POST. SBOL BPS ILOZ = s00'9T_- TIL OLBT_ Oth SHBOK 6b-OF
2ST] SVT 466 SZ'S1. S801 BPH aLO'OZ—wIESI «= 7D IL_— CEB. «OEST S4RRK 67-61
vInpy
sel all ZO BZ AEDT =H HOGI. LBZ 19 €£ 08Z@ Olog  savad gI-9T
601 6S6TI BLL OT HL IIT = eSBOL | eSRLI PEL «= LS ZD_OLIZ—OOLT = SHBAA ST-ET
sOPL1 L981 s6V'O1 ELT. AEDDL —ASOTSL«-9SO1 = 08°89 EP OBGT_ 0907 S4PAK TI-OI
ax69LT o0LLl9Z STITT aaITET weEPTZ SCOT ITHZ ZOOL OOLFL. DDI SHAK Gg
aabTBE aaS9E ee ZNOE BST aaSO'TE 4HbSOE aaPLOE —69'8T_—IT—HZ_—CODTI_-«OOSEL «SAA GE
aabTLb eel Dbb eePO'lh o48SBE ¥46S6E neOELE ve01'Th eetL'8E LT BIH ODT SHUR TT
eefSES axbT Lh sebT19 4265S aL BbY__anGS'OE _aeBH'19 exoL'eS SILI 089 ORL SOM TT
a Ww a Ww a Ww a Ww a wi da Ww
(%) (%) (%) (%) @) (eo4) By
NIGLOUd ADUWINA NIGLOWd ADWINA NIdLOWd _ ADWINA
(aq) (as)

Soyey 2914 POUT

SOYEU 2914 POUT

+N 1VA INDY

“sures 99] 40d soBeys yBnop prey pue YBnop yos 1e sayel) 2011 POY] Jo Ularoad pue AB0Ua 10} (INAY %) UONNgLNUOD [NIU “67 A192L


01 5100 IN

eIVEL e901 eINHT ELST. «EVI = TLIO wbEST—ON@OT «= TD LL_COPSL 0961 SABAK QUE
AISEL — 9OTL —#PSET ILL EVIL WL wbT PT wyTRI 7] LOOT. OFIZ SHAK 69-09
xISEL 49071 STOT «DNS aETIT «= LLB wEV'OT «7D TL_— LET. OZPT SAK GS-05
AIVEL 99071 9TOZ-—-IN'ST «ETT = LS LBZ ETON. «TLL OLB OhT SHEAA Gh-OE
eIVEL — 99OTL «ENGL BOTHL EVIL = TLS wZZOZ = wTH'SL «7D IL_OEHT. EST SHBAA 67-61
unpy
sO] EL 227991 «STL IE TE «= SHO AZNLT. «HTT «IDL OBZZ_—OLOE-— SHBAA BI-—9T
TOS1 SEL AOPLT COL INTENT BOLL ShPL LS] LIZ -OOLZ = SAPAA ST-ET
+1981 1661 = ePI'G1 = EOPT ST *S091 se IL'61 = ehO'RT «Oh Lh (0861-0907 S4eAX ZI-OT
aeTS'6T anfSBZ BST BO'ET wGLET —wefZaeSSOTHHEHT «OT —OOE:=«COLPL_ ODT S4BOK 6-9
09L 0p anl6'BE 4eLDOE LOT sDSTE HADETE 4eL60E 416'8Z IZ CZ O9TI_OSEL «= SURA S-E
aaSC0S anDSLP os6l'lh o068'LE ee6S'OP se€ERE veZh'Zh weZO'OL LI 810% DDL, sae TT
walOLS aaSEOS 445109 e9TS nn ee OP aeOID nec bs SILL OED OTL SOW TTD

a Ww a Ww i Ww a Ww a Wa Ww
% ‘%) Md %d @ Te) 23y
NIALOUd ADIN NIGLOWd ADNAN NIGLOUd — ADWANT
(qn (as) ; ;
sayey aou oeuneyeg sayey aol oBUNEEg +INTVA INTE

“sures 001
opune|jeg Jo ulaioud pue £819U9 403 (INFY %) UoINgINUOS [NAY “OE 19°L

sad safeis yBnop prey pue ySnop Yos re saxey 2:


ore $100 IN

20671 LZ etl bt P61 vl aISZ -wEL61 «= 7] L_ OPS O96L SHEA QL<
20671 LZ ¥SNET OLLI vl -ZO'PZ = eLOBI «ZL COLD. Ob IZ S4¥ AK 69-09
0671 LZ ¥9E'0Z ELST bl s890Z BOSSI. 7] TL OLBT_(Othz (SHR AK GS-05
20671 LZ x9€0Z —-¥€L'ST vl #8907 «BOSSI. «ZL OLBI.(OthT(SHRAA Gh-OE
20671 LZ +€L'61 SOS vl s€00Z BTS 7] TL COEHL.OEST S4PAK G7-6I
unpy
sIVEl 29601 20291 S9'TI el 6811 69691 SBT 19 €£ 0822 Ol0g SHEA BI-9T
ebO'PL = 06°71 eSSLT OPT E'S vl s7BLI EPL «LS OLIZ-—«OOLZ_-S4BAA ST-ET

sOCL1 09°81 ETSI BPBI ALIBI GIOZ ESOL «= LL'BT «OPH 0861090c SHAK ZI-OT
06517 aelVOT GST —-OSET «eoE6OTEORT «ODT LIZ ZOE: COLFL_ 0091 SHB GD
eA01BE  aeDEOE  eeZTOE —OTBZ ne eSPOL ONE 9'BT «ITS ZZ_—CODTL-CCOSEL SURO SE
4290 Lb eabb'by  eeBOTP oeL0'BE ae90IS eZ7BP eLO'TP aedRE LI 81060001, SHB TT
HefOES 24 90LY ee SPO9  eeB8TS eal BLS 2901S e819 esou'es SILI 089 OL SOUT T-9

a Ww a Ww a Ww a WwW a Wd Ww
%) %) %) %) co) (ey 28y
NIaLOwd ADWINA NIaLOWd ADWING NIGLOWd  ADWANG
(qH) (as)

soyey ania jodey, eéeseyeln, soyey aou jodey vdeSepeyy +AN1VA INTE

-“swuad 09] sad sa8eys
yBnop paey pue ynop yos re sayey 201 jodey edeFeepy Jo ulayord pue AB190U9 103 (INFY %) UOLINGITUOS |NFY “LE 7192L


mot
cone $100 IN

oF a > > +5 os rs oP sco; «BURR OLE
Sb Sb sh oh os os os o> $7-07 sueak 69-09
so s fa so os os us oP scoc_st¥k 65-05
Sb Sb or or os Os Ls ob S7-07 ‘sawak 6F-0F
ob sh sr or os os Ls aa $t-07 savad 67-61
unpy
s s $ Sb oF €7-07 ‘savak g1-91
os rs os os 07-81 savad SIL
oo 9 “go “oe est sawad 71-01
01-8 ol ol ol bit swat 6-9
srl £101 ser-0l ast ors sabe se
81°51 ars 81°51 wurst s0c-Lt sur “9 1896 71
: : ; : : : : : : sow 11-9
Coss AUvIaIG —_—O)UIMAKUVLaIG—_(%) UML AUVLAI () wagtd AUVLAIG ®
S] uaald
Go aw (as) (aw) as) op GS) xuviaia 8
sou jodey astzjodeg «— SPUEU PH SPHEL OP bitiied MPU a911 SuosBuog aa14 SuosBuog — FOnTEN
edeSerey — ekeBeepy «CPUC OPUNEME =P PIAT PH PIAT sere wserey, INaY
“swresd

001 4ad saGeys YSnop prey pue YSnop Yos 1e sanauien |]e Jo sayey 9914 Jo 49qy AseIIP 405 (INT %) UOKINguNUOD INIY “Ze 7192L



ssnve $100 INH

960 960 PTET 48P0Z 19 80S %O WO +ISEC «ILO 19 80S 008 008 LE Th Ol ZI sv QE

960 960 «0/81 EEL 19 BOS WO WO +1681 BEET 19 80S 008 008 OF SO Ol ZI SHEA 69-09
C01 COL +0081 ETEL 19 80S 860 860 +lO81 BEET 19 80S OSL OSL OF $9 OL ZI sEaxes-os
C01 CO OLB TEL BIT BOS 860 BO +lORl BEEL BZ BOS OSL OSL OP SO (Bz) ZI SHEA Gro
C01 C01 s0L'1 ETEL BIZ BOS 860 860 +lO8l EEL BIZ BOS OSL OSL Oh SO (Bz) ZI sHEatGz-~6I
unpy
120 420 66 96 BIZ OP PLO PLO BOTT 196 BIZ 9h OOOT OOO! ZL O% (Bz) FI sa¥aXgi-or
wo uo sto 8hZ «ITE LO LO or6 BIZ «ITE 0001 OOOl HL TO (8Z) GI saBaXsI-EL
420 20 Ohl «EOL «SOE 80S HLO FLO ITI sre Sof 80S OOO! OOO1 19 99 Of Zt s4Bad ZI-O1

Ort Ort sZL1 e9'9T -8L9 9 SOL SOL oPLIo90LT 899 OL OOL_-sOTS-sTS OL SHAK G9
IPE UPL eZ6LI TLE 89 BLO ET PET EBL LT 89 «8:9 «OSS OSS BF OS GG SHRM SE
PST PST SIZ 8602 EOL EOL Lh) LPI SLIT e2TIT ETL «EL OOS OSs IH BB SHA ZT

Cl C61 +bZET BPOT BL9 19 PRL PRL sISEZ 4ILOZ = BL 9 OOF ODH LEP ol sow tt-9

a W 4 W 4d Wd Wea Ww a W 4a wWaw Ww
i) 9) (a) a) a) tw) auiy Tay way 3By
WAIDTVD ONIZ NOUI WwAIOTVD ONIZ NOUL WOIDTYD ONIZ NOUE
(aH) (as)
sayey 9914 SuosSuog wyseleW soyey a014 SuosSuog 14Sere +ANTVA INDH

-swies8 09] sad sa8eys
yBnop prey pue YBNop Yyos ye soyBy 2912 TuosBuog wySepEW Jo uiMIo}e0 pue ouIZ “uo! 40} (INTY %) vOINNGUOD INTL “E€ 192,


sone tas
101 101 s801Z 44981 Or 80h P80 P80 +8017 lS BI be we 008 008 LE Cr or ral saad QL<
101 10 29691 6b 80b P80 FO 49691 a up TE 008 O08 Fr SO ol ZI s4eak 69-09
Lol 401 49691 6 BOY 680 680 49691 TIS LY UHE OSL OSL «OH 9 OL ZI SHBAK GS-0
Ol LOL 49691 ZL SLT BOY GO 68D 9691 ZS BT. HE OSL OSL OF SD (Bz) ZI SUEKGHOE
101 LO 49691 ZL SLT BOY 68 GRO HDT ZS BT. WE OSL OSL OF SD (8) ZI SUED Gr-GI
nnpy
ovo of Evol U9 SLI SE LV LD. BOL «LNB. BSE OO OOO! ZL 0 (HL) HI SHEAKBI-DI
oso «(080 «SOL ars sel gsz L490 L990 Ps'ol BPs Bol LyZ 0001 0OOl PL 76 (87) ol suBaXsT-Er
ovo 080 GLI HII SZ BOY L9 LID GLTL EBT. «SET ZE OOO OOO! 9 99 OF TI SHRRETI-OT
SV SUT e951 6751 HFS OF 960 960 9ST HTS. «SLY ONL OL OS—IS GOL SHER
Ol OL aSTOL AFSL PHS obs CT WI STON 951 ws ws oss Oss Br OS 6 6 savas se
191 191 S61 azOSL ELD ETD PET FEL S61 OI «BBS BBS OOS OOS OF Ty 8k TH
OT 107 eB01T e581 FHS Oh BT BFT 8017 LSB ws ce 00 OO Lt Tr 6 ol sour 11-9
a Wo 4a W 4a Wa wa W 4 Wo 4 W 4 Waw
%) CY Ta) Cr a) euy 28y
WaIgtva___ONIZ Now walgqvo, ONIZ NOW WAIDTY —_ONIZ_ NOU
am «
ene $9ul SomEU o $9ur any A ING
swes3

001 sad safeys ySnop prey pur YEnop yos re sayey 991 POY! Jo win!D{e9 pue oUIZ

‘you! 10} (INAY %) UONNUNUOD INFY “pe 192.


oN
EV €F1 e982 a061Z GF CL SOL SO w8ECC SPI $8 80 O08 O08 LE Tr OL ZI sHExXQLE
eri Vl +07 sitet 68 wl sol Sol s8ET7 9b'bl os 802 008 008 MF $9 OO TI saved 69-09
Wi Wt 07 sVel 68 we Tb TI s8ETz Taal ss BOL OSL OSL FF SO Ol Zl sawed GS-05
IZL ATL 40 SUPT BYE MHL NL ZILaEPOZ OWL = POE BOL OSL «OSL «TH GD CB) ZI SHOR Gr-OE
ZL ITT oOZ STL BIE HL ZIT TNT akb'OZ HL «HOE BOL «OSL «OSL. SD (BZ) ZI SHBAK Gz-61
unpy
160 160 sc7l wor sie 989 P80 FBO 8 6—90EI br ol Poe 409 0001 0001 ZL 0% (BZ) bl sa¥ad I-91
160 160 eZl 01 SIE BOY PRO HBO LTL« TOL. POE Lh OL. OOOT._ PL TH (8) GI SHAK SI-ET
160 160 s80'S1 t6EL Shr TPL «P80 FEO 1 ads stp 802 0001 o0O1 19 99 OZ ZI sHeadzI-OI
61 OT] PBL -POBI «O8H «GOT L:«COTT: RRL nEPBI. «HSB OOL©«CODL- «OOS: OLS GD
SOL SOL oLVOL eh BI 686 «6686 TFT TST BSG «881 pb bre OSS «OSS Sr OF 6 6 saeax $-¢
181 1S 0% ebPTZ EVIL EPIL 891 89 aSET et67Z = EDO «CFO! «=—00S_-— OOS sO 8 8 sawak Z-1
OTT WT VT 20617 686 o8 OVZ ONT IST BETZ bre ss oor «00 Le TP 6 ol sou [1-9
a owed wWo4a W 4a Wd W a Wood Wd Wiaiw
Ta) Ta) Wad (cay (ca) — uy way aay 38y
walgt> ONIZ Nout walty> ONIZ NOW WAIDTVD_—_ONIZ__NOUI
er ocanee og ec +a VA II
“swe 091

sad saBeis yBnop prey pue YSnop Yos re saxeY 2914 OBUNE|Jeg Jo wiNID|e9 pue DUIZ ‘UO! 40} (INA %) UOIINqNUOS INFY “SE AI9EL


Ol 101 68IZ 6c LL HO 960 960 se Zor < EBS 008 008 LE Th OL Zl SHBakQUE
ol 101 1941 OFZ LL @w9 960 960 eet ZVI L £85 008 008 F «S9 OL ZI BABAK 69-09
col Lol I9LI OFZ LL tH COL COT EBL wel LBS OSL OSL TH SD OL ZI SHAK GS-05
col Ll ILL OFZI SLT MHD COL EOL EBLE 9TH SZ 8S OSL OSL HF $9 (82) ZI SAB 6rOE
LO1 Lol I9LL PZ SLT HO COL EOL ERLI «HTL = ST_CEBTS OSL OSL 9 (BZ) ZI SHERK 6-61
ainpy

ovo ovo STIL 6) SLZ™S'S LO LOE 16 SZ ~— 0001. OO. ZL 0% (BZ) FI S4EOK BI-OT
oro 080 Sool O88 «LZ SOP LLO LEO BOIL «1B ST_—«BDE 0001 0001. «HL «TH (BZ) OI SHER SI-ET
oso «O80 «BTEI «ATTIC SBE THO ALO ALO bh EL ral SE €8'S OOO COO! 19 99 OZ ZI s4Ead ZI-O1
SVL SVE TOL BRST 9SB LL OL «OOFL: FST GOST BLL LOL: COHL_- «OSS COL SHRDK GD
orl FL BE91 TOL 9B HR irl IFT BOLI FOL BLL BLL OSS OSS Sr OS 6 6 sHExXKSE
I9l 191 STOZ UL £96 E96 FEL FSI  sOz 07 SLB SLB 00S 00S OF Ir 8 8 SHB TT
10Z 10Z BIZ 6TH. OSB LL «HI Lol 91 HI BLL LORY LEH OSM -9
a wea wood Wa Wea Ww a owo4a Wi 4a wWiaiw

%) (%) (%) (%) (%) (%) (uy on) Gu) 28y
walntvo ONIZ NOW WAIDTVD. ONIZ NOL WAIDTVD —ONIZ—_—_NOUT

(aH) a

sayey ants odey edeSeyey

soyey aon jodey eceBerew,

+A TVA INTE

saBeys y8nop puey pue ySnop yos 1e soyey 2014 jode], eARBe|eW Jo wn1o[e9 pue DuLZ “uost 10 (INFY %) YON

sures 99] sod
nuoo [NAY “9€ F192L


rer

6S «BRP LHS TI'S, B HD LB COL «CIEE: OH SHE SLE ITE CIE ONE 009 LS SaBAK QUE
69S Br SUS RGD YE LITE: CONE: GOR SE SLE ITE BE 009 Oe RAK GS-09
OS Wr WS US 9B 069 LE LL «IVECO: OSE SLE ITE EY BE 009 oe SHRAK GS-05
69s Wr WS US HR 069 ERLE: CONE: SOE SLE IEE BE 00D Ome SHRAK GO
6S «FSS IS «BHD FB OTLIDE: «COLE LO SHE SLE CIE CAE BNE 009 OL SHAK 67-61
apy

os ih 5 BY «ROD SED IELTS SLE HCH STE 007 0B SHEAR I-OL
9 sr LL tS 9D LTOL «TLE COOVE: ERY CSHE SF ITE uIS EOS OL SHEAR ST-ET
9 89 uk ark} uHLVOY. ser: ocer eh OGY SH SYS L'S 005 00s SHEAR TOF
18 fS8 968 968 BOTT BTL ezI. «ZI ahs RS OD HOD eS TTS DOD OOF OF SHEAR GD
18 SB 96R 9B BOT! BOTT LTT ~LTL aS eS OY HD BSS FD OFD oor sua se
8 HSB WR 968 BOTT BOT LTT WEL eS eS m9 HD BS SOD OFD oor sua 4
18 t8 96k 968 BOTT BTL —LTI «WeL EHS SOY HD BSS OD OFD oor som IT-9
cE Ww 4 Ww 4 Ww a Ww a WwW 4 Ww a Ww 4 w 4 Ww

Taw amy Guat) Cau 3) au ay Guay

¥ NIIWWALIA ¥ NIWWLIA V NUINV.LIA, sant Ns enna
a tee GS) ET oon (GHD SEU (as) so1EY SOB I9 —seHEY II +aNTVA ay
chedeew —edeSejeW —oeune|teg §=—scoeuneyeg «= PZ FSUT =P FUT —-Suosduos —BuosBuos Inca
widere __BeLe

“sures gg| sad so8es YBnop prey pue YEnop Yos re SalaLseA jJe Jo SaxY 9OU Jo W UIUN

205 (INFY %) YoHNgIUOS [NFU “LE A142 L

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION

Investigations conducted on rice flakes made from four rice varieties, two non-

pigmented (Malagkit Songsong and IR64) and two pigmented (Ballatinao and Malagaya

Tapol), harvested at soft dough and hard dough stages indicated differences in the

nutritional and sensory qualities. In general, the nutritional composition of rice flakes

varies as affected by the rice varieties and the stages of maturity.

The study specifically showed the following:


The moisture content of raw rice grains for all varieties at the soft dough stage

significantly decreased when processed into rice flakes.
The protein, fat, ash, crude fiber and carbohydrate content for all varieties
decreased when processed into rice flakes, whereas ash content tend to have
higher values in pigmented varieties as compared to non-pigmented varieties.
Mineral contents and beta-carotene contents were higher in pigmented rice
varieties as compared to non-pigmented varieties. An increase in mineral
contents, on the other hand, was observed at both soft dough and hard dough
stages when processed into rice flakes.

The carbohydrate profile (starch and amylose) decreased when processed into rice

flakes for all varieties regardless of its dough stages, while the total dietary fiber

content of rice flakes among all varieties increased as grains matured.


Glycemic

\dex of all rice varieties are classified as high regardless of variety and
dough stage. GI values of the entire sample were affected by its amylose and
dietary fiber content.

Antioxidant ac

and phytochemical contents were significantly higher at

pigmented varieties than non-pigmented varieties while a decrease in phenolic
contents was observed when pigmented varieties were processed into rice flakes
at the soft dough and hard dough stages. Lower values were observed for
flavonoids, tannins and saponins content while alkaloids were not present at all in
the varieties.

The non-pigmented variety Malagkit Songsong was slightly liked to moderately

liked for its color, aroma, flavor and appearance and was generally acceptable,

considering that texture attribute showed no significant difference among the
varieties at the soft dough and hard dough stages.

Based on the nutrient contribution (% RENI), rice flakes from different varieties
of rice regardless of dough stages are high sources of energy and protein for
children aged 6 months to 5 years and is considered as a source for age group 6
years old above. It is also considered as a source of dietary fiber for aged | year
old to 9 years old. Rice flakes are also considered as a source of zine for children

aged 6 months to 9 years old, however, rice is not considered as a source of iron,

calcium and vitamin A.

RECOMMENDATIONS

Rice is an important staple food for more than half of the world’s population and has
fed more people than any other crop has for thousands of years. In addition to its
traditional uses such as rice-based food items, new methods of processing have to be
developed for the increased utilization of rice grains. Provided with information on the
nutritional content and essential minerals in this study, rice flakes, specifically those
made of pigmented varieties, have potential use as snack food and breakfast cereals
targeting children and those at nutritionally-at-risk age groups.

In relation to this, further studies on nutritional content and bioavailability of minerals,
specifically iron and zinc, should be conducted particularly on the newly developed
product. Along with this is the test for shelf life and effect of storage to measure the
changes in nutritional and health value and to determine the ability of this product as an
emergency food. The test for the use of different packaging materials is necessary since

most available rice grains for consumers are not always freshly harvested. The use of rice

flakes breakfast cereals made from pigmented varieties in feeding programs should also
be established to know whether it can improve the nutritional status of children in

particular.

LITERATURE CITED

ABBAS, A., S. MURTAZA, F. ASLAM, A. KHAWAR, S. RAFIQUE and S.
NAHEED. 2011. Effect of Processing on Nutritional Value of Rice (Oryza
sativa). World Journal of Medicinal Sciences. 6 (2): 68-73.

AFIFY, A. M., H. S. EL-BELTAGI, S. M. ABD EL-SALAM and A. A. OMRAN.
2011. Bioavailability of Iron, Zinc, Phytate and Phytase Activity during Soaking
and Germination of White Sorghum Varieties. PLoS ONE 6(10): €25512.
Retrieved April 12, 2015 Accessed from
http://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371 /journal.pone,0025512

ASSOCIATION OF OFFICIAL ANALYTICAL CHEMISTS (AOAC). 1990. Official
Methods of Analysis. 13 ed. Washington: DC. 304 p.

ARVIDSSON-LENNER, R.. N. ASP, M. AXELSEN, S. BRYNGELSSON, E. HAAPA,
A. JARVI, B. KARLSTROM, A. RABEN, A. SOHLSTROM, I.
THORSDOTTIR and B. VESSBY. 2004. Glycaemic Index: Relevance for
Health, Dietary Recommendations and Food Labelling. Scandinavian Journal
of Nutrition 48 (2): 84-94,

ASHOK, P. K. and K. UPADHYAYA. 2012. Tannins are Astringent. Journal of
Pharmacognosy and Phytochemistry. 1 (3): 45-50.

AZIZAH, A.H. and H. ZAINON. 2007. Effects of Processing on Dietary Fiber Contents
of Selected Legumes and Cereals. Malaysian Journal of Nutrition. 3: 131-136.

BEMILLER, J. and R. WHISTLER. 2009. Starch: Chemistry and Technology. 3" ed.
Elsevier Inc. New York. p.490-495.

BINTI-IDRIL, N., A. DIANA and F. WARGAHADIBRATA. 2013. Preliminary Study:
Glycemic Index of Brown and White Rice Variant IR 64 in Healthy Adult Men.
International Journal of Intergrated Health Sciences. | (1): 37-41.


BRAND-MILLER J.. T. WOLEVER T, K, FOSTER-POWELL and S. COLAGIURI.
2003. The New Glucose Revolution. 2 ed. New York: Marlowe & Company. p.
301-315.

BULATAO, R., L. MABESA, R. MABESA and F. MERCA. 2012. Phytochemical
and Functional Properties of Philippine Sprouted Brown Rice (Oryza satiza L.)
and its Potential as Base Ingredient for Functional Beverages. Philippine
Agriculture Scientist. 95 (3): 225-235.

Bureau of Agricultural Statistics (BAS) Philippines Per Capita Rice Consumption.

Retrieved August 17, 2015 from http://oryza.com/contentrice-consumption-
decreasing-philippines-2008-says-bas#sthash.dA MFixBO.dpuf.

CHANG, T. and E. A. BARDENAS. 1965. The Morphology and Varietal
Characteristics of the Rice Plant. Technical Bulletin. International Rice Research
Institute. Los Bafios, Laguna.

CHAKUTON, K.. D. PUANGPRONPITAG and M. NAKORNRIAB. 2012.
Phytochemical content and antioxidant activity of colored and non-colored Thai
rice cultivars. Asian Journal of Plant Sciences.

CHUKWUMA, E.R., N. OBIOMA and O.1. CHRISTOPHER. 2010. The Phytochemical
Composition and Some Biochemical Effects of Nigerian Tigernut (Cyperus
esculentus L.) Tuber. Pakistan Journal of Nutrition. 9 (7): 709-715.

CODEX Alimentarius. 2007. Food Labelling. 5"" ed. Rome: World Health Organization
(WHO).

COX, S., A. ABU-GHANNAM and S. GUPTA. 2011. Effect of Processing Conditions
on Phytochemical Constituents of Edible Irish Seaweed. School of Food Science
and Environmental Health. Dublin Institute of Technology.

DEEPA, G., V. SINGH and K. A. NAIDU. 2010. A Comparative Study on Starch
Digestibility, Glycemic Index and Resistant Starch of Pigmented (“Njavara’ and
‘Jyothi’) and a non-pigmented (‘IR 64°) Rice Varieties. Journal of Food Science
and Technology. 47 (6): 644-649.



DOUGHARI, J. H. n.d. Phytochemicals: Extraction Methods, Basic Structures and Mode
of Action as Potential Chemotherapeutic Agents. Retrieved July 10, 2015
Accessed www.intechopen.com.

DYKES, L. and W. ROONEY. 2007. Phenolic Compounds in Cereal Grains and Their
Health Benefits. Cereal Foods World. $2 (3): 105-111.

ESFAHANI, A., J. WONG, A. MIRRAHIMI, K. SRICHAIKUL, D. JENKINS and C.
KENDALL. 2009. Glycemic Index: Physiological Significance. Journal of the
American College of Nutrition. 28 (4): 439-445.

EZEKIEL, R., N. SINGH, S. SHARMA and A. KAUR, 2013. Beneficial
Phytochemicals in Potato — a review. Food Research International. 50: 487-496.

FADAEI, V. and M. SALEHIFAR. 2012. Rice Husk as a Source of Dietary Fiber.
Annals of Biological Research. 3 (3): 1437-1442.

FAIGMANE, D.O. 2002. Nutritional and Sensory Qualities of Rice Flakes (Pinipig) and
its Selected Products.[MS Thesis]. University of the Philippines Los Banos,
College, Laguna. 121 p. [Available at the UPLB Library].

Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO). 1998. Carbohydrates in
Human Nutrition. Agriculture and Consumer Protection. Rome: WHO.

Food Agricultural Organization. Gross Nutrient Composition. Retrieved September 13,
2015 from http://www. fao.org/docrep/t0567e/T0567E08,htm#

FERNANDO, B. 2013. Rice as a Source of Fiber. Rice Research. Vol. | and 2. Retrieved
October 31, 2015 Accessed hitp://esciencecentral.org/journals/rice-as-a-source-of-fibre-
jrr.1000e101.pdf .

Food and Nutrition Research Institute of the Department of Science and Technology
(FNRI-DOST). 1997. Food Composition Table. Philippines: FNRI.


Food and Nutrition Research Institute of the Department of Science and Technology
(FNRI-DOST). 2015. Recommended Energy and Nutrient Intakes. Philippines:
FNRI.

FREI, M. and K. BECKER. 2004. Agro-biodiversity in subsistence-oriented farming
systems in a Philippine upland region: nutritional considerations. Biodiversity and
Conservation. 13: 1591-1610.

FREI, M., P. SIDDHURAJU and K. BECKER. 2003. Studies on the In Vitro Starch
Digestibility and the Glycemic Index of Six Different Indigenous Rice Cultivars
from the Philippines. Food Chemistry. 395-402.

FUJITA, A., H. FUJITAKE, K. KAWAKAMI and M. NOMURA. 2010. Antioxidant
activity of colored rice bran obtained at different milling yields. Journal Oleo
Sciences. 59 (10): 563-568.

GARCIA, M.C., M. T. BENASSI and M. SOARES. 2012. Physicochemical and
Sensory Profile of Rice Bran Roasted in Microwave. Cienc. Tecnol. Aliment. 32
(4): 24-26.

GIBSON, R.S. 1990. Principles of Nutritional Assessment. USA: Oxford University
Press. p. 456-460.

GOLDBERG, I. 1994. Functional Foods. USA: Chapman and Hall, Inc. p. 142-145.

GONI, I, A. GARCIA-ALONSO and F. SAURA-CALIXTO. 1997. A Starch Hydrolysis
Procedure to Estimate Glycemic Index. Nutt Research. 17 (3): 427-437.

HOUSTON, D.F. 1972. Rice: Chemistry and Technology. USA: American Association
of Cereal Chemist, Inc. p. 31-40.

HURRELL, R. and I. EGLI. 2010. Iron Bioavailability and Dietary Reference Values.
American Society for Nutrition. 91 (5): 89-100.

cree

HURTADA, W.A. 1995. Changes in the Chemical and Nutritional Composition of
Pinipig (rice flakes) during Processing and Storage. Ph.D. Dissertation].
University of the Philippines Los Banos, College, Laguna. 150 p. [Available at
the UPLB Library).

IQBAL S., M. . BHANGER and F. ANWAR. 2005. Antioxidant properties and
components of some commercially available varieties of rice bran in Pakistan.
Food Chemistry 93: 265-272.

JACOBS, M.B. 1972. The Chemistry and Technology of Food and Food Products, 2" ed.
New York: Interscience Publishers, Inc. p. 410-416.

JAISWAL, P. K. 1983. Specification of rice bran oil and extractions. Oil
Technologists'Association of India.64-77.

JEEVETHA S.,M. Y. BARAKATUN-NISAK, H. NGAN, A. ISMAIL and A. AZLAN.
2014. Relationship between Amylose Content and Glycemic Index of Commonly
Consumed White Rice. IOSR Journal of Agriculture and Veterinary Science. 7
(9): 12-18.

JENKINS, D.,C. KENDALL, L. AUGUSTIN, S. FRANCESCHI, M. HAMIDI, A.
MARCHIE, A. JENKINS and M. AXELSEN. 2002. Glycemic Index: Overview
of Implications in Health and Disease. The American Journal of Clinical
Nutrition. 76 (1): 266-273.

JOHANSSON, M. 2012. Dietary Fiber Composition and Sensory Analysis of Heat
Treated Wheat and Rye Bran. (MS Thesis]. Swedish University of Agricultural
Sciences. 160 p.

JULIANO, B. 1993. Rice in Human Nutrition. FAO.

JULIANO, B. 1985. Factors Affecting Nutritional Properties of Rice Protein.
Transactions National Academy of Science. 7: 205-216.

LAMBERTS, L. and J. A. DELCOUR. 2008. Carotenoids in Raw and Parboiled Brown
and Milled Rice. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry. 56 (24): 11914-11919.


LATTIMER, J.M. and M. D. HAUB. 2010. Effects of Dietary Fiber and its Components
on Metaboilc Heath. Nutrients. 2: 1266-1289.

LUDWIG, D. 2002. The Glycemic Index: Physiological Mechanisms Relating to
Obesity. Diabetes and Cardiovascular Disease. Journal of American Medical
Association. Volume 287 No. 18 Retrieved July 19, 2015 Accessed from
http://www direct-ms.org/pdf/NutritionGeneral/Glycemic%20Index.pdf.

LUSAS, E.W. and L. W. ROONEY. 2001. Snack Foods Processing. CRC Press LLC.
USA. p. 134-140.

B. LING and L. SU PENG. 2013. By-products of Rice Processing:
w of Health Benefits and Application. Rice Research. | (1): I-11

MOLDENHAUER, K., C, WILSON, P. COUNCE and J. HARDKE. n.d. Rice
Growth and Development. Retrieved July 7, 2015 Accessed from
http://www.uaex.edu/publications/pdf/mp192/chapter-2.pdf.

MOKO, E.M., H. PURNOMO, J. KUSNADI and F. G. IJONG. 2013. Phytochemical
content and antioxidant properties of colored and non colored varieties of rice
bran from Minahasa, North Sulawesi, Indonesia. International Food Research
Journal. 21 (3): 1053-1059.

MOONGNGARM, A., N. DAOMUKDA and S. KHUMPIKA. 2012. Chemical
Compositions, Phytochemicals and Antioxidant Capacity of Rice Bran, Bran
Layer and Rice Germ. APCBEE Procedia. 2: 73-79.

NYMAN M., M. SILJESTROM, B. PEDERSEN, K. E. BACH KNUDSEN, G. ASP, C.
G. JOHANSSON and O. EGGUM. 1983. Dietary Fiber Content and Composition
in Six Cereals at Different Extraction Rates. Cereal Chemistry. 6 (1): 14-19.

ODENIGBO, A.M., N. DANBABA and M. NGADI. 2014. Nutrient Composition and
Predicted Glycemic Index of Rice Varieties from Nigeria. British Journal of
Applied Science and Technology. 4 (2): 302-318.


ODOEMELAM, S.A. and C. I. OSU. 2009. Evaluation of the Phytochemical Content of
Some Edible Grains Marketed in Nigeria. E-Journal of Chemistry. 6 (4): 1193-
1199,

ORGANISATION FOR ECONOMIC CO-OPERATION AND DEVELOPMENT. 2004.
Consensus Document on Compositional Considerations for New Varieties of Rice
(Oryza sativay: Key Food and Feed Nutrients and Anti-nutrients. Retrieved July
16. 2014 Accessed from htip://www.oecd.org/science/biotrack/46815226.pdf.

OZCAN, T., A. AKPINAR-BAYIZIT, L. YILMAZ-ERSAN and B. DELIKANLI.
2014. Phenolics in Human Health. International Journal of Chemical Engineering
and Applications. 5 (5): 393-396.

ROFEROS, L.T., B. 0. JULIANO, and A. DR. FELIX. 2004. Improving Grain Quality
Beyond IR64. Plenary Paper, 17th National Rice R&D Conference, PhilRice,
Mujioz, Nueva Ecija.

ROHMAN, A., S. HELMIYATI, M. HAPASARI, and D. LARASATI
SETYANINGRUM. 2014. Rice in Health and Nutrition. International Food
Research Journal. 21 (1): 13-24.

ROY, P., T. ORIKASA, H. OKADOME, N. NAKAMURA and T. SHIINA.
2011. Processing Conditions, Rice Properties, Health and Environment.
International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health. 8: 1-20.

SAILAJA, Y.S. 1992. Popping and Flaking quality of Sorghum Culitivars in Relation to
Physichochemical Characteristics and In Vitro Starch and Protein Digestibility.
(Ph.D. Thesi). Andhra Pradesh Agricultural University. 200 p.

SAXENA, M., J. SAXENA, R. NEMA, D. SINGH and J. GUPTA. 2013. A.
Phytochemistry of Medicinal Plants. Journal of Pharmacognosy and
Phytochemistry. 1 (6): 168-182.

SIDDIQ, M. 2012. Tropical and Subtropical Fruits: Postharvest Physiology, Processing
and Packaging. USA: John Wiley and Sons Inc. p. 421-424.


SIKORSKI, Z.E. and A. KOLAKOWSKA. 2003. Chemical and Functional Properties of
Food Lipids. CRC Press. New York, USA. p. 13-14.

SITI AZIMA, A.M., A. NORIHAM and N. MANSHOOR. 2014. Anthocyanin content in
relation to the antioxidant activity and properties of Garcinia mangostana peel,
Syzigium cumini and Clitoria ternatea extracts. International Food Research
Journal. 21 (6): 2369-2375.

SMITH, C.W. and R. H. DILDAY. 2003. Rice: Origin, History, Technology and
Production. John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Hoboken, New Jersey. p. 443-449.

SOMPONG, R., S. SIEBENHANDL-EHN and G. LINSBERGER-MARTIN. 2011.
Physicochemical and Antioxidative Properties of Red and Black Rice Varieties
from Thailand, China and Sri Lanka. Food Chemistry. 124: 132-140.

SUKRASNO F., A. KUSNANDAR, H. WAFIQ AULIANA and A. KHAIRUL.
2011. Influence of Drying Method on Flavonoid Content of Cosmos caudatus
(Kunth) Leaves. Research Journal of Medicinal Plant. 5 (2): 189-195.

SUTHARUT, J. and J. SUDARAT. 2012. Total anthocyanin content and antioxidant
activity of germinated colored rice. International Food Research Journal 19(1):
215-221 (2012) Retrieved April 12. 2014 Accessed from
http://www. ifr} .upm.edu.my/19%20(01)%20201 1/(28)IFRJ-2011-
060%20Sudarat.pdf.

TABUAC, E. B. 2005. Nutritional and Sensory Qualities of Cooked Parboiled and Non-
Parboiled Dehulled Rice (Oryza sativa L.) (IR 68) at Soft Dough and Hard Dough
Stage. [MS Thesis]. University of the Philippines Los Banos, College, Laguna.
110 p. [Available at the UPLB Library].

TAMANNA, S., S. PARVIN, S. KUMAR, A. DUTTA, A. FERDOUSHI, M.
SIDDIQUEE, S. BISWAS and M. HOWLADER. 2013. Content of Some
Minerals and their Bioavailability in Selected Popular Varieties from Bangladesh.
International Journal of Current Microbiology and Applied Sciences. 2 (7): 35-43.


11s

THAPA, N. R. 2012. Effect of Tempering and Other Processing Treatments on the Anti-
nutritional Factors and a Canning Quality Attribute of Dark Red Kidney Beans.
[MS Thesis}. University of Wisconsin-Stout. 131 p.

THONGBAM, P. D., M. RAYCHAUDHURY, A. DURAI, S. PRASADDAS, R.
PATIRAM, K. T. RAMYA, R. FIYAS and S. V. NGACHAN. 2012. Studies on
Grain and Food Quality Traits of Some Indigenous Rice Cultivars of Northeastern
Hill region of India. Journal of Agricultural Science. 4 (3): 75-89

TOMASIK, P. 2003. Chemical and Functional Properties of Food Saccharides. CRC
Press. New York. Washington DC. p. 134-136.

VIDAL, A. J. and B. O. JULIANO. Comparative composition of waxy and nonwaxy rice.
Retrieved April 12, 2014 Accessed from
hitp:/www aaccnet,org/publications/cc/backissues/1967/Documents/Chem44_86.
pdf.

WALTER M. and E. MARCHESAN. 2011. Phenolic Compounds and Antioxidant
Activity of Rice. Brazilian Archives of Biology and Technology. 54 (1): 371-377.

WEBB, D. 2013. Phytochemicals’ Role in Good Health. Conference Issue. 15(9): 70.

WEI, Y.,M. SHOHAG and X. YANG. 2012. Biofortification and Bioavailability of
Rice Grain Zinc as Affected by Different Forms of Foliar Zinc Fertilization.
Retrieved March 6, 2015 Assessed from
http://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id= 10.1371 /journal.pone.0045428.

WHITNEY E. and S. R. ROLFES. 2008. Understanding Nutrition. 11" ed. USA:
Thomson Learning Inc. p. 153-159.

XANGSAYASANE, P.. F. XIE and T, H. BORROMEO. 2009. Grain Quality
Evaluation of Lao High Yielding Cultivars. The Lao Journal of Agriculture and
Forestry. 1 (9): 74-89.


YAMUNA, S. 2011. Thermal Processing Effects on Total Phenolic Content, Antioxidant
Activity. Trypsin Inhibitor Activity and In Vitro Protein Digestibility of Lentils.
MS Thesis. McGill University.

YODMANEE, S., T. T. KARRILA and P. PAKDEECHANUAN. 2011. Physical,
chemical and antioxidant properties of pigmented rice grown in Southern
Thailand, International Food Research Journal. 18 (3): 901-906.

ZIARATI, P. and N. AZIZI. 2013. Chemical Characteristics and Mineral Contents in
Whole rice grains, Hulls, Brown rice, Bran and Polished Ali Kazemi Rice in
Gilan province — North of Iran. International Journal of Farming and Allied
Sciences. 2 (24): 1203-1209.
