Carrying Capacity Assessment of Mt. Balungao Hot and Cold Springs Resort and Hilltop Adventure in Balungao, Pangasinan, Philippines
CHERRY SY PADILLA

UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES LOS BAÑOS

Master of Science in Environmental Science

AUGUST 2014

ABSTRACT

The LGU-operated Mt. Balungao Hot and Cold Springs Resort and Hilltop
Adventure is the only resort in eastern Pangasinan with hot spring waters believed to be
therapeutic thus gaining popularity among local and international visitors. While economic
benefits are being realized, sustainable tourism development needs to be taken into
consideration. Carrying capacity assessment offers a practical and effective tool for tourism destination stakeholders to help attain sustainable tourism. The resort’s physical and social carrying capacities were assessed during the peak
days of Christmas break in 2013 extending to February 2014. Adapting Cifuentes’ (1992)
formulae adjusted by Tran et al. (2007), the estimated daily effective real carrying capacity
of the swimming pools was 443 bathers. Records confirm that there were days that it was
exceeded. Social carrying capacity was assessed through evaluation of recreation
satisfaction of visitors and determination of residents’ attitude towards tourism exploring the
Doxey’s Irridex using semi-structured survey questionnaires. Despite some deficiencies in
the resort, visitors were generally satisfied with their vacation while residents are at the stage of euphoria. Thus, the social carrying capacity of the resort is not exceeded at present. Validation of the standard user requirement of the 2012 ISPSC using visual approach revealed that it was not applicable to the visitor-respondents of the resort.

CHAPTER I

INTRODUCTION

The Philippines, being an archipelagic country, has vast areas of tropical seas and
beaches as well as majestic, legendary mountains ideal as tourism attractions. These
provide astounding sceneries, ideal topography, diverse flora and fauna, water supply,
and other natural capital and raw materials for nature-based tourism at minimal cost. The
Philippine Government has recognized this potential to boost economic growth and has
been highly engaged in promoting tourism in the country with its latest tag line “It’s

More Fun in the Philippines”

Aggressive and constant marketing strategies by the government have brought
rapid growth to the tourism business in the country. The National Statistics and
Coordination Board accounts that visitor arrivals in the Philippines reached 4.3 million in
2012 recording a 9.1% increase relative to the past years. In 2011, the tourism industry
contributed 5.9% to total gross domestic product (GDP). Measured in terms of tourism
direct gross value added (TDGVA), it amounted to Php571.3 billion, which is higher by

10.2% than the previous year.

Tourism delivers great economic gains. However, it is fundamentally built and
dependent upon the natural and socio-cultural capital that is vulnerable to exploitation
due to human interferences. Growth of tourism industry also entails an increase in
resource utilization and pollution especially waste generation due to several land use

changes, construction of infrastructures, and regular influx of people. These bring

increased disturbance to the ecological system causing alterations to the various
biophysical processes that shape the landscape of an area. When the natural environment
upon which tourism depends is destroyed, the ability of the site to meet tourist
expectations is also reduced. While continuous development, additional facilities and use
of advanced technology may help mitigate this problem, the unregulated influx of tourists
can result to changes in the spatial structure of the landscape and consequently the
stability of the elements of the ecosystems. These can implicate the flow of materials and
energy thereby decreasing the ability of ecosystems to provide goods and services. This
has prompted the government to incorporate sustainable tourism development in the
country’s Tourism Master Plan to reflect its commitment to sustainability. This has been
more explicitly presented as policies or philosophies in the Tourism Act of 2009
(Republic Act 9593). The Act promotes sustainable tourism development that is
“ecologically sustainable, responsible, participative, culturally sensitive, economically
viable, and ethically and socially equitable for local communities”. Sustainable tourism
development was defined by the World Travel and Tourism Council (WTTC) in 1998 as
“meeting the needs of present tourists and host regions while protecting and enhancing
opportunity for the future through management of resources in such a way that economic,
social and aesthetic needs can be fulfilled while maintaining cultural integrity, essential

ecological processes, biological diversity and life support systems” (Alampay, 2005)

Sustainable tourism development policy necessitates the interaction and
cooperation of the different stakeholders like the national government, the private sectors,

the local community, and the local government units (LGUs). Under the Local

Government Code of 1991 (Republic Act 7160), LGUs are vested full autonomy to
manage economic enterprises like tourism. They are viewed to be in the most strategic
position to move forward towards sustainable tourism since they play a major role in
community development and are vital link of community to the national government. As
such, they were given expanded roles and responsibilities of formulating tourism
development plans and programs, obtaining investment support services, enhancing
tourism facilities, infrastructures and attractions and supervising business concessions,
security and regulation. With these expanded roles, LGUs are concerned in making
decisions towards sustainable tourism under several constraints like limited budget,

competence in prioritization and governance (Javier and Elazigue, 2011).

Another concern for sustainable tourism development for the LGUs is the need
for regular reliable research information. Accurate data are needed in making good
decisions for identifying opportunities for improvement, developing research agenda,
programs and partnerships. LGUs are in best position to gather information such as
tourists’ characteristics, resource inventory and utilization, profiling of local and
international source markets, and similar concerns. At the local level, most research-
related activities include statistics on tourism, cost benefit analysis, economic impact and
impact to policies. In most cases, analysis and integration of the results have faced

difficulties due to insufficient capabilities thus sustainability is not properly assessed.

One practical sustainability assessment tool in the context of tourism is the
determination of the carrying capacity of a destination. Carrying capacity is defined by

the United Nations World Tourism Organization (UNWTO) as the maximum number of

people that may visit a tourist destination at the same time without causing destruction of
the physical, economic, socio-cultural environment and an unacceptable decrease in the
quality of visitors’ satisfaction. Magnan and Duvat (2010) recount the evolution of the
concept as introduced by Malthus in 1798 with the perspective of resource limitations
and was first formalized scientifically at the onset of the 20" century in the field of
ecological studies. Its importance in human recreational concerns was later recognized in
the 1960s in national parks in USA due to increasing park visitation. This has set the
paradigm for addressing and limiting the extent of tourism development and tourism use
which can be achieved by setting threshold limits to maintain the ability of the destination
to continuously provide quality tourism products to visitors so as to avoid reaching the
point of stagnation or worse, the point of decline in the Tourism Area Life Cycle (TALC)
as illustrated by the Butler’s Model (Butler, 2011). Carrying capacity assessment offers a
practical and effective tool that can be used by tourism site operators to attain sustainable
tourism that is balanced with ecological integrity, economic goals, high level of tourist

satisfaction, and better quality of life for the local community.

Statement of the Research Problem

The “Mt. Balungao Hot and Cold Springs Resort and Hilltop Adventure” is one of
the many tourism sites in the country that is being managed by a municipal government.
The development of the resort was set off in 1996 after series of surveys and studies
conducted in collaboration with the Philippine Tourism Authority (PTA). Proposal for the

tourism development of the area was made after having found that the area is suitable as a

tourism destination that will be utilized as an investment opportunity to augment the
socio-economic well-being of the local community. More than six hectares of land at the

foot of Mt. Balungao was then allocated to the LGU to be developed as a tourism area.

Mt. Balungao is an inactive volcano which offers cold and hot spring water with
sulfuric content believed by locals to cure many dermal and epidermal ailments. This is
considered as the resort’s pull factor together with the therapeutic benefits of hot water
baths which the Great Paralytic, Apolinario Mabini himself, sought. With the hot and
cold swimming resort right at the foot of the mountain, Mt. Balungao was made more
popular as a naturally stunning vacation destination providing a number of adventurous
activities with its several recreational facilities such as the three cold and two hot water
swimming pools, pavilion/multi-purpose hall, overnight room accommodations (2-room
cabana), picnic groves, camping site, cottages, 620-meter zip line, spider bungee
trampoline, and the tracks for All-Terrain Vehicle (ATV), bicycle and climbing/hiking
More extreme outdoor activities such as trekking the Karab-as and Am-amutel trails and
climbing the 382 meters above sea level Mt. Balungao are also available with the aid of
local tourist guides. Local food products like the “100 goat recipes”, “wba”, “patopat”,

“tupig’” and other delicacies also complement the various tourism activities.

Various promotions for the tourism in the municipality made the town as one of
the most visited places in the province of Pangasinan. With these, the municipality of
Balungao recognized the need to invest in more facilities to further boost tourist arrival

thus, the concept of launching the first “Ropes Course” adventure, which consists of low

and high level elements recommended for team building ac ies, is now underway. A

longer zipline at 1.4 kilometers is also under construction simultaneously with road

widening project and resort development to draw more visitors to the resort.

With the emergence of tourism facilities and products in the town, increased
social and economic activities have been increasingly evident. Influx of tourists have
generated income for the municipality and likewise created jobs and livelihood for the

locals. However, it also comes with various environmental issues that can result to

undesirable changes in the area. One of these is the increased resource utilization which
may compromise the allocation for the local community. Water is the major natural
resource that is being used in the resort because of the five swimming pools which are its
major tourism facilities. At this point, water availability and water utilization for tourism
and for local residents have not been fully evaluated. | Another environmental concern
associated with the growth of tourism is the increase in solid waste generation. While
solid waste management is being implemented in the area, system for monitoring of
management implementation has not been established. Proper waste management would
play a crucial role in maintaining good perception on the tourism site and in preserving
the environment. Tourism growth also comes with congestion and an increase in the
level of tourists and local residents’ interaction which can cause negative perception
resulting to a shift in the level of acceptance of tourism in the area. Understanding these

social aspects of tourism in the area has not been fully considered.

Research Questions

The carrying capacity assessment of Mt. Balungao Hot and Cold Springs Resort
and Hilltop Adventure in the municipality of Balungao, Pangasinan will be guided by the

following research questions:

1. What is the average individual standard requirement of the visitor-respondents that

can be used as guideline in estimating the maximum bather load of the study resort?

2. What are the user capacities of the swimming pools- the major recreational facilities

of the resort- and the limiting factors that affect their capacities?

3. What is the perception of the visitor-respondents about the tourism facilities and

services of the resort?

4. What is the attitude of community people towards the tourists and tourism activities

in the municipality?

5. Does the water utilization of the resort affect the water resource allocation for the

local residents?

6. Does solid waste generation brought by tourism in the study site pose challenges on

waste disposal management of the municipality?

7. Is the guideline of the 2012 International Swimming Pool and Spa Code (ISPSC)
Public Version 1.0 regarding standard user requirement applicable to the visitor-

respondents in the study resort during the peak days of the study period?

Objectives of the Study

Since usable land for tourism, water supply, and solid waste disposal are
important considerations in measuring physical carrying capacity (Tantrigama, 1998) in
addition to the tourism facilities and other tourist requirements, large number of tourists,
perceptions of local residents, and recreation satisfaction of visitors are the primary
components in determining social carrying capacity, the objectives of the study will delve

on these aspects.

The general objective is to assess the physical and social carrying capacities of

Mt. Balungao Hot and Cold Spring Resort and Hilltop Adventure.

The specific objectives are the following:

1. Describe and assess the tourism resources of the resort which are important in the

determination of carrying capacity;

2. Determine the local community residents’ attitude and visitors’ perception towards

tourism in the study area; and

3. Validate the standard on user requirement set by the 2012 International Swimming
Pool and Spa Code (ISPSC) Public Version 1.0 to the visitor-respondents of the

study resort

Significance of the Study

The Mt. Balungao Hot and Cold Springs Resorts and Hilltop Adventure, like any
other tourism destination located on a mountain or hill, is highly dependent on natural
resources specifically water and forest ambiance to sustain its economic activities. In the
attainment of sustainable tourism and consequently sustainable development, having
economic growth, ecological conservation, and social welfare each reinforcing the other
should be ensured. To attain this goal, it is basically necessary to look into the limits
involved in the tourism activities and this is the determination of the carrying capacity of
the tourism systems. In fact, as a form of environmental management, the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), of which the Philippines is a member-country,
requires the determination of carrying capacity of ecotourism sites (Sunkar and Cereno,

2013).

Several carrying capacity assessments in the context of tourism destinations have
already been conducted in the Philippines particularly on protected areas such as small
islands, parks and seascapes with focus on the determination of the physical carrying
capacity which is the assessment of the physical resources and the recreational facilities
of the tourism destinations to be able to estimate the maximum number of visitors that
should be allowed in the area as guide for effective management of tourism. No related
study has been conducted on LGU-managed tourism destination in a forest reservation
yet. This study will therefore serve as pilot area for baseline study on LGU-operated
tourism not just in the assessment of physical carrying capacity but also of social carrying

capacity which takes into account the residents and the tourists of the study site.

Furthermore, this is an initial attempt in the country to validate the guideline on the
standard user requirement set by the 2012 ISPSC Public Version 1.0 (2011) in the

estimation of public swimming pool bather load.

The assessment of the physical and social carrying capacities of the resort is
beneficial in the identification of opportunities for improvement towards sustainable
tourism development by the LGU of Balungao through the Municipal Tourism Office
(MTO) which has the authority to operate and manage the resort. This will provide a
practical and effective tool in the analysis of the current tourism scenario to be able to
examine the extent of effect of the high level of tourist arrivals on the availability and
quality of environment and environmental resources as well as the level of satisfaction of
tourists and local residents. This is crucial because appropriate management of the natural
resources and the environmental components of tourism are important not only for the
economic success of the tourism destination, but for the protection and conservation of
the natural environment and the consideration of several stakeholders especially now that
MTO is in the stage of conceptualization of a Tourism Code and into several construction

and development projects for the expansion and improvement of the resort.

Understanding these concepts and taking the results of this study into account can
also be used by other tourism destination owners/operators or individual agencies to
facilitate planning for effective policy-making, rational decision-making and successful

management towards tourism sustainability.

i}

Scope and Limitations of the Study

There are several types of carrying capacity namely physical carrying capacity,
economic carrying capacity, social carrying capacity and ecological carrying capacity
(Zhang, 2005). The focus of this study was the assessment of the physical and social
carrying capacities of Mt. Balungao Hot and Cold Springs Resort and Hilltop Adventure,
in Balungao, Pangasinan. Physical carrying capacity assessment was focused on the
primary recreational attraction of the resort- the swimming pools. Assessment also
included the basic infrastructures, facilities, and personnel associated with swimming

likewise the ecological resources particularly the hot and cold spring water.

Since social carrying capacity involves the quality of experience of visitors and
the influence of tourism in the host community, social carrying capacity assessment
therefore included both the determination of the attitudes of the community residents
towards the presence of tourists and tourism and also the quality of the experience of
visitors in the resort. Methods of assessment were focused on the exploration of the

Doxey’s Irritation Index (Irridex) and Likert Scale.

The limited period and resources for data gathering had bearing on the selection
of respondents. Community survey was conducted to household-respondents focusing on
the two barangays that are nearest to the resort namely, Pugaro and Poblacion, which are
the communities generally impacted by the tourism in the municipality. Moreover, since
the concern for resort capacity is during peak season wherein visitor arrivals can be

overwhelming, estimation of carrying capacity focused on the peak months particularly

during the Christmas break which ranks second highest in terms of visitor arrival based

on the resort’s records,

Furthermore, survey of visitors was conducted on the peak days of December
2013 to the first two days of February 2014 with only the willing on-site visitors as
respondents. And since the nature of the study on visitor satisfaction requires the
assessment and perception of visitors who had experienced or seen the swimming
facilities of the resort, respondents were purposively chosen thus the representativeness
and generalizability of the result was limited to the visitor-respondents during the conduct

of the survey.

In addition, only approximations were used due to lack of records on lay-out and

measurements of the facilities of the resorts.

CHAPTER IL

REVIEW OF RELATED LITERATURE

Ecotourism as a Form of Sustainable Forest Tourism

Hall (2011) presents the extreme significance of forests in terms of
environmental, economic and social services during the International Year of the Forests
in 2011. Aside from their significant role of conserving water and biodiversity,
preventing flood and erosion, being carbon sinks in the context of climate change, forests
are also widely recognized in attracting tourists for recreation. Kuvan (2005) conducted a
case study regarding the use of forests for tourism purposes in Antalya-Belek and he also
noted the importance of forests for tourism. He considers forests as key touristic and
recreational resources that can be integrated with accommodation, transport facilities and

service infrastructures in Turkey.

In Southeast Asia, Sunkar and Cereno (2013) remark that the countries abound
with majestic mountains, thick lush rainforests, rivers, and lakes, as well as tribes,
ethnicities, and cultures which form one of the biggest diversities of life making many
countries in the region as top tourist destinations in the world. Some of the forest tourism
activities identified in the region are trail walking, plank and canopy walking, mountain
biking, jungle hiking, camping, spotting of wildlife such as bird watching, and other
adventure options. These forest-based and other nature-based tourism resources give a

big potential for expansion and further promotions by the countries in the region


In many regions worldwide, forests have been considered an important factor in
tourism because they basically constitute the natural capital and raw materials of tourism.
The contribution of forest tourism in finding solutions to economic development has been
recognized worldwide particularly in developing countries (Cunha, 2010). According to
Hall (2011), the United Nation Food and Agriculture Organization (UNFAO) estimates
showed that 3.7% of world's forests in 2010 were primarily used for the provision of

recreation, tourism, education or conservation of cultural and spiritual heritage.

Although the overall economic contribution of forest tourism and recreation is
hard to determine due to limited statistical data, available information illustrates that
billions of tourists are paying recreational visits to forests every year. For instance, in a
study of tourism in the publicly owned forested lands in Northern Ontario, Canada in
2008, Hunt ef al. noted that the 1,137 tourist sites of the region generated revenue of

approximately $114 million in 2000.

However, mismanagement of tourism activities especially those that are nature-
dependent can lead to degradation of natural resources and protected areas such as
forests. As cited by Cunha (2010), the common environmental issues of nature-based
tourism especially in mountain recreations around the world are deterioration of
vegetation and modified water and soil dynamics, erosion, creation of mud, improper
waste management and water contamination. According to Kuvan (2005), land use
change or deforestation, is likely the human actions responsible for most of the negative
environmental impacts of tourism on natural resources worldwide since forest lands are

converted and allocated for the construction of tourist facilities, accommodation, access

roads, and other infrastructure. This led Belek Conservation Forest of Turkey under
severe pressure of tourism because they overlooked the sustainable use of natural and
cultural resources that resulted to serious problems in these forest areas. In the case of
Cambodia where the Great Angkor Temple Complex (a UNESCO World Heritage Site)
lies, majority of forest loss is partially due to charcoal production to cater to the tourist
industry wherein all grilled meats are cooked with charcoal. Several traditional Khmer

dishes popular to tourists are likewise cooked in charcoal hot pot (Gaughan ef al, 2009)

In a Brazilian Atlantic Forest National Park, Cunha (2010) discovered that large

diurnal vertebrates were negatively affected by visitors hiking the trail. He further cited

other disturbances to fauna caused by forest visitations that are revealed by several
studies and these include changes in animal behavior including the avoidance of visited
areas, lower rates of social interaction, intensification of aggressive interaction leading to
high infant mortality rates, diet contamination, change in foraging patterns, and disease

transmission.

Moreover, it has generally been observed that tourism causes heavy consumption
of natural resources and at the same time generates so much waste and other
environmental problems thus posing great potential damage to ecological systems. As
Hummel (1984) points out (as cited by Kuvan, 2005), once forests are destroyed or badly
degraded, it is quite impossible to restore them and sustain their former functions. In this
context, appropriate management of natural resources as well as the environmental
components of tourism and tourism products is becoming popular and important for the

protection and conservation of the natural environment at the same time for the success of

tourism destinations. Kuvan (2005) lists some environmental indicators and criteria that
are being used in several tourist areas in the framework of forest productivity and
sustainability principles. He said that eco-labeling schemes, environmental certification
and awards, environmental quality indices for quality and competitiveness applied for
tourism enterprises will entice them to comply with environmental regulations and
policies thereby curbing the negative environmental impacts of tourism on the natural

resource base.

Similarly, sustainable forest management according to Font and Tribe (2000)
encompasses not only producing sustainable timber but also catering for recreation and
tourism, as well as social, cultural, economic, environmental, and other functions. They
suggest that tourism management plan should also be an integral part of the forest
management and should be revised every ten years. Participation in tourism management
costs by institutions outside the forests but are benefiting from its recreational value
should also be considered. They further suggest that inside protected areas, all tourist
activities should be incorporated in detailed visitors' plans and these should take an
integral part in management plans. It is also important to regularly assess the impacts of
tourism and that all facilities should be planned according to the carrying capacity of the
tourism area. Outside protected areas, they relate the importance of managing visitors and
measuring and controlling impacts. They also propose that large developments such as
tourist resorts and weekend houses should only be constructed near already built up areas

outside forests,


Font and Tribe (2000) likewise suggest that to attain sustainable forest
management, there is a need to ratify the general principles of sustainable management of
resources. The principles of sustainability according to Tuna (2011) include concern
about the future, equality between different generations, participation by social and
political groups, balance between economic and environmental factors, environmental
capacities, qualitative factors rather than quantitative, and taking local ecosystems into
consideration. It appears that ecological tourism or ecotourism is the most appropriate
form of sustainable tourism development because these ecological principles are the main
principles as to its development. Its policies are also in accordance with the sustainability
principle that natural and human resources are not just for the present but for the future
generations to enjoy therefore integrated efforts must be done for these resources to be

preserved today.

Ecotourism Development in the Phi

pines

Ecotourism was officially defined in the Philippines as “a form of sustainable
tourism within a given natural and/or cultural area where community participation,
conservation and management of biodiversity, respect for culture and indigenous
knowledge systems and practices, environmental education and ethics as well as
economic benefits are fostered and pursued for the enrichment of host communities and

satisfaction of visitors” (Khalifah and Yaik, 2013).

While tourism offers great economic benefits, the Philippine government was also

aware of its various negative impacts, thus the Philippine Tourism Master Plan was

formulated by the Department of Tourism (DoT) in 1991 with the help of United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) and UNWTO. In 1999, Executive Order 111 was
signed by the Philippine President to establish the guidelines for ecotourism
development. A multi-sectoral National Ecotourism Development Council (NEDC)
headed by the DoT and the Department of Environment and Natural Resources (DENR)
was created based on this directive to develop and implement ecotourism programs in the
country. Regional consultations and national planning workshops were conducted to
discuss issues/concerns and generate action plans for the improvement of the tourism
industry in the country focusing on the importance of natural and cultural protection of

heritage values (Sunkar and Cereno, 2013),

‘As an ASEAN member country, the Philippines’ ecotourism industry is also
gearing up towards ASEAN integration. Sunkar and Cereno (2013) relate that regional
and sub-regional cooperation is expected to generate synergized action plans,
international funding and technical assistance, increasing the chance for success of
ecotourism sustainable development. They also narrate that though the Philippines has
yet to catch up in terms of tourism revenue relative to its neighboring Southeast Asian
countries, DoT reports that the preceding years were successful in terms of visitor

arrivals, GDP, and jobs generated

Methodologies for Assessing Recreational Carrying Capacity

Since sustainable tourism signifies the wise use of tourism resources for present

and future needs, it is just proper to act in accordance with the Precautionary Principle by

setting limits on the use of tourism space and facilities through the assessment of the

carrying capacity of the tourism destination to maintain the quality of tourism products.

User capacity, visitor capacity and carrying capacity are one and the same concept
(Rees ef al., 2007) and Jovicic and Dragin (2008) explain that it can be assessed by
measurement of the destination as a whole with all its facilities or components or by
measurement of each of the individual, specific services and facilities. This should be
characterized by a tolerance limit that should not be exceeded so as not to experience the
negative effects of tourism. But just as Rees ef al. (2007) have mentioned, carrying

capacity does not only imply measurement by number of people.

Moreover, Jovicic and Dragin (2008) also elucidate that despite numerous
publications regarding the procedure for calculating and generating formulae for carrying
capacity, there is still no reliable and scientifically validated method. Different authors
use different standards depending on their experiences and empirical evidences. It varies
from every destination to the other depending on the natural features of the area, the way
the area is used, the behavior of tourists and community people, resort management and
goals, and other considerations. Carrying capacity therefore is site-specific and user-

specific

Carrying capacity, according to Rees ef al. (2007), was first used in public land
planning in the 1970s but due to the increasing number of visitation in parks, concern
leaned towards the associated impacts on resources and visitor experiences hence the
National Park Service needed to focus attention on carrying capacity assessment. In the

early 1990s, the National Park Service developed the Visitor Experience and Resource

Protection (VERP) framework to address user capacities in the National Park System
which was eventually applied in other national parks in America. Other approaches to
user-capacity management are the Limits of Acceptable Change (LAC), Visitor Impact
Management (VIM), Visitor Activities Management Process (VAMP), and Quality
Upgrading and Learning (QUAL). Alll these methods imply that “with any use comes

some level of impact that must be accepted”

A. Limits of Acceptable Change (LAC) Approach

The LAC is a framework used in recreational carrying capacity assessment
which “sets measurable standards with regards to the extent of use that a natural area
can and should be allowed to tolerate”. It basically deals with “how much change is
acceptable” by determining the environmental and social conditions. This framework
involves nine interrelated steps which result to the setting of standards and

appropriate actions to achieve manageable levels of recreational use.

This method enables the determination as to when enough acceptable change
has occurred. However, since it involves social acceptability, such being a social
phenomenon, it requires stakeholder involvement and support in selecting and setting
indicators and standards, management objectives, and managerial steps to be taken to
control excessive change and this is oftentimes hard to solicit. This process also

involves long planning periods and considerable expense.


The basic logic of the LAC process according to Cole, one of the original

authors of the LAC concept (as cited by the US Department of Interior, 1997), is as

follows.

Identify Two Goals in Conflict. In the case of national parks, the two goals are
usually the protection of environmental conditions and visitor experiences

(goal 1) and the unrestricted access to resources for recreational use (goal 2).

Establish that Both Goals Must Be Compromised. If one or the other goal
cannot be compromised, then the LAC process is not needed—one goal must
simply be compromised as necessary to meet the one that cannot be

compromised.

Decide Which Goal Will Ultimately Constrain the Other. In the case of
national parks, the goal of protecting environmental conditions and visitor

experiences will almost always constrain the goal of unrestricted access

Write LAC Standards for this Ultimately Constraining Goal. LAC standards

express the minimally acceptable conditions for the environment and visitor.

Compromise this Goal Until the Standards Are Reached. Allow the
environmental conditions and visitor experiences to degrade only to the
minimally acceptable standard. Recreational access should not be

substantially restricted until the standards are reached.


* Compromise the Other Goal as Much as Necessary. Once standards for
environmental conditions and visitor experiences are reached no more
degradation is allowed, and recreational access is restricted as needed to

maintain standards,

B. Visitor Experience and Resource Protection (VERP)

The VERP framework according to Belnap ef al. (1997) is one of the
adaptations of the LAC process. It is a planning and management framework with
emphasis on the impacts of visitor use while protecting the park resources and the
visitor experience. The factors that basically influence these are: visitor behavior; use
levels, types of use; timing of use; and location of use. The VERP framework is

composed of nine elements:

Element 1: Assemble an Interdisciplinary Project Team

Element 2: Develop a Public Involvement Strategy

Element 3: Develop Statements of Park Purpose, Significance, and Primary

Interpretive Themes; Identify Planning Constraints
Element 4: Analyze Park Resources and the Existing Visitor Use

Element 5: Describe a Potential Range of Visitor Experiences and Resource

Conditions (potential prescriptive zones)

Element 6: Allocate the Potential Zones to Specific Locations in the Park

(prescriptive management zoning)

Element 7: Select Indicators and Specify Standards for Each Zone; Develop a

Monitoring Plan
Element 8: Monitor Resource and Social Indicators

Element 9: Take Management Action

C. Visitor Impact Management (VIM)

The VIM Framework was developed by the US National Parks and
Conservation Association with the goal of controlling or reducing the undesirable

impacts of recreational use. The positive attributes of the framework include

simplicity, flexibility, cost effectiveness, timeliness. It also takes into account inputs
from stakeholders and local residents. However, it connotes diminished objectivity
and cultural sensitivity issues (Farrel and Marion, 2002). The eight interrelated steps
according to Graefe, 1990, 1991 and Vaske ef al., 1995 (as cited in Jenkins and

Pigram, 2008) are:

1. Pre-assessment database review
2. Review of management objectives

3. Selection of key indicators

4. Selection of standards for key impact indicators

5. Comparison of standards and existing conditions

6. Identification of probable cause and impacts
7. Identification of management strategies

8. Implementation

D. Visitor Activity Management Process (VAMP)

VAMP is a flexible framework which allows incorporation of process,
planning and program, monitoring and evaluation. It has been used in Canada since
the 1980s. Graham ef al. (as cited by Jenkins and Pigram, 2008) however argue that
though it is well-developed at the service planning level, it lacks power at the
management planning level. It also constraints the opportunities for experience in

management plans and zoning,

E. Quality Upgrading and Learning (QUAL)

The QUAL Process was developed by the US Army Corps of Engineers
during the 1990s with the objective of establishing carrying capacities at Corps lakes.
This process highlights two aspects of quality of visit experiences namely; the reasons
for choosing the specific place for the desired recreation activity and the observed
changes that occur in the area for repeat visitors. Systematic visitor inventory and
interviews are very important in this process according to Chilman ef al. (1995) and
this requires the collection of place-specific social data involving the number and type
of visitors and the visitors’ perceptions of the conditions and changes in the area. The

QUAL Process involves the following:

1. Setting of management goal such as quality recreation.
2. Generation of inventory of existing conditions.
3. Analysis of alternatives.
4, Objective setting and implementation.

5. Monitoring and evaluation

Carrying Capacity Assessments of Tourism Areas in the Philippines

Carrying capacity assessments have been conducted in the Philippines in the
context of small islands, coastal areas, and Protected Areas (PAs) utilized for tourism.
These assessments are principally focused on the determination of the physical carrying
capacity which involves the assessment of the resources and facilities of the tourism area
for the computation of the maximum number of visitors that should be allowed to enter

the areas and use the recreational facilities.

In 2004 for instance, Kagaoan conducted an ecotourism carrying capacity
assessment of the ecological, environmental and physical resources carrying capacities of
a wildlife sanctuary in Taganak Turtle Island to compute the limits of visitors. In her
study, she argued that to be able to appropriately assess carrying capacity which includes
sustainability of the different aspects of environment (natural, social, cultural, and
economic), maintaining the integrity of the ecosystem and considering the satisfaction of
resource users are equally important. With these, she found it necessary to determine the
“physical, environmental, social and cultural needs of existing and transient residents” as

well as the resource and habitat needs of wildlife. She pointed out that these requirements.

particularly land area, beach area, and water supply should be spared from tourism
development and activities thereby factored them in the computation of carrying capacity

of Taganak Turtle Islands.

After evaluation of the limits of physical and environmental resources of the
island, Kagaoan computed the maximum number of visitors that could be allowed to
swim, snorkel and watch turtles to define the ecological carrying capacity of the Turtle
Island using the standard set by the World Tourism Organization. She recommended a
limit of 72 persons per day during the lean season and 216 persons per day during the
peak season to avoid adverse tourism impacts with the assumptions that only low impact
tourism and minimal infrastructure development that are compatible with the general

ecotourism plan are constructed in the area

For coastal ecotourism, Quicoy and Briones (2009) assessed the carrying capacity
of resorts in Calatagan, Batangas, Philippines particularly swimming using two
standards. One is adopted from Boullon (1985) as cited in Libosada (1998) with the
average individual standard of 500m? and the other is the Visitor Carrying Capacity
Guidelines by the Florida Department of Environmental Protection, Division of
Recreation and Parks (undated) with SOft? to 200f? or 4.65m? to 9.30m? water area

requirements per swimmer.

To estimate the carrying capacity, it was assumed that the swimming area was
equal to the shore length which is 48 km multiplied by the distance from the shore
seaward which is 0.2km. With this, the swimming area was assumed to be 9.6km’ or

9,600,000m?, Using Boullon’s standard, the carrying capacity for swimming in Calatagan

beach was 19.2. With rotation coefficient of 3, the average daily visit was 58. This
implies that tourists should be limited to 58 per day. Using the Visitor Carrying Capacity
Guidelines by the Florida Department of Environmental Protection, Division of
Recreation and Parks, the carrying capacity was 2,087 and allowed daily visitors was
6,261 for the lower limit of 4.65m? while carrying capacity was 522 and allowed daily

visitors was 1,565 for the upper limit of 9.30m’.

Using 2007 data, average daily visits during the lean season from June to
February were 75 while 1,027 during the peak season from March to May. Using
Boullon’s standard, it showed that the average daily visits for both seasons are already
way beyond the carrying capacity for swimming. On the other hand, considering the
lower and upper limits of the Carrying Capacity Guidelines used by the Florida
Department of Environmental Protection, the average daily visits for both seasons are
still way below the Calatagan Beach’s carrying capacity in terms of swimming. The
authors found Boullon’s average individual standard big for Philippine scenario having,
observed that the tourists in the water were within each other's reach quantifying it at
about 2-10 meters away from the others hence the authors considered the latter guideline

more suited to Calatagan or even to Philippine scenario as a whole

Furthermore, the Ecosystems Research and Development Bureau (ERDB), the
principal research arm of the Department of Environment and Natural Resource (DENR),
recognized the importance of assessing the carrying capacity (CarCap) of tourism sites,
hence, CarCap assessment specifically physical carrying capacity, of several Protected

Areas (PAs) such as parks, small islands and seascapes for ecotourism was made one of

the components of its Banner Programs initiated in 2008. As of 2013, ERDB has
completed the CarCap assessment of 21 PAs in the different regions of the country with
the use also of the Boullon’s Formula. With this, they have recommended the threshold
limit that will guide management with regards to the number of visitors that should be
allowed to use the ecotourism facilities in these PAs to minimize or avoid negative
ecological impacts. From the results of these studies, preparation of CarCap Models
which served as inputs in formulating the national guideline for CarCap Assessments was
made. Furthermore, a Manual on CarCap Assessment for Ecotourism Management in
Protected Areas and Sustainable Development of Community-Based Forest Management
Sites was developed. This manual however, is still under review by the Protected Area

and Wildlife Bureau according to the author.

In the CarCap assessments, ERDB determined the average standard individual
requirement through survey method whereby visitors/tourists were asked how much
space they need to fully and safely enjoy a recreational facility without disturbing other

visitors/tourists.

The Host Community and the Tourists

Saveriades (2000) points out that attitude and perception towards tourism are
important considerations towards carrying capacity assessments. Attitude, according to
Saveriades (2000) and McDougal (1987) as cited in Saveriades (2000) is an enduring
predisposition towards a particular aspect of one’s environment reflected in the way one

thinks, feels, and behaves with respect to that aspect. Attitude is reinforced by

perceptions and beliefs of reality said Getz (2011) further. He also narrates that “many
researchers feel that attitudes are structured along three dimensions which are the
cognitive (perceptions and beliefs); the affective (likes and dislikes) and behavioral
{actions or expressed intents)”. Perception, on the other hand, is the immediate or
intuitive recognition or appreciation of moral, psychological or aesthetic qualities

(freedictionary.com).

Such attitude and perception by visitors and host community towards tourism
determine tourist-host interrelationships which define the behavioral component of
recreational carrying capacity. This behavioral component reflects the quality of visitor's
recreational experience which is focused on the encounters with other visitors and
perceived crowding. Crowding or increasing number of visitors in an area at one time
causes social impacts and as Wagar stated (as cited by Manning e” a/., 2002), when more
people visit a park, the environmental resources of the area and the quality of visitor
experience are both affected. The quality of experience that a visitor will accept before
seeking alternative destination and the degree of tolerance of host population with regards
to the presence of tourists compose the two aspects of social carrying capacity, according
to Lopez-Bonilla and Lopez-Bonilla (2008). They define social carrying capacity as the
maximum level of use that can be absorbed by an area without an unacceptable decline in
the quality of experience of visitors and without unacceptable adverse impact on the
area’s society. This is so because tourist satisfaction, which is found to decline with the
increase in level of tourist use, is considered a principal indicator in measuring carrying

capacity.


Diedrich and Buades (2009) also explored the importance of residents’
perceptions of tourism impacts in the life cycle of tourism industry. With Butler’s Model
of Tourism Area Life Cycle, they believe that understanding and assessing these impacts
is crucial in the sustenance and long-term success of any tourism endeavor. They
consider local perceptions as indicators of decline of tourism destination. Local
opposition was found to be the leading indicator of decline because such negative attitude
among residents can hinder the success and sustainability of tourism destinations. This

finding is also affirmed by several other studies.

The importance of incorporating local reactions to tourism as an element in
monitoring programs for management was also given emphasis by Faulkner and
Tideswell (1997) if sustainability is aimed. Tourism planners have observed the value of
employing greater participation of community members in planning. This could be
attributed to the fact that they are the ones mostly affected by the impacts of tourism
activities and that they are recognized as essential actors in the ‘hospitality atmosphere”
of a tourism destination, according to Simmons (1994). Liu (2003) affirms this by citing
‘Smith (1994) that the act of involving and rewarding the local people, being themselves
part of the tourism product, is essential because they are being interacted with the tourists
with their attitudes and behavior constituting the “hospitality resource” of the tourist

destination.


Doxey’s Irritation Index (Irridex) and Likert Scale

As has been established by several studies, tourism will not be successful
especially in the long run if not all stakeholders are taken into account. Hence, the
community people, tagged as the host of tourists in an area, are important consideration

in local tourism development.

Beeton (2006) narrates that in 1975, Doxey proposed a set of stages which
describes the host community’s response to and relationship with an increasing number
of visitors. Doxey called this set of stages the Irridex which is a tool in assessing social
carrying capacity in the context of local residents. Doxey relates (as cited by Beeton,
2006) that the model describes the community’s responses to the cumulative effects of
tourism development on social interrelationships in the host community. It is used to
analyze the community’s attitude or behavior particularly irritation towards tourism. The
Irridex reflects the reactions of the local people being euphoric at the early stage of
tourism, exhibiting excitement over the economic opportunities and social benefits that
tourism may have to offer thus, they welcome visitors and investors. But when benefits
are not realized by all, the stage elevates to apathy with the local residents tending to take
visitors for granted. With significant increase in tourist arrivals, the apathy will further
escalate to annoyance whereby the increasing number of visitors pose competition for
several resources between local residents and tourists. This stage signifies the saturation
point with the community reaching the social carrying capacity of the tourism
destination. With increased crowding problems, local people start to show antagonism to

tourists/visitors. This is the extreme phase with the residents blaming the tourists and


tourism activities as the cause of several problems in the community and this sometimes

may lead to hostility. Beeton (2006) relates that carrying capacity is exceeded at this

stage. The different stages of the Irridex with the corresponding characteristics focusing.

on social relations are shown in Table |

Table 1. Doxey’s Irritation Index showing social relations.

SOCIAL
STAGE CHARACTERISTICS
RELATIONSHIPS
Small number of visitors
- « Visitors and investors Visitors seek to merge with the local
eon are welcome community
Host community welcomes tourism
Limited commercial tourism
activity
« Visitors taken for
granted Visitor numbers increase
Visitors are ignored
‘Apathy

* More formal
relationships between
hosts and guests

Relationships between tourists and
the host community is more
formalized

« Resident misgivings
Annoyance about tourism
+ Range of saturation
points approached

Number of tourists grows
significantly

Increased involvement of external
commercial concerns

Increased competition for resources
between tourists and residents
Locals concerned about tourism

« Inritations openly

expressed Open hostility from locals
Antagonism —_« Residents perceive

tourists as the cause of Attempts to limit damage and

the problems tourism flows

Source: Doxey. 1975 as cited in Becton, 2006


A limitation of this framework is that it assumes the homogeneity of a whole
community when in fact it is heterogeneous with different sectors having different
characteristics, attitudes, perceptions and reactions towards community development. But
according to Beeton (2006), despite its being too simplistic, community planners still
refer to the Irridex treating it useful in the evaluation of the potential negative impacts of
tourism and in the assessment of the level of interrelationship between community
members and tourists where tourism development is taking place. Thus, the framework
remains one of the most widely cited frameworks in considering host community

responses to tourism (Page and Connel, 2006).

The Likert Scale is used in the analysis of the statements that are translated from
the characteristics of the different stages of the Irridex as well as in the analysis of the
visitors’ perception on crowding. The Likert Scale, developed in 1932 by Rensis Likert,
is a popular and useful question method used in surveys that allows the quantification of
opinion, perception, experience or satisfaction-based items. The questions are rated by
respondents based on a point scale that ranges in order of intensity or how extreme one
statement is from the other or the quality from high to low or best to worst using five or

seven levels (Allen and Seaman, 2007)

Saveriades (2000) used the Irridex model when he performed a survey to establish
the social tourism carrying capacity of four tourist regions in the east coast of the
Republic of Cyprus in investigating the attitudes and perceptions of the local people
towards tourism. With set of statements based on the Irridex in his questionnaire, he

found that enthusiasm, spontaneity, and hospitality express the feelings of majority of the

resident-respondents and that only a small percentage conveyed apathy or indifference
towards the presence of tourists. Only one interviewee exhibited irritation and
resentment. The author therefore translated these findings as first stage of euphoria in
Doxey’s Irritation Index having found no evidence of negative feelings towards tourists
in the regions. He concluded that social capacity limit of the tourist areas has not been
exceeded since majority of the residents actually did not “express the wish for a reduction
on the level of tourist arrivals” but “wanted tourism to be established”. Moreover, only
few complained that they “feel like foreigners in their own town” or “feel that their life is

impeded by the presence of tourists”.

Commissioned by Tourism Raglan, Ryan and Cooper (2004) also applied the
Irridex when they identified the attitudes of the residents towards current levels of
tourism in Raglan, New Zealand and to ascertain the residents’ feelings towards future
tourism development. Respondents were asked to rate statements reflecting different
types of attitude towards tourism development in the study areas with a 5-point scale to
draw their level of agreement. The scale was one where 0 = “Not Applicable/Don’t

Know/Have No Opinion”, | = “Strongly Disagree” and 5 = “Strongly Agree”

As previously mentioned, the social carrying capacity of a tourist destination
necessitates the assessment of both the level of tolerance or irritation of the local
residents to the presence of tourists and the quality of the recreational experience of
visitors to the tourism area. However, it has been noted by many researchers that social
carrying capacity threshold is the most difficult to measure primarily because it depends

on value judgments by humans which involve high level of subjectivity,


With this, Manning ef al. (2002) did a series of visitor surveys to identify
indicators and standards of quality of visitor experience and to estimate the carrying
capacity of Yosemite National Park using response scale which ranged from | (“Not a
Problem”) to 3 (“Big Problem”) to rate the level of seriousness of different factors that
could influence visitor satisfaction such as 1) traffic congestion on roads, 2) difficulty
finding a parking space, 3) inconsiderate driver, 4) too many tour buses, 5) too many
people on trails, 6) too many people at places like the base of Yosemite Falls, 7) too

much noise, and 8) too many rules and regulations,

Standards of quality which was focused on crowding-related issues using visual
approach with computer-edited photographs were prepared to show different levels of
visitor use. Respondents were asked to rate the acceptability of each photograph on a
scale ranging from +4 (“Very Acceptable”) to -4 (“Very Unacceptable”) with a “Neutral”

point of 0.

The researchers found that crowding-related issues specifically on the number of
visitors on trails and at the attraction sites came out as the potentially important indicators
of standards of quality for visitor experience. Crowding was found to be the “least

enjoyable aspect of visit” to any of the sites in Yosemite National Park.

Bonilla and Bonilla (2008) likewise proposed a measuring methodology on social
carrying capacity in the context of tourists which was carried out in four tourism
destinations in Western Andalusia. This empirical application focused on the perception
of tourists based on their level of satisfaction during their visit to the destination. The

authors set indicators by analyzing the relationship between the level of use of

destinations and the satisfaction of tourists. The level of use was determined by the
tourist density which is the number of tourists visiting a destination and by the social
density which is the number of tourists per 100 residents. The level of tourist satisfaction,
‘on the other hand, was measured through assigning of scores to certain elements of
destination which was used as indicators such as 1) natural attractions, 2) tourist goods
and services, 3) infrastructure, and 4) public services. The scores were on a 10-point scale
reflecting low or high degree of satisfaction. By computing the arithmetic means of the
different tourism elements, it was found that the highest average scores were that of 1)
courtesy and care, and 2) restaurants. The lowest scores were that of 1) taxi services, 2)
bus services, and 3) urban surroundings. In some of the cases, it was revealed that

satisfaction declines when levels of tourist use are higher.

‘A more recent study was also carried out by Ribeiro ef al, (2011) on a Portuguese
beach in Avencas in the Municipality of Cascais utilizing a survey method to analyze
users’ perceptions and opinions to evaluate social carrying capacity. They used 5-point
scale to determine users’ appreciation of some aspects of Avencas beach such as “Very

Bad”,

ad”, “Reasonable”, “Good” and “Very Good”. With 38 respondents, they found
that majority were satisfied with the number of people on the beach during their stay and
were also satisfied with the beach primarily on the aspects of Beauty/Landscape and
Security. Negative perceptions, on the other hand, were assessed in the aspects of Parking
and Accessibility which made the authors affirm other researcher’s observation that
parking can be an important factor in determining beach carrying capacity likewise an

important consideration of beach choice.


The 2012 International Swimming Pool and Spa Code (ISPSC) Public Version 1.0

The 2012 ISPSC Public Version 1.0 was prepared in 2011 by the Swimming Pool
Code Drafting Committee (SPCDC) established by the International Code Council (ICC)
with the cooperating sponsorship of The Association of Pool & Spa Professionals (APSP)
to address the need for a mandatory set of baseline requirements. The ISPSC was
intended to coordinate and enhance, in a single comprehensive guidebook, the provisions
in the International Codes and APSP concerning all aspects of swimming pool and spa
safety to meet the standard requirements of the Virginia Graeme Baker Act or the Pool
and Spa Safety of the United States to adequately protect public health, safety and
welfare. The ISPSC provides minimum regulations and model code development offering
international forum for pool and spa professionals to discuss the science, performance
and improvements to the ICC to be able to promote its mission and consistency in the
application of codes worldwide. The 2012 ISPSC Public Version 1.0 (2011) is available
as a resource document to be used as guide in the adoption and use by jurisdictions

internationally.

Section 403 of the ISPSC recommends the individual space requirement shown in
Table 2 for the estimation of maximum bather load which include Class B pools- public

pools or any pool intended for public recreational use.

Deep area is designated at water depth exceeding 1.52m (5 feet) while shallow
area is at water depth less than 1.52m (5 feet). This classification was taken from the
2012 ISPSC Public Version 1.0 (2011). Similarly, Chapter 8 of the PD 856 defines

“swimming area” to be 1.5m (5 feet) or less.


Table 2. Individual space requirement to determine maximum bather load set by the
2012 ISPSC Public Version 1.0 (2011).

SHALLOW DEEP AREA (NOT DIVING AREA
POOL/DECK AREA INSTRUCTIONAL INCLUDINGTHE (PER DIVING

/WADING AREAS DIVING AREA) BOARD)
Pools with minimum 15 20 300 A?
deck area (1.39 my (1.86 m?) (27.9 m)
Pools with deck area at Pra 15 300 f
least equal the water
surface area (1m) (1.39 m’) (27.9 m’)
Pools with deck area at 8 10 R? 300 A?
least twice the water
surface area (0.74 m’) (0.93 m’) (27.9 m)

Source: 2012 ISPSC, 2011

Visual Approach in Measuring Crowding

Vaske and Shelby (2008) relate that several researchers consider crowding as one
of the most frequently studied issues in the context of parks and outdoor recreation that it
becomes an important evaluative standard in the study of social carrying capacity. They
explain that when an area is evaluated by people as crowded, it means that they compared
the condition that they experienced with their perception of what is acceptable or of what
is standard. Concluding that an area is crowded implies that the existing conditions
exceeded their definitions of standard hence the area is used beyond its capacity. As
Manning et al. (2002) point out, once standards have been reached, carrying capacity has

been reached as well.

In areas where use levels are relatively high, narrative or numerical approach may

be a less appropriate method in researches about crowding norms since respondents are

found to hardly report a discrete maximum acceptable number of encounters with other
visitors or group of visitors. Furthermore, self-reports of encounters by respondents in
relatively high use areas are not accurate (Manning ef al., 1996). This was proven by
Shelby and Colvin (1982) cited in Manning ef al. (1996) on their study of river use
wherein floaters who experienced fewer than 6 encounters per day were able to account
them accurately than in events of higher levels of contact wherein most visitors reported

only about half of which actually occurred

Acknowledging the potential shortcomings of the traditional numerical approach,
arelated study by Manning ef al. (1996) which focused on Delicate Arch in Utah, utilized
image capture technology (ICT) in setting standards of quality in defining and managing
carrying capacity. A series of 16 photographs was developed to illustrate a range of
people-at-one-time (PAOT) that was rated by 473 visitors as to their acceptability. It was
found that there was a strong relationship between the number of people in the

photographs and the acceptability ratings.

ICT has been considered by many researchers as a “potentially useful tool for
visually representing a spectrum of visitor use and impact conditions” used for the
development of visual approach to measuring crowding norms. Theoretical and empirical
literature about norms supports visual approach which may provide a more valid measure
of crowding norms especially in areas that are highly used. This approach, based on
teasoning, is believed to be a more valid estimate of visitor tolerance because respondents
are able to see a realistic portrayal of settings of use as well as the characteristics of the

visitors encountered, said Manning er al. (1996). Visual research methods can also “focus

directly and exclusively on the variables under study and for standards of quality for
indicator variables that are difficult or awkward to describe in narrative or numerical
expressions”. Visual simulations can be in the form of artistic renderings, photographs,

computer-edited photographs, and videotapes (Manning and Freimund, 2004),

However, visual simulations also have limitations. Photographs may clearly
present the number of other visitors and the activities they are participating in, their
placement within the scene, their general appearance and their gender but it is not
expected that they depict all relevant elements of the characteristics of the visitors that

may relate to crowding norms.

To quantify crowding, Manning ef al. (2000) designed a survey to measure the
normative standards of carriage road visitors in Acadia National Parks Maine. They
integrated a visual approach in measuring crowding norms using series of computer-
enhanced photographs illustrating a range of use levels and types along a typical 100-
meter section of the carriage roads. These photographs included 19 images ranging from
0 to 30 visitors with mixes of bicyclists and walkers. These were presented to
respondents in random order and they were asked to rate the acceptability of each on a

scale from +4 (very acceptable) to -4 (very unacceptable)

A similar study by Manning ef al. (2002) using visual approach with series of
computer-edited photographs was employed in Michigan Avenue corridor of the prison
cellhouse. The study photographs, depicting a range of visitor use levels or PAOT, were
used in asking respondents to rate the acceptability using the same scale. They were also

asked to judge the photographs as to which level of use they prefer and the highest level

of use that the management should allow in the cellhouse. Visual presentation of
crowding was likewise used by Arnberger ef al. (2004) in examining the social carrying
capacity of an urban park in Vienna with several sections that are conservation areas,
gravel trails, paths, bicycling trails, lake for bathing and angling in summer and ice-

skating in winter.

Perceived crowding can be measured by calculating the percentages, means and

medians of the crowding scale (Vaske and Shelby, 2008).

CHAPTER Ill

CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK

The conceptual framework of this study (Figure 1) is based on systems analysis
with the concept of carrying capacity applied to a tourism destination particularly on the

use of public swimming pools. The enclosed components signify the scope of the study.

The important considerations of carrying capacity such as the maximum number
of tourists/visitors, satisfaction of tourists/visitors, concern about local residents, and
Tesource requirements are the factors that influence the physical and social carrying
capacities of the resort under study which happens to be in a forest reservation, a suitable
environment, which provides the tourism space and the hot and cold spring water which
are essential natural capital or ecological inputs of the resort that operates five public

swimming pools.

The LGU of Balungao manages and equips the resort with the necessary physical
resources such as infrastructures and equipment which include the swimming pools,
shower rooms, picnic areas, parking areas, solid waste disposal facilities, and other

amenities as well as the operations and management of these

The carrying capacity entails the determination of the number of users of the
swimming pools at one particular time with consideration of the average standard

requirements of visitors.

-amuoapy doy

pur Wosay

s8uudg ploc pure 107 oeSunyeg IW Jo sluaussasse Ajoedeo Burdureo [eI90s pur [eoIskyd axp Jo ylomaurey jemdaou0y *| amB14

wisuinoy,
aiqeureysng

Ayoede
Suicue
[et00g

quowasnboy
Prepueig
Tenpratpuy

SIO
hood
‘srouueid

Auoedea,
surdure)

‘Aroede>
urkureg

Buyhure
feed
aanoeya

luawissassy
Auoede

wstnoy,
pue sisiimoy,
pxemoy apm

kK

Axjunuiw09 1s0H
/SWOPISEY

enpyaspuy

quawasinboy

prepueig
Tenprarpuy

|

soy]
uoneoy

saomnosoy
qeoiskyd

Aun]

Soounosay,
Teo!@oj00g

quauluosaug



This standard requirement pertains to the ample space that the visitors personally

need for them to enjoy the recreational facilities and services (Tran ef al., 2007) at the
same time not causing disturbance to other users even during peak days in which user
density in the swimming pools can be high. Considering the worth of this factor, it is just
imperative to validate the existing international standard as to its suitability to local
setting for use of planners, policy-makers and decision-makers for the control of tourist
influx and tourism activities to be able to maintain visitor satisfaction, sustain tourism

operations as well as preserve tourism resources.

The physical carrying capacity of the swimming pools is the potential number of
users that they can accommodate. Its estimation requires the rotation factor which
denotes the average permissible length of time that the visitors will be using the facility
(Tran ef al., 2007) given the number of hours that the destination is open for public use.
Physical carrying capacity therefore reflects the maximum number of visitors that can be
accommodated by a facility within a specified period of time that the resort is open for

recreational use.

Furthermore, to be able to assess the effective real carrying capacity of the
swimming pools, consideration of the factors that may limit or hinder the use of a facility
is noteworthy since these have significant influence on the satisfaction of visitors.
Knowing these will also facilitate the resort management in planning and deciding on

solutions to correct these limiting factors to enable sustainable operation of the resort.


The social carrying capacity is likewise necessary for the success of tourism. This

is dependent on local residents and the tourists/visitors and their interactions. In the
context of local residents, their attitude towards tourism in the study area including their
tolerance to visitors’ presence and how this factor affects their daily lives are important
concerns since the local residents are the hosts of tourism in the area and their acceptance
of tourism activities has a significant bearing on the quality and continuance of tourism
Similarly, the perception of the visitors about the facilities and services of the resort is
important in the determination of opportunities for improvement to enable the resort
administration to maintain or enhance the quality and adequacy of facilities and services
for the recreation satisfaction of visitors who can be influential in promoting the resort by

recommending it to other people

All these considerations will aid the different stakeholders such as tourism
planners, policy-makers and decision-makers who are important agents in attaining
sustainable tourism which is balanced with ecological integrity, economic goals, high

level of tourist satisfaction and better quality of life for the local community.

CHAPTER IV

METHODOLOGY

Physical and social carrying capacity assessments for the tourism in the study site
were conducted. Determination of physical carrying capacity required information on the
ecological resources and physical resources being used for tourism such as the space or
area and the swimming pools including the water and facilities associated with

swimming

Determination of social carrying capacity, on the other hand, involved the
assessment of residents’ attitude regarding tourism in the area likewise their tolerance to
the presence of visitors/tourists. On the visitors’ side, their perception regarding
crowding-related concerns and other factors that influenced the quality of their
recreational experience in the resort were taken into account such as the adequacy and
quality of facilities and services including swimming pool water quality which were
evaluated using the Chapter VIII, Section 6 of the Department of Health (DOH)

Implementing Rules and Regulations of PD 856.

Data Gathering Approach

Data and information requirements for the study were collected through the
conduct of 1) face-to-face interviews and surveys; 2) observations and actual

measurements, and 3) gathering of secondary data and related literatures.


Primary data were gathered mostly through surveys and interviews using pre-
tested semi-structured interview schedule for selected respondents. In addition,
observation and ocular inspection in the study area were also done to collect other
relevant information on the tourism activities. Further, personnel from the resort,
Municipal Tourism Office, Municipal Planning and Development Office and Municipal
Engineering Office, and also the Municipal Mayor were engaged into discussions to gain

insights about the resort for the carrying capacity assessment.

Actual measurements of depth, size, area, and other dimensions of the resort
facilities under study were taken for the estimation of tourism carrying capacity. Some
measurements of the swimming pools were provided by the Municipal Engineering
Office of Balungao. Measurements of the water resources of the resort particularly the

flow rate were also done using a 16-liter pail and a timer.

Secondary data such as Municipal Profile, Comprehensive Land Use Plan
(CLUP) of the municipality, and other relevant documents were obtained from the

appropriate local government sections and private institutions in the municipality.

Water Quality Testing

Water is one of the important tourism resources of the resort. Water sampling and
testing was done due to lack of secondary data. Sampling preparation and sample
collection was based on the Department of Health Implementing Rules and Regulations

of Chapter VIII of P.D. 856. Three replicates representing samples from both ends and

middle portions were taken from Combined Sources A and B and from each of the five
swimming pools on March 3, 2014. The samples were transported in an ice box with ice
to the Microbiology and Ecology Laboratories of the Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic
Resources-National Integrated Fisheries and Technology Development Center (BFAR-
NIFTDC) of the Department of Agriculture in Bonuan Binloc, Dagupan City for
bacterial, pH, and alkalinity tests. Excess chlorine was not tested because the Ecology
Laboratory of BFAR- NIFTDC does not conduct analysis on said parameter. Moreover,
excess chlorine requires analysis within 15 minutes from the time of sampling and the
lack of laboratory nearby constrained the carrying out of the analysis. Similarly,
alkalinity test was not performed as per notification from the laboratory the day after the

samples were received that the laboratory ran out of reagents.

The temperatures of the pool water, including the spring water source were also
taken using a laboratory thermometer confirmed by the multi-parameter water testing
apparatus of the BFAR. Clarity/transparency of pool water was checked using a Secchi
Disk improvised based on the specifications by the Chapter VIII IRR of the PD 856
which was a black disk 15 cm (6 inches) in diameter on a white field. DOH requires that
the disc should be visible from the sidewalls of the pool at all distances up to 9 meters
measured from a line drawn across the pool when the disc is placed on the bottom of the

pool at the deepest point.


Selection of Resident-Respondents

The respondents of this study were the local residents of the municipality of
Balungao, the visitors/tourists of the resort, and the resort management and employees.

Interviews were done on December 2013 until February 2014.

For valid sampling technique, a statistician from the Statistical Consulting Group
of the Institute of Statistics at the University of the Philippines Los Bafios was consulted.

The residents in the two barangays nearest to the resort were considered using the list of
the municipality as reference, specifically the Rural Health Center’s record of household
count as of 2013. Household was used as the sample unit to avoid multiple respondents in
one household. Any member of legal age (at least 18 years old) of the household was
assigned as the respondent. They were selected through stratified random sampling with
the barangays as the strata with samples allocated proportionately in the two barangays

The formula used was:

N
no = xn
N
where:
nm, = __ sample size in the ith barangay
N, = population size in the ith barangay
N = total number of households in the ith barangays

n= sample size


The sample size was determined through the Slovin’s Formula as follows:

N
n =
1 + Ne*
where:
n= sample size
N = total population of the 2 barangays
e = margin of error at 10%

With 376 households in Barangay Poblacion, sample size was computed at 43 and
with 390 households in Barangay Pugaro, sample size was 45 with a total of 88 resident-
respondents. In randomly choosing the respondents, interval was established by dividing
the total number of respondents by the total number of samples, in this case was nine.
Therefore, residents in the list with an interval of nine were taken as respondents with
starting point for sampling determined through fishbowl method which was resident
number two in the master list. And as per statistician’s advice, 10% of the total
respondents, which was equivalent to nine, were set as reserved for replacement of nine
original respondents who were not available for interview after three attempts, refused to

be interviewed, and other valid reasons that interview was not carried out.


Selection of Visitor-Respondents

Considering the mobility, irregularity in number, unpredictability of stay, the
purpose to enjoy their vacation in the resort, and the objective of soliciting the visitors’
assessment of the resort’s amenities and perception of crowding in the pools, respondents
were selected based on purposive/convenience sampling method with the number of
samples obtained using the Slovin’s formula. The average of the daily visitor arrival with
the highest number of recorded visitors during the peak season for the year 2012 and

2013 was considered as the total population. Total respondents were 84 visitors.

To avoid disturbance of their vacation, visitors were asked of their willingness to
participate in the study. Only those who were willing and who have experienced any or
all of the swimming pools and who have used, seen, or observed the facilities of the

resort were considered as respondents

Physical Carrying Capacity Estimation

The formulae for tourism carrying capacity determination in protected areas by
Cifuentes (1992) were adapted in the estimation of the physical carrying capacity of the
swimming pools with some adjustments by Tran ef al. (2007) done in three phases.
Cifuentes’ formula for Physical Carrying Capacity was split into Carrying Capacity
(CC)- the term used by Calanog ef al. (2013) in their study of carrying capacity of

Pamilacan Island- and Physical Carrying Capacity (PCC) so that the bather load at one

time, with the average space requirement of visitors as the consideration, is derived at

the first phase. The modified 3-phase formulae are as follow:

Phase 1: Estimation of Carrying Capacity (CC)

The CC is estimated by using Cifuentes’ formula for physical carrying capacity
(PCC = Ax V/a x Rf) without the rotation factor (Rf). The formula is therefore reduced
to CC = Ax V/a, where A is the available area (or distance or length) for public use (m?
or m) and V/a is the visitor per area or distance or length occupied (tourists/m? or
tourists/m) which denotes the user density (D) using the average standard requirement of
visitors for ample space to undertake recreational activities comfortably and safely (Tran

et al., 2007). The formula used for the estimation of CC therefore is:

cc = AxD
where:
A = Available area/distance/length for public use (m? or m)
D = User Density (tourists/m? or tourists/m)

Water surface areas were determined by the boundaries or the perimeters of the
water in the swimming pools and these were estimated using the grid method using the

measurements provided by the Balungao Municipal Engineer’s Office personnel

supplemented by the actual measurements of the researcher. User density (D) was

determined based on the responses of visitors on-site during the interviews.

Phase 2. Estimation of Physical Carrying Capacity (PCC)

PCC = CC x Rf

Rotation factor is the number of permissible visits per day (Tran ef al., 2007) or
the number of times the site is visited by the same person in one day (Ortega ef a/., 2011).
Applied in this research, it is the number of times the swimming pools were used by the

same person in one day. It is derived by the formula:

Number of hours an area or facility is open for visitors
Rf =

Average duration of use of the area or facility

The average time or duration of use of the swimming pools was determined

through interview of visitors in the recreational facilities under study.

Phase 3: Estimation of Effective Real Carrying Capacity (ERCC)


where:

ch Corrective factors (%)

Corrective factors or limiting factors are those that have negative impact on
tourism activities expressed in percentage (%). Corrective factors for management
capacity were factored in the computation, hence the estimation of real and effective
carrying capacities were reduced into effective real carrying capacity (Tran ef al., 2007).

These were identified during the interview and observation in the site. The formula is:

MI
cf = —— x 100

where:

MI

u

limiting magnitude of the factor

Mt

total magnitude of the factor

Social Carrying Capacity Assessment

Residents’ Attitude towards Tourism and Visitors/Tourists

Prior to actual interviews, interview schedules were prepared and pre-tested to
three residents of Los Bafios, Laguna on November 2013 to check for the validity of the

questions. After the pre-test, revisions were made to the questions that were found

difficult to be understood and to be answered by the respondents. An average of 15

minutes was noted for an interview to last.

With the help of two trained enumerators, local community respondents were
interviewed face-to-face on January 2014. Respondents were asked to sign an Informed
Consent written in Filipino (Appendix I) certified by the interviewer/enumerator. The
pre-tested semi-structured survey questionnaire/interview schedule (Appendix II) was
used to gather information regarding the respondents’ demographic characteristics, water
sources and requirements, waste disposal systems, and their attitude towards the presence
of visitors/tourists and the operation of a tourist destination located in their municipality.
This was done also to understand their level of interaction with the visitors of the resort
as well as the impact of the tourism in their social, economic and environmental aspects
of living and their attitude towards these aspects. The interview schedule translated in

Filipino is in Appendix IIL

Moreover, statements that translated the characteristics of the different stages of
the Doxey’s Index of Irritation or Irridex (Beeton, 2006) required the resident-
respondents’ rating according to their reaction or level of agreement to each of the
statements to be able to solicit data regarding their attitude relative to the presence of
visitors and of tourism in their municipality. The statements were based from the
research studies of Saveriades (2000), Faulkner and Tideswell (1997), and Ryan and
Cooper (2004) with selections, modifications and additions to suit the applicability to the
study area. A 5-point scale (Figure 2) was used in rating these statements such that I =

“Strongly Disagree” to 5 = “Strongly Agree”


1 2 3 4 5

« = ed iy >
Strongly Disagree | NoOpinion Agree Strongly
Disagree Agree

Figure 2. A 5-point scale for evaluating residents’ attitude towards tourism

The frequency counts, means and percentages of the responses for the statements
were computed and the results were assessed against the stages of the Irridex with the
corresponding characteristics to be able to categorize the level of attitude and irritation of

the residents with the visitors and of the tourism in the study site.

Recreation Satisfaction of Visitors

To assess the social carrying capacity in the perspective of visitors, a survey using
pre-tested semi-structured interview schedule (Appendix IV) was also administered to
on-site visitors during the peak days of Christmas break in 2013 extending to the first two
days of February 2014 in time for a weekend and a Jamboree held near the resort when
Jamboree participants take turns in going to the resort thus, modeling a high level of use
of swimming pools in the resort. Pre-testing of interview schedule was done to three
visitors in a popular resort in Pansol, Calamba, Laguna on November 2013. An average

of 20-minute interview was recorded.

Aside from the socio-demographic profile of the visitors/tourists, their

preferences, considerations and motivation in choosing the site and recreational activities

as well as crowding-related concems were asked. Visitors were also inquired about the
factors that influence their satisfaction in relation to the use of the recreational and other
facilities of the resort. The factors that were considered were based from the survey used
by Ribeiro e/ al. (2011). The factors were: 1) accessibility, 2) size, 3) beauty/landscape,
4) facilities, 5) cleanliness, 6) parking, and 7) security. Other factors included were: 8)
number of visitors, 9) hospitality, 10) weather, 11) value for money, and 12) over-all

satisfaction.

Other indicators of recreation satisfaction asked were 1) the number of times that
the visitors went to the resort for recreation, 2) their willingness to come back, and 3)

their willingness to recommend the resort to other people. The adequacy and quality of

tourism facilities and services were also asked for evaluation. Suggestions regarding the

improvement of any of the factors found unsatisfactory were also solicited.

A 5-point scale (Figure 3) was used in rating these factors such that 1 = “Very

Good” to 5 = “Very Bad”.

« >

VeryGood Good Satisfactory Bad —-Very Bad

Figure 3. A S-point scale for evaluating visitors’ perception of tourism
facilities and services.


Validation of the ISPSC Standard on Bather Load

To explore if the standard set by the ISPSC on bather load is applicable to the
visitor-respondents in the study resort area, the standard on individual bather space
requirement for public swimming pools was attempted to be pilot-tested through the
Participation of visitors of the resort in an actual try-out or simulation based on their
perception of crowding. The simulation approach would have provided participants the
actual scenario of the public swimming place thus would have allowed them to have an
actual feel or experience and assessment of the swimming pool, its water, its

surroundings, and the other users in the pool.

The method was carried out on December 26, 2013, one of the peak days of the
month, Anticipating that some visitors may be hesitant to participate, freebies and raffle
prizes were prepared to motivate them to join. A teaser of the freebies and prizes with the

mechanics of the social experiment was attached to each of the interview schedule.

The number of participants depended on the maximum user or bather load of the
swimming pool based on the ISPSC standard. This was determined by dividing the area
of the water surface of the swimming pool by the standard of the ISPSC which was
1.86m? per user in deep area (water depth exceeds 1.52m) and 1.39m? per user in shallow
area (water depth is less than 1.52m) since deck area/pathway was estimated to be 127m?
which is less than the total water surface area of the swimming pool. The upper adult
pool was used in the activity since this was the only pool in the resort with shallow and

deep portions.


The grid method was employed to estimate the water surface area which was
computed at ~148.56m? based from the measurements provided by the Municipal
Engineer's Office of Balungao, The shallow portion has a water surface area of
=50.33m? while the deep portion has ~98.23m?. Using the ISPSC standard, the total
number of bathers recommended for the pool under study was 36 in the shallow portion
and 53 in the deep portion. Hence, total bathers recommended for the entire pool was
estimated to be 89. This was supposed to be the first scenario to be validated together
with two other scenarios. The second scenario involved participants with half the number
of recommended bathers in the swimming pool which were 18 and 27 for shallow and
deep portions, respectively totaling to 45 participants. The third scenario required a
number of participants twice as many as the recommended bathers which were 72 and

106 for shallow and deep portions, respectively, with a total of 178 participants (Table 3)

Table 3. Number of bathers used in the validation of the 2012 ISPSC bather load in the pool
under study.

uaung WATER WATER RECOMMENDED
SWIMMING StiAcE —DEFTIL STANDARD" NUatpER OF
AREA) "On 4 ATHERS cUNHER
Stalow 8039S 139 %6 i
Deep 398.23, >is 1.86 33 27 106
Tout __14856 ® 6 178

In each of the try-outs/scenarios, participants were to rate their perception of
crowding adapting a S-point Likert Scale using color-coded flags which were earlier

prepared. These were water-proof flags made of plastic, each with dimensions of 15cm x

13cm attached to a bamboo stick 30cm in length. The back of each flag was lined with
white plastic of similar material to avoid or at least minimize the chances of other
participants to see the responses of others which may influence their own responses. The
colors of the flags were based from the colors of the rainbow so that these and their
equivalent meanings will be easily remembered by the participants. The colors used were
red, orange, yellow, green, and blue (ROYGB) with the corresponding scale below
(Figure 4). Red with a corresponding rating of 1 indicates “Not at All Crowded” to blue

with a corresponding rating of 5 denotes “Extremely Crowded”

1 2 3 4 5
Red Orange Yellow Green Blue
< >
Extremely Not Crowded Just Right Crowded —_ Extremely
Not Crowded Crowded

Figure 4. A 5-point scale for evaluating visitors’ perception of crowding for the
public swimming pool under study.

Due to the large number of participants needed for the simulation, nine
enumerators/assistants were hired and trained before the simulation proper. The
procedure and the contents of the interview schedule were discussed with them to be able
to conduct an organized and successfull simulation. Opportunely, aside from the walk-in
visitors on December 26, there was also a group composed of more than 200 people who
were expected to arrive in the resort on that day. The group, composed mostly of teens in
their high school years, started to arrive at around eight o’clock in the morning. The
leaders of the group were approached and the intent of tapping them for the simulation

was explained. However, the leaders cannot decide for the whole group since the

members belonged to different teams from different districts. The president of the group
who arrived at a later time was consulted but he needed to confer the matter with all the
group leaders since they had their own itinerary/program to follow while in the resort
Later in the afternoon, after the researcher's several attempts of convincing them, they
agreed to cut their team building activity short and allowed the members to participate for
half an hour only starting at 4:30PM because they needed to accomplish their scheduled

activities in the resort as well.

Simultaneously with following-up with the aforementioned group, the
enumerators and the researcher also roamed around the resort starting at 8AM to ask
visitors to participate in the activity. Though there were visitors who were willing to
participate, many refused. Those who agreed to join were given one questionnaire each
for them to answer after exploring the resort and its amenities. Items not filled out,
including the last part of the questionnaire which required their perception of crowding

during the simulation, were to be followed up after the simulation.

A total of 81 visitors were convinced to join but before the team reached 81, many
of the potential participants already went home leaving the questionnaires anywhere in
the resort. Some handed the questionnaires to the team after answering some of the
questions and asked for freebies in exchange of the questionnaires which were not yet
properly filled out. The mechanics of the activity was again explained to them and

convinced them to wait but they were ready to go and refused to take part.

When the aforementioned group who consented to participate in the activity

headed to the swimming area, they were requested to proceed to the upper pool for the

simulation where the procedure was explained and the flags were distributed to them.
Unfortunately, majority did not want to join especially those who tried the pool water
which was very cold and had very deep portion. Moreover, the leaders also did not want
the children to swim in the deep portion of the pool for safety reasons. With these
restrictions, the willing participants had to draw together in groups in the shallow portion
of the swimming pool. The walk-in visitors who earlier volunteered to participate were
invited to join but they were discouraged by the presence of many people in the upper
pool that they no longer wanted to join. Nonetheless, the simulation and the raffle draw
went on, regardless of insufficient participants, as a way of showing appreciation to the
president, the leaders of the group, and the children who gave in for the request of the

researcher despite their limited schedule.

A second attempt for simulation was considered by assembling community people
or high school students from the town. The downside of this type of participants, similar
to the participants gathered during the simulation on December 26, 2013, are

homogeneity in terms of place of origin/residence, limited age range, and the high

possibility of everyone knowing the other participants which are most often not the actual
scenario in public swimming places. Knowing the other bathers in the swimming pool
may have a great influence on perception of crowding because this may possibly let the

participants tolerate high level of density of people in the pool.

Due to these limitations and other concerns with regards to the large number of
Participants who may be willing to volunteer for the simulation, resources to finance

several hired labor to handle such big group of participants, transportation, resort

entrance and cottage fees, foods, and other resources required to carry out the social
experiment, a visual approach was instead explored to achieve the goal of determining

visitors’ perception of crowding to validate the ISPSC standard on bather load.

Edited photographs were utilized for the visual approach. To prepare for these,
actual pool users were requested to stay and swim in different spots and positions in the
upper swimming pool for several shoots taken in a fixed station. This enabled the capture
of proper scale for editing 3-scenario photographs wherein 89, 45 and 178 bathers each
were filled in (Appendices V, VI and VII) using the Adobe Photoshop version CS3
software also known as Photoshop Version 10 by a hired labor in a computer shop in
Balungao, Pangasinan. More photographs of swimming pool users were cut out from the
other pools of the resort using the same software. Since the study involved only the water
surface area required by every pool user, people at the deck area/pathway and
surrounding areas were not depicted in the photographs since they may present more
crowded scenarios with the tendency of respondents to evaluate crowding of the

swimming area rather than just the swimming pool water area

The photograph with the standard number of bathers (89) according to the ISPSC
was labeled “I” while photographs with half the standard number of bathers (45) and
with twice as many as the standard (178) were labeled “2” and “3”, respectively to avoid
confusion as to noting which photograph was rated. Each photograph was also provided
with printed 5-point scale, the same with that used in the simulation, on the top right
portion for quick and easy reference for the respondents. The photographs were covered

with thick transparent plastic cover to make it durable and water-resistant. These were

shown randomly to on-site visitor-respondents to prevent starting point bias. Evaluation
of these photographs in the context of crowding made up the last part of the interview of
each respondent using the interview schedule for visitors/tourists (Appendix IV). Follow-
up question for the numeric response for the individual standard requirement was also
asked from the participants for validation of responses and for the estimation of bather

load and carrying capacity of the swimming pools

Data Analysis

Descriptive statistics using frequency counts, means and percentages of the results
of the study were evaluated using Microsoft Excel and statistical analysis software e.g.
Statistical Package for the Social Sciences (SPSS). Results were used to profile the
respondents, their attitude and satisfaction as residents and visitors of the tourism area.
Analysis on the collected visitor-respondents’ data and perception of crowding for each
scenario depicted in edited photographs was consulted with the Statistical Consulting

Group of the Institute of Statistics in UPLB.

Results from the residents’ responses for the attitude statements were computed
and assessed against the stages of the Irridex with the corresponding characteristics to be
able to categorize the level of attitude and irritation of the residents toward the visitors

and of the tourism in the study site.

Other primary and secondary data were tabulated, discussed and plotted for
graphical analysis to identify possible patterns or trends that can be associated with the

tourism industry in the area

CHAPTER V

DESCRIPTION OF THE STUDY AREA

Mt. Balungao Hot and Cold Springs Resort and Hilltop Adventure, located in the
Municipality of Balungao in the province of Pangasinan, was selected for this study
based on its accessibility, existing available facilities, utilization of natural resources,
biophysical scenery, existence of local people surrounding the area, on-going tourism
activities which are gaining high demand, and the prospects of the area for future

development.

As per report on the assessment of the proposed resort by the Department of
Environment and Natural Resources (DENR) in 1995, the area can be declared as a
municipal park and the municipality can seek financial assistance from the Department of
Tourism (DOT) or Philippine Tourism Authority (PTA) for its development as a tourist
spot. The development of the resort was set off in 1996 after series of surveys and studies
conducted by the PTA. Proposal was made after having found that the area is suitable as
a tourism destination that will be utilized as an investment opportunity to augment the
socio-economic well-being of the local community. It was granted an Environmental
Compliance Certificate (ECC) by the DENR through the Environmental Management

Bureau (EMB) of Region I on September 6, 2012.

Initially, 6.5 hectares of land was allocated to the LGU of Balungao as tourism
economic zone. Another 0.5 hectare was added for the development of the Hilltop

Adventure which includes the zip lines.


The resort, also called by the locals as bundok or bantay (mountain) in the dialect,

offers several recreational facilities for leisure and adventurous activities which draw
local and foreign visitors to the area. At present, there are two cubicle-type hot-water
pools, two adult cold-water pools, one kids’ cold-water pool, duplex-type lodge, 620m
zip line, ATV cars, and bungee trampoline. Soon to be launched are ropes course and
another zip line at 1.4km length. The mountain is also offered for hiking, mountain

climbing and trail walking. Picnic groves and camping sites are also available.

Geographical Location

The resort was built right at the foot of Mount Balungao, an inactive volcano
which is approximately 382 meters above sea level with slope ranging from 15-30%. It is
located in Barangay San Andres in the municipality of Balungao which is one of the
eastern municipalities of Pangasinan Province in Northern Philippines. It is situated
approximately 120°40° to 4°30” east longitude and 15° 47° to 15°50” north latitude.
Balungao is bounded by the municipalities of Sta, Maria on the north; Cuyapo, Nueva
Ecija on the south; Umingan on the east, and Rosales on the west (CLUP of Balungao,

Pangasinan, 1994-2004).

The municipality of Balungao, officially founded in 1815, used to be a part of
Cuyapo, Nueva Ecija. It was made a separate town in the late 18” century and was
annexed to the municipality of Rosales in the early 19” century because of its
geographical location, It is situated about 10 kilometers east of the Manila-North Road

reckoning from Carmen, Rosales and is approximately 72 kilometers from Baguio City,

the country's well-known Summer Capital and approximately 286 kilometers away from
Metro Manila, the country's capital. The municipality can be accessed by land and
primary means of public transportation are public utility jeepneys (or PUJs) and tricycles,
The geographical location of the study site is shown in Figure 5 and the site map is

shown in Figure 6.

Land Area

Balungao has a total land area of 9,380 hectares which is 1.75% of the total land
area of the province of Pangasinan. Mt Balungao covers an area of 7.8 hectares with
abundant vegetation. The municipality's forest resource is roughly 1,041.865 hectares
and of the forest area, 761 hectares Or 73.09% is public forest and 280 hectares or 26.91%

is unclassified public forest.

Etymology of the Municipality

Local legend narrates the creation of the name “Balungao” which stemmed from a
story about a young married lady, an early settler of the town with ancestry from the
Hocos Region, who was known for her beauty but was widowed at a very young age. The

eople called her “balun-ugaw” which, in the native dialect, means widowed young


Nueva Ecija

Legend

Philippines
{& Pangasinan Province

‘Maps Source: PhilGIS, 2014

Figure 5. Location map of the study area.

Coordinate System Luzon 1811
TFs Datum tuzon 1811
iometers Unis Degree

Source nw nama gov
"3 Date rested 15 ty 2014

Figure 6. Site map of the study area.



Climate

Balungao has Type I climate which is characterized by two seasons namely wet
and dry. Wet seasons are from the months of May to October. Except for May, these are
Jean months for the resort up to November. The rest of the year (November to April) is
dry season which covers also the peak season for the resort which is from December to
May. This implies that weather and climate may have an influence on tourists’ decisions
and tourism operations management which have bearings on the effective carrying

capacity of tourist destinations because they can limit or enhance visitor arrivals.

Rainfall

Table 4 shows that on the average, the month of August has the most number of
days with rain followed by July and September. PAGASA-Dagupan relates that rains
usually pour in the afternoon to evening unless the rains are due to typhoons. An average
of three typhoons strikes the area with average duration of 4.21 days per typhoon as per
record of the World Wildlife Fund. January has the least number of days with rain with
an average of one day with only few days’ difference compared to February, March,
April, November, and December. Annual average number of days with rain is around


Highest amount of rainfall was observed in August with an average of 767.9mm
during the last five years. Least amount of rainfall was recorded on January with only

3.2mm on the average during the last five years. Average annual rainfall was 2,849.5mm

wal

WSWOVd ‘201n0g

sors'z NOEL SST St euI'G = OE L9OE «LET oeer't fr 90e'e Ler reo,
ror rz ver € oF z oF s of z ) 0 soquiszeq
019 ts oer s et z ctor 8 $661 ut oe 1 saquiaxon,
rere vet orsot u 96r 9 Lest tl 78s a zL08 £1 329010
sorr oz cess fia Loge 4 oar uw ror in eles €% —_sequardag
6L9L wee OPEIT 0 ¥r66 uw o9re te sear w ree % ——asniny
s'90r ove wee ot oro % cor st ws9t 61 s'88r itd Aine
seer out Sse + 8489 @ Tere tt vat s1 ours 6 ung
9st gz oct tI vor st Looe ay ovat L 698% st sew
Tot 09 8801 s ot € oer £ re € Lizz 9 dy
zee or su 8 orgs 9 9s 1 on) 0 19% s wry
“9 wz can z sor s oz a ot U oo 0 Atenaqad
ve OL w6 1 oF I oT i vo L x0 1 Aceruret
GW skvad = WW) SAV. «WW SAV. «WW SAV GW) SAV MW) Savaa
‘TIVANIVE 40'ON ‘TIVANIVE 4O'ON TIVENIVA 4O'ON ‘TIVANIVE JOON TIVINIVE JOON ‘TIVNIVE 4O'ON Now

aovuaay

£107

od

TH0z,

o107z

6002,

£10Z-6002 ‘IleJULeA Jo NOW pue UIeL YIM sKep Jo JOQUINN *p 2192L.


Table 5 illustrates that the annual relative humidity in the area in 2013 is 83.4%
while average annual temperature is 31°C with a temperature range of 19°C registered in
January to 38°C in April. Mountain ranges that form part of the Cordillera Mountain
protect the municipality from easterly winds. However, the area is affected by southwest
monsoons on May to October with rains usually occurring in the afternoon or evening,
Average wind speed is observed at 002 to 003 mps. These climatic conditions make ideal

settings for resort-goers to take pleasure in bathing in public swimming pools.

Table 5. Relative humidity, air temperature and wind speed, 2013

MEAN
REL MEAN MIN MAX

MONTH TEMP TEMP TEMP

MEAN MAX.
‘WIND WIND

HUM 4 . EMP ‘SPEED SPEED

(%) CO) CO) CO) MsEc) (M/SEC)
January 819 258 +190 325 003 016
February 81.3 2775-200 ©3580 002 o10
March 803 280 20.0 «= 36.0003 012
April 78.7 3134S 38.0008 ola
May 82.0 308 = 240 37.5002 ola
June 83.4 299 238 360 003 016
July 86.4 576-230-346 (002 ois
August 88.5 220 230 349 002 ola
September 87.6 20 235 345 002 ola
October 85.0 280 «225 «33.5003 017
November 83.0 24 223 345002 012
December 83.0 273-210 33.5003 017
Average 83.4 31.0 22.2 35.0 003 O14

Source: PAGASA


Risk Areas

Records and experience prove that Balungao is exposed to frequent severe
flooding, especially during heavy monsoon rains. Nonetheless, the presence of the
Ambuclao and Binga Hydro-Power Plants found along the Agno River that drain towards

Eastern Pangasinan help prevent massive destruction during flooding occurrences

Approximately 200 hectares of the town are erosion prone areas and these are
found in barangays San Aurelio, Angayan Sur, Esmeralda, San Andres, Pugaro and
Poblacion. These parts of the municipality are highly susceptible to erosion because of
their flat terrain and their proximity to river tributaries. About 1,600 hectares has slight

susceptibility to soil erosion while the remaining is not susceptible to erosion at all.

Hot spring water flows from Mt, Balungao Balungao since it is located above a
major fault line. This alarms the municipality because this may pose hazards of
earthquake episodes. Fortunately, Balungao has never been struck by strong earthquake
since it was created as a municipality. No man-made critical risk areas or establishments

are within the territorial jurisdiction of the municipality at present.

Demography

Balungao had a total population of 26,678 with 34.58% or 9,225 living in the
urban barangays and 65.42% or 17,453 in the rural barangays (Table 6) according to
NSO in 2010. Annual growth rate of the municipality was 1.90. With this, NSO projected

a population of 28,762 in 2013.


Table 6. Population and number of households per barangay in Balungao, Pangasinan,

2010.
NUMBER OF
BARANGAY POPULATION HOUSEHOLD
Urban
Poblacion 1,941 463
Pugaro 2,259 501
Kita-Kita 1,624 357
San Aurelio 1,721 437
San Leon 1,680 397
Sub-Total 9,225 2,155
Rural
Angayan Norte 1,263 288
Angayan Sur 645 137
Capulaan 1,027 251
Esmeralda 2,599 588
Mabini 718 200
Mauban 1,042 221
Rajal 1,613 375
San Andres 899 223
San Aurelio I 1,275 281
San Aurelio IIL 649 169
San Joaquin 1,475 363
San Julian 953 243
San Marcelino 1,336 309
San Miguel 627 157
San Raymundo 1,272 296
Sub-Total 17,453 4,101
Grand Total 26,678 6,256

Source: NSO, 2010 as cited in Municipal Data of Balungao, Pangasinan

Total households in the urban barangays were 2,155 or 34.45% while there were

4,101 households or 65.55% in the rural barangays. Barangay Esmeralda had the highest

number of population (2,599) and households (588) while barangay San Miguel had the
least (627). Barangay Angayan Sur had the least number of households (137). Average
household size was 4.26 (NSO, 2010 as cited in Municipal Data of Balungao,

Pangasinan

Water Supply

The main supplier of potable water in Poblacion, Kita-Kita, Pugaro, San Aurelio
I, San Aurelio Il, San Aurelio Ill, San Leon, Mauban, Angayan Norte, Rajal, and

Umingan is the Balungao Water District (BWD).

Two deep wells, situated at Poblacion and Rajal, are the main sources of water
supplied by the water district. Though the well in Poblacion is not operational at the
moment, the well in Rajal, with a total rated capacity of 20 liters per second (Ips) with its
30HP pump, is capable of servicing up to 3,000 connections. As per BWD records, there
were only 1,392 connections in 2013 with average monthly consumption of 19.91m? per
connection indicating a 27,714.72m* average monthly consumption. Total water

production on November 2013 was 31,164m* implying an oversupply of 3,449.28m’,

Other sources of water in Balungao are tubed/piped wells, shallow and deep
wells, springs, rivers, streams, and rain, Purified and alkaline water can also be availed

from water refilling establishments in the town.

Records show that 5,269 households or 84.22% of the total households in the

municipality in 2012 had potable sources of water. The rest had unsafe water.


Tourism Products

Mt. Balungao is the primary tourist attraction of the town. Fishponds in
Barangays Esmeralda, Mabini, San Andres, San Aurelio and Sta. Rita are also considered
ideal for family fishing adventures, picnicking as well as educational trips for students for

the promotion of the economic and aesthetic values of fishpond industries in the area.

‘Along with the advancement of tourism in the municipality is the increasing
popularity of other tourism products such as the /upig, a native snack prepared with
ground sticky rice wrapped in banana leaves and cooked over charcoal fire; patupat,
made with sticky rice in woven buri palm (Corypha utan) leaves cooked in boiling sugar
made from sugar cane or buri palm; tuba, a freshly harvested sweetish sap of buri palm;

and goat recipes.

Solid Waste Management

The municipality is enforcing several ordinances regarding garbage disposal and
collection. These are: 1) Municipal Ordinance No. 2006-05 (Comprehensive Solid Waste
Management Ordinance of the Municipality of Balungao); 2) Resolution No.387 s, 2000
(To amend Ordinance No.5, series of 1988 which is an ordinance prohibiting any person
from throwing garbage along the public market, public plaza, national highway,
provincial road, municipal streets, barangay roads, along river banks, under bridge ridges,
irrigation canals, vacant lots or public or private properties and providing penalties for
any violation thereof); 3) Resolution No.31 s, 1980 (An ordinance requiring all owners of

residential houses and business establishments to dig a compost pit within their yards for

proper disposal of garbage), 4) Resolution No.160 s, 1981(An ordinance prohibiting any
person from throwing refuse or abandoning the wastes of their animals along the national
highway, provincial and barangay roads and providing penalties for any violations
thereof) ; 5) Resolution No.328 s, 1991(An ordinance regulating the threshing of palay
along the national, provincial, municipal and barangay roads); and 6) Resolution No.
401, s 1997 (An ordinance prohibiting any person from urinating and or littering of paper,
trash refuse, cigarette butts and other rubbish within the municipal compound and
providing penalties for any violation thereof). Moreover, pursuant to the provision of
sections 16 & 17 of Republic Act 9003 otherwise known as the Philippine Ecological
Solid Waste Management Act of 2000, the municipality formulated its Ten-Year

Ecological Solid Waste Management Plan, 2010-2020.

Though efforts for proper segregation, collection, transport and disposal of solid
wastes are being done, solid waste collection and disposal system of the municipality is
operational only in four barangays, specifically Kita-Kita, Poblacion, Pugaro, and San
Aurelio I due to lack of funds to procure garbage trucks and to pay for the wages of more
garbage collectors. Industrial and commercial establishments pay an annual garbage
collection fee of Php600.00 while residents who wish to have their garbage collected
particularly those within the solid waste collection service area pay an annual fee of

Php480.00 payable quarterly as per Article 1X of the Municipal Ordinance No. 2006-05.

Several garbage drums are placed in the public market, Municipal Hall and along
Don Teodoro Bascos Street, Two trucks, with a capacity of 3.5m each, are used for

collecting unsorted garbage from these drums every Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday.

Trucks station in areas where residents bring their wastes during collection days. Each
truck takes an average of two trips every collection day. The collected wastes are
disposed in the 1.5 hectares open dumpsite in Barangay Pugaro which is about 2km away
from the town proper. Table 7 presents the volume of collected solid waste in the
municipality in 2010 as measured at disposal site. Commercial establishments, which
include the public market and the resort, generate the highest volume of solid waste with
3m? daily having a share of 50% of all solid waste collected in the municipality. Least
contributor of solid waste is the agriculture sector with 0.30m° average daily volume

which is only a small portion (5%) of the total solid wastes of the municipality.

Table 7. Summary of solid waste collection volume of the Municipality of Balungao,2010.

AVERAGE AVERAGE

SOLID WASTE WEIGHTED

GENERATOR aa | alee amid PERCENTAGE
Residential 1.20 438.00 20%
Commercial/Market 3.00 1,095.00 50%
Streetwaste 0.90 328.50 15%
Institutions 0.60 219.00 10%
Agricultural 0.30 109.50 5%

TOTAL 6.00 2,190.00 100%

Source: MPDO of Balungao

Other efforts to address solid waste problems in the municipality include
procurement of shredders for the production of organic fertilizer out of biodegradable
wastes collected in the market and some residences. Vermin culture is also being done in
concrete boxes constructed along the lot owned by the municipality at the southern part

of Poblacion area.

CHAPTER VI

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Tourist Arrivals

Being the only resort with hot spring in the eastern part of Pangasinan and which
is believed to offer therapeutic benefits coupled with intensive promotional activities of
the Municipal Tourism Office of Balungao, Mt. Balungao Hot and Cold Springs Resort
and Hilltop Adventure has gained considerable popularity that many visitors from the
locality, nearby municipalities/provinces and even foreign countries flock to the area to
enjoy the soothing and relaxing experience that the hot spring promises. With the
launching of the Hilltop Adventure in September 2011 wherein zip lining along 620-
meter cables was made available to the public, the resort expected to draw more
visitors/tourists especially during the months covering December to May. Highest tourist
arrivals are noted during the month where Holy Week falls. Records showed that the
Tesort received as high as 1,583 visitors on Good Friday and 1,706 visitors on Black
Saturday in 2013. Ranks second in terms of highest tourist arrival is during the Christmas

break on December to January.

Table 8 shows the number of visitors/tourists coming to the resort. A total of
64,333 people paid visit to the resort in 2012 during the 6 peak months giving an average
of 10,722 a month. A huge difference of 19,040 visitors was noted the year after since
there were only a total of 45,293 visitors with an average of 7,549 a month during the six

peak months.


Table 8. Monthly tourist arrival in the resort.

NUMBER OF TOURIST ARRIVAL

adil 2012 2013

Peak Months
December 7,931 7,834
January 9,213 7,248
February 6,694 4,560
March 8,691 10,152
April 20,010 8,333
May 11,794 7,166
Total 64,333 45,293
Average 10,722 7,849

Lean Months
June 4,749 3,560
July 3,382 2,766
August 3,078 2,740
September 3,399 2,196
October 3,756 2,963
November 6,761 3,776
Total 25,125 18,001
Average 4,188 3,000
Grand Total 89,458 63,294
Average 7,455 5,275

Source: Municipal Tourism Office of Balungao

A total of 89,458 and 63,294 visitors/tourists came to the resort in 2012 and 2013,
respectively. Arrival decreased by 26,164 which is almost 30% of the previous year’s
statistics. In fact, it is observed that tourist arrival in each month declined except for the
month of March since Holy Week was celebrated in March in 2013. Resort employees
treat the decreasing arrivals as normal. They are however expecting an increase in 2014
and in the succeeding years due to the addition of a longer zipline and some

improvements in the resort such as construction of concrete benches, minipark, higher

class toilets, landscapes, pavilion rehabilitation, road concreting and widening, and street

lighting. More development projects for the resort are actually underway

Table 9 shows the recorded number of international visitors of the resort in 2013
This signifies that the resort is also drawing interest from tourists from other countries
such as United States of America, Texas, Canada, France, Switzerland, Netherlands,
United Kingdom, Spain, Germany, Holland, Belgium, Singapore, Japan, Korea, Iran,
Saudi Arabia, Russia, and Israel. There were also visitors from Italy and Sri Lanka during

the survey.

Table 9, Number of international visitors of the resort, 2013.

NUMBER OF
MONTH INTERNATIONAL VISITORS
January .
February 34
March 9
April 9
May 0
June *
July 7
August 46
September 6
October .
November 69
December 21 _
Total 201

Source: Balungao Municipal Tourism Office
*No available data due to failure to record by resort personnel in charge

Domestic visitors were from the provinces of Pangasinan, Nueva Ecija, Isabela,
Tarlac, Cavite, La Union, and other nearby places. Some are from the cities of Baguio

and Manila.

The Swimming Pools and Related Amenities of Mt. Balungao Hot and
Cold Springs Resort and Hilltop Adventure

There is no specific regulation by the ISPSC as to the shape, length, width, and
water depth of public swimming pools although it requires a maximum water depth of
1,23m (4feet) for spas. It also suggests taking into account the effect of a given shape to
the safety of users and to the maintenance of required level of air circulation to ensure
sanitation. Similarly, the DOH as stated in PD 856 sets no specific limits for length and
width. The shape, however, should not impair the safety and the need to facilitate
supervision of bathers, as well as the proper circulation of pool water. It also requires a
minimum water depth of 91cm (0.91m or 3 feet) except for special purposes or for
restricted or recessed areas in general swimming set primarily for the use of children

Required maximum water depth at the shallow end of swimming pools is 107cm (1.07m

or 3.5 feet) except for competitive or special purpose swimming pools

Upper Adult Pool

The upper adult pool was constructed at the upper portion of the resort. One way

to get to this pool was via a 9-step staircase (Figure 7). The different approximate

measurements of the pool are summarized in Table 10. The pool, with estimated water
surface area of 148.56m’, is kidney-shaped with perimeter measuring approximately
53.70m. It is 21m long with an average width of 7m. The pool was designed for adults
since it has a deep portion of 1.52m (Sft) to 1.83m (6.10ft) which is more than half of the
area of the entire pool (~98.23m’ or 66.12%). Children and non-swimmers can enjoy the
shallow part of the pool, though, which is as shallow as 0.03m at the steps. Water depth
beyond the steps is 1.03m (3.40ft). Average depth excluding the portion of the steps is

1.50m (4.91 ft). Shallow part is estimated at 50.33m” or 33.88% of the entire pool.

Figure 7. Photographs of the upper pool and the access staircase.

The water in the upper adult pool, with volume estimated to be 213m?, was
measured at 26°C at the time of data gathering. Common comment from visitors was that
the water is very cold for them to swim in. This makes the pool rarely used by visitors
aside from its being deep. This temperature may be due to its location which is partially
shaded by trees or because the water is not changed regularly that it has cooled down to

such temperature in time. The water in this pool is continuously filtered with an electric

filtering machine as seen in the left photograph. Maximum number of actual users in

this pool was 33 individuals at one time during the time of study.

Table 10, Approximate measurements of the upper adult pool.

PARTICULARS MEASUREMENT
Perimeter 53.70m
Length 21m
Average Width Tm
Water Surface Area 148.56m?
Average Depth 1.50m (4.918)
Volume of Water 213m?
Temperature 26°C

Lower Adult Pool

The lower adult pool (Figure 8) is situated right down the steps directing to the
swimming area and just in the proximity of some nipa huts and cottages. This makes it
more accessible for bathers. Surface area and volume of water of this swimming pool was
estimated at 212.64m? and 238.11m°, respectively. Its shape is similar to the upper adult
pool with a perimeter of 58m, length of 22m, and average width of 9.48m. The
temperature of water in this pool was 28°C at the time of the study. This is 2 degrees

warmer than the water in the upper pool.


Figure 8. Photograph of the lower adult pool.

This pool has a higher level of use than the upper pool probably because it is more
accessible and its water is warmer, clearer, and shallower. Based on observation during
the peak days of December and January, maximum number of bathers at one time was

noted to be around 92 children and adults combined.

Water levels at the time of the study were as shallow as 0.11m at the steps.
Measuring from the floor of the pool, water depth ranged from 0.91m (3feet) to 1.35m
(4.40ft) with an average of 1.15m (3.76ft). The water in this pool is not also regularly
drained and replaced. However, it is filtered and backwashed up to four times a day
according to utility personnel, Released water is refilled straight from the source via one
to two hosepipes. The summary of the estimated measurements of the lower adult pool is

shown in Table 11.


Table 11. Approximate measurements of the lower adult pool.

PARTICULARS MEASUREMENT
Perimeter 58m
Length 22m
Average Width 9.48m
Water Surface Area 212.64m?
Average Depth 1.15m (@.76ft)
Volume of Water 238.11m?
Temperature 28°C

Kids’ Pool

With shape similar to the upper and lower adult pools, the kids’ pool which is
shown in Figure 9, has a perimeter of 32m, length of 13m, and average width of 4.39m.
Water depth beyond the steps was measured at 0.61m (2A) to 0.82m (2.678). Its
approximate water surface area and volume of water are 54.1 1m? and 38m’, respectively.
Temperature reading was 29°C. Maximum swimming pool load noted during the study
was 45 bathers mostly children from age one to six years and some adult companions.

The estimated measurements related to the kids’ pool are shown in Table 12.

Figure 9. Photograph of the kids’ pool.


Table 12. Approximate measurements of the kids” pool.

PARTICULARS MEASUREMENT
Perimeter 32m
Length 13m
Average Width 434m
Water Surface Area $4.11m?
Average Depth 0.73m (2.388)
Volume of Water 38m?
Temperature 29°C

Water in this pool is neither filtered nor treated with any chemical but is
sometimes left to overflow once it is filled up through the pipes which are connected
directly from the source of water. The pool water is usually replaced daily usually late in

the afternoon or evening using the same hosepipes.

Hot-water cubicle-type pools

There are two identical hot pools in the resort (Figure 10) constructed adjacent to
each other, Perimeter of these irregularly shaped pools measures approximately 13.5m
each. They are 4.50m long with average width of 2.46m. Available space for seating is
about 10.67m. Water depth is 0.95m (3.12f) with volume of water for each of these

pools estimated as 7.29m’,


Figure 10. Photograph of the cubicle-type hot-water pools of the resort.

Hot groundwater supplies these two pools which are free-flowing through a pipe
in each pool 7.62cm (3 inches) in diameter installed directly to the wall of the pools. The
water in the pools are neither filtered nor treated with chemicals. They are drained
everyday usually late in the afternoon. The temperatures of the water were measured at
44°C and 42°C in Hot Pool | and Hot Pool 2, respectively at the time of data collection.
Water replacement takes approximately 9.17 hours for the Hot Pool | and 7.35 hours for
Hot Pool 2 overnight. The distance of the water sources, with that of the Hot Pool 2’s
source which is more or less 27m away, is believed by personnel to be the reason for the
difference. Physical or geological assessments may provide a more scientific basis. The
temperatures of the water in the pools have cooled down to 41°C (Hot Pool 1) and 40°C
(Hot Pool 2) at daytime when the pools were already in use perhaps due to heat transfer
with the air and with pool users facilitated by stirring up by the movements of users
inside the pools. The pools were observed to be shared by children and adults of both
sexes to utmost 31 in Hot Pool 1 and 30 in Hot Pool 2 during the study period. Table 13

provides the summary of estimated measurements.


Table 13. Approximate measurements of the hot-water pools.

PARTICULARS MEASUREMENT
Perimeter 13.5m
Length 4.5m
Average Width 2.46m
Average Depth 0.96m
Volume of Water 7.29m*
Seat Length 10.67m
Temperature Hot Pool 1 41°C

Hot Pool 2 40°C

Picnic Huts and Cottages

There are 15 kubo (nipa huts) and seven cottages located all over the resort for
rent at Php150 and Php100, respectively. The nipa huts can accommodate 9-12 persons
while the cottages can seat eight persons each implying accommodation for around 236
visitors. While plastic tables and chairs are available for rent at PhpSO per set of one table
and six chairs, these are but very few to meet visitors’ needs since during the peak days
of December and January, it was observed that visitors just find a place anywhere in the
area to set up for their picnics because of insufficiency of these infrastructures. Such set

up were not charged of user fee

Toilets, Shower, Lavatories, and Dressing Rooms

A separate toilet and shower rooms for males and females which are also used as

dressing rooms are constructed adjoining each other. For males, there are two water

closets, two showers, two urinals, and one lavatory/washbasin. For females, there are two
water closets, four showers, and one bathroom sink. PD 856 requires the toilets and

shower facilities in Table 14 based on time of maximum bather load.

Table 14. Ratio of visitors to water closets, showers, urinals, and lavatories as required by PD 856.

NUMBER OF CATER URINAL LAVATORY SHOWERS
PERSONS Male Female Male Male Female Male Female
1-50 1 1 1 1 1 2 2
51-100 2 2 2 1 1 3 3
101-150 2 3 2 2 2 4 4
151-200 3 4 3 2 2 5 5
>200 1:75 1:50 1:75 1:100 1:100 1:50 1:50
No. of Existing 5 3 1 1 3 4

Facilities

Since statistics on the gender of visitors are not available, it was not possible to
assess the sufficiency of the above facilities by male and female categories. However,
with an assumption that male to female ratio of visitors is 1:1 and with the resort’s
maximum bather load of more than 200 people based on records, the resort’s current
available toilet facilities as of study date connote that the water closets are good for 150
males and 100 females, the urinals are for 150 males, the lavatories are available for 100
males and 100 females, and the showers are good for 100 males and 200 females. To
avoid the problem of insufficiency of any of these facilities at any given day, it implies

that maximum number of visitors should not exceed 200.

There are five outdoor shower stations with four showers each but only one was
functional at the time of the study. The two hosepipes that supply the swimming pools

with water were used as temporary substitutes. Considering the ratio of one shower for

every 50 visitors, these 20 units can be available to as many as 1000 visitors when they

are restored.

The resort management is presently addressing the problem concerning the
inadequacy of these facilities. Construction of additional three water closets each for
males and females, three urinals for males, and three lavatories for common use is on-
going thereby increasing the capacities of these facilities. But since there are no
additional shower rooms, it implies that the maximum number of visitors should still be

200.

Information Office

Serving as information offices of the resort is the nipa hut at the entrance area
where payments for entrance fees are collected and also the receiving area at the zipline
station situated in the multi-purpose hall. Having two possible locations made inquiries of

visitors promptly attended.

Grilling Stations

There are eight grilling stations in the resort located near the nipa huts and

cottages. These are noticeably deficient during peak days as reflected by the scenario

during the peak days of December and January wherein visitors set up their own grilling

and cooking units anywhere in the resort using big rocks found around the resort.

Kitchen Sinks and Faucets

Four units of sinks with faucets were constructed at the north side of the resort
beside a grilling station. These seemed to be adequate considering that visitors bring their
own water and some wash in or near their respective areas in the resort. Some also bring

prepared foods already that they no longer need to wash the foods or utensils,

Parking Area

Silva (2002) discussed in his study of the carrying capacity of beaches on the SW
coast of Portugal that parking areas, especially if they are not properly organized and
managed, also exert a strong influence on carrying capacity. In the study resort, there are
at least four designated major parking areas totaling to about 1,193.3m”. These areas were
able to accommodate 49 vehicles of different types such as trucks, jeepneys, vans, cars,
tricycles, motorcycles, and kuliglig (a locally fabricated farm transport medium) during
the peak days of December and January 2013. However, while these parking areas were
able to hold all the vehicles that entered the resort, parking was not properly organized
and managed since visitors just park wherever space was available even to areas which

were not designated as parking zones.


Signs and Warnings

Signs and warnings were deficient in the resort during the study period. The only
posters found in the resort at that time were one placard each for: directing the parking
area for motorcycles and tricycles; informing vehicle drivers not to park at the zip line
zone; and advising everyone not to throw garbage in the site. There were other signs
destroyed by recent storms but are soon to be replaced according to the designated
Tourism Information Officer. Essential signs and warnings for a public bath which were
lacking in the resort are directions, emergency telephone numbers, markings on pool
water depths, maximum bather load, sanitary practices and proper use of the pools and

other facilities, among others.

Rules and regulations with regards to swimming are not displayed in the resort.
The Information Officer explained that they verbally remind these to visitors by roaming
around and talking to them. A more practical means of conveying these important
concerns is through posters or placards that are properly prepared and conspicuously
located since they provide steady or constant reminders and easy reference for visitors

especially the safety precautions in swimming and proper use of the swimming pools

Garbage Bins

Recycled plastic chlorine containers are used as garbage receptacles which are
placed all over the resort for easy access by visitors. These are regularly emptied by

resort utility personnel on duty. However, the garbage bins are not lined with plastic trash

bags and are not provided with tight fitting lids or covers. Moreover, these are only of

one type hence no label as to which type of wastes the receptacles are used for

Resort Personnel

The resort is operated by the Local Government Unit of Balungao, Pangasinan. It
is managed by the Municipal Tourism Council composed of a Municipal Tourism Officer

(MTO)-Designate, Tourism Information Officer-Designate, and a member.

A midwife from the Rural Health Office of the municipality takes duty as the
medical/first aid assistant of the resort every Saturday, Sunday and holiday. The resort
has no official competent and trained lifeguard in constant attendance. Employees explain
that all personnel on duty serve as lifeguards. But none of them has proper training for

life-saving and artificial resuscitation.

In recent years, Citizens Armed Forces Geographical Unit (CAFGU) and police
officers were deployed in the area. But since the place is generally peaceful, two utility
personnel act as look-out during the night. On Jamboree days, military men guard the

security of the area

Moreover, an employee is assigned at the entrance area to receive and record
guests, and to collect entrance fees. An Administrative Aide from the Municipal
Treasurer's Office backs up collection of fees every Saturday and as needed. Other

employees, including the first aid assistant, when on duty, roam around the resort to

collect rental fees for the use of cottages, nipa huts, tables and chairs. With such, the

resort does not encounter problems regarding manning the collections.

Regarding utility personnel, there are more or less 10 who are hired to maintain
the cleanliness of the entire resort including the comfort rooms. Some of them are also
assigned to drain, clean, filter, and refill the pools and treat the pool water. Others assist
in zip line operations. On peak days, management calls for job orders to support

operations thus, the resort does not experience manpower shortage as to utility personnel

Water Sources for the Swimming Pools

Hot Spring Water Sources of Hot-Water Pools

The hot-water pools have their own water sources. Hot Pool | has its spring water
source beside it. An insignificant difference of less than 0.5 second was noted in the
filling up of a 16-liter container from January 19 to February 2, 2014 and March 2, 2014
This may only be due to some factors in measurements rather than increase in water
supply at that time. Flow rate or water discharge is constant at 0.22 Ips for the three

measurement dates (Table 15).

Water temperature increased from 44°C in January and February to 45°C in
March. It was actually mentioned in the municipality’s CLUP that Mt. Balungao, a
reputed volcano, has hot spring that changes in temperature. A geological assessment

may provide scientific explanation


Table 15. Length of time to fill up a 16-liter pail, water flow rate, and the temperature of the
Hot Pool | water source.

Tera TIME (SECONDS) FLOW RATE (LPS)
Jan. 19,2014 Feb. 2, 2014 Mar. 2, 2014 = Jan. 19,2014 Feb. 2,2014 Mar. 2, 2014

1 72.20 72.70 73.70 0.22 0.22 0.22

2 71.50 75.40 72.50 0.22 0.21 0.22

3 7250 70.50 73.40 0.22 0.23 0.22

4 71.80 72.10 73.20 0.22 0.22 0.22

5 72.40 72.10 72.10 0.22 0.22 0.22
Average 72.08 72.56 72.98 0.22 0.22 0.22
Temp °C) “4 “4 45

The Hot Pool 2’s source of water is approximately 27m away from the pool. This
is believed to be the reason for the 2-degree lower temperature compared to Hot Pool 1
whose water source is right beside it though a more scientific explanation for this must be
established. A less than half of a second difference in the length of time consumed in
filling up a 16-liter pail on the three measurement dates was also observed. A constant

0.28 Ips flow rate was also noted. Please see Table 16.

Table 16. Length of time to fill up a 16-liter pail, water flow rate, and the temperature of the
Hot Pool 2 water source.

TIME (SECONDS) FLOW RATE (LPS)

TRIAL “Jan 19,2014 Feb.2,2014 Mar 2,2014 Jon. 19,2018 Feb,2,2014 Mar 2,2014

1 57.70 57.50 58.20 0.28 0.28 0.27

2 57.60 $57.20 58.60 0.28 0.28 027

3 58.20 58.20 57.80 0.27 027 0.28

4 58.20 57.40 58.30 0.27 0.28 0.27

5 58.60 58.10 $7.50 0.27 0.28 0.28
Average 58.06 57.68 58.08 0.28 0.28 0.28

Temp (°C) 2 2 a



Comparing the two pools, it took longer for the 16-liter container to be filled up
from the water source of Hot Pool 1 by 14.60 seconds on the average. Reasons behind
this cannot be concluded since the sources and water pathways are not exposed. There are
no changes in the amount of water supplies for the two hot-water pools from January to
March 2014 as signified by the same averages in terms of water flow rate. This is may be

due to non-occurrence of significant amount of rain during the season.

Water Sources of the Upper, Lower and Kids’ Pools

The sources of water that supply the cold-water swimming pools of the resort are
located at the upper portion at the southern side of the resort near the upper adult pool.
Water Source A (Figure 11) is a cold spring water, with a temperature of 28°C at the time
of study, located at around 115.6m elevation and about 43m away from the Hot Water
Source B which is approximately 34.56m away from the point where these sources meet
and collected (Combined Sources A and B) to supply the cold-water pools. Water Source
A is from a deep excavation about 45.72m (150-feet) which is believed to have been
created from mining or treasure hunting in the area many years back. Resort management
had it bounded with concrete and boulders with a net canopy to prevent plant litters and
other dirt from falling into the water. An opening was made below to allow water to flow

into the creek leading to the point where the water is collected.


Figure 11. Sources of water for the upper adult pool, lower adult pool and kids” pool.

Water Source B is hot spring water with 44°C temperature flowing through a
7.62-cm (3-inch) pipe inserted through the lower portion of a hill beside the creek. Hot
water also spring from few crevices in the stream bed near Water Source B. These waters
are mixed with that from Water Source A along a rocky creek up to the point where they
are collected (Figure 12) which is constructed with shallow concrete barrier to hold the
water. It is installed with a 7.62-cm (3-inch) diameter pipe wherein two smaller hosepipes
are also inserted to supply the pools with water. These hosepipes also serve as substitutes
for the defective outdoor showers. Water from this point had a temperature of 31.5°C at

the time of study.

Since the areas are not restricted, they are prone to disturbance, erosion and

pollution by hikers and visitors who are exploring the area. Aside from various solid

wastes mostly non-biodegradable scattered at the Water Source B area, there were also
fruits and candles of which some were lighted and left unattended. These, according to
the MTO, were from a faith healer from a nearby barangay and his “patients” who
offered them early Saturday momings for the recovery of the “patients” from their
illnesses. It is also the belief of the faith healer that constant visiting and praying in the

area will prevent Mt. Balungao, which is an inactive volcano, from erupting.

Figure 12. The area where Combined Water Sources A and B are collected.

Intermittent sources were also found up beyond the creek where Sources A and B
flow. They were not contributing water during the time of the study but resort personnel

narrated that water also flows from the said creeks during seasons of adequate rains.

Measurements of the discharge of water from where Sources A and B are
collected were also done on January 19, February 2 and March 2, 2014 to determine any

changes in the quantity of water supply for the season (Table 17). A 16-liter pail was also

used to collect the water discharged from the basin with five trials. Averages of 21.04
seconds, 20.58 seconds, and 20.62 seconds were noted on said dates. It took lesser time to
fill up the container which consequently yielded a little increase in flow rate from by 0.02
liter per second (Ips) during the last two measurement days. This is may be due to the
brief rainfalls of trace amount that occurred early in the morning of February 2 and

February 24 though the difference is not really that significant

Table 17. Length of time to fill up a 16-liter pail and the water flow rate of the Combined
Water Sources A and B.

TIME (SECONDS) FLOW RATE (LPS)
TRIAL
Jan. 19,2014 Feb. 2,201 Mar.2,2014 Jan. 19,2014 Feb. 2,2014 Mar. 2, 2014
1 20.90 20.40 20.5 0.77 0.78 0.78
2 21.00 20.10 219 0.76 0.80 0.73
3 21.00 20.70 203 0.76 0.77 0.79
4 21.30 20.90 20.1 0.75 0.77 0.80
3 21.00 20.80 20.3 0.76 0.77 0.79
‘Average 21.04 20.58 20.62 0.76 0.78 0.78
Temp.(C) 31.5 315 315

Though the flow rate from the source of water itself was 0.76 Ips to 0.78 Ips, the
flow of water from the hosepipes that supply water to the cold pools was recorded at 0.16
Ips and 0.15 Ips on January 19 and February 2, 2014 respectively (Table 18). This was
attributed to the leaks of the hosepipes and the leaks at the pipe where the two hosepipes
were connected. Flow rate increased to 0.57 Ips on March 2, 2014 because the resort

management replaced the leaking hosepipes.


An interview with an employee who has been working in the resort for years now
recalled that amount of water supply in the resort has been the same ever since. No
significant changes were noted per season except when there are episodes of rains with

considerable amount.

Table 18. Length of time to fill up a 16-liter pail and the water flow rate of the pipes that
supply the cold-water pools.

TIME (SECONDS) FLOW RATE (LPS)
TRIAL
Jan. 19,2014 Feb. 2,2014 Mar. 2,2014 Jan. 19,2014 Feb. 2,2014 Mar. 2, 2014
1 98.40 110.20 27.60 0.16 OS 0.58
2 98.40 111.40 28.10 0.16 old 0.57
3 99.00 110.40 29.20 0.16 O14 0.55
4 99.00 109.80 27.90 0.16 0.15 0.57
5 99.00 109.70 28,20 0.16 0.15 0.57
‘Average 98.76 110.3, 28.20 0.16 0.15 0.57
Temp. °C) 30 30 30

Quality of the Resort’s Water Source and Swimming Pool Water

The water in the swimming pools, when they were in use, were tested and
assessed for bacteriological quality (total bacteria) and physico-chemical quality (acidity
and clarity/transparency) based on the standards of the Department of Health as stated in
the IRR of Chapter 8 of PD 856 (Public Swimming or Bathing Places) of the Philippines.

The water source which is the combined Sources A and B was also tested for pH and

total bacteria to assess its quality before it is supplied to the pools and used by bathers.

Table 19 shows the results of the tests conducted.

Table 19. Quality of the water source and swimming pool water of the resort.

PHYSICO-CHEMICAL _ BACTERIOLOGICAL

SAMPLE SOURCE =
Clarity* pH ‘APC (CFU/ml water)

Combined Sources A and B -

Replicate 1 15 300

Replicate 2 15 200

Replicate 3 72 400
Upper Adult Pool No

Replicate 1 3.5 60

Replicate 2 3.0 <10

Replicate 3 32 20
Lower Adult Pool Yes

Replicate 1 32 10

Replicate 2 3.0 <10

Replicate 3 28 <0
Kids' Pool Yes

Replicate 1 70 15,000

Replicate 2 719 24,000

Replicate 3 85 900
Hot Pool | Yes

Replicate 1 84 900

Replicate 2 8.2 600

Replicate 3 87 200
Hot Pool 2 Yes

Replicate | 78 2,000

Replicate 2 83 700

Replicate 3 8.4 2,000
DOH Acceptable Limit Yes 74-18 200

* Secchi Disk in the deepest point of pool is visible from sidewalls at all distances up to 9m


Except for the water in upper adult pool, the rest were clear since the Secchi Disk
submerged in the deepest point of the pools can still be seen from sidewalls at all
distances up to 9m. Results of this assessment revealed that the upper pool’s water was
already turbid because the submerged Secchi Disk can no longer be seen even right at the
tester’s position. Though the pool water was continuously filtered, some swimmers
remarked that there were a lot of sediments on the pool floor which, when stirred up

during swimming, made the water more turbid

The lower adult pool was clear even up to 9m from the submerged Secchi Disk.
This is possibly due to chemical treatments. The kids’ pool and the hot-water pools also
passed the assessment although the pool waters were not treated by any chemicals

probably because they have shallow water level

As advised by other swimming pool owners and by the supplier of pool chemicals
that pool water need not be replaced often and can actually be used even up to 15 years as
long as they are regularly treated with muriatic acid, calcium hypochlorite (chlorine) and
algaecide, the resort applies these chemicals to the upper and lower adult pools every
evening by the utility personnel on duty. Amount and frequency of application depends
on the pools’ level of use and visual characteristics particularly turbidity. Utility
personnel decide how much and how often the application is. More chemicals are added
if the pool has been heavily used during the day and if water clarity has deteriorated. The
15-ml cap of the algaecide container is used to measure the chemical for algaecide
application while a 1.2-liter dipper is used to estimate muriatic acid and calcium

hypochlorite applications. These are separately added into a bucket with water and then

manually poured and tossed all over the pool water. Utility employee reported that
approximately 40 liters of muriatic acid, 45kg of granular calcium hypochlorite, and one

liter of algaecide are consumed for the two big pools a month

The addition of these chemicals affects the chemistry balance of water pools.
Calcium hypochlorite, for instance, has a pH of 11.8 (Missouri Department of Health and
Senior Services (MDHSS), undated) thus, it will increase the pH level of the water when
applied to the pool. Muriatic acid is usually used to bring the pH level down and to
balance the water chemistry. This is essential because correct pH level will allow chlorine
to work effectively as a bactericide and algaecide and also provide comfortable water
condition for bathers, The MDHSS actually does not recommend operating swimming
pools at pH 6,5 because they consider this acidic enough to be unsafe for bathers and to

facilitate corrosion of pool fixtures, metal fittings and pipes

The proper application of chemical treatments and the monitoring of water
chemistry balance of the swimming pools seemed to have been overlooked as indicated
by the very low pH levels of the two adult pools which were treated with muriatic acid,
chlorine, and algaecide. The pH readings from water samples taken from these pools
ranged from 2.8 to 3.5. These levels imply that the water in these two treated pools have
gone acidic and way below the standard range required by the DOH which is 7.4 to 7.8
This may be due to accumulated muriatic acid owing to continuous application whereas

the waters are not regularly drained and replaced

Since the human body has a pH of 7.4, the human eyes have a pH of 7.3 to 7.5

(MDHSS, undated) and human tears have pH of 6.5 to 7.6 (Abelson e/ a/., 1981), bathers

are expected to be uncomfortable in this water because the eyes, as well as the skin will
react due to irritation. This is confirmed by visitor-swimmers who complained that the

water was irritating to the eyes and itchy on the skin.

The pH levels of the water in the kids’ pool and the hot-water pools, on the other
hand, were generally high. Only one replicate from the Hot Pool 2 fell in the maximum
level of 7.8 pH. One replicate from the kids’ pool had a pH reading of 7.0 which was
likewise out of range. The rest of the pH readings of the samples taken from the kids’
pools and two hot-water pools were beyond the 7.8 maximum pH level. Conversely, the
pH levels of two replicates from the water source were within the allowable range.

However, one replicate was below the standard range by 0,2

Out of range pH levels is an indication that the water chemistry of the swimming
pools is not properly managed. As for the treated pools, too much or not proportionate
amounts of chemicals are possibly applied. This should be addressed by the resort
administration because it could pose risks not only to pool fixtures but especially to
humans as well as to plants, animals, soils, groundwater, surface water, and atmosphere

when these waters are released from the pools

For bacteriological quality of the waters, total aerobic bacteria were counted
through colony forming unit per milliliter of water (CFU/ml water). Only the chemically
treated pools (upper and lower adult pools) were found to contain very low bacteria
counts may be due to the application of chlorine which is a disinfecting agent. The rest of
the samples generally had counts greater than the allowable level of 200 CFU/ml water.

The kids’ pool had the highest count with two of the replicates even reached 15,000 and

24,000 CFU/ml water. Aside from the source itself possibly containing high level of
bacterial count, this could also be attributed to users, especially the children, possibly
releasing human wastes in the pool. The bacteria counts in the hot-water pools were not
as high as that of the kids’ pool may be because of the high temperature of the waters and
the sources which are not exposed to elements that could possibly contaminate the water
unlike the water sources of the kids’ pool which is running through an open creek where

people can freely enter. This could also be due to lack of footbath.

Water Supply for the Comfort and Shower Rooms

‘The comfort and shower rooms of the resort have separate water sources. Water
from two deep wells is pumped into a reservoir with 27,000 liters capacity. Resort

personnel narrated that they never run out of water from these sources.

Physical Carrying Capacity Assessment of the Swimming Pools

Consistent with the findings of some researchers, respondents had difficulty
giving numeric responses with regards to how much water space they need in using
public swimming pools. To help them estimate, they were presented examples of actual
spaces to illustrate how wide particular areas were for their comparison. They were also

asked to estimate space using their stretched hands.


Water Surface Area and Seat Length Requirements of the Visitor-Respondents
Upper Adult Pool

There were 33 among the respondents who used the shallow portion of the upper
adult pool (Table 20). However, one respondent who required 40m? was omitted after
testing the data for outliers using boxplot (Appendix V). Responses from the 32
remaining respondents reveal that with 1m? as the minimum space requirement and 10m?
as the maximum, the average water surface space requirement of all the shallow pool

users of the upper pool was approximately 5.21m?

Respondents claimed that they were already satisfied with the reported space
because they did not know how to swim and they were just soaking in the water while
chatting with friends. Respondents who required bigger space wanted to learn how to
swim, to move around easily, to have space for other users, and to avoid bumping others.
One of the respondents said she was fat, hence she wanted 4m? of water space. Users in
the shallow part of the pool who had skills in swimming needed wider water space
because they found it more enjoyable and relaxing to swim in spacious water so that they
can move their arms freely without splashing water on other users, swim around the pool

and even underwater, do laps, and avoid bumping others


Table 20. Water surface area requirement of the visitor-respondents in the shallow
portion of the upper adult swimming pool of the resort.

AREA REQUIREMENT (M?) FREQUENCY
1 1
2 4
25 1
4 3
6 1
2 3
2.25 1
3 1
4 3
3 3
6 2
7 1
10 8
Average 5.21 Total 32

Table 21 shows the space requirements of the respondents in the deep portion of
the upper adult pool. The minimum and maximum requirements were 2m? and 15m?
respectively. With this, it demonstrates that on the average, approximately 6.75m? space
was required by the respondents. This is bigger by 1.54m? than the average space
requirement of the users in the shallow portion of the same pool. This implies that the
users of the deep portion wanted a wider space for moving around the pool may be
because they had better skills in swimming and they did more activities in the pool such

as swimming around, swimming underwater, diving, and lapping


Table 21. Water surface area requirement of the visitor-respondents in the deep portion of
the resort’s upper adult pool.

AREA REQUIREMENT (M?) FREQUENCY
2 5
2.25 1
3 2
4 3
5 4
6 2
7 1
15 1
10 12
i 1
15 1
Average 6.75 Total 33

Lower Adult Pool

It was found that a slightly smaller space was required by the respondents when
they were in the shallow lower adult pool (Table 22) may be due to higher level of use

than the upper adult pool,


Table 22. Water surface area requirement of visitor-respondents in the resort’s lower

adult pool
AREA REQUIREMENT (M?) FREQUENCY

05 1

1 1

2 4

2.25 9

3 1

4 5

45 1

5 2

8 1

10 1

2 4

2.25 2

3 2

4 5

5 10

6 2)

7 1

8 1

10 15

Average 5.16 Total 68

Some respondents stated that though they wanted a wider space, the pool was
already crowded. One respondent who claimed 40m? was removed from the computation
after testing the data for outliers using boxplot (Appendix V). The minimum reported
Tequirement was 0.5m? while the maximum was 10m*. An average of 5.16m? water space

was estimated for the user-respondents of this pool.

a

Kids’ Pool

Most of the users of the kids’ pool were observed to be children of ages one to six
years with some adult companions. The children were asked of their space requirements
but they cannot respond appropriately even with the effort of illustrations. Among the 26
respondents who used the kids’ pool, only 25 were considered because one was found to
be an outlier (Appendix V) having required 16m?. Though there were few who swam
and went around the pool, most were just seated while their feet or body were soaked in
the water. Some were there to look after a child. With 1m” and 5m? as the minimum and
maximum space requirements, respectively, the average water surface requirement of the

25 respondents was approximately 216m”, Please see Table 23.

Table 23. Water surface area requirement of visitor-respondents in the resorts’ kids’ pool.

AREA REQUIREMENT (M’) FREQUENCY
1 4
2 1
3 2

45 1
5 1
1 4

1s 1
2 8
3 2
5 L

Average 2.16 Total 25



Cubicle-Type Hot-Water Pools

Since the cubicle-type hot-water pools were constructed with underwater seat,
nearly all users were just seated while soaking themselves or their feet in the hot water.
They were therefore asked of the span of seat that they needed in using any of the two
identical hot-water pools. Only 79 among the 83 respondents who used the hot pools
were considered in the computation since four were found to be outliers (Appendix V).

Table 24 shows that at least 0.3m and at most 1.5m were the responses yielding an

average of 0.88m.

Table 24. Seat length requirement of the visitor-respondents in the resort's hot pools.

SEAT LENGTH (M) FREQUENCY
03 1
0.5 15
0.6
07 1
08 1
09 32
1.0 4
12 2
13 1
15 12

Average 0.88 Total 79



From the respondents, only three tolerated side by side seating to accommodate

more users with one remarked that he was a social person and he wanted to make friends
with other visitors. The rest wanted space between seatmates on both sides. Some of their
reasons were: to have enough space for self: to soak self comfortably without hitting or
bumping other users; to keep distance from others who were strangers, and to be able to
move or stretch body, hands, and feet freely. They also mentioned about minimal
disturbance if they were seated far apart from other users making the pools more spacious

thus, it was more relaxing and more comfortable for them.

Duration of Use/Stay of Visitor-Respondents
Resort

The swimming facilities of the resort are open for 15 hours from 6AM to 9PM.
according to the Designated Information Officer of the resort. Four out of the 84
respondents were treated as outliers after testing the data using boxplot (Appendix V).
These were the respondents who stayed in the resort overnight. Table 25 shows that the
day visitor-respondents stayed in the resort from a minimum of one hour to a maximum
of nine (9) hours for an average of approximately 4.50 hours. They started to arrive at
8AM. It was observed that most visitors start packing up for departure at around 4PM

already. One respondent stayed in the resort until 6:30PM


Table 25. The duration of stay of the visitor-respondents in the resort

DURATION OF STAY (HOURS) FREQUENCY

1.25
1S

1.75


3.75

4.25
4.75

RNRAH UAL eH HbA

ri




8.5

HH ue uvwon

Average 4.5 Total 80

Upper Adult Pool

The number of hours that the swimming pools were available for use and the

number of hours that a person stayed in the pools were used in the estimation of the

11s
rotation factor for the assessment of the potential carrying capacities of the different

swimming pools

The respondents who used the shallow portion of the upper adult pool bathed
from two minutes to 120 minutes (two hours). Average duration of use was 33.30
minutes or 0.56 hour. Those who bathed in the deep portion of the upper adult pool used
it as quick as five minutes to as long as 120 minutes or two hours) (Table 26). The

average duration was 37.33 minutes (0.62 hour).

Table 26. The duration of use of the resort’s upper adult pool by the visitor-respondents.

SHALLOW PORTION DEEP PORTION
Duration of Use Frequency Duration of Use Frequency
(minutes) (minutes)

2 2 5 !
5 1 10 6
10 6 12 1
16 3 15 3
20 2 20 !
30 9 25 1
45 1 30 9
60 7 45 U
90 1 60 7
120 1 90 u

120 2

Average 33.30 reise Average 37.33 ees

(0.56 hour) (0.62 hour)



Common remarks by the respondents who did not use the pool long enough were

the depth, low temperature, turbidity, and the chlorine smell of the pool water. There
were also comments about the many leaves floating on the water and the rough and sharp
pebbles embedded on the steps which made them transfer to the other pools. Some also
found the water very deep and very cold for them to tolerate in swimming. However,
many of them still used the pool for 30 and 60 minutes regardless of the unfavorable

remarks.

Lower Adult Pool

It was observed that there were more bathers in the lower adult pool than in the
upper adult pool probably due to its accessibility. It was located in the main swimming
area where the cottages, huts, and other facilities were situated. Its water was also clearer
and shallower. These factors somehow made the lower adult pool used longer by more
visitors than the upper adult pool. Moreover, there were comments that they did not

know that there was also a pool upstairs

Some respondents soaked themselves into the water for few minutes only because
the pool was already crowded. One said she just wanted to close the pores of her skin
after soaking into the hot pools. Others just wanted to try and experience all the pools.

Similarly, most of the respondents used the lower pool for 30 and 60 minutes (Table 27).


Table 27, The duration of use of the resort’s lower adult pool by the visitor-respondents.

DURATION OF USE (MINUTES) FREQUENCY

2 2

5 2

10 6

15 5

20 2

30 29

45 1

60 15

90 1
Average 33.24 (0.55 hour) Total 63

Responses of six respondents were taken out since they were found to be outliers
(Appendix V). With the remaining 63, an average of 33.24 minutes or 0.55 hour was

obtained.

Kids’ Pool

Table 28 illustrates the length of time that the respondents used the kids’ pool of
the resort. One was treated as outlier after testing using boxplot (Appendix V). The range
therefore was from two minutes to 60 minutes (one hour) with an average of 27.08

minutes or 0.45 hour.


Table 28. The duration of use of the resort’s kids’ pool by the visitor-respondents.

DURATION OF USE (MINUTES) FREQUENCY
2 1
5 1
10 5
1S 2
20 1
30 "
60 4
Average 27.08 (0.45 hour) Total 25

Cubicle-Type Hot-Water Pools

Alhajj ef al. (2009) analyzed injury data related to hot tubs, whirlpools and spas
published in the American Journal of Preventive Medicine and they recommended a
water temperature of at most 40°C with exposure in hot water for 10-15 minutes only to
prevent heat overexposure which may cause several health issues such as overheating,
dehydration, increased blood pressure, and stroke for those who have cardiovascular

disease according to a medical doctor (America Now, 2013)

However, in the study resort as seen in Table 29, the average number of hours that
the hot pools were used by the user-respondents was 44.73 minutes (0.75 hour). Only 17
of them soaked in the hot water for at most 15 minutes. The rest stayed in the hot pools
from 20 to 120 minutes (two hours) One respondent even used the hot pools for 180

minutes (three hours) and two for 240 minutes (four hours) though they said they soaked

there for several times with minutes to hours of intervals. These were however omitted in

the computation since they were found to be outliers (Appendix V).

Table 29. The duration of use of the resort’s hot pools by the visitor-respondents.

DURATION OF USE (MINUTES) FREQUENCY
2 1
3 2
5 2
10 6
15 6
20 7
30 18
45 2
60 26
90 4
120 6
Average 44.73 (0.75 hour) Total 80

The collected data required in the estimation of carrying capacities of the different

pools are summarized in Table 30.


Table 30. Data required in the estimation of carrying capacities of the different swimming

pools of the resort.

AVERAGE

rveorroot , ARE AvemaGe ours PURATION Densrry ROTATION
REQ’T OPEN (HOUR) PER SQM

Upper Adult Pool 148.56m*

Shallow Portion 50.33m" 5.21m* 15 0.56 0.19 26.79

Deep Portion 98.23m? 6.75m? 15 0.62 0.15 24.19
Lower Adult Pool 212.64m* 5.16m* 1s 0.55 0.19 27.27
Kids’ Pool 54.11? 216m? 1s 0.45 0.46 33.33
Meatlegty 10.67m 088m 15 0.75 14 20.00

Limiting/Correcting Factors in the Use of the Swimming Pools of the Resort

Limiting factors or corrective factors, according to Tran ef al. (2007) are those

that have negative impacts on tourism activities which are selected and based on the

tourism activities and local conditions of the study area. These factors are translated into

quantitative or semi-quantitative values that are computable, easily surveyed and

collected by field research and questionnaire, These are specific to the area or facility

under study since each varies from the other. The following are the limiting factors that

were identified by this research and by the visitor-respondents:


Upper Adult Pool

Ten factors were found to be limiting the use of the shallow portion of the upper
adult pool. The same factors were applicable to the deep portion with pool depth as one

additional limiting factor.

Cf;: Swimming Pool Unusable Hours

The swimming area of the resort is open for public use for 15 hours from 6AM to
9PM according to the Designated Information Officer. However, utility personnel start
applying chemical treatments to the upper pool usually around 7PM. Thereby, the upper
pool is commonly usable only for 13 hours from 6AM to 7PM. With two hours that the
pool is no longer usable despite the resort still open, the I estimated corrective factor

(Cfi) is 13.33%.

Ch: Pool Water Quality

The survey also revealed that the quality of the pool water affected the
satisfaction of users indicated by their complaints that the water was turbid, salty, bitter,
with sediments, and irritating to the eyes, skin and throat. There were 59 uncomfortable

respondents out of 84, hence the estimated Cf, is 70.24%.


Cf;: Chlorine Odor of the Pool Water

Another quality of water commonly mentioned was the chlorine level of the pool
water indicated by complaints of strong chlorine smell by 15 respondents. Cf of 17.86%

was estimated for this aspect.

Cf: Floating Leaves, Dead Insects, Ete.

Due to presence of trees, particularly acacia, near the pool, leaves, some dead
insects, and other objects frequently fall onto the pool water making it unlikable by 11 of
the 84 respondents and negatively affected their enjoyment. An estimated Cf for this is

13.09%.

Cfs: Pool Water Temperature

There were comments not only from the respondents but from other visitors that
the water in the upper adult pool was very cold (26°C) which limited their stay and use of
the pool. They suggested that the temperature should at least be that of the lower adult
pool (28°C) by adding hot spring water for them to be able to use and enjoy the pool. A

two-degree limiting factor denotes a Cfs of 7.14%.

Cf: Rough and Sharp Steps

Another factor that hindered the use of the upper pool was the rough and sharp

pebbles embedded on the surface of the steps. There were actually cases of injuries

related to the steps during the survey days. An area of approximately 8.6m? is covered by
the said steps out of the total pool area of 148.56m’. The estimated Cfs therefore is

5.79%,

Cf;: Inconspicuous Pool Location

It was also found that the location of the pool restricted the use of the upper pool.
Since it is located upstairs and there are no signs directing to its location, it is not
noticeable from the main swimming area. Two of the respondents did not use the pool
because they did not know that there was a pool upstairs, Cf, therefore was estimated at

2.38%,

Cfg: Lack of Fence/Barrier

Some respondents also expressed concern about the portion of the pool which is
immediately beside a deep section where a creek is located up to the portion where the
access staircase is located, There is no fence or any barrier making the pool unsafe for
visitors. The unsafe portion is approximately 50% of the swimming pool area, hence

another corrective factor (Cfs).

Cfo: Pool Water Depth

Since the deepest point of the pool is 1.83m, common comments heard also from
respondents and other visitors about the upper pool was that it was very deep. There were

21 among the respondents who found the pool deep enough for them and this restricted

their use of the pool. Since deep pools are defined at depths of 1.5m and above, 66.12%
of the upper adult pool is deep. This portion was avoided by most visitors, hence the

estimated Cfy in the deep portion of the upper adult pool.

Lower Adult Pool

Cf: Swimming Pool Unusable Hours

The lower adult pool is usually available only for 13 hours from 6AM to 7PM
despite the swimming area being open 15 hours from 6AM to 9PM since utility personnel
on duty start applying chemical treatments to the pool usually around 7PM. The

estimated Cf, for this concern is 13.33%.

Cf: Pool Water Quality

The lower adult pool was observed with problems similar to the upper adult pool
regarding water quality, It also negatively affected the satisfaction and potential use of
the pool by 50% of the respondents according to the survey conducted whereby they also
whined about the water being turbid, salty, bitter, with sediments, and irritating to the
eyes, face, skin/body and throat, Therefore, another corrective factor (Cf) of 50% was

estimated.


fy: Chlorine Odor of the Pool Water

The pool being regularly treated with chemicals similar to the upper adult pool, 15
respondents disapprovingly remarked about the strong chlorine smell of the pool water.

With this, the estimated Cf is 17.86%.

Cf: Floating Leaves, Dead Insects, Etc.

Since there are also plants such as acacia near the pool, leaves, dead insects, and
other objects are also falling onto the pool water and this made 12 respondents

uncomfortable in using the pool. An estimated Cf; for this is 14.29%.

Kids’ Pool

Cfi: Swimming Pool Unusable Hours

The kids’ pool is generally available only for approximately 12 hours from 6AM
to 6PM despite the swimming area open for 15 hours from 6AM to 9PM since utility
personnel on duty drain the pool usually around 6PM. The estimated Cf, for this concern

is 20%.

fe: Pool Water Quality

Since the water in the kids’ pool is not filtered nor chemically treated but supplied

directly from the source, the water is turbid and looks dirty with sediments, leaves and

other foreign matters, Twenty-two respondents were heard of these complaints thus, a Cf

of 26.19%.

Cfs: Lack of Barrier

The kids’ pool likewise has no barrier or fence to secure users from falling into
the stream just beside the pool. The unsafe portion accounted for approximately 45%

hence its Cfy,

Cubicle-Type Hot-Water Pools

Cf: Swimming Pool Unusable Hours

The hot pools are usually drained at 6PM although the resort is still open for
public use until 9PM. This makes the hot pools usable only for 12 hours from 6AM to
6PM although it should have been available for 15 hours. The estimated Cf; for this

concern is therefore 20%.

Cf: Pool Water Quality

The waters in the hot pools are also supplied directly from their own sources
They are not filtered nor treated with any chemicals. Taking these into account, the
waters likewise look dirty because they are turbid and mossy. Some respondents also
observed that some children users were spitting and some adult users were scrubbing

their bodies inside the pools and these contributed to the poor quality of the water. Some

commented also that the water in the pools tasted salty and bitter perhaps due to the
sulfur contents of the water. All these unpleasantly affected the satisfaction of twenty-two

respondents who were heard of these complaints thus, a Cf, of 26.19%.

Cfy: Size of the Pools

Majority (51 out of 84) of the respondents commented about the size of the hot
pools that they are very small. Some remarked that the hot spring is one the resort’s
major attractions therefore, there should be bigger and more hot pools than cold pools.
Being small, they are always crowded and brought displeasure to the visitor-respondents.

With this, the Cf; is 60.71%.

Cfs: No Handrails

There were 12 among the 84 respondents who complained about the absence of
handrails. It was actually observed that there were old people who had difficulties getting
into the pool. Some needed companions to assist them. Considering this, a Cf of 14.29%

was factored in.

Cfs: No Roof

There were complaints from respondents about the lack of roof over the hot pools.
They commented that using the hot pools should have been more relaxing if the pools
were under a shade because the water in the pools in itself is already hot. Some users

were observed to be using umbrellas, towels or clothes over their head while using the

hot pools during the hottest part of the day. With 9 out of 84 respondents who remarked
that they should have enjoyed the pools more if the pools were shaded yielded a Cfs of

10.71%.

Other Limiting Factors

Other limiting factors applicable to all the swimming pools are inclement weather

and management capacity discussed as follow.

Inclement Weather

Peak seasons of the resort fall during the dry months, Regular rains therefore do
not significantly hinder visitors in going to the resort. With this, the average number of
typhoons that hit the area during the peak months is the climatic factor considered. An
average of 1.125 typhoons during the six peak months with an average duration of 3.875
days strike the area as per record presented by the World Wildlife Fund for the years
1990 to 2009. Therefore, there are 4.36 days during the peak months (182 days) that
weather is not ideal to go to the resort. A limiting factor of 2.40% is thus factored in each

swimming pool.

Management Capacity (MC)

Management capacity, explained by Ortega ef al. (2011), relates to the best
condition that administration should practice to meet goals in satisfactory way. It is

expressed in percentage of optimum using the average of three variables: infrastructure,

equipment, and personnel. Infrastructure and equipment were assessed based on quantity
‘or adequacy; and on quality which covers condition and functionality. Personnel simply
considered the number of workers. The assessment of the management capacity of the
resort is in Appendix VI. The corrective factors for management capacity in the context
of infrastructure, equipment and personnel were estimated to be 44.88%, 62.50%, and

8.30%, respectively yielding an average of 38.56%.

The summary of the limiting factors of the swimming pools identified during the

conduct of the study is presented in Table 31

Table 31. The limiting/corrective factors of the different swimming pools of the resort.

UPPER LOWER ying, HOT HOT
LIMITING FACTOR ADULT ADULT p69; POOL POOL
POOL POOL 1 2
Unusable Hours 1333 13.33 20.00 20,00 20.00
Pool Water Quality 70.24 50.00 26.19 26.19 26.19
Chlorine Odor of Pool Water 17.86 17.86 = = =
Floating Leaves, etc 13.09 14.29 7 5 a
Pool Water Temperature 7.14 - - - -
Rough and Sharp Steps 5.79 p 5 5 -
Pool Location 2.38 - - : :
Lack of Fence/Barrier $0.00 - 45.00 5 S
Pool Depth 66,12 . 5 5 -
Size of Pool - - - 60.71 60.71
No Handrails - - - 14.29 14.29
No Roof/Shade - - - 10.71 10.71
Inclement Weather 2.40 2.40 2.40 240 2.40

Management Capacity 38.56 38.56 38.56 38.56 38.56



Estimated Carrying Capacities of the Swimming Pools

Using the responses of the visitor-respondents during the interview days along
with the other approximate data gathered during the survey, the estimated carrying
capacities of the swimming pools of the resort are discussed below and are presented in

Table 32. The computation for the estimations is shown in Appendix VII.

Carrying Capacity (CC)

The CC or estimated number of bathers at one particular period of time in the
upper adult pool is 25, with 10 and 15 bathers in the shallow and deep portions,
respectively. On the other hand, there are 41 bathers who can simultaneously use the
lower adult pool while 25 bathers in the kids’ pool. The hot pools can accommodate 13
users each at one time. This suggests a maximum of 117 visitors using all the different
pools at one time with the average space requirement of visitor-respondents as
consideration. If this number of users is the only allowed visitors in the resort to use the

pools in one day during the peak season, the monthly estimated users is 3,510

Physical Carrying Capacity (PCC)

In consideration of the rotation factor which is the number of hours that bathers
use the pools in one visitation day during the peak season with the resort open for 15
hours every day, the potential physical carrying capacity of the upper adult pool is
estimated to be 631 bathers per day- 268 in the shallow portion and 363 in the deep

portion of the pool. The lower adult pool, on the other hand, can be used by 1,118 bathers

in one day. The kids’ pool can also accommodate 834 bathers taking turns in one day
while the hot pools can hold up to 260 users each per day. This suggests a total of

approximately 3,103 users for all the pools in the resort in a day from 6AM to 9PM.

Table 32. The estimated carrying capacities of the different swimming pools of the resort

cc PCC ERCC

TYPE OF POOL ~ Per Per Per Per Per ‘Per
Day _Month___Day__ Month __— Day __ Month

Upper Adult Pool 25 750 631 «(18,930.19 570
Shallow Portion 10 300 268 8,040 13 390
Deep Portion 15 450 363 10,890 6 180
Lower Adult Pool 41 1,230 1,118 33,540 2056150
Kids’ Pool 25 750 834 25,020 163 4,890
Hot Pool 1 13 390 260 7,800 28 840
Hot Pool 2 13 390 260 7,800 28 840
Total 17 3,510 3,103 93,090 443.—13,290

Effective Real Carrying Capacity (ERCC)

Factoring in the corrective factors determined during the study, the ERCCs of the
shallow and deep portions of the upper adult poo! were estimated to be 13 and 6 users,
respectively with a total of 19 users per day for the entire pool. The lower adult pool, on
the other hand, can accommodate 205 bathers a day. The kids’ pool can be used by 163
visitors while the hot pools can carry 28 users each per day. These add up to 443 daily
visitors or 13,290 monthly visitors. Comparing this against the actual visitor arrivals of

the resort, it points out that there were 31 days in 2013 that visitor arrivals surpassed 443

visitors and the tendency of the swimming pools that were used beyond their capacity
especially during peak season in which daily visitor arrivals even reached as many as
1,706 during the Lenten Season and 1,128 during the Christmas Break. Note that not all
visitors going to the resort are using the swimming pools. However, survey on visitors of
this study discovered that almost all (89.22%) of the members of the groups of

respondents used any or all of the swimming pools.

Monthly estimation of carrying capacities, with the assumption that there are 30
days in one month, was done since the data gathered focused on the peak season of the
resort. It is assumed that the duration of use or rotation factor and space requirements of
visitors may be different when they are in a different scenario during the lean months
when there is lesser visitor density in the resort and lower level of use of the swimming

pools. Yearly estimation was thus not computed.

Carrying Capacity Assessment Using the ISPSC Standard

The carrying capacities of the swimming pools were also estimated (Table 33)
using the ISPSC standard on user requirement which are 1.39m? and 1.86m? in shallow
and deep portions of swimming pools, respectively, to compare the results with that of
the carrying capacities of the swimming pools using the user requirements of the visitor-
respondents of this study. No standard on user requirement on seat length in the hot

pools, hence, the respondents” average requirement was used for the estimation.


Table 33. The estimated carrying capacities of the different swimming pools of the resort
using the ISPSC standard on user requirement.

cc PCC ERCC

TYPE OF POOL ~ Per Per Per Per Per Per
Day Month __Day__ Month __ Day __Month

Upper Adult Pool 89 2,670 2,247 67,410 67 2,010
Shallow Portion 36 1,080 965 28,950 461,380

Deep Portion 53 1,590 1,282 38,4602 630
Lower Adult Pool 153 4,590 4,173 125,190 763——-22,890
Kids’ Pool 39 1,170 1,300 39,000 253 7,590

Hot Poo! 1 13 390 260 7,800 28 840
Hot Pool 2 13, 390 260 7,800 28 840
Total 307 9210 8,240 247,200 1,139 34,170

Since the user requirement recommended by the ISPSC is lesser than the average
requirement of the visitor-respondents, results apparently showed that more visitors can
be accommodated by the swimming pools. It was estimated that bathers at one time in the
upper adult pool, lower adult pool, kids’ pool and two hot pools were 89, 153, 39 and 13
each in the hot pools, respectively, totaling to approximately 307 bathers for all the five
swimming pools. A big difference of 190 bathers compared to the number of bathers
using the respondents’ average numeric response. With these, a monthly ERCC of 34,170

users for all the swimming pools is implied over 13,290 users.


Social Carrying Capacity Assessment of Tourism in Balungao

Profile of Local Resident-Respondents

Table 34 displays the socio-economic characteristics of the household-
respondents who were from Barangays Pugaro and Poblacion wherein 51.14% were from
the former and 48.86% were from the latter. Total respondents were 88 household
members majority of which were females (67.05%) while only 32.95% were males. This
is because most of the respondents were housekeepers (31.82%) who were the ones at
home during the conduct of the survey. Moreover, some male household members
preferred their wives to be interviewed. There were also cases in which the husbands

were employed out of the country

Majority or 70.46% of the respondents were married while only 11.36% were
single. The remaining were widowed (11.36%) and living-in with partners (6.82%). All
of the respondents were of legal age from 19 to 86 years and were living in the
municipality for | to 86 years already hence it was assumed that they all had knowledge

about the resort and its impacts to the townspeople and to the municipality.

All respondents had undergone formal education mostly high school graduates
(31.82%). Only 9.09% did not graduate in high school. There were about 14.77% who
finished elementary while only 6.82% did not, The rest made it to college with 21.59%
who graduated. Moreover, 5.68% took vocational courses. They had varied occupations

but they were mostly housekeepers (31.82%) and vendors (19.32%). Roughly 4.55% had


no means of livelihood, Including the housekeepers, there were around 36.37% who may

be given opportunity for livelihood projects to help families augment their living,

Table 34. Socio-economic characteristics of household-respondents.

VARIABLE ITEM FREQUENCY PERCENT
Barangay Pugaro 45 51.14
Poblacion 43 48.86
Gender Female 39 67.05
Male 29 32.95
Civil Status Married 62 70.46
Single 10 1136
Widowed 10 11.36
Live-in 6 6.82
‘Age Group (years) 11-20 1 114
21-30 10 11.36
31-40 14 15.91
41-50 25 28.41
51-60 13, 14.77
61-70 15 17.04
71-80 7 7.95
81-90 3 3.41
Residency (years) 1-10 16 18.18
11-20 15 17.04
21-30 12 13.64
31-40 12 13.64
41-50 9 10.23
51-60 10 11.36
61-70 9 10.23
71-80 3 3.41
81-90 2 2.27


Table 34 continued.


VARIABLE ITEM FREQUENCY PERCENT
Educational Elementary Graduate 13 1477
Attainment High School Level 8 9.09
High School Graduate 28 31.82
College Level 9 10.23
College Graduate 19 21.59
Vocational Course Graduate 5 5.68
Occupation Housekeeper 28 31.82
Vendor 7 19.32
Farmer 8 9.09
Construction Worker 4 4.55
Pensioner 4 4.55
Government Employee 3 3.41
Teacher 2 2.27
Barangay Employee 2 2.27
Beautician 1 1.14
Board of Director of BWD 1 114
Butcher 1 1.14
Dressmaker 1 114
Driver 1 114
Fumiture Designer 1 1.14
Helper in Funeral 1 114
Painter 1 114
Photographer 1 114
Priest (Phil. Independent) 1 114
Self-Employed 1 114
Sun Cellular Agent 1 1.14
Tile Setter 1 1.14
Tricycle driver 1 114
Vulcanizing 1 114
None 4 455
Household Income —_1,000-10,000 71 80.68
(Php) 11,000-20,000 13 14.77
21,000-30,000 2 2.27
31,000-40,000 2 2.27



Table 34 continued.

VARIABLE ITEM FREQUENCY PERCENT
Household Size Small (1-3 members) 34 38.64
Medium (4-7 members) 49 55.68
Large (more than 7 members) 5 5.68
Tourism-Related None 82 93.18
Source of Income Tricycle driver 2 2.27
General Merchandising 1 1.14
On-Call Utility at the Resort 1 1.14
Photography 1 114
Tupig Vendor 1 114
Affiliation in Civic None 59 67.05
Organization Senior Citizens 22 25.00
Barangay Officials Association 1 114
Knights of Columbus 1 114
League of Local Planning;
Association of Appointed 1 1.14
Government Officials &
Employees of Balungao
National Organization of
Priests \ 4
Teachers' Group 1 114
Women's Club/Non-Gov’t Org I 114
Balungao Vendors Association 1 114

Household incomes ranged from Php1,000 to Php40,000. Almost all (80.68%)
were earning at most Php10,000 a month while 14.77% were earning Php11,000 to
Php20,000 a month. Very few (4.54%) were making an income of Php21,000 to

Php40,000 a month for the entire household.


Majority (55.68%) of the respondents had a medium-sized household with five (5)

to seven (7) members. There were 38.64% who had small household with one (1) to three
(3) members while only 5.68% had large household with more than sevem (7) members.
The biggest size was 13 while the smallest was with only one (1) member which means
that the respondent was living alone by himself. The average household size of the

respondents was 6.18 which belonged to the medium category.

Almost all of the respondents (93.18%) had no work that was related to tourism in
the municipality. The rest earned from driving a tricycle which visitors rent in going to
the resort, keeping a general merchandise store in the public market where visitors drop
by to buy their products, having a photography venture at the resort, vending ‘upig; and

by being an on-call job-order utility employee at the resort.

Majority (67.05%) of the household-respondents did not belong to any civic
organization while 25.00% were members of the group of Senior Citizens in the
municipality. The rest were either part of the Barangay Officials Association, Knights of
Columbus; League of Local Planning and Association of Appointed Government
Officials & Employees of Balungao; National Organization of Priests, Teachers’ Group;

Women's Club/NGO; and Balungao Vendors Association.


Water Sources and Water Consumption of Household-Respondents

A large portion (75.00%) of the household-respondents depended on the
Balungao Water District (BWD) for their domestic water consumption (Table 35). Only

26.14% relied on artesian well and 12.50% on deep well.

Table 35. Primary sources of domestic water of the respondents.

SOURCE FREQUENCY PERCENT (%)
Balungao Water District 66 75.00
Artesian Well 23 26.14
Deep Well i 12.50

The monthly average water consumption of the household-respondents with
BWD as their source of water was 16.54m’, The rest (28.41%) cannot report the volume
of water that they consumed monthly because they had no means of measurement unlike
the subscribers of the water district who had water meters. Overall, around 28.41% were
consuming water within the volume range of 1-10m’ monthly with minimum charge

(Table 36). Roughly 43.18% consume beyond the minimum volume up to 40m? a month.

Table 36. Monthly water consumption of the respondents.

WATER CONSUMPTION (M?)_ - FREQUENCY PERCENT (%)
1-10 25 28.41
11-20 22 25.00
21-30 10 11.36
31-40 6 6.82
No Answer* 25 28.41

*No water meter


Table 37 shows that nearly all respondents (95.45%) reported that they did not

experience water supply shortage while a very few said there was an occurrence of water

supply shortage but this was only due to the maintenance of the water district (3.41%)

and out-of-order well (1.14%) and not actually related to the presence of resort in Mt.

Balungao. BWD records, in fact, show that there was an excess of more than 3,000m’ in

water production in November 2013. The resort is not dependent on the BWD because it

has its own sources of water. Besides, resort-goers bring their own drinking water, thus,

the water supply for the community people is not compromised at present.

Table 37. Occurrence of water supply shortage.

ANSWER FREQUENCY PERCENT (%)
No 84 95.45
Yes
Due to BWD maintenance 3 3.41

Due to out-of-order well 1

1.14



Solid Waste Generation of Resident-Respondents

With regards to solid waste concerns, majority (59.09%) of the household-
respondents did not avail of garbage collection by the municipality perhaps due to the
Php480.00 annual garbage collection fee payable quarterly as required by Article IX of
the Municipal Ordinance No. 2006-05. Only 40.91% had some of their wastes collected
by municipal garbage collectors which were disposed to the dumpsite in Barangay
Pugaro. Table 38 presents the types of garbage generated by the respondents and their

corresponding method of disposal

Since cans, plastics and glasses are marketable, almost all of the respondents sold
these for additional earnings. Very few of them had these types of wastes collected by the
municipal garbage collectors. Some included these items with the wastes that were
burned (2.27%) while others give these to children (1.14%) perhaps for them to sell these

articles as well. One respondent said the cans were recycled.

Almost half of them also sold papers and boxes (44.32%). Nearly the same
percentage burned these or used these to start fire when burning wastes and cooking
(40.91%). Approximately 13.64% include these to the wastes to be collected by the
municipal garbage collectors while 1.14% allowed these to rot in the yard together with

other wastes.


ody 10A0-yo] Aue vey 10U pip Kays rey paresseU %| p'¢ BWOS “asay pousng siuapuodsos Jo aBeIUsds0d
ures ay] “S10}991109 aBequed Aq paroayjoo aisem Jo adky asaya PeY %bI"I KUO (%ZE'PS) SHONP pue ‘suayoryo ‘sBid ‘sye0 ‘sBop
Se Yons S[eusTUe 04 spooy JA0-YO] s104) pay siuOpuodsos je K[waUE ‘reAaL0P\ ‘S1OI99]]09 aBeqzeB Aq paroa|joo saisem asay) pey OYM
%OS'LE 919M BID, IO1 01 asayp pamolfe isnf oBeUsoIed sures BY, -(%LZ'Z) Siad JayI0 puk syoNp ‘sBid 01 aWOs pay Kay) ples S194

(%S6.LS) pauing a1om Kay jun pred ayy ut Kup 01 sBurjaad ajqeie8an pue siiny ayy pamojfe suapuodsas ayy Jo AuoleW,

sob S67E LtT Ire 000 000 000 000 000 ‘UON
000 000 000 000 000 000 000 000 came apoxooy,
came 000 vt 000 Ltt 000 rit 000 000 20Y OF MOILW/ld
sos S6TE os'79 came SOLS L7@ 1606 LtZ L77 URIS ajsung
000 000 000 000 000 came 000 ert ell UDIPIIYD) 1 PAID
000 000 000 TE v6 LtT 000 000 000 000 s[ewtUYy 0} poo
98E 60'bE 60'bE came Os Le 39s POEL ssp sob uonsa||0)
afequey ‘un
000 000 000 000 000 16:06 were S076 16:06 IPS
saisvm  SUJAVI. SONIN SdOOd SONITIAE = ON Cavog <TveEMaNE

‘SNDIdVN -WRNL YAO ATAVLADTA SOILSVTd SNVD

AUVLINVS INVId -Jda1 ONY Lind CE

‘SHILLOG /SUDdVd
ssv19

snoauvzvH

Jesodstp Jo spoyrow s10y1 pue saisem pljos Surzesoued suapuodsas-pjoyasnoy Jo aBeiuacied “SE 919°


More than 60% of the respondents burned their plant trimmings while only 1.14%

just allowed these to rot. However, some 34.09% waited for the municipal garbage
collectors to pick these wastes up. There were 2.27% who had no plant trimmings. For
sanitary napkins and diapers, 32.95% no longer had household members using such
products thus, they were not generating such type of wastes. The same percentage burned
these wastes while a little more of them (34.09%) had these collected by the garbage

collectors.

Hazardous wastes were either collected by garbage collectors (38.64%), burned
(55.68%), and put in pit and/or let to rot in the yard (1.14%). A few 4.55% said they did

not have any hazardous wastes.

Results showed that the only types of waste collected and disposed to the
dumpsite are mostly fruit and vegetable peelings, plant trimmings, hazardous wastes,
sanitary napkins and diapers with percentage of respondents of just more than 30% each
Additionally, only four barangays are covered by municipal garbage collection and only
300 households have their wastes collected. This means that only a minimal volume of
wastes generated by the households and insitutions covered by collection reach the

dumpsite.

The Housing and Land Use Regulatory Board (HLURB) requirement for
dumpsite area per 30,000 population is one hectare (CLUP of San Juan Batangas, 2001 as.
cited by Quicoy and Briones, 2009). This implies that the area for dumpsite in the

municipality is still sufficient since population count is below 30,000.


Local Resident-Respondents’ Perceived Impacts
m in the Municipality

Perceived Positive Impacts of Tourism

When resident-respondents were asked for a positive impact of tourism
development in Mt. Balungao, the most common answers were “more people are
attracted to come to our place” (32.95%) and “increased income for the municipality”
(27.27%). Other perceived positive effects were “the town and its products become
popular” (11.26%), “more people are employed” (7.95%), “presence of beautiful
recreational place in the town” (6.82%), “improved income for local business” (4.55%),
“improved local economy” (1.14%), “improved road condition” (1.14%), and “the town
is progressing” (1.14%). These responses indicate the residents’ positive perception on
the tourism activities in their municipality. It can be noted that the perceived positive
impacts were all on socio-economic benefits and no positive impacts to the environment
were mentioned. A few respondents (5.68%) were not able to mention any positive
impact of tourism development in Mt. Balungao. While these respondents were aware of
the tourism activities in the municipality, they believed that the positive impacts are yet
to be seen and the economic benefits yet to be realized. Figure 13 illustrates the

graphical analysis of the perceived positive impacts of tourism in the municipality.


35.00
30.00
. 25.00
4 sa
A
Fa 15.00
= 10.00
= -> -_ -
0.00
“ Sf a
ee ~ ra
es
ra

Positive Impacts

Figure 13. Positive impacts of tourism perceived by respondents.

Perceived Negative Impacts of Tourism

A large percentage (71.59%) of respondents believed that there were no negative
impacts brought by the tourism in the municipality while the rest cited several setbacks
(Figure 14). There were 6.82% who believed that it was the cause of the “surroundings
becoming dirty”, raising concems about waste generation and garbage disposal. One
respondent talked about tourists who were throwing their garbage from their vehicles on
their way to the resort. Another negative impact mentioned was “many trees are cut”

(5.65%). This was due to the improvement and widening of the road going to the resort.

80.00
70.00
60.00
50.00
40.00
30.00
20.00

Percent Respondent

Negative Impacts

Figure 14. Negative impacts of tourism perceived by respondents.


Only a few recounted that tourism was the reason of “many accidents” in the area

(3.41%), citing accidents that happened on the road going to the resort. Moreover, there

were 2.27% who talked about the risk of increasing health problems since resort-goers

believe that the hot sulfuric spring water can cure many dermal diseases. Many visitors

using the swimming pools may have contagious skin ailments which may cause the

spread of diseases. Other negative impacts mentioned with 1.14% respondents each citing

them were “expensive goods”; “improper management”;

‘may cause hold-ups”; “may

increase illegal drugs trade”; “only few people benefit from tourism”; “overcrowding

sometimes”; “some drivers are gathering firewood”; “some visitors are stealing

construction of “very high roads” which may cause accidents in the area.

and


Perceived Changes in the Vicinity of the Resort

Figure 15 illustrates that the most prominent change in the vicinity of the study
area observed by many respondents was the “improved road condition” (86.36%) owing
to the road improvement and widening project of the municipality which also included
installation of street lights. A very minimal percentage of 1.14 declared that the area
“became beautiful with many plants” although there were also the same percentage who
mentioned unfavorable changes such as “many trees are cut” and “poultry houses were
built that cause proliferation of flies”. There were some 10.23% who cannot give any
comment because they were no longer going to the resort thus they were unable to

observe any changes. These are the aged respondents.

90.00

80.00

70.00

60.00

50.00

40.00

30.00

20.00

sceeel “- ae _— _—

0.00 |
Improvedroad Nocomment _Became_—-Manytreesare _Poultryhouses,
condition beautiful with cut were built that

many pants cause

proliferation of
flies

Percent Respondent

Changes in the Vicinity of the Resort

Figure 15. Observed changes in the vicinity of the resort by the resident-respondents.


Perceived Changes in the Municipality due to Tourism

Excluding the 12.50% who said that there were no changes and 4.55% who
answered that they did not know if there were any changes in the municipality that should
be credited to the tourism in Mt. Balungao, it was noted that the rest of the household-
respondents (82.95%) observed only favorable changes in the municipality owing to the
tourism in Mt. Balungao (Figure 16). These changes were: “increased income” (17.05%);
“municipality became cleaner” (17.05%); “improved municipal hall” (10.23%);
“Balungao became popular” (6.82%); “jobs are created” (6.82%), “town plaza has
improved” (6.82%); “more municipal projects” (3.41%), “construction of stalls for ‘pig
vendors” (2.27); “improved local economy” (2.27%); “improved road condition”
(2.27%), “development in the town” (1.14%), “improved facilities” (1.14%); “improved
municipal hall and town plaza” (1.14%); “improved services” (1.14%); “increased tourist
arrival” (1.14%); “more sources of income for people” (1.14%); and “town products

made more known” (1.14%).


18, =|

seo | — ths, i ot mene |

10.00

2.00

| i | I

“|

= | [buuteccess |

Jo Ye Oe i Gd eae Gt |
oe SS a oe ef ee eo see |

oe os
x oe a o 4 ve 2
ra ee

Percent Respondent

Changes in the Municipality

Figure 16. Observed changes in the municipality brought by tourism.

Residents’ Attitude Toward Tourism in the Municipality

Table 39 shows that all resident-respondents agreed to the statements, “Tourism
planners should further enhance tourism development.” and “It is good to have tourism in
Balungao because it gives residents the opportunity to meet people from other
places/countries.” High percentage of respondents also agreed that tourism has increased
their pride and honor (98.86%); that tourism is good for the local economy (93.18%); and
that tourism caused significant improvement in services and facilities for the community

(86.36%).


a1eag WoyrT wurod-s 21p UO ¢ pue f Jo IsUOdsIY.y

ze6I Os 61 z st t +7 er ‘a0e(d sno uy a8eqred/s9N| paseasout 3uUNg sIsuNO |. Ow
‘ere M0 Ul

1od jeyuouruos1auo 10y aqqisuodsou st wisiuno|, Os

Sedrorumur sno

Aus Lot ad 0 a L & TE uy ustmnoy ayp Jo asneooq siuapioce su0U! are 2z9\L], Oz

Ayrunumuios 241 ySnonp Japa

painquisip 108 wstsno1 Jo SIgoU99 SUL

are ay) Jo aminy ayn 1noqe

78°95 oor ere aI we oO tt 8 Suomstoap SunyeU! UDyAd STUIPISOY [E00] JO SMTA Os

4p 01 uonuone ajay Xed suoougo Bun

Iysz 00% x4 z & t id 6 uo

zee 00° Lot o 6z uu Iz u

LU oor a9 ee le fi 6 I sane tor too rare te Got
23}doad [820 24 40)

tL OOF 98 oe 6 £ st s pooujonn pue sgof iveursoplaoid usunog, =) ZI
Synumusws09 sn0 UT

ex co ce cu 2 i € ayy so sinpenb ayp arcidun ueo <nsnpur wsumo yz“) St

9c98 oor we 6c ue 6 € 0 {aprmuriuao sno wy Sopyt!28j PUP SOAS we
Jo wowarordun ayp ut wwesynudis st wsENO |,

816 o's os 9s 9 s I 0 Susouode 200] No 10} Pood st ANNsMpu! wSLIMO} 3H 61
‘swuapsar

9886 00'S est o8 L 0 U OME err stn penaeea on perestersevarincr} We
sounjunos/s20e]d 19410
coor o's Ist u ui o 0 0 woyy ojdoad your 01 <anmyzoddo axp swwapisos sontg
11 asneoaq oeSunfeq UI uIstNO} axe 0} POO8 SI]
siuouidojasap wstmo) soyuTy aBernoous

Cocoon CP ee U v 0 © pynoys sroono Sunred wstsnors,cnedronmun ogy“? 9%

$ D € z 1
BBY sy UO aazesrq mse TdAL
vATUOV NVIGSW AOVYGAV fiduong vow "dQ  <yuong ANGWALVLS ue “ON,
% INIWALVIS

%
AONANOTHL

OIUNUE ay} UF S1SLINO} Jo doudsasd a4 BuIpseas siudUareIs apmate 01 1UsUIaeITE JO SjaAg| sIUapuodsas-WapISY GE 21G2L


uaiaieig aaneBan (-) “IuoWoIErg oansod (+)
‘3189§ UOY" 1ulOd-¢ aIp UO ¢ PUR F Jo asuOdsIri,

000 001 ert ° ° fl 6 8 poddors 9q pinoys soeyduno wi usuney (sz
auosi0430q i
090 oo wi ° ° ° a 9L 51 aoejd sno o1 Buruioo sistuno1 duet Jo a0uasoud SILL ¢
sysuno1 ay) Jo asned0q SOU UIELDO 18
000 oot cal o o z tt ° se a (oe

axe aif ut op 10u op | sBunp awos <peasye are ary,
fT 00"! art 0 1 0 €1 FL" 2W109 10U PIP sistino} Jt 1J0 191199 99 pInom earE aL Ore
“wisuno) Jo ypsox8 atp aonpax 0} sueyd

Cx poly Cu v 3 u ct ee sopisuoo pinoys sonuotpne Sunme|d wsumor ou, ots
- “poe|d ano 01 Sunoo aze oy
ES tne CoH 0 v C Be £F — sisuno} yo asnesaq Surpsioro Jo sutajqoud ze 2194, oa
'9s89sip '
be Cu aay u 2 u ae es ‘Jo peaids oy) sosneo <aypedronmur sno ur wstzno J, Ou
-yedrorunur
79 001 ssl 1 s 4 ot oF ino ut soumtia Saad s1out 01 spea} wsUNO |, Oot
dood Gaqununuoo jo syoryoq rennurds pure
soe 001 ost 0 L ° 4 as remy un masis ant peadelia els Oot
Agrunuruz09
606 oot ort 1 t 0 a1 ia) sno wy suo|qoud Supyed pue oygen a1e019 sisuno Ot
“ . aztIgEIS 29,
G44) bau CH G - ' ce 85 pynoys aoejd sno 0} Surwioo ssuino} Jo JaqumU 24 si
‘naps adoo oy Anfedtorumur
a] oe Ci E Q S Gs a ‘yp 0) 1sey 00) BurAvor8 St SISLIMO1 Jo soquMU DY, GH
‘MoUTUOSTAUD 200] 4NO O} JeaN & St suOEME
ual 007 61 z ol 9 ee le pur sonmioey wistino} Jo wowdojarap ay. O¢
s r € z I
aay odo aauesiq ‘adAL
SIRIOV NVIGAW FOVEAV Goong ™8V oy ™FPT guns INIWALVLS pus “ON
% INSWALVIS
ANAND TWA

~ panunuo 6¢ 91421


Majority of the respondents also agree that tourism can improve the quality of life

in their community (77.27%) and that more jobs and livelihood opportunities are created
for the local community (73.86). Job opportunities created include manpower for the
resort operations, hiking tour guides, laborers for the construction of roads and other
facilities for the resort. Livelihood opportunities created include selling of local products
like ‘upig, patupat and tuba, selling of general merchandise to visitors from the town
proper or inside the resort and providing transportation to visitors going to the resort. It
was noted that some of the respondents are yet to benefit from the jobs and livelihood
opportunities created by tourism development in the area (22.73%). Results also showed
that while there were 44.32% who agreed to the statement, “The benefits of tourism get
distributed widely through the community.”, some 36.36% disagreed and 19.32%

rendered no opinion.

Residents’ responses to Statement 5 pose a possible concern for resort
management. More respondents (56.82%) agreed that “tourism planning officers
pay little attention to the views of local residents when making decisions about the future
of the area”. Faulkner and Tideswell (1997) emphasized the importance of incorporating
local reactions to tourism as an element in monitoring programs for sustainable tourism
management. Tourism planners have observed the value of employing greater
participation of community members in planning since they are the ones mostly affected
by the impacts of tourism activities and that they are recognized as essential actors in the

“hospitality atmosphere’ of a tourism destination, according to Simmons (1994).


Liu (2003) affirms this by citing Smith (1994) that the act of involving and
rewarding the local people, being part of the tourism product, is essential because they
are being interacted with the tourists with their attitudes and behavior constituting the

“hospitality resource” of the tourist destination.

Most respondents disagreed to all other negative statements related to tourism
development in Mt. Balungao, implicating a positive attitude of residents. It was noted
however, that 30.68% of respondents ageed to the statement, “There are more accidents
because of the tourism in our municipality”. Several accidents along the road going to
and from the resort and inside the resort were cited by respondents. Further, 28.41%
and 13.64% agreed on the statements, “Tourism is responsible for environmental
pollution in our area.” and “The development of tourism facilities and attractions is a
threat to our local environment.”, respectively. Concerns on increased solid waste
generation, cutting of trees and hot and cold spring water utilization were raised by some

respondents during interview.

On residents’ interaction with tourists, most resident-respondents (72.73%) said
that tourists do not affect their lifestyles, and all disagreed to the statement, “The
presence of many tourists coming to our place is bothersome.”. Further, high percentage
of disagreements were noted on statements pertaining to tourists as being hindrance to
day to day activities of the locals (97.73%), tourists as the cause of traffic and parking
problems (90.91%) and tourists causing changes in cultural beliefs (92.05%). Majority
(76.14%) of the resident respondents also disagreed on the statement, “Tourists bring

increased litter/garbage in our place”.


Resident survey results indicated that most locals had positive perception and
attitude towards tourism and tourism development in the municipality. Majority would
welcome tourism development and wanted the current level of tourism activity to
increase. Most respondents exhibit excitement over the socio-economic benefits from
tourism and presented no sign of wanting to limit or reduce tourism development
activities. Findings also suggest that residents do not perceive tourists as the cause of
problems in the municipality. Tourists’ presence is not causing any impediment to the
locals’ day to day activities and is not causing a significant irritation. Translating these
findings to Doxey’s Irritation Index, the host community of the tourism in Mt. Balungao
Hot and Cold Springs Resort and Hilltop Adventure is at the stage of euphoria.
Therefore, the social carrying capacity of the municipality in the context of host

community is not yet exceeded.

Profile of

itor-Respondents

Table 40 displays the socio-demographic characteristics of the visitor-
respondents. Female respondents comprised 51.19% of the total visitors surveyed. This
was slightly greater than the males who made up 48.81%. Most were married (59.52%)
and the rest were single (35.71%). Their ages ranged from 13 to 83 years, with ages 21
to 30 making up the highest percentage (35.71%). There were visitors from foreign
countries like Italy, Sri Lanka, and America but most declined the request for interview
thus, almost all respondents were Filipinos (96.43%). Majority of the respondents were

also from the province of Pangasinan (75.00%) comprising a total of 63 from which eight

Table 40. Socio-demographic profile of the visitor-respondents.


VARIABLE ITEM FREQUENCY PERCENT
Gender Female 43 51.19
Male 4l 48.81
Civil Status Married 50 59.52
Single 30 35.71
Separated l 119
Divorced 1 1.19
Live-in 1 1.19
Widowed 1 1.19
‘Age Group (years) 21-30 30 35.71
11-20 14 16.67
31-40 14 16.67
41-50 12 14.29
51-60 10 11,90
61-70 2 2.38
71-80 1 1.19
81-90 1 119
Nationality Filipino 81 96.43
American 1 119
Filipino-American 1 1.19
Sri Lankan 1 119
Place of Origin Pangasinan 63 75.00
Nueva Ecija 9 10.71
Metro Manila 7 8.33
Tarlac 3 3.57
Bicol 1 1.19
Nueva Vizcaya 1 119
Highest Educational College Graduate 34 40.48
Attainment College Level 15 17.86
HS Grad 15 17.86
HS Level 10 11.90
Vocational Course 5 5.95
Elementary Graduate 4 4.76
Elementary level 1 119



Table 40 continued.

VARIABLE ITEM FREQUENCY PERCENT
Monthly Income Group —_1,000-10,000 42 50.00
(Php) 10,001-20,000 18 21.43

20,001-30,000 10 11.90
30,001-40,000 1 119
40,001-50,000 4 476
50,001-60,000 2 2.38
60,001-70,000 2 2.38
70,001-80,000 1 119
No Answer 4 4.16

(8) were from Balungao and the rest were from other towns of the province. Only few
were from the nearby provinces of Nueva Ecija (10.71%), Tarlac (3.57%), Bicol (1.19%),
and Nueva Viscaya (1.19%). There were also some visitor-respondents coming from

Metro Manila (8.33%).

All respondents have undergone formal education and the total of those who were
in high school level (11.90%), high school graduates (17.86%), college level (17.86%)

and college graduates (40.48%) made up most of the respondents.

Monthly family income ranged from Php1,000.00 to Php80,000.00. Half of the
respondents were earning at most Php10,000.00 a month while around 21.43% were
making at most Php20,000.00 a month. The rest (28.56%) had at least Php20,000.00 to at
most Php80,000.00 to support the family each month. This demonstrates that although a

big portion of the respondents belonged to lower income brackets, who were the resort’s

target market, there was also some of high income class who went to the resort for their
vacation. There were 4.76% respondents who waved their right not to disclose

information about their monthly income,

Solid Waste Generation of the Visitor-Respondents and
Solid Waste Management of the Resort

The resort does not practice waste segregation at the moment but saleable wastes
such as tin cans, plastics, glass bottles, and similar items are segregated and set aside by
utility personnel to be sold with the sales divided among themselves for additional
earnings. Other types of wastes such as left-over foods, vegetable and fruit peelings,
disposable plates, cups, spoons and forks, plastic bags, diapers, and other types of refuse
are put in big drums until they are picked up by the municipality’s garbage collectors to
be disposed at the dumpsite in Barangay Pugaro twice a week or sometimes even daily
depending on the volume of wastes generated. Plant litters are burned by utility

personnel on duty

Table 41 shows the estimated volume of solid waste generated by visitors during
the peak days of December 25 to 31, 2013. Highest volume of waste was generated on
December 25 with 0.78m’ probably because visitors brought many foods in excess of the
Noche Buena hence many left-over foods and wastes contributed to total waste generated
on that day. Less waste was collected on December 29 and 31 may be due to relatively
fewer visitors during those days. Total waste generated by visitors during the week was

approximately 3.38m’ entailing an average daily generation of 0.48 m’. However, since

some of the solid wastes are sold, only approximately 0.31m? on the average is brought to
the dump site everyday during the peak season. And since not all households in the few
barangays covered by garbage collection are contributing to the wastes brought to the
dump site, the present 1.5-hectare dumping area may still be sufficient to accommodate
the present volume of wastes generated by the resort and by the households currently

served by municipal garbage collection.

Table 41. Approximate volume (m*) of solid waste generated by the resort from
December 25 to 31, 2013.

TYPEOF DEC. DEC. DEC. DEC. DEC. DEC. DEC.

WASTE 25 26 27 ne 31 AVERAGE
Tin Cans 003-005 003 +005 ~~ 003 005 ~~ 003 0.04
Plastic Bottles 0.10 0.050.100.0505 0.00.05 0.07
Glass Bottles 0.050.030.1010 0.05 0.058003 0.06
Other Wastes 0.600400. 04D_—_—OID 0400.20 oa

TOTAL 0.78 = 083033060 0.23 0600.31 0.48

Visitor-Respondents Means of Knowing About the Resort

Table 42 shows that a large fraction of the respondents recalled that the resort was
recommended to them by their friends, relatives or family members (75.00%). Others
saw the print ads and tarpaulin that advertise the resort (13.10%). The rest have known
about the resort because it was near the Jamboree site that they were staying (3.57%),

saw the on-line advertisements (2.38%), researched the internet (2.38%) and saw the

resort featured over the television (1.19%). There were respondents also who said that
they knew about the resort because they were from the province of Pangasinan (1.19%),

and from the municipality of Balungao where the resort is actually located (1.19%).

Table 42. Visitor-respondents' means of knowing about the resort.

MEANS FREQUENCY PERCENTAGE
Recommended by friend/other people 6 75.00
Print ads/Tarpaulin ih 13.10
Near Jamboree Site 3 3.57
Online ads 2 2.38
Researched in the internet 2 2.38
Featured on TV 1 1.19
From Pangasinan 1 1.19
From Balungao 1 1.19

r-Respondents Consideratio

in Choosing the Resort

Table 43 presents the considerations of the respondents in choosing the resort for
their vacation during the interview. With increased awareness in health and wellness as
promoted by many organizations using multi-media, it is no surprise that visitor
respondents’ primary consideration was the therapeutic benefits of soaking in hot spring
water (64.29%). Having natural hot spring water has been the resort’s primary pull factor
for visitors and can be considered as a major competitive advantage among all other
resorts in the nearby municipalities. Accessibility was also one of the major

considerations (39.29%). Having majority of respondents residing in the province of


Pangasinan and the nearby province of Nueva Ecija, trip to the resort was fast and easy.

Improved road conditions further enhanced the resort’s accessibility.

Table 43. Visitor-respondents' considerations in choosing the resort

FACTOR CONSIDERED FREQUENCY PERCENTAGE
Therapeutic benefits of hot spring 34 64.29
Accessibility 33 39.29
Beauty/Landscape 26 30.95
Recreational Facilities 17 20.24
Size/Space availability/Not crowded 12 14.29
Cleanliness 10 11.90
Hospitality 5 5.95
Experience 1 1.19
Exploration of new place 1 119
Near Jamboree site 1 1.19
To see the resort 1 119
Security 1 119
Weather 1 1.19
Affordability 1 1.19
Invitation from family member 1 1.19

Beauty and landscape, as with many tourism sites, was also a key factor

considered by many of the respondents (30.95%). They were attracted by the forest

setting for recreation, one of the major natural capitals of the resort, which gave them a

more relaxed environ. Some 20.24% respondents went to the resort because of the

presence of several recreational facilities and activities that could be tried and enjoyed

such as the zipline, bungee trampoline, ATV driving, hiking, and picnicking other than

just swimming.


Recreational Activities by the Visitor-Respondents in the Resort

Table 44 shows that most of the respondents were interested in the hot and cold
spring water swimming pools and picnic facilities. Since the respondents were purposely
chosen, all of them used the swimming facilities of the resort. Only 76.19% of them
picnicked because some went home before lunch time. Disappointed with the discounted
user fee of Php250.00 which they found expensive, only 10.71% actually explored the

zipline, Moreover, barely 4.75% went hiking and merely 1.19% tried the ATV.

Table 44. Recreational activities that the respondents participated while in the resort

RECREATIONAL ACTIVITY FREQUENCY PERCENTAGE

Swim 84 100,00
Picnic 64 76.19

Zipline 9 10.71
Hike 4 4.76

ATV 1 1.19

Types of Swimming Pools Used by the Visitor-Respondents

There were 96.43% among the respondents who used both the hot and the cold
swimming pools (Table 45). Scarcely 2.38% used one of the hot pools only and 1.19%

the upper adult pool only.

Table 45. The type of swimming pool that the visitor-respondents used in the resort.

TYPE OF SWIMMING POOL — FREQUENCY PERCENTAGE
Hot and Cold Pools 81 96.43
Hot Pool Only 2 2.38
Cold Pool Only 1 1.19


Table 46 shows that the most common reason of the visitor-respondents for using

the hot-water pools was for relaxation. There were 38 who believed that it was a good

way of de-stressing and pampering self, Similarly, 24 respondents wanted to gain the

therapeutic benefits of the hot spring water believing that it is good for the health and is a

natural medicine that can heal and soothe body pains. There were user-respondents who

had arthritis, fractures, and carpal syndrome. One was a stroke patient

Table 46, Reasons of respondents for using the hot-water pools

REASON FREQUENCY
Relaxation 38
Therapeutic Benefits 24
Warming Down 19
Try and Experience 4

No Answer 2



Some of them soaked in the water just to warm their body down after using the
cold-water pools. Others said the wind made them feel cold thus they needed to use the
hot-water pools. There were 14 of them who were curious about the hot spring water that

they wanted to try and experience. Two respondents did not give any reasons.

Visitor Satisfaction

Indicators that visitors are satisfied with their stay in the resort are the number of
times that they have been to the resort, their willingness to spend their vacation in the

resort again, and their willingness to recommend it to other people.

Number of Visits to the Resort

Table 47 shows that almost half of the respondents were first time visitors of the
resort (46.43%). The combined percentage of those who were repeat visitors or those
who had been to the resort for vacation for at least two times up to more than 20 times

already was 53.57%.


Table 47. Number of times that the respondents visited the resort.

NUMBER OF VISIT FREQUENCY PERCENT
1 39 46.43
2 21 25.00
3 on 13.10
4 3 3.57
5 2 2.38
7 2 2.38
10 2 2.38
15 2 2.38
>20 2 2.38

Willingness of the Visitor-Respondents to Come Back to the Resort

In Figure 17, one visitor (1.19%) was not sure of coming back to the resort
because he seldom goes home to the province. The other one (1.19%) openly expressed
his dissatisfaction and admitted that he no longer wanted to come back because he was
not satisfied with the customer service and cleanliness of the resort. However, almost all
or 97.62% expressed their willingness to return to the resort for another vacation which

included those who were first-time goers.


= Yes ™ No ® Not sure

1.19

1.19 |
| |

Figure 17. Percentage of respondents who were willing to spend
vacation to the resort again.

Common reasons of respondents for their willingness to come back to the resort
were: the hot spring water (19.05%); the natural beauty of the place (19.05%); the
goodness of the place to enjoy and have fun (19.05%); and because they wanted to ride
the zipline (11.90%). Table 48 presents the respondents’ reasons for coming back to the

resort for vacation.

Table 48. The respondents’ reasons for coming back to the resort for vacation.

REASON FOR COMING BACK FREQUENCY PERCENT
Hot spring 16 19.05
Place is beautiful 16 19.05
To enjoy/Have fun 16 19.05
Zipline 10 11.90

Family bonding 5 5.95,

Table 48 continued


REASON FOR COMING BACK FREQUENCY — PERCENT
Accessible 3 3.57
To see improved facilities 3 3.57
Affordable 2 2.38
To relax 2 2.38
Birthday celebration 1 1.19
Bonding with friends 1 119
Many recreational activities 1 1.19
Annual school event 1 119
Not crowded 1 1.19
Personnel are accommodating 1 119
When invited again 1 119
When time permits 1 1.19
Not sure, Seldom go home to the province 1 119
Not coming back 1 1.19
No answer 1 L19

Willingness to Recommend the Resort to Others

Similarly, almost all (96.43%) were willing to recommend the resort to other

people (Figure 18), Only 3.57% said that they will not with comment that the resort is of

poor quality. One respondent also found the place very far that his friends may not be

able to come, hence he will no longer recommend it to them,


mYes No

Figure 18. Percentage of respondents who were willing to
recommend the resort to other people.

The reasons of the respondents why they will recommend the resort to their
friends and other people are listed in Table 49. The most common responses were: the
place is good- quiet, adventurous, private, with beautiful view (21.43%), for their friends
to experience also the benefits of hot spring (21.43%), for their friends to try the zipline
(15.48%) and for them also to experience or see the whole resort (14.29%). One
respondent said he will recommend because some of his friends are also curious about the

resort.

Other reasons include the presence of many recreational activities that can be
done in the resort other than just swimming (5.95%), vacation in the resort is relaxing and
enjoyable (2.38%), affordable entrance fee and cottage rental (2.38%), stay in the resort

is worth the value for money (1.19%).


Table 49. Respondents’ reasons for recommending the resort.

REASON FREQUENCY PERCENTAGE
The place is good 18 21.43
Experience the benefits of hot spring 18 21.43
Experience the zipline 13 15.48
To experience/see the resort 12 14.29
Lots of recreational activities 5 5.95
Promote the town and its tourism 4 4.76
Relaxing and enjoyable vacation 2 238
Affordable entrance fee and cottage rental 2 2.38
Value for money 1 119
Unique resort- with both hot and cold 1 119
Promote and appreciate the environment 1 1.19
Accessible 1 1.19
Recommend during lean months 1 119
Recommend if resort improves 1 Lio

A respondent also mentioned the accessibility of the resort (1.19%) because he
lived in the municipality while another considered the presence of both hot and cold
springs in one resort as unique (1.19%). The same percentage talked about promoting and
appreciating the environment while some 4.76% wanted to promote their town and its
tourism to make the place more popular. There were respondents also who were willing
to recommend the resort but only during the lean months when the resort is not

overcrowded (1.19%), and if management improves the resort (1.19%).

The results of the survey having large percentages of respondents who keep
coming back to the resort for vacation, who were willing to spend vacation there again,

and who were willing to recommend the resort to others signify that they were generally

satisfied with their stay. Their pleasing reasons in recommending the resort to others also
reflect the high level of satisfaction that they experienced in the resort. This is an
advantage for the resort since word of mouth as a means of spreading about the
destination is an effective instrument of promoting the resort. People talking about their
firsthand experience of the resort are more reliable sources of information than any other

form of advertisements where unfavorable features of the resort may not be revealed.

Visitor-Respondents’ Perception on the Adequacy and
Quality of Infrastructures and Personnel of the Resort

Majority of respondents commented that signs and warnings, toilets, shower
rooms and dressing rooms were inadequate (Table 50) and were not satisfied with the
quality of these (Table 51). During the time of survey, there were no signs and warnings
bearing rules and regulations on the proper use of the swimming pools. There was only
one sign in the swimming area which warned visitors not to throw garbage anywhere.
Evaluation of the adequacy of shower rooms, dressing rooms and toilets showed water
closets and urinals are still generally sufficient most of the time in a year, but were
expected to be insufficient during peak seasons when the survey was conducted. Further,
the new toilets cum dressing rooms were yet to be operational. Some also expressed
discontent about the number and size of hot pools having only 2 and very small that they

were always crowded with users.


Table 50, Frequencies and percentages of respondents who were satisfied and dissatisfied
with the adequacy of infrastructures in the resort.

SATISFIED DISSATISFIED
INFRASTRUCTURE

Frequency Percentage(%) Frequency _ Percentage (%)
Information Office 69 82.14 1s 17.86
Picnic Huts/Cottages 46 54.76 38 45.24
Swimming Pools 6 72.62 2B 2738
Shower Rooms 21 25.00 63 75.00
Toilets 20 23.81 64 76.19
Dressing Rooms 24 28.57 60 143
Garbage Bins 59 70.24 25 29.76
Tables and Benches 66 78.57 18 21.43
Grilling/Cooking Stations 60 71.43 24 28.57
Kitchen Sinks/Faucets 54 64.29 30 35.71
Parking Arca 67 79.16 7 20.24
‘Water Supply 46 54.76 38 45.24
Signs and Warnings 6 74 78 92.86
Stores 60 M43 24 28.57

Table 51 shows that the respondents were generally satisfied with the quality
infrastructures or facilities of the resort. Only few of the facilities were found to be in bad
or very bad quality by some respondents. More respondents were not also satisfied with
the quality of water citing comments like water tastes salty and bitter. Some respondents
also noticed white precipitates on their skin when water had dried. High percentages of
respondents were also displeased about the quality of the toilets, shower rooms, dressing

rooms, and signs and warnings.

More respondents were satisfied with the adequacy and quality of all other

facilities but it was noted that there were still some who were dissatisfied. This can also


be attributed to the high number of visitors during the survey period. These findings are

important because they can serve as opportunities for improvement for the management

as to the infrastructures of the resort especially now that they are in the process of

redeveloping the area

Table 51. Frequencies and percentages of respondents who were satisfied and dissatisfied
with the quality of infrastructures in the resort.

SATISFIED DISSATISFIED
INFRASTRUCTURE
Frequency Percentage (%) Frequency _ Percentage (%)

Information Office 16 90.48 8 9.52
Picnic Huts/Cottages 68 80.95 16 19.05
‘Swimming Pools 65 77:38 19 22.62
‘Shower Rooms 29 34.52 55 65.48
Toilets 28 33.33 56 66.67
Dressing Rooms 25 29.76 359 70.24
Garbage Bins 60 143 24 28.57
Tables and Benches o7 79.16 17 20.24
Grilling/Cooking Stations 60 143 24 28.57
Kitchen Sinks/Faucets 56 66.67 28 33.33
Parking Arca 44 $2.38 40 47.62
Water Supply 35 41.67 50 59.52
Signs and Wamings 3 3.57 81 96.43
Stores 35 65.48 29 34.52

Table 52 displays the frequency and percentages of respondents who were

satisfied and dissatisfied with the personnel and some features of the resort under

consideration. Results show that most are satisfied with the information officer (89.29%)

defining this as the personnel whom they asked about the directions of the location of the

facilities of the resort. Most of them also found the payment collectors (90.48), utility
personnel (76.19%), and store attendants (83.33%) satisfactory. More than half of them
were not satisfied with the first aid assistant (55.95%) knowing that she was present only
during weekends and holidays. Resort management justified the lack of lifeguard by
having all personnel on duty acting as lifeguards should untoward incidents happen to

bathers in the pools.

Table 52. Respondents’ satisfaction of the personnel and features of the resort.

SATISFIED DISSATISFIED
INFRASTRUCTURE
Frequency Percentage(%) Frequency Percentage (%)

Information Officer 15 89.29 9 10.71
First Aid Assistant 7 44.05 47 55.95
Lifeguard 16 19.05 68 80.95
Sceurity Officers 33 39.29 31 oo.7t
Payment Collectors 6 90.48 8 9.52
Utility Personnel 64 76.19 20 23.81
Store Attendants 70 83.33 14 16.67
Size of Resort 65 77.38 19 22.62
Beauty/Landscape 66 78.57 18 21.43
Cleanliness 58 69.05 26 30.95
Weather 81 96.43 3 3.57
Recreational Facilities vy 84.52 13 15.48
Parking 61 72.62 2B 2738
Sccurity/Peace&Order 68 80.95 16 19.05
Hospitality 16 90.48 8 9.52
Number of Visitors B 86.90 ul 13.10
Value for Money 80 95.24 4 4.76

Overall Satisfaction B 86.90 u 13.10



With this, a large percentage (80.95) of respondents raised concern about the lack

of trained lifeguard who should be in constant attendance in the resort especially that one
of the pools was deep. Since there were no security officers in the area during the time of
the study, some 60.71% also expressed dissatisfaction regarding this concern. However,
military men were deployed in the area to safeguard visitors when a jamboree was held

near the resort.

In general, the features of the resort under consideration were found by the
respondents as satisfactory implied by the high percentages of those who rated these as
very good, good, or satisfactory. Almost all (95.24%) expressed satisfaction by citing that
the experience they had in the resort was worth the fee they paid. When asked about their
overall satisfaction of the totality of the resort and their experience therein, there were
86.90% who had positive responses. This is an indication that the resort, though it has
several imperfections, is generally a good place to spend a day of relaxation based on the

result of assessment by the visitor-respondents.

Validation of the 2012 ISPSC Standard User Requirement

The results of the validation of the standard space requirement per bather in
public pools recommended by the ISPSC using 84 purposively selected respondents
during the peak days of late December 2013 to early February 2014 are presented in
Table 53. As previously discussed, the recommended space requirement for every user in
the shallow portion was 1.39m? and in the deep portion was 1.86m?. These space

requirements were used in the determination of the corresponding number of users to be

filled in the pool in the 3 edited photographs which were randomly shown to the

respondents. Results are summarized in Table 53 below.

Table 53. Respondents’ perception of crowding using 3-scenario photographs of the
upper adult swimming pool of the resort.

PICTURE! PERCENTAGE (%)
SCENARIO oD MEAN MEDIAN
1 (89 pool users) 4.76 1190 3810 44.05 1.19 3.25 3
2. (45 pool users) 11.90 2857 5833 119 02.49. 3
3. (178 pool users) 0 0 476 20.24 75.00 4.70 5

*T=extremely not crowded, 2=not crowded, 3=just right, 4=crowded; 5=extremely crowded

Scenario in Picture 1 depicted a total of 89 bathers in the pool which is the
recommended standard user density (Appendix VIII). Results demonstrate that it was
perceived by 16.67% of the respondents as either “extremely not crowded” or “not
crowded” and remarked that the pool can still accommodate more bathers. Some 38.10%
perceived the scenario as “just right”. Though there were visitors who perceived the
scenario in Picture 1 with the pool still spacious and with the ideal number of bathers,
there was a considerable percentage (45.24%) who actually perceived it as already
“crowded” or “extremely crowded”. A mean response of 3.25 for Picture | signifies that
the respondents’ perception was moving towards crowded. A median of 3 indicates that
respondents were almost equally divided between those who perceived the standard as
not yet crowded/just right and those who consider it as already crowded. These findings

suggest the recommended user requirement was applicable only to a little more than half

of the respondents. The rest found it to be already crowded. This could be related to the
average requirement that they personally required which suggested a total of 25 bathers

only in the pool

Picture 2, on the other hand, portrayed a user density of 45 in the pool which was
half the number of users in the recommended density (Appendix IX). The highest
percentage of respondents (58.33%) perceived it “just right” and 40.48% said it was not
yet crowded. Further, a mean of 2.49 and a median of 3, crowding scenario presented in
Picture 2 was generally regarded as not crowded and acceptable by most visitor
respondents. While the survey on user average space requirement suggested a total of 25
bathers only, visual approach confirmed 45 bathers at one time were still acceptable to
most respondents. This can be explained by the significant difference between narrative

numeric approach and visual approach as concluded by Manning ef al. (1996)

Picture 3 showed the number of users which was double that of the recommended
number totaling to 178 users in the pool (Appendix X). The crowding scenario in Picture
3 with a mean of 4.70 and a median of 5 was perceived as crowded and was no longer
tolerable to most respondents (95.24%). Only 9.52% of them said that the user density
was still “just right”. Given this scenario, some respondents commented that they will no
longer swim in the pool. Others said they can tolerate the crowd provided that they know

the people who are in the pool

CHAPTER VII

SUMMARY, CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS

Summary

Mt. Balungao Hot and Cold Springs Resort and Hilltop Adventure is owned and
operated by the Local Government Unit (LGU) of Balungao. It is the only resort with hot
spring in the eastern part of Pangasinan which is believed to offer therapeutic benefits
thus has gained considerable popularity that many visitors from the locality, nearby
municipalities and provinces and even foreign countries flock to the area to enjoy the

soothing and relaxing experience that the hot spring water promises.

Recorded tourist arrival in 2013 was 63,294. Though it decreased by almost 30%
relative to the previous year’s statistics, the number of arrivals can still be regarded high
for an underdeveloped resort. Considering only the peak months of 2013, there were
45,293 recorded visitors. Increase in visitor arrivals is anticipated this year due to
addition of a longer zipline and some developments in the site. These reflect a high level
of use of the facilities which necessitates proper management to ensure the sustainability
of the resort’s resources and operation and also to maintain or enhance visitor
satisfaction. With these, an assessment of the carrying capacity of the swimming facilities

of the resort is worth carrying out.


An assessment of the physical and social carrying capacities of the resort was
conducted which was the general objective of the study. The specific objectives were to
describe and assess the tourism resources of the resort which are important in the
determination of carrying capacity; to determine the local community residents’ attitude
and visitors’ perception towards tourism in the study area; and to validate the standard on
user requirement set by the 2012 International Swimming Pool and Spa Code (ISPSC)
Public Version 1.0 to the visitor-respondents of the study resort through their perception

of crowding using visual approach.

The resort has five swimming pools, three of which had cold pool water with
temperature ranging from 26°C to 29°C while the two cubicle-type pools had water with
temperature ranging from 40°C to 41°C during time of use. The pH level of the water in
the kids’ pool was generally beyond the allowable range of 7.4 to 7.8 set by the
Department of Health (DOH) and with bacteriological levels of 900 to 24,000CFU/ml
water which may be unsafe for bathers. Since the upper and lower adult pools were
chemically treated, their bacteriological quality were way below the acceptable limit
However, their pH levels were quite low entailing acidic water which may also pose
health risks to bathers. On the other hand, the cubicle-type hot-water pools had generally
high pH and bacteriological levels. One of the hot pools also had a temperature of 41°C at
the time of use which was one degree centigrade higher than recommended. These

conditions likewise may bring undesirable health effects to pool users

Quantity-wise, the two cubicle-type hot pools have sufficient supply of water that

the resort is able to drain and replace the water every night. Among the three cold pools,

only the kids’ pool is drained and its water replaced usually every night. The waters in
the two adult pools are rarely drained and replaced. Considering their sizes and the huge
volume of water that they require, resort personnel recall that it takes few days for these
pools to be filled up. This may also be attributed to low water supply since the measured
flow rate during the time of study was only 0.78 Ips. The indoor shower and comfort
rooms, on the other hand, are adequately supplied with water according to resort

personnel due to the 27,000-liter capacity reservoir.

Of great influence also to carrying capacity of the swimming pools are the
adequacy and quality of infrastructures, equipment and personnel. Generally, the
infrastructures in the resort are rated adequate and of satisfactory quality by the visitor-
respondents. However, they required more and bigger hot-water pools, toilets, indoor
shower and dressing rooms, signs and warnings regarding proper use of swimming pools,
and enough good quality water supply. More picnic huts/cottages and markings on water
depths of pools were also requested to be provided. An area or room equipped with a set
of minimum equipment required for emergency purposes only is also lacking. Moreover,
the resort needs to provide equipment such as standard 24-unit first aid kit, set of life-
saving equipment, personal protective equipment (PPE), excess chlorine testing kit, and
pH testing kit. Competent and trained lifeguard and first aid assistant in constant

attendance are also lacking,

The formulae proposed by Cifuentes (1992) in the determination of tourism
carrying capacity in protected areas adjusted by Tran ef al. (2007) were adapted in the

estimation of physical carrying capacities of the five swimming pools of the resort. In the

upper adult pool, shallow portion users require an average of 5.21m? water surface area
while deep portion users wanted a bigger space of 6.75m” on the average. In the lower
adult pool, an average of 5.16m? space was the requirement- slightly lesser than the
required space in shallow portion of the upper adult pool. Smallest space was required by
the respondents in the kids’ pool with an average of 2.16m”. The length of seat required
in the hot pools was asked since it was observed that the users were just seated while
soaking in the hot water. It was found that 0.88m seat length was the respondents’

average requirement.

Several factors were found to limit the use of the swimming pools and affect the
full satisfaction of visitors and these were unusable hours, pool water temperature, pool
depth, rough and sharp pool steps, pool water quality, chlorine odor of pool water, leaves
and other objects floating on pool water, inconspicuous pool location, lack of fence or
barrier on pool’s danger side, size of pool, inclement weather, and management capacity
which covers resort infrastructures, equipment and personnel. Using these findings, the
daily ERCCs are 19, 205, 163 and 28 each in the hot pools, respectively with a total of
443 pool users. These correspond to monthly ERCCs of 570, 6,150, 4,890, and 840
bathers each in the hot pools, respectively during the peak season totaling to 13,290

bathers.

Social carrying capacity involves both the determination of the attitudes of the
community residents towards the presence of tourists and tourism and the quality of
experience of visitors in the resort. Exploring Doxey’s Irritation Index (Irridex), findings

revealed that almost all household-respondents had positive attitude towards tourists and

tourism development in the municipality. This was manifested in the findings that
majority welcomed tourism development and presented no sign of wanting to limit or
reduce tourism development activities, They actually wanted the current level of tourism

activity to increase and to be given more attention as to provision of more tourism

facilities and attractions. Most respondents also exhibited enthusiasm over the socio-
economic benefits of tourism. Results also showed that residents refuted the tourists as
the cause of problems in the municipality, the impediment to their lifestyle or the cause of

significant irritation.

In the context of visitors is the level of satisfaction that they experience in their
stay in the resort. Visitor satisfaction was evaluated and it was found that almost all of the
respondents were willing to return to the resort for another vacation. Repeat visitors were
actually more than half of the respondents. The rest were first timers in the resort and
only one of them expressed disinterest in coming back. Nearly all were also willing to
recommend the resort to others. These findings signify that the respondents were
generally satisfied with their stay in the resort. Their good reasons in recommending the
resort to others also reflect the high level of satisfaction that they experienced in the
resort. Similarly, almost all expressed satisfaction by citing that the experience they had
in the resort was worth the fee they paid. When asked about their overall satisfaction of
the totality of the resort and their experience therein, most of them had positive

responses.

The results of the validation of the standard space requirement per bather in

public pools recommended by the ISPSC using visual approach showed that half the

number of users in the recommended bather density (45 bathers) was generally regarded
as not crowded and acceptable by most visitor respondents. The crowding scenario
presenting twice the standard (178 bathers) was perceived as crowded and was no longer
tolerable to most respondents. The scenario depicting the standard bather load by the
ISPSC (89 bathers) was considered as not crowded and acceptable by a bit more than half
of the respondents while a considerable number of respondents found it to be already
crowded. This could be related to the average requirement that they personally required

which suggested a total of 25 bathers only in the pool.

Other important considerations in assessing the carrying capacity of a destination
are water supply and solid waste issues. At present, provision of adequate water supply to
the municipality does not pose challenges since survey results showed that local residents
never had shortage of water supply despite the presence of the resort. Regarding solid
waste concerns, the resort does not practice waste segregation at present but some wastes
such as cans, plastics, glass bottles, and similar items are set aside and sold by utility
personnel thus, of the 0.48m° average solid waste generated everyday during the peak
season, only 0.31m° was the estimated daily volume of solid wastes brought to the
dumpsite from the resort. Since not all households in the few barangays covered by
garbage collection are contributing to the wastes brought to the dump site, the present
1.5-hectare dumping area may still be sufficient to accommodate the present volume of
wastes generated by the resort and by the households and institutions currently served by

municipal garbage collection


Conclusion

In order for a tourism destination such as the study resort to develop sustainably,
Proper management and controls must be taken into effect with consideration of the
physical and social impacts of tourism. The attitudes of the host community and the
perceptions of visitors regarding tourism and its facilities and services are essential as
basis for future tourism planning by considering these as guides in recognizing

opportunities for improvements

Physical carrying capacity assessment of the swimming-related facilities of Mt.

Balungao Hot and Cold Springs Resort and Hilltop Adventure revealed that individual
space requirements and duration of use were different in each of the pools. Some of the
factors that limit the use of the pools and affect visitor satisfaction were also found to be
specific to each pool, Factoring these in the estimation, a daily ERCC of 443 bathers was
estimated which is greater than the recorded average daily visitor arrival of 252 in 2013

However, it was noted that there were days in the previous years and during the study
period that visitor arrivals went beyond the daily ERCC. Highest recorded number of
visitors was as high as 1,706 in March and 1,128 in December on mentioned year. These
indicate that the swimming-related facilities of the resort tend to be used more than they

can accommodate during the peak seasons.

Resident survey results presented the host community of the tourism in Mt.
Balungao to have a positive attitude about tourism development in the municipality

which translates to the stage of euphoria based on Doxey’s Irritation Index. Visitor

survey results also indicate that the resort, though it has several deficiencies, is generally
a satisfying place to spend a day of relaxation. Thus, the social carrying capacity in the

context of tourism in the municipality of Balungao is not exceeded at this present stage.

The standard space requirement per bather in public swimming pools
recommended by the ISPSC was considered as not crowded and acceptable by a little
more than half of the respondents (54.76%) while a considerable number of respondents
found it to be already crowded (45.24%). Twice the standard was considered as crowded
and no longer tolerable to most respondents (95.24%). On the other hand, half the
standard was far more acceptable to most respondents having a total of 98.81% who
considered it as not crowded and just right. These results confirm that the guideline of
the 2012 International Swimming Pool and Spa Code (ISPSC) regarding standard user

requirement is not applicable to the visitor-respondents of the resort.

With regards to water supply and solid waste issues, survey results showed that
local residents never had any shortage of water supply. Thus, at present, the water supply
for the community people is not compromised despite the presence of the resort in Mt.
Balungao. On solid waste management, findings showed that only 20% of all the
barangays in the municipality is serviced by municipal garbage collection and not all
households in these barangays availed of garbage collection. Since some types of wastes
can be sold to junk shops, only a portion of the total wastes generated by the covered
households, institutions and the resort is brought to the 1.5-hectare dumpsite. Hence, at
present, solid waste issues may not yet be posing challenge to solid waste management.

However, the municipality may have to consider addiditon of related infrastructures and

personnel alongside strict enforcement of municipal ordinances regarding solid waste
disposal in order to provide efficient garbage collection services to all households and

institutions in the municipality.

Recommendations

Recommendations for Future Research

Carrying capacity assessment is a very broad subject and this study focused on the
physical carrying capacity of swimming-related facilities and the social carrying capacity
of the tourism development in the municipality. Further studies can be done on the
physical carrying capacity of the other recreation facilities of the resort to determine its
composite physical carrying capacity. Determination should include the assessment of the
quality and adequacy of related infrastructure, facilities, and personnel since they greatly

influence the carrying capacities of the recreational facilities under assessment.

The economic carrying capacity and the ecological carrying capacity of the resort
may also be assessed since information generated from these researches will be beneficial
for the resort management to identify present and potential problems that may be
associated with tourism development in order to effectively implement corrective or

preventive actions to ensure sustainable tourism development

Moreover, with the emergence of more tourism sites managed by different LGUs

in the country, studies on the management capacity of the different LGUs would help

identify management gaps and supports needed to enhance their tourism management

capabilities.

Recommendations for the Resort Management

Survey results in this study identified several concerns from the local residents
and the visitor respondents. Among the concerns raised by local residents was that
tourism planning officers pay little attention to the views of local residents when making
decisions about the future of the area and that some local residents are yet to benefit from
the tourism development in the municipality. Resort management should pursue the
implementation of appropriate actions to address the concerns of local residents like
conducting consultations with them and with other stakeholders or other similar activities
where local residents’ views are heard and at the same time they are informed about the
improvement projects or activities brought by tourism development in the municipality.
Through these, they can be assisted in the identification of economic opportunities to

further enhance benefits to the local community.

Local residents also cited concerns about trees being cut due to road improvement
projects, waste generation, and occurrence of accidents as the major negative impacts of
tourism development. Road improvement projects are required to comply with various
environmental laws prior to implementation. It is recommended that the public be made
aware of the compliance to these environmental laws and the mitigations being done to
reduce the environmental impacts of the road widening project. Directional signs and

road safety signage such as speed limits and warnings on accident prone areas should be

included in the road improvement project. Further, the local government should seek to
improve the solid waste management system of the municipality by strict enforcement of

municipal ordinances regarding solid wastes.

Visitor-respondents’ concems include inadequacy of signs and warnings, rules
and regulations, toilets, dressing rooms, shower rooms, and hot-water pools. Many
visitors were not also satisfied with the quality of these facilities. Most of them also

observed the unavailability of lifeguards, security and medical officers.

Resort management was able to make a positive response with the construction of
additional toilet but need further provision of necessary infrastructures and equipment
especially those pertaining to public health and safety such as footbaths, swimming pool
rules and regulations, caution/precaution signs on hazard areas, pool water depth and pool
water temperature, emergency room/area, standard first-aid kit, life-saving equipment,
and other emergency equipment. Construction of more hot-water pools that are bigger
and sheltered may also be considered. It should be ensured that, when in use, pool water
temperature is not exceeding 40°C, with the proper use of these pools which include the
maximum length of time (15 minutes) for allowed users only, posted at the swimming

area. Proper water quality management should also be done to provide visitors a public

resort with safe bathing conditions. Trained and competent lifeguard, security, and

medical personnel should also be in constant attendance in the resort.

It is also recommended that the management should educate visitors about the
resort's hot and cold spring water resource, solid waste management and other applicable

visitor practices needed for environmental conservation. Some visitors were voicing

concer about the salty and bitter taste of water, not fully aware of the volcanic origin of
the water being used for the swimming pools. Further, visitors were observed to be
throwing non-biodegradable wastes to the surroundings. Educating the visitors will also

help manage their expectations about the resort’s facilities and service.

To avoid overcrowding during peak days, discount rates and other promotional
gimmicks may be offered during lean days to attract visitors to pay visits to the resort
during these days. Making reservations should be encouraged and should be used as aid
for the resort management in anticipating the number of visitors coming to the resort, in
notifying people about the scenario in the resort, and in regulating visitor arrivals to avoid

accepting visitors beyond the resort’s carrying capacity

And since carrying capacity changes with changes in facilities and visitor
requirements over time, carrying capacity assessment is proposed to be conducted as

needed.

LITERATURE CITED

ALAMPAY, R.B. (ed). 2005. Sustainable Tourism: Challenges for the Philippines
Philippine APEC Study Center Network (PASCN) and the Philippine Institute for
Development Studies (PIDS), Philippines. 304 pp.

ALHAJI, M., NELSON, N.G., and McKENZIE L.B. 2009. Hot Tub, Whirlpool, and Spa-
Related Injuries in the U.S., 1990-2007. American Journal of Preventive Medicine
37 (6) 531536

ALLEN, LE. and C.A. SEAMAN. 2007. Likert Scales and Data Analyses. Statistics
Roundtable. Available at https://secure.asq.org, Accessed on November 2013

ARNBERGER, A., W. HAIDER, A. MUHAR. 2004. Social Carrying Capacity
Assessment of an Urban Park in Vienna. Working Papers of the Finnish Forest
Research Institute 2. Vienna, Austria.

BEETON, S. 2006. Community Development through Tourism, Landlinks Press.
Australia. 246 pp

BELNAP, J., W.A. FREIMUND, J. HAMMETT, J. HARRIS, M. HOF, G. JOHNSON,
D.W. LIME, RE. MANNING, S.F. McCOOL, M. REES. 1997. VERP: The Visitor
Experience and Resource Protection (VERP) Framework. A Handbook for Planners
and Managers. US Department of Interior. National Parks Service. Denver Service
Center.

BOULLON, R.C. 1985. Planificacin del Espacio Turistico. Ed. Trillas, México, DF
[AmazonLink] (cited in Libosada, 1998)

BUTLER, R.W. 2011. Tourism Area Life Cycle. In: Contemporary Tourism Reviews
(series ed. C. Cooper). Goodfellow Publishing Ltd. Woodeaton, Oxford.

CALANOG, L.A, AG. CALDERON, L.A. CALDERON, RL. SIBAL, MR
SANTIAGO. 2013. Gender Analysis and Tourism Carrying Capacity in Pamilacan
Island , Bohol, Philippines. Project Terminal Report. ERBD, College, Laguna,
Philippines

CHILMAN, K., J. VOGEL AND G. BROWN. 1989, Recreation Visitor Inventories: Key
Information for Capacity Management. In: Proceedings of the 2003 Northeastern
Recreation Research Symposium (comp., ed. J. Murdy) USDA Forest Services,
Newton Square, PA.


CIFUENTES, M. 1992. Determinacion de Capacidad de Carga Turistica en Areas
Protegidas. Centro Agronomico Tropical de Investigacion y Linsetansa Catie.
Turrialba, Costa Rica. 28pp.

CUNHA, A.A. 2010. Negative Effects of Tourism in a Brazilian Atlantic Forest National
Park. Journal of Natural Conservation, Vol. 18, Issue 4, pp. 291-295,

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH. 1998. Public Swimming or Bathing Places.
Implementing Rules and Regulations of Chapter VIII of the Code of Sanitation of
the Philippines (PD 856)

DIEDRICH, A. and E.G, BUADES, 2009. Local Perceptions of Tourism as Indicators of
Destination Decline. Tourism Management, Vol. 30, Issue 4, pp 512-521

ECOSYSTEMS RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT BUREAU-DEPARTMENT OF
ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL RESOURCES (ERDB-DENR) Terminal
Reports. College, Laguna,

FARREL, T.A. and J.L. MARION. 2002. The Protected Area Visitor Impact
Management (PAVIM) Framework: A Simplified Process for Making Management
Decisions. Journal of Sustainable Tourism. Vol. 10, No. 1

FAULKNER, B. and C. TIDESWELL. 1997. A Framework for Monitoring Community
Impacts of Tourism. Journal of Sustainable Tourism, Vol. 5, No. 1, pp 3-28.

FLORIDA DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION DIVISION OF
RECREATION AND PARKS: Visitor Carrying Capacity Guidelines (undated).

FONT, X. and J. TRIBE. 2000. Forest Tourism and Recreation: Case Studies in
Environmental Management. CABI Publishing, NY, USA. 292 pp.

GAUGHAN, A.E., M.W. BINFORD and J. SOUTHWORTH. 2009. Tourism, Forest
Conversion, Land Transformation in the Angkor Basin, Cambodia. Applied
Geography, Vol. 29, Issue 2, pp 212-223

GETZ, D. (2011). Residents’ Attitudes towards Tourism: a Longitudinal Study in Spey
Valley, Scotland. In: Tourism Management towards the New Millennium. (eds. C
Ryan, and S. Page). Routledge , NY, USA. pp 139-154

HALL, C.M. 2011. Seeing the Forest for the Trees: Tourism and the International Year
of the Trees. Journal of Heritage Tourism, Vol. 6, Issue 4, pp 271-283

IMPLEMENTING RULES AND REGULATIONS OF R.A. 9593, OTHERWISE
KNOWN AS THE TOURISM ACT OF 2009.


INTERNATIONAL CODE COUNCIL, INC. with the Cooperating Sponsorship of The
Association of Pool & Spa Professionals. 2011. 2012 International Swimming Pool
and Spa Code Public Version 1.0. USA

JAVIER, A.B. and D.B, ELAZIGUE. 2011. Opportunities and Challenges in Tourism
Development: Roles of Local Government Units in the Philippines. Paper presented
at the 3rd Annual Conference of the Academic Network of Development Studies in
Asia (ANDA). Nagoya, Japan. March 5-7, 2011

JENKINS, J.M. and PIGRAM, J. 2008. Visitor Impact Management Model/Framework
(VIM). In: The Encyclopedia of Tourism and Recreation in Marine Environments.
(ed. M. LiCK) CAB Intemational. UK. pp 507-509.

JOVICIC, D. and A. DRAGIN. 2008. The Assessment of Carrying Capacity- A Crucial
Tool for Managing Tourism Effects on Tourism Destinations. Turizam, Vol. 12, pp
4-11

KAGAOAN, C. 2004, Carrying Capacity for Ecotourism and Wildlife Sanctuary,
Taganak Turtle Islands, Philippines . Unpublished Graduate Dissertation. School of
Environmental Science and Management. University of the Philippines Los Bafios,
College, Laguna.

KHALIFAH, Z and Y.J. YAIK. 2013. Status of Ecotourism in ASEAN Countries. In:
Opportunities and Challenges of Ecotourism in ASEAN Countries (eds. S. Kim, M.
Kang and D. Sukmajaya). Seoul, Republic of Korea. pp 16-36.

KUVAN, Y. 2005. The Use of Forests for the Purpose of Tourism: The Case of Belek
Tourism Center in Turkey. Journal of Environmental Management, Vol. 75, Issue 3
pp 263-274.

LIBOSADA, C. JR. M. 1998. Ecotourism in the Philippines. Bookmark, Inc., Makati
City, Philippines. 203pp.

LIU, Z. 2003. Sustainable Tourism Development: A Critique. Journal of Sustainable
Tourism, Vol. 11, No. 6, pp 459-475

LOPEZ-BONILLA, J.M. and L.M. LOPEZ-BONILLA, 2008. Measuring Social Carrying
Capacity; An Exploratory Study. Tourismos: An International Multidisciplinary
Journal of Tourism. Vol. 3, No.1. pp 116-134.

MAGNAN, A. and V. DUVAT. 2010. Could Tourism Carrying Capacity be a Useful
Tool for Adapting to Climate Change? Littoral 2010. pp 1-8


MANNING, R.E. and W.A. FREIMUND. 2004. Use of Visual Research Methods to
Measure Standards and Quality for Parks and Outdoor Recreation. Journal of Leisure
Research. Vol. 36, No. 4, pp 557-579.

MANNING, R_E., LIME, D.W., FREIMUND, W.A., PITT, D.G. 1996. Crowding Norms
at Frontcountry Sites: A Visual Approach to Setting Standards of Quality. Leisure
Sciences. Vol. 18 pp 39-59.

MANNING, RE, W. VALLIERE, B. MINTEER, B. WANG, C. JACOBI. 2000.
Crowding in Parks and Outdoor Recreation: A Theoretical, Empirical, and
Managerial Analysis. Journal of Park and Recreation Administration, Vol. 18. No.4
pp 57-72

MANNING, RE, W. VALLIERE, B. WANG, S. LAWSON, P. NEWMAN. 2002
Estimating Day Use Social Carrying Capacity in Yosemite National Park. Ontario
Research Council on Leisure. Leisure/Loisir. 27 (1-2):77-102.

McCOOL, S.F. 1996. Limits of Acceptable Change: A Framework for Managing
National Protected Areas: Experiences from the United States. Paper presented at
Workshop on Impact Management in Marine Parks. Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia
August 31-14, 1996.

MISSOURI DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND SENIOR SERVICES. Section for
Environmental Public Health. Undated. Swimming Pool and Spa Water Chemistry.
Available at health.mo.gov. Accessed on December 2013.

ORTEGA, JL C., RM C. DAGOSTINO and AL C. MAGANA. 2011. Estimating
Carrying Capacity in a Natural Protected Area as a Conservation Strategy. AIAII
Conference Proceedings. Impact Assessment and Responsible Development for
Infrastructure, Business and Industry. 31" Annual Meeting of the International
Association for Impact Assessment. Centro de Convenciones, Puebla-Mexico. 28
May-4 June 2011

PAGE, S.J. and CONNEL, J. (eds). 2006. Tourism: A Modern Synthesis. Cengage
Learning EMEA. 546 pp.

QUICOY, A. and N. BRIONES. 2009. Beach Carrying Capacity Assessment of Coastal
Ecotourism in Calatagan, Batangas, Philippines. Journal of Environmental Science
and Management Vol. 12, No. 2, pp 11-27

REES, M., K. CAHILL, M. SAFFORD, AND H. RICE. 2007. VERP, LAC, VIM,
VAMP: A Database that Compiles User-Capacity Indicators and Standards on the
Web. Park Science Vol. 24, No. 2, pp 38-40


RIBEIRO, M., FERREIRA, J. C. e SILVA, C. P. 2011. The Sustainable Carrying
Capacity as a Tool for Environmental Beach Management. Journal of Coastal
Research, SI 64 (Proceedings of the 11th International Coastal Symposium), 1411 —
1414. Szczecin, Poland. Special Issue 64.

RYAN, C and C. COOPER. 2004. Residents’ Perceptions of Tourism Development —
the Case of Raglan, New Zealand. Tourism Review International. Vol. 8, No. 1, pp
1-15

SAVERIADES, A. 2000. Establishing the Social Tourism Carrying Capacity for the
Tourist Resorts of the East Coast of the Republic of Cyprus. Tourism Management.
Vol. 21, Issue 2, pp 147-156.

SILVA, C.P. 2002. Beach Carrying Capacity Assessment: How important is it? Journal
of Coastal Research, Special Issue 36, pp 190-197,

SIMMONS, D.G. 1994, Community Participation in Tourism Planning. Tourism
Management, Vol. 15, Issue 2, pp 98-108

SUNKAR, A. and R. CERENO. 2013. Ecotourism Development in Brunei Darussalam,
Indonesia, Lao PDR, Myanmar, Singapore and Philippines. In: Opportunities and
Challenges of Ecotourism in ASEAN Countries (eds. S. Kim, M. Kang and D.
Sukmajaya). Seoul, Republic of Korea. pp 52-87

TANTRIGAMA, G. 1998. Carrying Capacity and Sustainability of Coastal Tourism in
Hikkaduwa, Sri Lanka and Calangute, Goa, India. Tropical Coasts. Vol. 5, No. |

TRAN, N., NGUYEN, T.L., DANG, M., DINH, X.T. 2007. Tourism Carrying Capacity
Assessment for the Phong Nha-Ke Bang and Dong Hoi, Quang Binh Province. VNU
Journal of Science, Earth Sciences 23, pp 80-87.

TUNA, M. 2011. Social and Environmental Impacts of Tourism Development in Turkey
In: Sustainability of Tourism: Cultural and Environmental Perspectives. (eds. M
Kozak and N. Kozak). 2011. Cambridge Scholars Publishing, UK. pp 1-16

VASKE, J.J. and L.B. SHELBY. 2008. Crowding as a Descriptive Indicator and an
Evaluative Standard: Results from 30 Years of Research. Leisure Sciences, 30: pp
111-126,

ZHANG, R. 2005. Assessing the Carrying Capacity of Tourist Resorts: An Application
of Tourists’ Spatial Behavior Simulation Based on GIS and Multi-Agent System.
Wuhan University Journal of Natural Sciences, Vol. 10, No. 4.
