The DOST Courseware Project 2.0: “Breaking Language Barrier Through Localized-Text Translation and Annotation”

LOUIE CARL R. MANDAPAT

UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES LOS BAÑOS

MASTER IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY

APRIL 2013

Abstract

The Courseware Project 2,0 is an enhancement of the current website
“Courseware in Science and Mathematics” that will cater new major functionality which
is the localized-text translation and annotation of courseware modules that complies with
the requirement of Department of Education’s Mother Tongue-Based Multi-Lingual
Education (MTB-MLE) policy. The project localized four modules: for Science Grade 3 and three for
Mathematics Grades 1-3 for four major dialects of Ioko, Cebuano, Maranao and
Tagalog. Testing of the prototype was done by the project proponents using DOST network
facilities and of their respective offices. Development of the prototype was done by using
PHP, JQuery, MySQL, Adobe Dreamweaver, Sothink SWF Decompiler and Adobe Flash CS4 to address the requirements of the project.

I. The Problem Domain

A. Statement of the Problem

Since the 2009 launch of the courseware website by Science Education Institute
(SEI) and Advanced Science and Technology Institute (ASTI) of the Department of
Science and Technology (DOST), it served as a repository of the one hundred and one
(101) elementary level modules. The current courseware website only caters modules in
English contexts which does not conform to the Department of Education (DepEd) policy
on the use of local dialect or language in teaching elementary from Grades | to 3.The
project addressed this limitation through localization of the courseware modules to major
dialects which hopefully would aid the pupils understand better and easier the modules in

science and mathematics.
B. Background and Objectives of the Project

In 2004, SEI and ASTI collaborated to develop an educational tool for elementary
science and mathematics. SEI provided the content and development of the lessons while
ASTI took charge of the digitization. This project is a major enhancement of the existing
DOST Courseware project proposal which already been presented in International
Conference for Open-Distance e-Learning (ICODEL) last February 22-24, 2012 with
working title “Hamessing the Use of Open Leaming Exchange to Support Basic
Education in Science and Mathematics in the Philippines”. A major issue discussed
during the open forum was the alignment of the DOST modules to the Department of

Education’s (DepEd) Order No. 74, s. 2009 ? dated July 2009, “Institutionalizing Mother


Tongue-Based Multilingual Education (MTB-MLE)”. MTB-MLE prescribes the use of
the language learners speak at home in delivering lessons and in classroom discussions
and now being implemented from pre-school up to Grade 3 and in the altemative learning
system. After some brainstorming and collaborative ideas, it came up with the proposed
additional feature of the courseware which is the localization of English context to major
dialects by means of localization functionality where the user can do the uploading of

localized audio and localized text materials in the courseware.
The following are the project’s objectives:

1. align the website to the MIB-MLE requirement of DepEd; and
2. assist in the development of the Courseware Project 2.0.

C. Significance and Scope of the Project

Aligned the website to MTB-MLE requirement of DepEd - The project addressed
the Mother Tongue-Based Multilingual Education (MTB-MLE) policy requirement of
DepEd on the current limitation of the DOST Courseware by providing localized

modules available online only.

The network of language experts for this project was organized by SEI and sent
audio versions of the modules and collaborated with the users on the context of the

translated modules.

For the localization of modules, only one module from science and two from

mathematics for each grade level for four major dialects of Iloko, Cebuano, Maranao and

Tagalog were translated. User Acceptance Test (UAT) involved six (6) students from
each grade level. Overall, ten (10) teachers from different regions, five (5) parents, five
(5) children, two (2) members of the courseware development group of ASTI and one (1)

college student tested the courseware project with a registered sixty-nine (69) users.

Testing of the prototype was be done by the project proponents using the DOST

network facilities and of their respective offices.

Assist in the development of the Courseware Project 2.0 — Developed the project
version using PHP®, JQuery®, and MySQL’ running on Ubuntw’ server addressing the

requirements of the courseware.

D. Documentation of Existence and Seriousness of the

Problem

In 2004, the Science Education Institute (SEI) seek for assistance from the
Advanced Science and Technology Institute for their idea of using Information
Technology (IT) in conducting classroom lectures with the plan to optimize,
streamline and standardize lesson presentation through the use of cost-effective and
high-quality solutions, which would help students to be more competitive, maximize

and enhance learning tools through the use of this technology.

On November 16, 2006, the project “Development of Computer-Aided-
Instructions for Science and Mathematics — Modules in Science and Mathematics for

Elementary Schools” was formally launched at Discovery Suites, Ortigas Center,

Pasig City. The event was participated by officials and staff from the Department of
Education, Department of Science and Technology, the Media, Teachers and Students

as well.

As of today, about 7,000 copies of courseware modules have been distributed to
various public elementary schools, public offices, some foreign guests, science

centrums and lawmakers.'

With the existing system’s feature of providing modules in English language, the
translation of modules to the major dialects prescribed in the MTB-MLE
implementation would require high budgetary requirement if no other solutions or
alternatives will be considered apart from reproduction of the existing packaged

modules for elementary level.

Since the Courseware in elementary science and mathematics are in English
language, reproduction in CD-ROM of the 101 modules to translate each lesson to the
dialects prescribed in the MTB-MLE would require the following budget allocation

from the government. To compute:

a. Total production cost of 101 modules = P3,242,828.00
b. To translate 101 modules in 12 dialects:

Digitization in CD-ROM

@ P3,242,828.00 x 12 dialects = P38,913,936.00
c. Consultancy Fees for Language Experts

12 consultants @ 1,500/module x 101 =P 1,818,000.00


Sub-total for translation project =P49,818,000.00
Replication @ 765,500.00(10,000 copies) x 12 =P 9,186,000.00
TOTAL REPRODUCTION COST* =P59,004,000.00

* Based on the 2008 actual development, production and replication costs/rates

I. Approach Taken in this Project
A. Theoretical Framework

1. Information System Theory

Perceived

Extemal |/

Attitude -eward Behevieral Actual system
variables \\ i

using intention touse P|] Use

Figure 1. Technology Acceptance Model from http://jeme.indiana.edu/vol13/issue /park.htm (Accessed
‘November 2012)

The author considered the use of Technology Acceptance Model (TAM) shown in
Figure 1 that is based on the theory of action by Davis (1986) which deals more
specifically with the prediction of the acceptability of an information system. The
purpose of this model is to predict the acceptability of a tool and to identify the

modifications which must be brought to the system in order to make it acceptable to

users. This model suggests that the acceptability of an information system is

determined by two main factors: perceived usefulness and perceived ease of use.

Perceived usefulness is defined as being the degree to which a person believes
that the use of a system will improve his/her performance. Perceived ease of use refers

to the degree to which a person believes that the use of a system will be effortless.

2. Systems Design Principles

Systems development
initiated

¥

Investigate and analyze

problem sufficiently to

develop workable solution

¥

Develop prototype {e-

_——__¥

ut prototype into operation

Refine and modify prototype

Complete component
or system

Figure 2. Prototyping process flow

This project was developed using prototyping Systems Development Life Cycle
(SDLC) shown in Figure 2 which will it was initially built to produce a model then
after thorough analyzing and investigation of the specified requirement to develop a

workable solution, the project was constantly refined and modified.

This prototype model was eventually enhanced iteratively and the system was
developed based on the identified new requirements/features based on the testing and

development period.

This SDLC reduced time and costs to develop an information system because
changes cost exponentially more to implement as they are detected later in
development, the early determination of what the user really wants resulted in faster
development and less expensive information system. It also required user involvement
and allowed them to see and interact with a prototype model providing them better and
more complete feedback and specifications which prevented many misunderstandings

and miscommunications regarding the requirements.
B. Rationale for the Framework

There is no perfect system. Therefore, there are always rooms for improvement to
every system available. The DOST Courseware will always have future additional
requirements that will improve its functionalities. With prototyping, future additional

requirements can be catered by the system.

C. Technologies Used

In addressing the limitation of the system, the project used Sothink SWF
Decompiler’, Adobe Flash CS4 and Adobe Audition to accommodate the localization
of modules. HTMLS, CSS3 and JQuery were used in order to perform the required
functionality for the Courseware modules. The use of these technologies provided
effective results for this project because of their capability to accommodate
localization of modules. Sothink SWF provided the decompiling of the SWF files to
their raw FLA files. Adobe Flash CS4 provided environment for manipulating lines of
codes to make this localization made possible. Adobe Audition provided manipulation
of audio transition of the localized audio materials. This project used JQuery and its
plugins as its JavaScript library since it is already been used in the version 1.0 of the
system, The programming language used in the project was object-oriented PHP so
that the classes/scripts used in the program can be reused for other applications/system
in the future. The project used Adobe Dreamweaver CS5.5 for development

environment.
Ill. Project Design
A. Concept
The Courseware Project 2.0 (Breaking Language Barrier through Localized-text
Translation and Annotation) is an enhancement of the current proposed system which

primarily will cover the limitation of the current website that contains modules in

English context only.

Upon accessing the website of the courseware, the user can view details regarding
the modules. If the user wants to view the localization module, he/she must

register/login first.

1. Uploading of localized materials

Figure 3. Uploading localization materials interface

For the uploading of localized materials in Figure 3, the administrator
added a Language Expert User (LEU) that can upload localized materials like
audio, text and module assessment. Each listing was categorized based on
localization material type. When adding localization material, localization form
contains the module and dialect to be assigned and the input form for locating the
directory of the localization material to be uploaded. The LEU can also delete

localization materials just by clicking the DELETE link.

2. Localization of module

‘THE Days it THE WEEK

Figure 4. Module localization interface

For localizing the modules in Figure 4, the original audio of the SWF file
was muted in order to accommodate the localized audio. Localization is available
only to the modules that contain localization materials uploaded by LEU. A drop
down list box is provided that contains different dialects if the user wants to
switch for other equivalent localization.

For the requirements of MTB-MLE localization feature, only modules
from Grades 1 to 3 were localized to conform to the requirements of MTB-MLE’s
policy of using the following twelve (12) languages in teaching and production of
visual and supplementary educational aids: Tagalog, Kapampangan,
Pangasinense, loko, Bikol, Cebuano, Hiligaynon, Waray, Tausug,
Maguindanaoan, Maranao, Chabacano and Ivatan. Initially, in designing the
prototype, only three major languages will be used for each lesson in Science
Grade 3 and Mathematics Grades 1-3. However, only one lesson per subject per

Grade was selected to apply the four localized languages of Iloko, Cebuano and


Maranao and Tagalog and that will compose the initial three (3) localized

modules for both subjects. These are:

1 For Science

© Grade 3 - Habitat

2. For Mathematics

o Grade 1 — The Days in a Week

© Grade 2~ Telling Time

© Grade 3 — Interpreting Pictographs

Table 1. Number of Lessons by Subject and Grade

Total Grade/No. of Lessons

Subject One Two Three
Science 7 7 z
Mathematics 10 11 ll

3. Downloading of localized materials

DOWNLOAD TEST

P))
LUO |

yen EA

Figure 5. Downloading localization materials icon

In Figure 5, registered users can download the localization materials

specifically the audio, text and module assessment. The audio localization is

limited only to mp3 format, the text localization is of pdf format while the module



assessment is of doc format. Localization materials can be accessed and

downloaded in the detail section of the modules.

B. Methods

1. Design studies

Several open learning technologies particularly through web portals became
popular to stakeholders because of the free massive resources in the form of videos,
lessons, quizzes, tests and curriculum. These include Massachusetts Institute of
Technology Open Courseware (MIT-OCW), Khan Academy, Me-Graw Hill
Publishing, Prentice-Hall and Camegie Open Learning among others. The content,
design and organization of the open learning resources from these websites are

considered during the design of the enhancements for the courseware portal.

The prototype is designed such that it follows the basic web 3.0 standards in terms

of interactivity, layout and functionality.


Learn. Explore. Have Fun,

Figure 6, The Courseware Project prototype

The Courseware Project prototype beta version 1.0 was presented during

ICODEL of which it was designed as it appeared on Figure 6.

It was tested with various actual users such as students, teachers, parents,

professionals and courseware development group.

A user acceptance test (UAT) evaluation form was developed to gather feedback

on content, navigation, functionality, graphics and the like.

The data was processed to gather significant results to assist in the improvement
of the prototype to consider the principles of Technology Acceptance Model (TAM)

theory.

‘The revision of prototype was based after the result of the iteration process and
implemented after consultation with the courseware development group of SEI and

ASTI.


C. Process Model

The Courseware 2.0 enabled users to localize courseware modules online and
download audio and text localization. In figure 7, we can see the flow on

localization.

Figure 7. Data Flow Diagram


D. Entity Relationship Diagram

The Courseware Project 2.0 contains 16 tables. In figure 8 below,

relationships between tables are represented by arrows. Primary keys were

depicted by PK.
‘Blogs wiaccount
P ‘eile
PK Jig Px [ie
pix ]a ‘Diiows
og_user |_p] [username Px
og_sat password module_jd e
1og.date tseriype cea | Lpl late
iog_imo tie ato
ogi escrpion th
stn
isbn date
fie
assessment Wiad ‘Biannotaion io_size
PK [ass id Px [is PK Jann i aa
user user user Fives
L} |fie-is L} fies L} fies ee
F| oiler ia cioiect id iaect jd
assessment audio annotation
sownioad doweload download
‘binembers ‘icomments ‘Biopes
p> [Px [emia Px [id irk [ie
ype \. ser id
ce tseriype
ender topic dose
femal éate_addea
password 0
Eey vow
province
tpieesback ety
SchooiName
PK Jia schoolType
oradoLovel Gos
LL ®  |osicenome Px Tie
fad oser
eolyertyp0 | usectvoe) topic 8
date registoro aate
—|...| eee alo, added es
ip
ae samauaan ‘Wbuikdownioad
D/PK [dialect id fe rar Px Tid
ialect name =F Samoa

Figure 8. Entity Relationship Diagram


E. Functional and Non-Functional Requirements
1. Functional Requirements

a. In module localization, after the user selects a dialect, the system checks in
the database if it has available localization, otherwise, it displays the
original English audio module.

b. Before the user can preview the localization, the browser must have adobe
flash player installed.

c. In uploading audio localization, the file format of the audio must be mp3
format.

d. In uploading text localization, the file format of the text must be in pdf
format.

e. Inuploading assessment test, the file format must be in doc format.
2. Non-Functional Requirements

a. Sufficient network bandwidth is needed to synchronously play the module
together with the audio localization.

b. The project is capable of being used anytime, assuming that the user has
internet connection.

c. The project complied with the DepEd’s MTB-MLE policy of prescribing
the use of the local language in delivering lessons at home and in

classroom.


. Failure rate is expected when the web server of the project is unavailable.
Backup of the project can be performed either monthly or quarterly
depending on the future implementation and maintenance of the project.
Unauthorized access to the system and its data is prohibited. The password
is secured by mdS5 encryption.

. User manual is available for ease of use of the system.


Results and Discussions
To align the website to MTB-MLE requirements of DepEd, the project
provided functionality for uploading of localization materials by creating a

Language Expert User module that manages the uploading of localization

materials,

. This functionality is one of the features by which either the Language Expert User (LEU)

who will be assigned by SEI or the courseware administrator could do the uploading of
localization materials. In this case, for the prototype of Courseware Project 2.0, this
author acted as the localization administrator by which localized audio, text and tests
were managed.

Localization materials is either audio or text type. Localization audio material can be
created by digital voice recording devices such as computers, laptops or voice recorders.
After texts localization and voice recording, the localization administrator uploaded the
digital audio file in the courseware and allowing only mp3 format as file type.

In recording the voice audio, the file type it generated was wav format that the
localization administrator needed to convert first the audio file to mp3 format before it
can be uploaded to the courseware site. The localization administrator used the

application Adobe Audition to convert the wav format to mp3 format.


0:001000)

Figure 9. Adobe Audition Interface

In figure 9, Adobe Audition can convert the audio from wav format to mp3
format. In converting the audio, the author followed these simple steps:
a. Open the audio file by browsing the file location (ctrl + O)

b. Save as mp3 format (ctrl + shift + s)

Figure 10. Actual pdf file that can downloaded in the project

|. Localization text material is in PDF format. In the PDF that you can see in figure
10, the user can see the original English content/text of the module as well as the
equivalent localized text of the module. The localization administrator also

uploaded a test/assessment file for each dialect per module to further assess the


comprehension or learning of the students for the localized module. After
answering the test, the registered user can email the file to the courseware
administrator or this test can be an additional material or reference for teachers to
assess learning of their student.

File type limitation is depending on the server’s configuration. But for this
project’s case, the server’s configuration was set to 20MB because there was a
time when the localization administrator repeatedly failed uploading a specific
localized audio material. The localization administrator found out that the file size
of the audio was more than 18MB. When the server’s configuration for the max
file upload size to 20MB, the localization administrator successfully uploaded the
audio with 18MB file size. The author changed the server’s configuration for max
file upload size by updating the php.ini value of upload_max_filesize to 20MB.
The server’s apache’ server needs to be restarted to take effect the changes made

to php.ini.

Result:

lL.

Provided playback of localized modules within the website.

2. Some localization materials were not accurately synchronized but understandable

and comprehensible.
Initial upload of localization materials yielded to permission error in server. It is
fixed by changing the folder permission of the destination folder for the audio and

text localization materials.


4. Uploading of localization materials was easy because after selecting module and
dialect, the localization administrator can just browse for the directory
localization material that were uploaded.

5. Localization materials listing were categorized such that it can be sorted and set
number of records per page for easy viewing.

6. Localization materials listing pagination makes the interface clean and organized.

To align the website to MTB-MLE requirements of DepEd, the project provided
functionality for online module localization by muting embedded audio of the swf file

and then simultaneously plays the audio localization of the selected dialect.

1. In viewing details for each module, the registered users of the system not only can
access the localized version for each module, but also can download the localization
materials and module assessment for each module.

2. In localization of modules, only selected modules from Grades 1 to 3 were localized.
In designing the prototype, four major languages were used for each lesson in Science
Grade 3 and Mathematics Grades 1-3.

3. Only one lesson per subject per Grade was selected to apply the four localized
languages of Iloko, Cebuano, Maranao and Tagalog. The initial four (4) modules for
both subjects are:

o For Science
= Grade 3 — Habitat

© For Mathematics


= Grade 1 - The Days in a Week
= Grade 2 — Telling Time

"Grade 3 — Interpreting Pictographs

agtrar

Figure 11. Localization module.

. From the modules page, the user has an option to choose dialect/language to listen to.
In figure 11, upon selection of a language, the available modules with localization
shall be listed. Upon play the same video as the original with English text will play
but without the English audio. Instead, an audio of the localized language is
synchronized with the video.

. Before the modules can be localized, the selected modules were decompiled using
Sothink SWF Decompiler. The decompiler produced the raw Flash file (FLA format)

of the SWF file of modules.


Figure 12. Sothink SWF Decompiler Interface

In figure 12, we can see the interface of the decompiler the author used. In
decompiling the sw file, the author followed these steps:
i. Browse for the swf file using the explorer section of the decompiler
ii, In the export section, tick the checkbox and then click Export FLA/FLEX
6. After the decompiling process, the raw FLA file was edited using Adobe Flash CS4.

The flash file was edited to accommodate audio localization material.


10.

rte Ling. can we
‘pout fora pene
oy?

Figure 13. Adobe Flash CS4 Interface

In figure 13, we can see the interface of the flash editor the author used.

”. The author inserted a script that the courseware can pass Flashvars? to the module to

control the volume of the module. Flashvars are variables which can be passed from a
web page to a Flash (SWF) file. This means that a web page can define any variables

in the HTML page and these variables can be used by the Flash file.

3. Uses flashvars name "varvol" to mute and unmute the volume of the module.

). Actual script for muting and unmuting:

var myobj=new Sound()?
myob3 .setVolume (vazvol) 7
myob3.start()7

The variable was used in the flash file to determine whether to mute or unmute the
volume of the module. If the module is selected together with a dialect, the volume of
the flash file was set to zero (0) to accommodate the localized audio material.If no
dialect was selected, the volume is unmuted and played with the original English

embedded audio of the module. .


11. The author tried embedding the localized audio in “The Days in a Week” module.
Before embedding it in the module, the author repeatedly checked if the localized
audio is synced with the actual display of equivalent English text. In the flash code of
the module, the original English audio was embedded separately making it laborious
to syne the localized audio for every scene. Adobe Audition was used to sync the
localized audio. The author has chosen Adobe Audition because of his familiarity
with the software. Unnecessary noises were deleted in the localized audio, reduced
and added long pauses and making the audio faster and sometimes slower. English
audios like “Excellent” and “Try Again” were not localized due to lack of available
voices. As of now, it is not available in the beta version of the project for it is not yet
programmed to accommodate embedded localized audio. The author tried this
experimentation to explore future implementation of the project.

12. In viewing embedded module, the browser of the user must have an adobe flash
player installed in order to preview the module. Otherwise, the user cannot preview
the module.

13. In localizing the modules, the following persons were contracted to translate the
modules at P500 each module (except for Tagalog modules).

o _Iloko—Ms. Dinah Dumlao, Elementary Grades Teacher, Science Paoay ES,
Paoay, Ilocos Norte

o Cebuano - Ms. Jessamine Rosal, Registered Nurse, Cebu City

© Maranao — Ms. Sheila Marie Lazaro, Biology Teacher, Philippine Science

HS, Central Mindanao Campus, Iligan City, Lanao del Norte


° Tagalog - Ms. Josephine Feliciano, SRS II, SEI- DOST
14. The English texts of the original four modules were captured by Ms. Josephine
Feliciano and emailed to the resource persons for localization or equivalent context-
meaning in local dialect. The translation was coordinated and retrieved starting
November 2012 until January 2013. Only the Iloko language has the recorded

localized loko voice over, while the rest provided only the localized texts.

a

. loko voice recording was done in a non-recording studio using only a headset with
microphone by the original translator and Windows Recorder application. Cebuano
and Maranao voice recording was done by Ms. Feliciano and Tagalog by Ms. Jobelle
Gayas, officemate of Ms. Feliciano. The recording for the three languages were done
also in a non-recording studio using a laptop, a headset and Windows recorder
application strictly following the script of localized modules.

16. Editing/Tweaking of voice to fit the characters was done using Cyberlink Wave v10.

In editing the audio, since different languages have different lengths in words,

synchronizing the localized audio especially Iloko was set to different phases of

speed, sometimes a little faster.

Result:

1. Localized the modules by muting the English audio and playing the localized audio
simultaneously. Muting the English audio was done by passing flashvar from the web
page to the swf file signaling the module whether to set the volume to zero (0) or one
hundred (100). Playing the localized audio was done by embedding the localized

audio with the file type limitation of mp3.


2. After decompiling the swf files to its raw format, some fonts of the original file were
not recognized by Adobe Flash CS4 that resulted to changing the fonts to the default

type face of the software.

Stoners ero |

Figure 14. Adobe Flash CS4 Font Mapping Dialog
In figure 14, we can see the font mapping dialog provided by Adobe Flash CS4. Some
fonts used by the swf file were not recognized by the flash editor version used in this
project.

3. Successfully embedded the localized audio in the swf file for “The Days in a Week”
module. The module was accurately synced equivalent to its original English audio
using Tagalog as its dialect. Not all audio was localized to Tagalog like the word
“Excellent” and “Try Again”.

4. Retrieval of localized texts from resource persons took 5 to 10 days or more probably
because they were assigned a non-official task but were compensated just the same,

5. Recording of Iloko audio/voice over by Ms.Dumlao who also localized the texts,

needed major cleaning because of noise background. A registered user commented

that it seems the Iloko audio was recorded by a person who is not fluent in Iloko. The


original translator is attributing this observation to the below standard recording of
the audio.

. Recording of other localized languages however, which was done at SEI multimedia
room was generally within acceptable standards.

. Voice recording of Cebuano and Maranao was done by Ms. Feliciano who is not
native to those dialects that pronunciation, intonation and diction were observed to be
not accurately executed.

. In the three approaches used for the synchronization of localized audio only two
methods were tested: the Recorded downloadable audio and the non-embedded
synchronized audio.

|. In the first method where the audio will just be downloaded and listened to, the Grade
1 pupil who listened to the Mathematics lesson “The Days in a Week” Tagalog audio
scored only 3 points in the Tagalog test compared to a score of nine in the English
test.But the other student who took the same test for the same module scored higher
in Tagalog than English at 8 and 9 respectively. The second pupil do not know the
equivalent Tagalog term for Wednesday and Thursday. For Grade 2 lesson in
Mathematics “Telling Time” the first pupil who viewed both English and Tagalog
modules preferred and took the English test only where the pupil got a perfect score
of 10. The second pupil who took the same test scored one point higher in Tagalog
than in English at 9 and 8 respectively. The third pupil however, had the same score

of 7 both for English and Tagalog tests. The pupil who took the test for Grade 3


Science lesson “Habitat” scored higher by one point in English than Tagalog with 9
and 8 respectively.

10. During the interview, out of the six pupils tested, one expressed preference to English
than Tagalog, four preferred English first but after short thinking also expressed
preference to Tagalog then eventually liking both languages. One pupil did not state
his preference.

11. The internet speed affects the synchronization of the localized modules. Sometimes
the localized audio was loaded first than the embedded module.

12. User needs to download adobe flash player for browser first before they can preview

embedded modules making it more tiring for the users.

To align the website to MTB-MLE requirements of DepEd, the project provided
functionality for downloading localization materials by creating download link/icon of

localization materials in each module.

1. In this feature, registered users can download the localization materials they want. Upon
viewing of the detail of the selected module, he/she can download the localization materials
located at the bottom portion of the Dialect drop down list box. The audio icon represents as
the audio localization material while the pdf icon represents the text localization material.
They can also download module assessment per module that contains test questionnaire they

can answer.


(es) (seas (oesatea

Figure 15. Registered user localization module. Localization materials were encircled.

In figure 15, we can see the localization icons that are available for download.
2. Inthe module localization page the following materials can be downloaded:
© the recorded audio of the localized text represented by |);

* apdffile of the localized text represented by “J. ; and

© an assessment test about the modules represented by y¥ which are
different from the evaluation questions embedded in the module but

available for Tagalog and Cebuano only.
Result:

1. Users can download localization materials as much as they want, resulting to
excessive usage of bandwidth.

2. The downloadable audio material is available in mp3 format only.

3. Users who do not have Adobe Acrobat Reader installed cannot view the pdf file of

the localized text.


To assist in the development of the Courseware Project 2.0, the author provided

the overall designing and programming to cover the following functionalities:

1. Assisted in the over-all coding and programming of the Courseware Project 2.0 to
cover the following functionalities:
o User Registration
© Modules search, playback and download
© Development of user feedback mechanisms
o Development of reports generation mechanism
o Development of administrator module
o Linking of menus to different functionalities
© Localization of Modules
2. Development of a Web 3.0 ready website where users could collaborate and be highly
interactive and dynamic in sharing the website through various social media e.g.

Facebook and Twitter.

Figure 16. Courseware social media module


In figure 16, we can see the social media plugin of the project. After clicking the
social media available, the website will open a new tab or page redirecting to the
Social Media page. There are three options:

1) Facebook
2) Twitter
3) Google +

3. The author used PHP and JQuery as the programming language and MySQL as the
backend for the project. The project was designed using object-oriented programming
(OOP) so that it can be reused in the future for its future enhancements and
implementations. Most functionalities of the project were plugins already available in
the internet. Functions that used JQuery plugins were the Social media feature,
Ontology feature, listing pagination, CAPTCHA and simultaneous playing of
embedded swf file and localized audio.

4. In bulk downloading, the author used a Completely Automated Public Turing Test to
Tell Computers and Humans Apart (CAPTCHA) to prevent unwanted scripts to
automatically download the bulk modules in rar file type. The user needs a winrar'' to

extract the downloaded bulk module file.


YOU ARE DOWNLOADING ALL MODULES

| °

Move mouse through the bar

YOU ARE DOWNLOADING ALL MODULES

am 6°

here

YOU ARE DOWNLOADING ALL MODULES

ees

Figure 17. Courseware CAPTCHA interface

In figure 17, we can see the CAPTCHA used in the project. As we can see, there are
three (3) phases in the figure. The first phase is the initial phase which displays the
information on how to proceed in downloading bulk module. The second phase is the
phase which displays the progress. The third and the last phase is the phase which is
the user proves that he/she is a human. If the user failed to mouse over throughout the
bar provided, it brings back the process to first phase.

.. The project used CSS3 for styling overall components. Manipulating font size, font
color, text positioning, text alignment, body backgrounds and many more. The
images in the website are being cropped and resized using Paint.Net software.

}.. The project is powered by Google Analytics (GA) located at the bottom part of the

page for monitoring website activity for the period of testing.


Google

Pangkalahatang-deya ng Magia Mar? 2013-Abr 1.2019

‘51 (ra) tong bumiata eae na to

Figure 18. Google Analytics Courseware dashboard

As we can see in figure 18, using Google Analytics, the administrator can monitor
and produce reports like Page Visits, Bounce Rate, Geographical Access, Type of

Browser used, Operating System used, Average time for page visits and many more.

Results:

. Generally, the Courseware Project 2.0 functionalities were acceptable to the user.
The users experienced dynamic interactivity, user-friendly interface and manipulation

of elements in the website.


V. Conclusions

1. Localization feature makes it easier for some of the users to understand the module
content although not conclusive for other languages.

2. For some of the uploaded prototypes, audio localization are not perfectly
synchronized to the SWF file because of two different elements that are playing in
different phasing but manually synchronized to assume length of time by which the
user will manipulate the module.

3. Localization is only available online. When the user downloads the module, the audio
present in the SWF file is the original English audio.

4. Currently the localized audio is using the original English video with muted audio
that when downloaded no audio will be heard as to neither the English and localized
audio.

5. For this prototype, the localization administrator was the author that it is easy for him
to upload and manipulate the functionality. If this will be deployed to Language
Expert User (LEU), standard technical specifications should be set to standardized the
quality of audio as well as the formatting of assessment tests.

6. The interface of the Courseware Project 2.0 should be adopted because of its new and
major functionalities flexible enough to accommodate user requests and adhere to the

mechanics of Web 3.0.


Vi. Recommendations

1.

Modules should be edited to accommodate external audio source in order to make the
localization accurately synced to the swf file as what was did in the module “The
Days in a Week” where the audio was first segmented then embedded into the SWF

file to perfectly synchronize.

. There should be a separate SWF file system for the original English Modules and the

localized modules such that the ideal embedded localized audio in the English Video
would have a separate localized file for the program to call each time it is being
played. It shall also be available for download as a complete localized package of a

module with the video and localized audio.

. Modules may not necessarily be re-digitized to align the lessons to the DepEd’s

requirement for Mother Tongue-Based Multi-Language Education Policy (MTB-
MLE). With the introduction of evolving technologies to insert or embed audios to
SWF files (playback files), it is now more feasible to localize modules in different
dialects without a high budgetary re-production requirement since many other

educational materials are also produced with the same concept of dual language.

. If Language Experts User (LEU) will be allowed to upload audio and test assessment

for the localization, there should be a training to guide them on the recording of audio

to acceptable standards as well as the design of standard test assessment instrument.


Vil.

References

[1] ASTI Courseware Development Group, Science Education Institute (SEI) —
Department of Science and Technology (DOST)

[2] Mother Tongue Based website, Accessed November, 2012, http://mothertongue-
based blogspot.com

[3] Media College, Flashvars, Accessed March 23, 2013,

http://www mediacollege.com/adobe/lash/actionscript/flashvars.html

[4] Sothink SWF Decomiler, Accessed January 31, 2013,

http://www sothink.com/product/flashdecompiler/

[5] PHP, Accessed March 23, 2013, http://php.net

[6] Jquery, What is JQuery, Accessed March 23, 2013, http://iquery.com/

[7] MySQL, Accessed March 23, 2012,

http://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/5.0/en/what-is-mysql.html

[8] Apache, Accessed March 23, 2013,
http://nttpd.apache.org/ABOUT_APACHE.htm!
[9] Ubuntu, Accessed March 23, 2013, https://help.ubuntu.com/11.10/installation-

guide/i386/index.html

[10] Completely Automated Public Turing Test To Tell Computers and Humans
Apart (CAPTCHA), Accessed March 23, 2013, http://www.captcha.net

[11] Winrar, Accessed March 23, 2013, http://www.rarlab.com
