Populating Galactic Dark Matter Halos with Galaxies Using Machine Learning

Allen Neil C. Garcia

UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES DILIMAN

Master of Science in Physics

June 2023

ABSTRACT

Robust understanding of the connection between galaxies and the dark matter
(DM) halos that host them is achieved using modern hydrodynamic simulations.
However, such simulations are generally computation-intensive and require a lot
of computing time. In this study, we develop machine learning (ML) models to
map baryonic properties of galaxies onto DM halos from the SIMBA cosmological
hydrodynamic simulation, at redshifts z = 0 — 2, in a computationally efficient
manner. In particular, we trained random forest (RF) and extremely randomized
trees (ERT) models to predict central galaxy properties, namely, the stellar mass
M∗, neutral and molecular hydrogen masses M_HI and M_H2, star formation rate
SFR, and the gas-phase metallicity Z_gas using DM halo properties, namely, the
primary halo mass My and the mass of the previous halo progenitors, nearby halo
mass densities ρ within r = 300, 1000, 3000 kpc, halo half mass radius r_h, halo spin
λ, and halo velocity dispersion σ. Consistent with previous work, we find that the
model predictions are able to successfully recover the mean relations between the
halo mass and galaxy properties, as well as the intrinsic second parameter corre-
lations, such as the fundamental metallicity relation (FMR) with the stellar mass
and the effect of black holes in the quenching of galaxies, though they are not able
to reproduce the observed scatter around the mean relations. We also study the
relative importances of the features in predicting the different galaxy properties.
Results from this study illustrate both the potential and current limitations of ML
approaches for generating realistic galaxy catalogs.

PACS: 98.80.-k (Cosmology), 07.05.Kf (Data analysis: algorithms and imple-
mentation; data management)

Chapter 1

Introduction

In the ACDM cosmological model, dark matter (DM) halos form through density
fluctuations in the early universe and grow hierarchically through mergers. It is
believed that these halos serve as the gravitational scaffolding upon which galax-
ies form and evolve [1]. Understanding the relationship between galaxies and their
host dark matter halos is a fundamental question in modern astrophysics. In recent
years, significant improvements in computing paved the way to the development
of simulations that are able to simulate the growth of the large-scale structure as
constrained by DM halos. These simulations are used to understand the intrinsic
galaxy-halo connection, which refers to the intricate interplay between the proper-
ties of galaxies, such as their luminosity, size, and distribution, and the underlying
dark matter halos that host them.

Traditional methods of probing the galaxy-halo connection that relies on the in-
formation provided by DM-only N-body simulations include statistical techniques
like subhalo abundance matching (SHAM) [2] and halo occupation distribution
(HOD) [3], and physical models like semi-analytic models (SAMs) [4]. However,
these methods often suffer from uncertainties associated with the simplification of
the astrophysical processes involved in galaxy formation and evolution, such as
feedback from stars and black holes, and the effects of baryonic physics. Addition-
ally, SHAM and HOD techniques commonly presupposes a monotonic relationship
between the halo mass and galaxy luminosity which might not be the case in the

real Universe. Offering a more sophisticated approach in probing the galaxy-halo
connection are cosmological hydrodynamic simulations, albeit comes with heavy
computational costs. These simulations co-evolve dark matter and gas particles
with the growth of the cosmological large-scale structure [5]. Despite the physically
motivated nature of SAMs and hydrodynamic simulations, these techniques are
generally too computationally expensive to efficiently probe the galaxy-halo con-
nection in a Gpc*-scale. The heavily parametric nature of traditional techniques in
probing the galaxy-halo connection and the massive computational requirement of
hydrodynamic simulations begs the development of a non-parametric and flexible
approach of understanding the galaxy-halo connection on a larger scale.

Recently, machine learning (ML) have been used to various astrophysical ap-
plication [6-8] and have emerged as a powerful tool for studying the galaxy-halo
connection. Machine learning algorithms can analyze high-dimensional datasets
and identify patterns in the data, allowing for more accurate and precise modeling
of the galaxy-halo connection within a small amount of time as it does not require
the inclusion of the complex baryonic processes taking place within galaxies. One
promising approach is to train various machine learning algorithms on data from
physically accurate hydrodynamic simulations or SAMs that span a large volume
[9, 10].

In this study, we aim to leverage the ability of tree-based machine learning
methods like random forest (RF) and extremely randomized trees (ERT) in pop-
ulating galactic dark matter halos from the SIMBA hydrodynamic simulations [11]
with galaxies. Specifically, we test the capability of ML in recovering the mean scal-
ing relations and scatter around the halo mass. Additionally, we explore whether
ML reproduces the intrinsic second-parameter correlations as a function of the
stellar mass such as the fundamental metallicity relation (FMR) and the star
formation-stellar mass relation. Lastly, this study seeks to explore how machine
learning models uses different halo properties in predicting various galaxy proper-

ties.

This manuscript is organized as follows: in Chapter 2, we further discuss the
commonly used techniques in probing the galaxy-halo connection mentioned ear-
lier. In Chapter 3, we review SIMBA, the cosmological hydrodynamic simulation
that is used to train the ML models. In Chapter 4, we discuss the set-up and
implementation of the ML models used in this study. In Chapter 5 we present our
results. Lastly, in Chapter 6, we lay out our conclusions and recommendations for

future work.

Chapter 2

Probing the galaxy-halo
connection

In this chapter, we discuss the techniques in probing the galaxy-halo connection
(GHC), highlighting their advantages and disadvantages. This chapter is struc-
tured as follows: in Secs. 2.1 to 2.4, we separately discuss the most commonly used
methods in constraining the intrinsic GHC. In Sec. 2.5, we discuss the emergence

of machine learning (ML) as a powerful alternative over the traditional methods.

2.1 Subhalo/Halo Abundance Matching

Subhalo/halo abundance matching (SHAM) is a technique used in cosmology to
connect the observed properties of galaxies with the properties of dark matter halos.
It is a statistical method that uses the abundance of galaxies, commonly extracted.
from data obtained by astronomical surveys, and dark matter halos, commonly
extracted from N-body simulations, to establish a relationship between the two,
allowing for predictions of galaxy properties based on the properties of their host
halos. Within the standard ACDM formalism of hierarchical structure formation,
the principal assumption behind abundance matching is that the luminosity L or
the stellar mass M, of a galaxy is closely tied to the mass M, of a halo or subhalo
in a one-to-one correspondence that preserves rank ordering (2, 12]. That is, the

most massive (luminous) galaxy lives in the most massive halo or subhalo, the

2.2. Halo Occupation Distribution (HOD)

second most massive galaxy lives in the second most massive halo or subhalo, and
so on.

Since galaxy stripping occurs before halo mergers (e.g. subhalo accretion to
a larger halo), another approach of this method is to abundance match galaxies
to subhalos based on their time of accretion. This was done by connecting galax-
ies to the subhalo’s maximum circular velocity during accretion V,2s5 which is a
better proxy than the halo mass when considering halo merger history and the
effects of tidal stripping [13, 14]. HAM can also be used to predict the stellar-to-
halo mass (SMHM) relation, but this requires tedious parameter tuning to match
observations. Another approach, proposed by Hearin and Watson [15] is the in-
clusion of a halo property that encompasses the history of halos. In their work,
they included the property Zstarve, Which corresponds to the redshift at which star
formation in galaxy ceases, as additional property to determine the luminosity and
color of galaxies residing within DM halos. They called this method conditional
abundance matching (CAM).

2.2 Halo Occupation Distribution (HOD)

Using SHAM in describing the clustering of galaxies within a population of DM
halos is not possible and is not recommended as it relies heavily on linking galaxies
to DM halos using specific galaxy and halo properties that do not include any in-
formation about their distributions. Halo occupation distribution (HOD), another
statistical approach similar to SHAM, is a method that enables one to model the
distribution of galaxies residing within halos/subhalos. HOD defines the relation
between galaxies and halos as the probability distribution, P(N|M), that a halo
of mass M hosts N galaxies. The HOD typically takes as input the halo mass
distributions of halos from cosmological models and predicts the clustering of both
central and satellite galaxies, which are modeled separately, within these halos
[3, 16}.

Some variations of HOD include the use of the conditional luminosity func-

2.3. Semi-Analytic Models (SAMs)

tion (CLF) and the conditional stellar mass function (CSMF) which indicates the
average number of galaxies with a certain luminosity [17] and stellar mass [18],
respectively as tracers of galaxy bias. Just like SHAM, HOD formalism deals with
a number of parameters, especially when modelling the distribution of central and
satellite galaxies, and also requires the use of high-resolution N-body simulations
with the addition of data from astronomical surveys to link galaxies to DM halos.
Also, as the two methods are generally statistical in nature, it is not possible to
probe how baryonic processes like radiative cooling, feedback, and star formation

drive the observations constrained by these methods.

2.3 Semi-Analytic Models (SAMs)

Semi-analytic models (SAMs) offer a physical approach that captures the complex
baryonic processes happening within galaxies to model the galaxy-halo connec-
tion. Specifically, SAMs are computational approaches that combine simplified
analytic prescriptions of galaxy formation, such as for radiative cooling, gas recy-
cling, and feedback with numerical simulations, to study the formation and evolu-
tion of galaxies in the Universe. These models are used to simulate galaxies that
follow the hierarchical growth of the DM-dominated large-scale structure from the
early Universe up to the present day which includes mergers and accretion [4, 19].
SAMs provide a powerful tool for understanding the physical processes that govern
the formation and evolution of galaxies in a cosmological context.

Despite providing a physical model of the Universe in a cosmological scale,
SAMs are considered to be a less accurate approach compared to the more so-
phisticated technique called hydrodynamic simulations (discussed in the following
section, Sec. 2.4) as they make use of overly simplified analytic prescriptions of
galaxy formation, thus the term “semi-analytic”, for relatively faster computing
time. The utilization of simple analytic approach in SAMs means it needs to be
continually tested with data from more sophisticated hydrodynamic simulations

and high-redshift surveys. The major limitation of SAMs is that they require a

2.4. Hydrodynamic simulations

large number of free parameters, which in turn require heroic efforts to constrain
simultaneously to match any new data [20]. One way to do this parameter tuning
is to apply Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) techniques which tends to be a
more intensive approach than HAM and HOD approaches [21]. However, what
separates SAMs from the previously-discussed statistical approaches is that its pa-
rameters are physical, not statistical and it directly probes the complex process of

galaxy formation.

2.4 Hydrodynamic simulations

As stated in Sec. 2.3, feeding physically-motivated galaxies to dark matter halos
from DM-only N-body simulations requires the use of simplified analytic prescrip-
tions of galaxy formation such gas cooling, star formation, and feedback. SAMs
are generally lacking in complexity and do not accurately capture the physical
processes involved in galaxy formation and evolution. Rapid advancements in
computing led to the emergence of a more sophisticated technique in simulating
the cosmological large-scale structure using hydrodynamic simulations. In these
simulations, galaxies are formed by treating gas particles like ideal fluids, which is
subject to additional hydrodynamic and radiative processes, while simultaneously
evolving them with dark matter particles in an ab initio manner, using various
gravity and hydrodynamic solvers (codes). In other words, the formation and evo-
lution of galaxies is simultaneously simulated with the growth and evolution of
the DM-dominated large-scale structure. This makes hydrodynamic simulations
a better option than the previously discussed methods that utilize pure DM-only
N-body simulations in modelling a baryonic Universe. Numerous state-of-the-art
hydrodynamic simulations have been generated with different specializations in
terms of baryonic processes happening within galaxies. Some of these include the
Magneticum simulation [22], which was used in examining star formation in the
brightest cluster galaxies (BCGs) of galaxy clusters [23], the HORIZON-AGN hy-

drodynamic simulation [24], which was used to study the impact of active galactic

2.5. Machine Learning (ML)

nuclei (AGN) feedback in the density profiles of galactic DM halos and galaxies
[25], the IlustrisTNG simulation [26], which was used to probe the mass-metallicity
relation on galaxies [27], and the SIMBA hydrodynamic simulation [11], which ex-
plored the effects of black hole feedback by incorporating additional black hole
accretion model other than the commonly employed Bondi-Hoyle-Lyttleton model.
Overall, the results from these simulations successfully mimic and are tightly con-
sistent with astronomical observations. In Chapter 3, we discuss in more detail the

state-of-the-art SIMBA hydrodynamic simulation which is utilized in this thesis.

2.5 Machine Learning (ML)

Since conventional techniques used to understand the galaxy-halo connection such
as HAM, HOD, and SAMs are considered to be overly simple, as they are heavily
parametric, a holistic and flexible approach that remains computationally cheap
would be ideal. Machine learning (ML), a technique that exploits the ability of
various computer algorithms such as nearest neighbor, decision trees, and neural
networks to acquire information from high-dimensional data, is another rapidly
developing approach that have been proven to be a solution to this task. ML
has already been applied to study various complex astrophysical models includ-
ing predicting stellar parameters from SDSS and SEGUE spectra [6], probing the
formation of the large-scale structure via DM particle classification [28], creat-
ing weak-lensing convergence maps [29], and photometric redshift estimation for
current [7] and future surveys [8], among many others.

The idea of using ML in understanding the galaxy-halo connection is as follows:
using the data from robust cosmological hydrodynamic simulations or SAMs, a
computer will be trained to learn how DM halo properties relate to various galaxy
properties without providing any analytical prescription of the complex baryonic
processes of galaxy formation. With this, applying ML to study the galaxy-halo
connection is considered as a regression problem, wherein the target quantities are

continuous, using a supervised approach since ML will ‘learn’ from an existing

2.5. Machine Learning (ML)

dataset.

ML has recently been applied to various cosmological hydrodynamic simulations
such as the IlustrisTNG [9], HORIZON-AGN [30], and MUFASA [10]. The primary
results from these studies state that ML was able to reproduce the mean relations
between galaxy and halo properties but fails to reproduce the scatter around the
mean. Additionally, the stellar mass M, is the only galaxy property that is well
predicted by ML (p 2 0.9) as it is tightly connected to halo mass M, as observed
and implemented in HOD, HAM, and SAMs. Constraining other properties such
as the neutral hydrogen mass Myy and the star formation rate remains a challenge
(p S 0.8). Recently, SIMBA has been employed in developing a hybrid ML model
that predicts the central black hole mass Min, the neutral hydrogen mass Min,
and the molecular hydrogen mass My using DM halo properties from a simulation
and galaxy properties predicted by an analytical model of galaxy formation [(31].
Also, just recently, SIMBAwas also utilized in developing physics-informed neural
networks (PINNs) in mapping baryonic properties to halo properties wherein a
neural network is trained with an extended loss function enforced with the physics

of baryon conversion efficiency and the Kullback-Liebler divergence metric [32].


Chapter 3

The SIMBA cosmological
hydrodynamic simulation

In this Chapter, we discuss the state-of-the-art SIMBA hydrodynamic simulation
which we utilize in this study. First, in Sec. 3.1, we describe the structure of SIMBA,
exploring specifically how it simultaneously forms galaxies with the evolution of the
large scale structure and how black holes are formed and seeded in the simulated
galaxies, a unique attribute by SIMBA which is not captured in other simulations.
In Secs. 3.2 and 3.3 we describe the SIMBA runs and the publicly-available data
used in this study.

3.1 Overview of SIMBA

The SIMBA hydrodynamic simulation [11] utilizes a framework similar to its pre-
decessor MUFASA [33], but with updates on the sub-resolution star formation and
feedback prescriptions. Both SIMBA and MUFASA use an updated version of GIZMO
meshless finite mass (MFM) cosmological gravity and hydrodynamic solver [34, 35],
which offers significant advantages compared to the commonly-used smoothed par-
ticle hydrodynamics (SPH) method employed in other simulations in terms of han-
dling fluid problems related to strong shocks and discontinuities. Both simulation
also utilize the use of GRACKLE [36] for the radiative cooling, photoionization

heating, metal cooling, and non-equilibrium evolution of primordial elements, and


3.1. Overview of SIMBA

the implementation of FIRE (Feedback in Realistic Environments) high-resolution
zoom simulations [37, 38] in modelling two-phase decoupled star formation-driven
galactic winds.

Notable improvements in SIMBA include the addition of black hole growth via a
torque-limited accretion model [39], the inclusion of black hole feedback via kinetic
bipolar outflows [39, 40] and X-ray energy [41], and the utilization of the AREPO

codes [42] in modelling on-the-fly dust production and destruction.

3.1.1 Star formation

Similar to MUFASA, the complex star formation in SIMBA employs the molecular
gas-based prescription from Krumholz et al. [43], commonly referred to as the
KMT model. In a cosmological hydrodynamic simulation, a gas particle’s molec-
ular hydrogen (Hz) gas fraction relative to the atomic/neutral hydrogen (HI) gas
in an atomic-molecular complex, which is essentially a star-forming region, is ap-
proximated as a function of a parameter s, given by

Pit s
= r1-0. — 1
fia = Oe Wie (; zim) (3.1)

with
_ In(1+0.6x + 0.01”)
°* 0.0396 Z(=/Mope~)

which is a quantity that corresponds to the size of the atomic-molecular complex.

(3.2)

Here, Z is the metallicity of the gas measured in solar units, x is the dimensionless
interstellar radiation field strength given by

143.1(Z)2-355

x(Z) ¥ 3.1 7 ;

(3.3)

which quantifies the intensity of the external radiation that affects the transition
from HI gas to He gas within a star-forming region (higher values of x indicate
stronger radiation which may result to He dissociation, effectively suppressing star
formation), and is the HI gas column density for star formation. The larger the

atomic-molecular complex (larger s), the larger the amount of dust that can absorb


3.1. Overview of SIMBA

external radiation which can suppress star formation. Using the KMT model, in
a cosmological simulation, the Hz gas fraction of a gas element is calculated using
Eq. (3.1) if s < 2, otherwise fy, = 0.

In the case of the star formation in both MUFASA and SIMBA, there is an
imposed minimum metallicity of 10-3 Zo. Additionally, a minimum gas density
for star formation of ny > 0.13 cm-° is required. Given fy, in Eq. (3.1), the star
formation rate in SIMBA is governed by a Kennicutt-Schmidt law for star formation
[44, 45]

dM, _ (oo9)fie
ae > (0.02) (3.4)

where fy, is taken per gas element and tgyn is the local dynamical time for star

formation given by

tan = =
m= JGp

where G is the gravitational constant. Once these ingredients for star formation are

(3.5)

met within a gas element, each MFM fluid element randomly spawns star particles
of virtually the same mass as the gas elements. This is attained by simultaneously
converting each gas element into collisionless star particles instead of spawning
multiple star particles from a single gas element while reducing its mass. The
latter is avoided in MUFASA and SIMBA to prevent the MFM from developing
instabilities.

The complex build-up of H2 gas in SIMBA, as prescribed by the KMT model,
and the dependence of star formation with the amount of Hz gas in the simulation,
as shown in Eq. (3.4), will prove to be of great importance later in Secs. 5.1.3
and 5.1.4 as poor prediction of a galaxy’s gas mass, specifically of the Hz gas, will

translate to poorer prediction of the star formation rate, and vice versa.

3.1.2 Black hole growth and seeding

What separates SIMBA from its predecessor MUFASA is its inclusion of black hole
growth and seeding in the simulation. In SIMBA, black hole growth is a product


3.1. Overview of SIMBA

of the combination of two accretion models around the central black hole: torque-
limited accretion from cold gas and Bondi accretion from hot gas.

The torque-limited accretion from cold gas is employed in SIMBA following Hop-
kins and Quataert [46]. The gas inflow rate M, driven by gravitational instabilities

from galactic scales to the accretion disc around the black hole is given by

8/2 (_ Mon 3 Menc(Ro) Ro \7? fo \7 -
tie went? (cos) (Aine) (sine) (+7) Moxe* Go)

with

Male)! (3.7)

fo © 0.31 f2 ( 10M
where er is the normalization factor that describes the processes that affect the
transport of gas at unresolved scales within the simulation such as nuclear star
formation and stellar feedback, fy describes the mass fraction of both stars and
gas present in the accretion disk relative to the total mass of the black hole Mtn,
Menc(Ro) is total enclosed baryonic mass within a radius Ro which includes stars
and gas, fas is the mass fraction of gas in the disc relative to Mpyn, and Ma(Ro) is
the mass of the accretion disc within Ro. Note that quantities evaluated at a radius
Ro from each black hole effectively encompasses the nearest 256 gas elements in a
simulation.
On the other hand, the Bondi-Hoyle-Lyttleton hot gas accretion model takes

the form

4nG?Me,p
(v? +02)?
where p is the mean density of hot gas, c, is the speed of sound of hot gas, and v is

Mpondi = €m (3.8)

the velocity of hot gas, all of which are calculated within the black hole accretion

kernel, the region where gas or material is being gravitationally attracted and

accreted onto the black hole. In SIMBA, the efficiency €,, is suppressed to 0.1.
The two accretion models which span the galactic scale down to the black hole

accretion disc, are numerically implemented within SIMBA as the total black hole

accretion rate given by
Men = (1 —1)(Mr + Meonas) (3.9)


3.2. SIMBA runs

where the radiative efficiency 7 is set to 0.1.

These black holes are then seeded into individual galaxies using an on-the-
fly friends-of-friends algorithm during the simulation. Black holes are seeded to
galaxies with stellar mass of M, > ‘Yon X Meeea- In SIMBA, the following values were
employed: Mecea = 104 Mo/h with h = 0.68 and yy = 3 x 10° translating to a
stellar mass threshold of around M, > 10°° Mo or logy) M, > 9.5. This relatively
high M, requirement results from the adopted FIRE simulations in SIMBA which
places black holes to high-mass galaxies as stellar feedback strongly suppresses
black hole formation in low-mass galaxies [47].

The inclusion of black hole growth and its seeding to galaxies in SIMBA later
motivates the filtering of the dataset utilized in this work which will be discussed
in Sec. 3.3 and the implementation of the machine learning models which will be
discussed in Sec. 4.2. Additionally, we will also explore the effect of black holes in
the suppression of star formation in galaxies which will be discussed in Sec. 5.2.2.

3.2 SIMBA runs

SIMBA runs assume a Planck Collaboration concordant cosmology constrained
by the following cosmological parameters: total matter (both baryonic and non-
baryonic) density 0, = 0.3, dark energy density 2, = 0.7, baryon density Q, =
0.048, Hubble’s constant Hp = 68 km s~! Mpc“, density fluctuations at 8 h~! Mpc
og = 0.82, and scalar spectral index n, = 0.97. [48]. The primary runs of SIMBA
consist of 4 runs in varying volumes: 100h-! Mpc down to z = 0, 50h7! Mpc to
z= 1, 25h7) Mpc to z = 2, and 12.5h-} Mpc to z = 5, all with 10243 dark matter
particles and 1024° gas particles. We note that the currently publicly-available
snapshots and galaxy catalogs’ are extracted from runs different from the primary
ones but yield results consistent with those presented in Ref. [11].

There are 3 publicly-available runs with different volumes: 100h-! Mpc (the
flagship run), 50h~! Mpc (the feedback variants run), and 25h7! Mpc (the high-

Inttp://simba.roe.ac.uk/


3.3. Data from SIMBA

resolution run) on a side. All the runs output 151 snapshots and catalogs from
z = 20 to z = 0. The flagship run uses 1024° particles for both DM and gas,
employing full SIMBA physics. The feedback variant, with 512° particles for both
DM and gas, explores the parameter space as it contains full SIMBA physics run,
arun without X-ray AGN feedback, a run without X-ray or jet feedback, without
AGN feedback, and a run without star formation and AGN feedback. Lastly, the
high-resolution run uses 512° particles for both DM and gas over a smaller volume.
In this work, we use the halo and galaxy catalogs from the flagship run.

Halos in the simulations are identified on the fly using 3D friends-of-friends
(FoF) algorithm within GIZMO with a linking length of 0.2 times the mean in-
terparticle spacing, without the consideration of subhalos. Galaxies are identified
using a 3D FoF galaxy finder with a linking length of 0.0056 times the mean inter-
particle spacing. This galaxy-finding method is applied to all stars, black holes, and
gas elements with densities above the minimum star formation threshold density of
ny > 0.13H atoms cm~°. Black holes and hydrogen clouds are assigned to galax-
ies to which they are most gravitationally bound. Larger galaxies can be assigned
more than one black hole, where the central black hole is taken to be the most
massive one. Galaxy and halo cross-matching is done using a YT-based PYTHON
package, CAESAR’, in post-processing which outputs an hdf5 file containing the
galaxy and halo catalogs.

3.3. Data from SIMBA

We use the SIMBA flagship run’s galaxy and halo catalogs at redshifts z = 0,1,2
corresponding to snapshot numbers 151, 105, and 78, respectively. Table 3.1 lists
the counts of halos, galaxies, central and satellite galaxies per snapshot.

For our machine learning implementation, only the central galaxies will be
included. In addition, since we are interested in predicting the galaxy’s black hole

masses, we only include galaxies with stellar mass M, = 10°° Mo or log M, > 9.5

2https: //caesar.readthedocs. io/en/latest/running. html


3.3. Data from SIMBA

Table 3.1: Raw count of halos and galaxies per snapshot of the SIMBA flagship

run

Redshift Snapshot Halos Galaxies Centrals Satellites
z=0 151 464,043 55,609 35,843 19,766
z=1 105 530,411 39,298 27,198 12,100
z=2 78 545,417 30,743 + -23,042~SSs«7,701

(as noted in Sec. 3.1.2, galaxies with lower
not assigned black holes).

stellar mass than this cut-off mas are

Because our ML models will use the most massive progenitor halo from 5 previ-

ous snapshots as features, we clean our sample by removing halos for which any of

these progenitors are larger than the halo at the present snapshot since progenitor

masses are expected to be smaller due to mergers over time. This criteria removes

< 1% of the halos.

We note that there is a one-to-one correspondence between halos and central

galaxies in our sample. Table 3.2 lists the sample count and the average halo and

stellar masses per snapshot.

Table 3.2: Summary statistics for

the sample used in this study

Redshift Snapshot Centrals

(logio My) (logo Mx)

z=0 151 13,929
z=1 105 8,295
z=2 78 4,046

11.8 9.97
12.0 10.2
12.1 10.2


Chapter 4

Machine learning framework

After processing the data from SIMBA to align with our objectives, we are now
ready to train the machine learning models to ‘learn’ how to populate galactic
dark matter halos with galaxies. In this Chapter, we discuss the machine learning
framework used in this thesis. This chapter is structured as follows: in Sec. 4.1,
we provide an overview of how the ML algorithms we will utilize, Random Forest
(RF) and Extremely Randomized Trees (ERT), work. In Sec. 4.2, we discuss how
the ML models are trained on the SIMBA data and implemented in this work.

4.1 Supervised tree-based ML algorithms

ML algorithms fed with continuous, high-dimensional data, can learn in two ways:
supervised, where the ML model tries to learn a labeled target quantity based on
a set of input features, or unsupervised, where the ML model tries to learn from
unlabeled data, identifying patterns within, such as clustering, and learning their
intrinsic relationships.

In the context of applying ML in populating DM halos with baryonic properties,
the supervised learning method is widely used. Supervised ML models, when fed
with some training data (X,y), essentially tries to learn the mapping G(X — y),
which will then be applied to previously unseen data. Within supervised ML,

there are a plethora of algorithms that have been previously used to map baryons


4.1. Supervised tree-based ML algorithms

to DM halos. These include neural networks (30, 49], k-nearest neighbour algorithm
[10, 49, 50], support vector regression algorithm (10, 50], and the most widely-used
tree-based algorithms, like random forest (RF) and eztremely randomized trees
(ERT) [9, 10, 31, 49, 51-53]. Results from these studies suggest that tree-based
algorithms like RF and especially ERT perform the best in learning the correlation
between the DM halos and the galaxies that they host.

RF and ERT, as their names suggest, are ensemble machine learning approaches
which are built by aggregating the predictions of multiple decision trees (DT), the
most basic unit of these algorithms. DT is one of the most powerful and widely-
used ML algorithm, both in classification (when predicting categorical data) and
regression (when predicting continuous data) problems.

Decision trees use a process called recursive binary splitting to construct a
‘tree’. From the ‘root’, where the entire dataset is used, it selects an input feature
and a corresponding split point that minimizes the mean squared error (MSE), or
any other custom loss function, at each node. The tree is grown recursively by
repeating this process until certain stopping criteria are met, such as a maximum
depth of the tree, a minimum number of samples required to split a node, or when
the tree reaches a leaf node with all target values being the same.

Due to the meticulous construction of a decision tree, it is usually prone to
overfitting. This happens when an ML model becomes heavily reliant on the the
data it was trained on which in turn results to poor predictive accuracy when fed
with new unseen data. There are several measures that can be done to prevent DT
from overfitting such as ‘pruning’ the ‘branches’, which is a way of removing splits
that are not very helpful in the learning process, controlling various hyperparame-
ters that controls the growth of the ‘tree’, or limiting the input data. However, one
of the most, effective ways is to use ensemble learning approaches which is basically
what RF and ERT are.

RF and ERT are two distinct tree-based ensemble learning approaches which

can be used to minimize the risk of overfitting when dealing with tree-based algo-


4.2. Machine learning set-up

rithms. The only similarities between both methods are the use of multiple decision
trees during the learning process and the minimization of the average square of the
errors in learning the mapping between the features and the target quantities.

In RF, multiple decision trees are trained via bootstrapping, wherein random
samples with replacement are drawn from the original dataset to create multiple
subsets of training data for each tree. Adding another layer of randomness, the
‘trees’ grow recursively by selecting the best feature from a randomly sampled
subset of features that maximizes information gain or minimizes impurity at each
node, until a stopping criterion is met. Once all the decision trees are trained on
the bootstrapped subsets of the training data and with random feature selection,
RF combines the predictions of all the trees to make the final prediction. The most
common approach is to take the average of the predictions from all the trees which
provides a robust and accurate prediction [54].

On the other hand, ERT ditches the bootstrapping and selects the splitting
points randomly without considering the optimal split in terms of information
gain or node impurity. This introduces further diversity among the trees in the
forest and makes ERT faster than RF [55]. In this thesis, both algorithms are
trained using data from SIMBA to learn how to populate galactic dark matter halo
with galaxies.

4.2 Machine learning set-up

The two ML algorithms are trained separately on a high-dimensional dataset from
the SIMBA hydrodynamic simulation to learn the mapping between galaxy proper-
ties and DM-halo only information. Following Agarwal et al. [10] and as motivated
by Moews et al. [31], the input fed to the machine learning algorithm is a set of
the following halo properties which encompasses physical, environmental, and his-
torical properties of a DM halo:

T= (Mu, {Mprogen,i}s {05}; Mas A, Ovel) (4.1)


4,2. Machine learning set-up

where Mj is the mass of the parent halo measured at the current snapshot, {Mprogen,i}
are the masses of the most massive progenitors from the 5 preceding snapshots,
thus considering the merger history of the halo, {p;} is the set of nearby halo
mass densities at radii r = 300, 1000, and 3000 kpc, thus taking into account the
small-scale and large-scale environment of each halo, 7, is the halo half-mass ra-
dius which provides the information about the size and extent of the halo, 2 is the
halo spin which is a measure of the angular momentum of a halo, and oy. is the
halo velocity dispersion which characterizes the statistical spread or dispersion of
velocities among dark matter particles within the halo. These chosen input halo
properties are a union of the halo properties used by previous studies [10, 31, 32].

From the halo properties, we develop separate models to predict each of the
following galaxy properties:

O = (Mx, Min, Muz, SFR, Zges, Mon) (4.2)

where M, is the stellar mass, Myy is the neutral hydrogen mass, Myo is the molec-
ular hydrogen mass, SFR is the star-formation rate, Za, is the SFR-weighted
gas-phase metallicity measured as the ratio of abundance of oxygen related to hy-
drogen [O/H] in SIMBA, and My, is the mass of the black hole at the center of the
galaxy.

The entire dataset is divided into two parts — a training set which is composed
of 75% of the entire dataset and a test set, which is completely unseen by the
model during training, composed of the remaining 25%. For both ML models, the
space of the ML hyperparameters were randomly sampled 500 times per target
attribute to give the optimal hyperparameter configuration for each models. The
hyperparameters we searched for include the number of trees n_estimators, the
maximum depth that each tree can attain max_depth, the minimum number of
samples required to split an internal node min_samples_split, and the number of
features to consider when looking for the best split max_features. We note that
for the ERT models, as discussed in Sec. 4.1, the tuned max_features is None as

it randomly chooses features from the entire dataset for splitting.


4.2. Machine learning set-up

All these ML-related configurations and tuning are carried out using the PYTHON
library SCIKIT-LEARN [56]. Specifically, the train-test_split function is used for
the splitting of the datasets into training and test sets. Note that the splitting of
the entire dataset between training and testing is done randomly, controlled by the
random.state parameter. Assigning different values to this parameter will result
to different splits. In this work, we used random_state = 0 for all ML models and
changing this didn’t dramatically affect the performance of the models (this is fur-
ther discussed in Sec. 5.1.7). The hyperparameter tuning is carried out using the
RandomizedSearchCV class. Finally, the training of the ML algorithms was done

using the built-in ExtraTreesRegressor and RandomForestRegressor classes.


Chapter 5
Machine Learning vs SIMBA

In this chapter, we present and discuss the results of applying RF and ERT models
in predicting the baryonic properties of galaxies that reside within SIMBA DM halos.
The structure of this chapter is as follows. In Sec. 5.1, the ML predictions are
compared against the underlying true SIMBA values. In Sec. 5.2, the reproduction
of various second-parameter correlations, mainly focusing on the relations around
the stellar mass and star formation rate, is tested. Lastly, in Sec. 5.3, we explore
the relative importance of the input DM halo properties in predicting the baryonic

properties of the galaxies.

5.1 Predicted galaxy properties vs SIMBA true
values

In this Section, we present how each of the predicted baryonic properties of the ML
models compares with the true values from the SIMBA hydrodynamic simulation.
After training the ML models to learn the complex relationships between DM halo
properties given in Eq. (4.1) and the baryonic properties of the galaxies they
host given in Equation (4.2), we test the accuracy of each model by essentially
comparing the predicted galaxy property with the underlying true SIMBA data
across all redshifts z = 0, 1, and 2.

For each galaxy property, we plot the relation with halo mass and compare


5.1. Predicted galaxy properties vs SIMBA true values

how well the predictions reproduce the mean relations from SIMBA. We also check
whether ML was able to reproduce the distribution of the galaxy property as a
whole by plotting a kernel density estimate (KDE) plot.

Following Ref. [10], we evaluate the goodness-of-fit of the models by calculating
the mean deviation y, rms error ¢, coefficient of determination or regression score

R?, and the Pearson correlation coefficient p for the residuals, given by

pw, 2) = ‘3 (4; — 2) (5.1)
o?(é,2) = v4 » (4: - 2)? (5.2)
R(@,2) <1 - Sp oa) (5.3)

DY (a — a)
SN (@— (@)) (ee — (2))
VEN G- MY YEP ee -

where # and z correspond to true and predicted values in log units, respectively,

plé,2) = (5.4)

(2) and (zx) corresponds to the means of the true and predicted values, respectively,
and N is the overall sample size. These model performance tests were conducted
separately for each galaxy property at all redshifts and results are presented in
Secs. 5.1.1 to 5.1.6. In the final section, Sec. 5.1.7, we summarize this set of
results and compare the ML performance across different galaxy properties. Note
that all reported metrics are for the test set which is the same set fed to all models
after training.

Listed in Table 5.1 are the reported performance metrics, R? and p, at z = 0,
for works by Kamdar et al. (2016) using the MlustrisTNG simulation [9] and Agarwal
et al. (2018) using the MUFASA simulation [10], whose approach are similar to this
work. Note that in Kamdar et al. (2016), the total gas mass Mgs. is considered,
instead of the separate masses of the neutral and molecular hydrogen gases, which
was done in Agarwal et al. (2018) and in this work. Additionally, Agarwal et al.
(2018) were not able to consider the central black hole mass due to the limitations


5.1. Predicted galaxy properties vs SIMBA true values

Table 5.1: Performance metrics reported by related works. Listed are the coef-
ficient of determination R? and Pearson correlation coefficient p for each galaxy
property.

Kamdar et al. Agarwal et al.
(2016) [9] (2018) [10]
R? p Rr p
M, | 0.91 0.95 0.90 0.95
Mees | 0.67 0.85 : :
My - - 0.35 0.59
= = 0.51 0.71
SFR | 0.63 0.79 0.55 0.74
Zees | 0.93 0.96 0.73 = (0.86
My, | 0.72 0.85 - -

of the MUFASA simulation. As concluded in both works, stellar mass M, (p ~ 0.95
for both works) and gas-phase metallicity Z,., (Kamdar et al. (2016): p ~ 0.96,
Agarwal et al. (2018): p ~ 0.86) are the most tightly predicted galaxy properties
while the star formation rate (p ~ 0.70 — 0.80 for both works) is poorly predicted.

5.1.1 Stellar mass

Table 5.2: Test performance metrics for the stellar mass M, predictions at all
redshifts and for the RF and ERT models

Redshift | # 20™*) u R p

RF ERT [RF ERT |RF ERT] RF ERT
Z=0 | 099 097} 0.13 0.13 | 087 087] 0.93 0.93
z=1 | 058 -213/020 0.20/0.78 078/088 0.89
z=2 |-1052 -12.08|025 024/076 0.76|0.87 0.87

The results, as described above, for the ML predictions of stellar mass M, from
DM halo-only information are shown in Figures 5.1 and 5.2, and Table 5.2. We
find, similar to previous work [9, 10, 32], that both RF and ERT model predictions
for M, are able to reproduce the actual values from SIMBA well on average, but


5.1. Predicted galaxy properties vs SIMBA true values

o

Figure 5.1: Stellar mass M, vs. halo mass M, relation from the RF

(upper panels) and ERT (lower panels) models for z = 0, 1, and 2 (left to
right panels). Also plotted are the actual values from SIMBA (gray dots).
Binned means from the ML models (yellow stars) and the SIMBA data

(black circles) are shown with 1o error bars.

y
V

Figure 5.2: Kernel density estimate (KDE) plots for stellar mass M, for
z=0, 1, and 2 (left to right panels). Distributions of ML predictions (RF:

red, ERT: blue) are overlaid against SIMBA true values (gray).


5.1. Predicted galaxy properties vs SIMBA true values

yield narrower distributions. Panels of Figure 5.1 show that at all epochs, both
RF and ERT models were able to reproduce the mean stellar mass to halo mass
relation of SIMBA as indicated by the overlapping circular and star markers and
their lo error bars. They also show that across all halo masses, the scatter in the
mean relation is underpredicted, as seen in the smaller 1¢ scatter in the binned
means (yellow vs. black error bars). Comparing across epochs, the predictions
match best for z = 0, with R? ~ 0.9 compared to R? ~ 0.8 for the higher redshifts;
this trend is reflected in the other metrics as well. The discrepancy may partially
be attributed to the fact that the ML models were trained with relatively smaller
number of data (see Table 3.2) at higher redshifts. We see from Figures 5.1 and
5.2 that for z = 1 and 2, there are low M, SIMBA galaxies (with M, ~ 10%5)
with parent halo masses ranging from 10!! — 10? Mo that are not seen in the
predictions. This demonstrates a limitation of a straightforward ML approach
that does not explicitly take scatter into account. More sophisticated models, such
as one recently implemented in Ref. [32], incorporated a loss function to a neural
network that enforces scatter reproduction.

As discussed in Sec. 2, HAM and HOD methods exploit the close relationship
between M, and M,, so it is not surprising that our ML models are also able to
exploit this relationship and reproduce the mean scaling relations. However, the
information from the other input features do not seem to be sufficient to capture
deviations from this mean relation and reproducing the scatter is still an open

problem as of this writing.

5.1.2 Neutral hydrogen mass

The results for the ML predictions of neutral hydrogen mass Mjy from DM halo-
only information are shown in Figures 5.3 and 5.4, and Table 5.3. The panels
of Figure 5.3 show that the scaling relation of HI mass with halo mass evolve
significantly over epochs. Driven by increased variability in evolution tracks of

galaxies, the distribution becomes broader over time, as is also seen in Figure 5.4.


5.1. Predicted galaxy properties vs SIMBA true values

a

a
t

By am

Figure 5.3: Neutral hydrogen mass Myq vs. halo mass M, relation from
the RF (upper panels) and ERT (lower panels) models for z = 0, 1, and 2
(left to right panels). Also plotted are the actual values from SIMBA (gray
dots). Binned means from the ML models (yellow stars) and the SIMBA
data (black circles) are shown with 1o error bars.

Figure 5.4: Kernel density estimate (KDE) plots for neutral hydrogen
mass Myy for z = 0, 1, and 2 (left to right panels). Distributions of ML
predictions (RF: red, ERT: blue) are overlaid against SIMBA true values
(gray).


5.1. Predicted galaxy properties vs SIMBA true values

Table 5.3: Test performance metrics for the neutral hydrogen mass Myy predic-
tions at all redshifts and for the RF and ERT models

Redshift | (10™*) a R p

RF ERT [RF ERT | RF ERT] RF ERT
Z=0 146 1.62] 0.33 033/050 0.52} 0.71 0.72
z=1 |-715 -513]0.29 029/041 042/064 0.66
z=2 |-149 —0.68| 0.23 0.23]038 041| 0.62 0.64

The ML predictions are able to reflect this trend as well, but still yield narrower

distributions in all cases.

In this case, the model performance is comparable across epochs — as reflected
in similar values of R? ~ 0.4 and p = 0.7. As in the case of M, predictions, both RF
and ERT models yield very similar results. Poor prediction of gas masses, like Myy
and Myp (discussed in the next section, Sec. 5.1.3), has been a common problem
reported by previous studies [9, 10]. Gas masses are very sensitive to small-scale
fluctuations happening within the galaxy brought upon by rapidly varying bary-
onic processes like radiative cooling, feedback, and gas recycling. These processes
are not essentially captured by the DM halo features that we used in training
the ML models, which resulted to the poor performance of ML in predicting this
baryonic information. More sophisticated models, such as physics-informed neural
networks (PINNs) [32] and hybrid approaches [31] are being developed to address
this limitation of the standard ML approach.

5.1.3. Molecular hydrogen mass

Results for the ML predictions of molecular hydrogen mass (My2) from DM halo-
only information are shown in Figures 5.5 and 5.6, and Table 5.4. These results
are qualitatively similar to what we found for Myq, as discussed in the previous
section, Sec. 5.1.2. Quantitatively, the performance metrics are relatively worse,
with R? ~ 0.4 and p ~ 0.6 across all epochs. This shows that ML was unable
to capture the complex H>-based star formation of SIMBA. It is also worth noting


5.1. Predicted galaxy properties vs SIMBA true values

See

Figure 5.5: Molecular hydrogen mass My2 vs. halo mass Mj relation
from the RF (upper panels) and ERT (lower panels) models for z = 0, 1,
and 2 (left to right panels). Also plotted are the actual values from SIMBA
(gray dots). Binned means from the ML models (yellow stars) and the
SIMBA data (black circles) are shown with lo error bars.

Figure 5.6: Kernel density estimate (KDE) plots for molecular hydrogen
mass My for z = 0, 1, and 2 (left to right panels). Distributions of ML
predictions (RF: red, ERT: blue) are overlaid against SIMBA true values
(gray).


5.1. Predicted galaxy properties vs SIMBA true values

Table 5.4: Test performance metrics for the molecular hydrogen mass Myo pre-
dictions at all redshifts and for the RF and ERT models

Redshift | #20™*) Yu R p

RF ERT | RF ERT [RF ERT | RF ERT
z=0 | —03¢ —1.08] 036 0.36)042 041] 0.65 0.66
z=1 | -13.05 -10.79|034 033/043 0.43] 0.65 0.66
z=2 | -119 —161|0.30 0.30|042 043/065 0.66

that the similarity in R? and p values with increasing redshift suggests that ML,
in general, struggles to predict My2 when fed with DM halo-only information,

regardless of the number of data used in training.

5.1.4 Star formation rate

Table 5.5: Test performance metrics for the star formation rate (SFR) predictions
at all redshifts and for the RF and ERT models

Redshift | # 20°) Y R p
RF ERT [RF ERT | RF ERT [RF ERT
z=0 | -110 413/054 0541034 0.34] 058 0.59
z=1 |-1733 -1380}059 0.57|029 032/054 0.57
z=2 737 10.66|051 050/026 0.28|0.51 0.53

Results for the ML predictions of star formation rate (SFR) from DM halo-only
information are shown in Figures 5.7 and 5.8, and Table 5.5. As discussed in Sec.
3.1.1, the primary drivers of star formation in SIMBA galaxies is the molecular gas
mass, as specified in Eq. (3.4). Therefore, it is not surprising that ML predictions
for SFR perform comparably as for My2, namely with R? ~ 0.3 and p ~ 0.5 — 0.6
across epochs. The qualitative trends are the same as for My, and My as well
— the predictions reflect the trend of broader distributions at lower z, but fail to
match the full scatter. In particular, for SFR, there is a clear bimodal distribution
for z = 1 (middle panel of Figure 5.8), while the predicted distribution is narrowly
single-peaked.


5.1. Predicted galaxy properties vs SIMBA true values

ine io.

a]

Figure 5.7: Star formation rate (SFR) vs. halo mass M, relation from
the RF (upper panels) and ERT (lower panels) models for z = 0, 1, and 2
(left to right panels). Also plotted are the actual values from SIMBA (gray
dots). Binned means from the ML models (yellow stars) and the SIMBA
data (black circles) are shown with lo error bars.

|
Ae _.

Figure 5.8: Kernel density estimate (KDE) plots for star formation rate
(SFR) for z = 0, 1, and 2 (left to right panels). Distributions of ML
predictions (RF: red, ERT: blue) are overlaid against SIMBA true values
(gray).


5.1. Predicted galaxy properties vs SIMBA true values

We note, though, that despite the shortcomings of the predictions in reproduc-
ing the distributions in SFR and gas masses separately — they are able to capture
the second-parameter correlation, that is the correlation between scatter in the
gas content, gas-phase metallicity, and SFR observed in SIMBA galaxies as well as
observed galaxies. This will be discussed in detail later in Sec. 5.2.

5.1.5 Gas-phase metallicity

Table 5.6: Test performance metrics for the gas-phase metallicity Za, predictions
at all redshifts and for the RF and ERT models

Redshift | # 10°) a R p

RF ERT [RF ERT | RF ERT | RF ERT
Z=0 110 1.64] 0.13 0.13] 0.65 0.67} 0.81 0.82
z=1 668 6.951020 020/061 0.63|0.79 0.80
z=2 |-5.09 -387|0.22 0.21|046 0.48 | 0.68 0.69

Results for the ML predictions of Zga; from DM halo-only information are
shown in Figures 5.9 and 5.10, and Table 5.6. Panels of Figure 5.9 show how
the distribution of Z,s, evolved across epochs as galaxies follow different evolution
tracks. At z = 0, there are 2 distinct clumps: one at low M, centered around
log Zgos * —2.1 and another stretching across higher M, 2 10)? Mg with log Zgas
centered around -1.6. This translates to a bimodal distribution seen in the left panel
of Figure 5.10. The predictions remarkably reproduced the two-peaked distribution
though similarly to previous results, it yields narrower distributions for both peaks.
The results are qualitatively similar for z = 1 and 2, as shown in the remaining
panels of Figures 5.9 and 5.10 with a trend of worsening performance at higher
redshift (as reflected in the metrics of Table 5.6 as well).

Overall, the model performance falls somewhere between that for M, and the
gas content masses, with R? ~ 0.5—0.6 and p ~ 0.7 —0.8. This has been observed
in previous work [9, 10] as well and attributed to the fact that similar to M,,

Zgos is an accumulated quantity, albeit with a more complex evolution governed


5.1. Predicted galaxy properties vs SIMBA true values

Figure 5.9: Gas-phase metallicity Zgas vs. halo mass M, relation from
the RF (upper panels) and ERT (lower panels) models for z = 0, 1, and 2
(left to right panels). Also plotted are the actual values from SIMBA (gray
dots). Binned means from the ML models (yellow stars) and the SIMBA
data (black circles) are shown with 1o error bars.

Figure 5.10: Kernel density estimate (KDE) plots for gas-phase metal-
licity Zgas for z = 0, 1, and 2 (left to right panels). Distributions of ML
predictions (RF: red, ERT: blue) are overlaid against SIMBA true values
(gray).

5.1. Predicted galaxy properties vs SIMBA true values

by a somewhat subtle competition between gas inflows, gas outflows, and metal
enrichment. For the observed correlation in scatter between Z,,, and SFR — also
teferred to as the fundamental metallicity relation (FMR), refer to the discussion
in Sec. 5.2.1.

5.1.6 Black hole mass

Table 5.7: Test performance metrics for the black hole mass Mpp predictions at
all redshifts and for the RF and ERT models

Redshift | #(20~*) G R P
[RF ERT | RF_ERT [RF ERT | RF ERT
Z=0 7840.39] 041 0.40] 0.59 0.6010.77 0.78
Aol 703 7.80) 0.59 058/050 0511071 0.71
z=2 —37.77 —43.76| 0.71 0.70) 0.49 0.50}0.70 0.71

Results for the ML predictions of Myn from DM halo-only information are
shown in Figures 5.11 and 5.12, and Table 5.7. Panels of Figures 5.11 and 5.12 show
the evolution of the distribution of Mp across epochs. In this case, the distribution
grows narrower over time for the SIMBA galaxies (gray dots in Figure 5.11 and gray
curves in Figure 5.12), and the predictions do not reflect the trend (red/blue dots
in 5.11 and red/blue curves in Figure 5.12), severely underpredicting the scatter
for z = 2.

At all redshifts, there is a trend in residuals — with overprediction of Mpn at
low masses (Mbp < 10” Mg) and underprediction at higher masses. The mismatch
worsens with higher redshift, as reflected in the values of the mean deviation y, and
mms error o.

Despite this, the mean trends are matched well (black circles and yellow stars
in Figure 5.11. The models yield R? ~ 0.5—0.6 and p ~ 0.7—0.8, comparable with
models for Zges. We also note that the Mp, predictions capture second-parameter
correlations with stellar mass and SFR. This will be discussed in detail in Sec.
5.2.2.


5.1. Predicted galaxy properties vs SIMBA true values

Figure 5.11: Black hole mass Mj, vs. halo mass M, relation from the
RF (upper panels) and ERT (lower panels) models for z = 0, 1, and 2
(left to right panels). Also plotted are the actual values from SIMBA (gray
dots). Binned means from the ML models (yellow stars) and the SIMBA
data (black circles) are shown with 1¢ error bars.

Figure 5.12: Kernel density estimate (KDE) plots for black hole mass
My, for z = 0, 1, and 2 (left to right panels). Distributions of ML predic-
tions (RF: red, ERT: blue) are overlaid against SIMBA true values (gray).


5.1. Predicted galaxy properties vs SIMBA true values

5.1.7 Summary

Table 5.8: Performance metrics of the ERT models for different galaxy properties
for z = 0,1, and 2.

M, | 0.87 0.93 | 0.78 0.89 | 0.76 0.87
My | 0.52 0.72 | 0.42 0.66 | 0.41 0.64
My | 0.44 0.66 | 0.43 0.66 | 0.43 0.66
SFR | 0.34 0.59 | 0.32 0.57 | 0.28 0.53
Zgos | 0.67 0.82 | 0.63 0.80] 0.48 0.69
My, | 0.60 0.78 | 0.51 0.71 | 0.50 0.71

Table 5.8 summarizes the performance metrics for different galaxy properties
reported in Secs. 5.1.1 to 5.1.6. Here, we only show the ERT model results for R?
and correlation coefficient p. Consistent with results from previous work 9, 10], the
models performed best in predicting M,, followed by Zzas, and M,,. The models
poorly performed most in predicting gas masses My and Myp, as well as SFR which
is mainly driven by H2 gas. For all galaxy properties, the models yield narrower
distributions compared to SIMBA, which motivate modifications that would enforce
the reproduction of scatter, as attempted in Ref. [32].

As a sanity check, we trained and tested all the models at z = 0 with vary-
ing train-test splits by changing the value of the random_state parameter (see
Sec. 4.2) to 69 and 134. We note that these changes yield minimal variation in the
performance metrics as listed in Table 5.9.


5.2. Consistency with second parameter correlations

Table 5.9: Performance metrics of the ERT models fed with different train-test
splits controlled by varying the random_state parameter.

random_state = 0 | random_state = 69 | random_state = 134
R? p R p R? p

M, | 0.87 0.93 0.87 0.93 0.87 0.93

My | 0.52 0.72 0.52 0.72 0.53 0.73

My | 0.44 0.66 0.40 0.63 0.43 0.66

SFR | 0.34 0.59 0.35 0.60 0.34 0.60

Zeas | 0.67 0.82 0.67 0.82 0.67 0.82

Mpn | 0.60 0.78 0.61 0.78 0.61 0.78

5.2 Consistency with second parameter correla-
tions

In this section, we present how the ML model predictions quantitatively recover
second-parameter trends in galaxy properties. Specifically, in Sec. 5.2.1, we present
the trend that galaxies with higher gas content and lower metallicity have high SFR
at a given M,, also known as the fundamental metallicity relation. In Sec. 5.2.2,
we present the trend that galaxies that host more massive central black holes have

lower SFR at a given M,, and other trends involving Mpn.

5.2.1 Fundamental metallicity relation

In theory, the heavy inflow of metal-free gases, primarily due to mergers which
are abundant at higher redshifts, drives star formation while heavy outflows of
metal-rich materials due to processes like supernovae explosions and AGN feedback
directly suppresses star formation and greatly affects the stellar mass of galaxies,
especially at the present time. This suggests that there is a tight correlation
between the stellar mass, star formation rate, and metallicity of galaxies. This
relation has been observed, both observationally for local galaxies [59, 60] and via

simulations at the present time to z = 3 [61], and is commonly referred to as the


5.2. Consistency with second parameter correlations

we e THe 7
5 a Pere By |
a : Sree |

Figure 5.13: The fundamental metallicity relation (FMR) at z = 0 from
both ML models (left panel: RF, right panel: ERT). From top to bottom:
neutral hydrogen mass fraction fj, molecular hydrogen mass fraction fy,
and gas-phase metallicity Z,,,. Galaxies are color-coded by their distance
from the mean sSFR—M, relation. Mean scaling relations are shown for
SIMBA and ML predictions (green and blue dashed-dotted curves, respec-
tively). Also, overlaid are data from observations from Catinella et al.
(2012) [57] and Saintonge et al. (2017) [58] shown as circle and triangle
markers, respectively.

fundamental metallicity relation (FMR) [62].

The primary idea of FMR is that, as a function of stellar mass, galaxies with
suppressed star formation (quenched galaxies) typically have higher than average
gas-phase metallicity. This extends to the idea that actively star-forming galaxies
host a significant fraction of neutral and molecular hydrogen masses [57, 58].

In Figures 5.13 and 5.14, we show that the ML predictions were able to repro-
duce these second-parameter trends around the stellar mass M, of SIMBA galaxies
at redshifts z = 0 and 1, respectively. The results for both ML models are shown,
where the plots at the left panel are for RF predictions and plots at the right panel
are for the ERT predictions. Both ML models show similar scatter and accurately

reproduce the mean scaling relations, shown as green dashed-dotted lines for SIMBA


5.2. Consistency with second parameter correlations

Figure 5.14: Same as in Figure 5.13 but for galaxies at z = 1

and blue dashed-dotted lines for ML. Galaxies are color-coded according to their
distance from the mean sSFR—M, relation where the specific star formation rate
(sSFR) is given by
SFR
sSFR = Mi (5.5)

Bluer galaxies correspond to actively star-forming ones while redder galaxies cor-

responds to quenched ones. Without any baryonic input and without prior knowl-
edge about FMR, ML was able to recover that as a function of M,, star formation
has positive correlation with gas mass and negative correlation with metallicity.
Compared to the FMR from SIMBA galaxies (Figures 8 and 9 of Ref. [11]), the
predictions show a cleaner separation between actively star-forming and quenched
galaxies, which is consistent with the narrower distributions in galaxy properties
from the ML predictions, as shown in Sec. 5.1. It is also shown that the trend
produced by both ML models is consistent with the observations by Catinella et
al. (2012) for the fax — M, relation [57] and by Saintonge et al. (2017) fu — Mx
relation [58] at z = 0.

Finally, we note that the FMR is also reproduced at z = 2 but is less evident


5.2. Consistency with second parameter correlations

due to fewer number of data points.

5.2.2 Black hole - stellar mass relation and quenching

Observations have shown that the mass of supermassive black holes (SMBH) re-
siding within galaxies are strongly correlated with various galaxy properties like
the stellar mass [63], the stellar bulge mass [64], and the stellar velocity dispersion
[65, 66]. An indicator of a physically accurate hydrodynamic simulation is the re-
production of these observed correlations. Separate studies have shown that SIMBA
was able to accurately predict these observed trends [11, 67, 68]. Here, we explore
whether the ML predictions are able to quantitatively reproduce the SMBH-galaxy
relations found in SIMBA.

Figure 5.15: The stellar mass - supermassive black hole mass (M, — Mbn)
relations at z = 0 for SIMBA (left panel) and ML (middle panel: RF,
tight panel: ERT). Galaxies are color-coded by their specific star-formation
rate (sSFR). Mean scaling relations are shown as dashed-dotted lines for
SIMBA and ML (blue dashed curves). Also overlaid are results of the
M, — My relation from observations from Kormendy & Ho (2013) for
bulge-dominated systems [69] and Bentz et al. (2018) for spiral, star-
forming systems [70], as dashed-dotted and dotted lines, respectively.

Figure 5.15 shows the My, — M, relation from SIMBA (left panel) and the ML
predictions (middle panel: RF, right panel: ERT) is shown in Figure 5.15. Galaxies

are color-coded according to their specific star formation rate (sSFR) equal to


5.2. Consistency with second parameter correlations

Figure 5.16: The sSFR - M, relations at z = 0 for SIMBA (left panel) and
both ML models (middle panel: RF, right panel: ERT). Galaxies are color-
coded according to the ratio of their central black hole mass and stellar
mass, M,,/M,. Mean scaling relations are shown as blue dashed-dotted
lines. The horizontal line at log,, sSFR = —11 indicate the reference value
separating quenched and actively star-forming galaxies.

SFR/M,. Bluer galaxies are actively star forming while redder ones are quenched.
Mean scaling relations are plotted as blue dashed-dotted lines. As shown, both
ML models were able to reproduce the mean relations but failed to replicate the
scatter. Also, overlaid are the M, — My relation from observations by Kormendy
& Ho (2013) for bulge-dominated galaxies which are essentially quenched systems
[69], shown as dashed-dotted lines, and by Bentz et al. (2018) for late-type, star-
forming galaxies [70], shown as dotted lines. SIMBA and both ML models were able
to reproduce the trend observed by Kormendy & Ho (2013) on quenched systems.
Furthermore, we note that while the SIMBA galaxies reported in Ref. [11] populate
the region indicated by the trend observed by Bentz et al. (2018) (shown as dotted
lines) for star-forming galaxies (see their Figure 13), there is a scarcity of these
galaxies in our sample (in both training and testing sets). Explaining this difference
will need further investigation, but we note that this may be attributed to the fact
that the publicly-available catalog of SIMBA used in this work came from a more
recent run than the initial runs used in Ref. [11] (as discussed in Secs. 3.2 and 3.3).

Interestingly, ML was able to recover the quenching (log sSFR < —11) of galax-


5.2. Consistency with second parameter correlations

Figure 5.17: The supermassive black hole mass - neutral hydrogen frac-
tion (My, — fu) relations at z = 0 for SIMBA (left panel) and both ML
models (middle panel: RF, right panel: ERT). Galaxies are color-coded by
their specific star-formation rate (sSFR). Mean scaling relations are shown
as dashed-dotted lines (blue curves).

ies that host high-mass BHs (log Mpn > 8.0 ), albeit not producing the lowest sSFR
galaxies found in SIMBA (red dots in the left panel are yellow to orange dots in the
middle and right panels). Another view of this is through the sSFR—M, relations,
shown in Figure 5.16. Galaxies are color-coded by Mpn/M,; bluer galaxies host
low-mass BHs while redder galaxies host more massive BHs relative to their stellar
mass. Supporting the results presented in Figure 5.15, galaxies with massive BHs
tend to have suppressed star formation (log;) sSFR < —11) while galaxies with
low-mass BHs tend to be actively star forming.

Additionally, motivated by the results from Ref. [68], we show that both ML
models are able to accurately recover the Mp, — fin relation from SIMBA in Fig-
ure 5.17. Here, galaxies are color-coded according to their sSFR and the mean
scaling relations are plotted as dashed-dotted lines. We find that both ML models
were able to replicate the observed relation between Mpn and fin, that is, galaxies
with low neutral hydrogen fraction tends to host massive BHs and typically have

suppressed star formation.


5.3. Relative importance of halo properties

5.3 Relative importance of halo properties

During training of RF and ERT models, input features are typically scored accord-
ing to the frequency or proportion of times it is used for splitting across all the
trees in the ensemble. Input features that are used more frequently for splitting,
are considered more important, as they contribute more to the overall predictive
performance of the model. In this Section, we report the relative importances of
the host halo properties used in predicting baryonic galaxy properties.

Shown in Figures 5.18 to 5.20 are heatmaps showing the relative feature impor-
tance for the RF and ERT models (left and right panels, respectively) for z = 0,
1, and 2. Rows show the halo properties used as features. Columns correspond to
the different predicted galaxy properties. We note that the values are normalized
using min-max normalization so that at each column, the minimum value is 0 and
the maximum value is 1, which clearly shows the most and least important halo
property.

There are considerable differences between the two models, indicating that they
leveraged different combinations of features to predict the same galaxy property.
Here, we note the features deemed important by both models, which serves as an
indication that they contain relevant information for the galaxy property being
predicted.

As shown in Figure 5.18, at z = 0, for predicting M,, both RF and ERT models
heavily utilized the primary halo mass, M, and the halo velocity dispersion, 7 —
“discovering” the tight relation leveraged by SHAM methods which rank halos by
either M, or o to assign galaxies according to their stellar mass or luminosity. In
predicting Min, Muz, SFR, and Zges, both models gave significant amount of im-
portance to the halo spin parameter A. This is in contrast to the findings reported
by Agarwal et al. (2018) [10] that the spin parameter was not an important feature
in their models. The difference may stem from the fact that they report results
for the combination of all galaxy properties. This result is not surprising, however,
as based on simple galaxy formation models, high-spin halos are expected to host


5.3. Relative importance of halo properties

Figure 5.18: Heatmap showing the relative importances of features
(rows) used by the RF (left) and ERT (right) models at z = 0 across
different predicted galaxy properties (columns).

star-forming disk galaxies (with high gas content and SFR and low metallicities)
while low-spin halos would host massive elliptical galaxies (with low gas content
and SFR and high metallicities).

Perhaps the most interesting result is that both models utilized the nearby halo
mass densities around a 300-kpc radius when predicting the molecular hydrogen
mass Myo. As the star formation process in SIMBA, and in the real Universe in
general, heavily relies on Ho, it would be interesting to investigate further the
dependence of Myz2 on the halo environment. This may be related to the ram

pressure stripping of gas off of galaxies, which arises due to the motion of a galaxy


5.3. Relative importance of halo properties

Figure 5.19: Heatmap showing the relative importances of features
(rows) used by the RF (left) and ERT (right) models at z = 1 across
different predicted galaxy properties (columns).

through the intracluster medium (ICM), the heated gas between cluster environ-
ments. Since both dark matter and gas particles are co-evolved ab initio in a
cosmological hydrodynamic simulation, the overall density of an ICM, may be af-
fected by the density of the DM halo cluster that hosts it. Specifically, the higher
the density of the ICM in a galaxy cluster where a galaxy is moving, the greater
the ram pressure it experiences, which in turn strips gas off of it.

Finally, for predicting My, the primary halo mass M, is found to be an impor-
tant feature by both RF and ERT. As discussed earlier in Sec. 5.2.2, more massive

black holes are found in more massive galaxies and these galaxies are hosted in


5.3. Relative importance of halo properties

Figure 5.20: Heatmap showing the relative importances of features
(rows) used by the RF (left) and ERT (right) models at z = 2 across
different predicted galaxy properties (columns).

more massive halos, which is exploited by the ML models.

At z = 1, as shown in Figure 5.19, both models once again utilized the halo
velocity dispersion 7, and the primary halo mass My, though to a lesser degree,
in predicting M,. In predicting My and SFR at this redshift, both models gave
significant amount of importance to the halo spin parameter , similar to one at
z=0. Interestingly, both ML models heavily utilized the nearby halo mass density
within the 300-kpc radius in predicting My, My2, SFR, and Z,a. This may be
related to the prevalence of galaxies being stripped off of gas content due to ram
pressure stripping at this redshift.

AT

5.3. Relative importance of halo properties

Finally, at z = 2, as shown in Figure 5.20, both ML models agree that M, is
best predicted using the halo half mass radius 7, and the halo velocity dispersion a.
Interestingly, both models gave importance to r, when predicting Zgas and Mpn. It
would be interesting to investigate further the dependence on ry of both M,, Zges,
and Mbpn, which may be related to the central density of halos and the galaxies
that they host. Additionally, for both RF and ERT, the halo spin parameter
X remains to be an important feature when predicting My2 and SFR while in
predicting Myy, the nearby halo mass density is the primary feature utilized. This
may still be related to the ram pressure stripping of gas content, like HI gas which
is more abundant at higher redshifts, off of galaxies brought by interacting with a
high-density medium. It would be interesting to explore this stripping process on
galaxies at higher redshifts.


Chapter 6

Conclusions and
Recommendations

In this work, we have investigated the capability of various machine learning (ML)
algorithms in populating galactic dark matter halos with galaxies. We train Ran-
dom Forest (RF) and Extremely Randomized Trees (ERT) models on halo and
galaxy catalogs from the state-of-the-art SIMBA hydrodynamic simulations using
only DM halo properties as features and test how well they are able to reproduce
observed properties of SIMBA galaxies for 3 epochs, z = 0, 1, and 2.

Consistent with previous work, the ML predictions were able to reproduce the
mean scaling relations with halo mass but fail to reproduce the scatter around these
mean relations, consistently yielding narrower distributions. They were also able to
reproduce second-parameter correlations, specifically the fundamental metallicity
relation (FMR) and the quenching of galaxies hosting more massive central black
holes.

Additionally, we found that the ML models, despite having different feature
selection approaches during training, consistently ranked as high importance cer-
tain host halo properties in predicting specific galaxy properties, which can provide
insights to processes that drive the galaxy-halo connection. One of the interesting
findings is the utilization of the nearby halo mass density around a 300-kpc radius
by both models when predicting the molecular hydrogen mass My which might


be related to the ram pressure stripping of gas off of galaxies when moving through
a high-density medium.

Developing ML models reinforced with information about the physics of galaxy
formation, like the physics-informed neural networks (PINNs) and imposing scat-
ter reproduction by incorporating a custom loss function to the model, as recently
employed in [32], is a step towards overcoming the limitations of standard ML
approach demonstrated here. Achieving the goal of accurately matching baryon
properties towards realistic cosmological galaxy catalogs is an active area of re-
search.

For future work, it may be interesting to explore the possibility of utilizing
transformer models, which have been very successful in generative artificial intel-

ligence (AI) applications, towards addressing this challenge.


Bibliography

[7]

C. S. Frenk and S. D. M. White, “Dark matter and cosmic structure,” Annalen
der Physik 524, 507-534 (2012).

A. Vale and J. P. Ostriker, “Linking halo mass to galaxy luminosity,” Monthly
Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society 353, 189-200 (2004).

A. A. Berlind and D. H. Weinberg, “The Halo Occupation Distribution: To-
ward an Empirical Determination of the Relation between Galaxies and Mass,”
The Astrophysical Journal 575, 587-616 (2002).

S. D. M. White and C. S. Frenk, “Galaxy Formation through Hierarchical
Clustering,” The Astrophysical Journal 379, 52 (1991).

R. S. Somerville and R. Davé, “Physical Models of Galaxy Formation in a
Cosmological Framework,” Annual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics
53, 51-113 (2015).

P. Re Fiorentin, C. A. L. Bailer-Jones, Y. S. Lee, T. C. Beers, T. Sivarani,
R. Wilhelm, C. Allende Prieto, and J. E. Norris, “Estimation of stellar atmo-
spheric parameters from SDSS/SEGUE spectra,” Astronomy & Astrophysics
467, 1373-1387 (2007).

M. Carrasco Kind and R. J. Brunner, “TPZ: photometric redshift PDFs and
ancillary information by using prediction trees and random forests,” Monthly
Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society 432, 1483-1501 (2013).


Bibliography

ipa


13)


15)

16)

A. D’Isanto and K. L. Polsterer, “Photometric redshift estimation via deep
learning. Generalized and pre-classification-less, image based, fully probabilis-
tic redshifts,” Astronomy & Astrophysics 609, A111 (2018).

H. M. Kamdar, M. J. Turk, and R. J. Brunner, “Machine learning and cos-
mological simulations - I]. Hydrodynamical simulations,” Monthly Notices of
the Royal Astronomical Society 457, 1162-1179 (2016).

S. Agarwal, R. Davé, and B. A. Bassett, “Painting galaxies into dark matter
haloes using machine learning,” Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical
Society 478, 3410-3422 (2018).

R. Davé, D. Anglés-Alcdzar, D. Narayanan, Q. Li, M. H. Rafieferantsoa, and
S. Appleby, “SIMBA: Cosmological simulations with black hole growth and
feedback,” Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society 486, 2827—
2849 (2019).

A. V. Kravtsov, A. A. Berlind, R. H. Wechsler, A. A. Klypin, S. Gottlober,
B. Allgood, and J. R. Primack, “The Dark Side of the Halo Occupation Dis-
tribution,” The Astrophysical Journal 609, 35-49 (2004).

C. Conroy, R. H. Wechsler, and A. V. Kravtsov, “Modeling luminosity-
dependent galaxy clustering through cosmic time,” The Astrophysical Journal
647, 201 (2006).

A. Klypin, F. Prada, G. Yepes, S. He8, and S. Gottléber, “Halo abundance
matching: accuracy and conditions for numerical convergence,” Monthly No-
tices of the Royal Astronomical Society 447, 3693-3707 (2015).

A. P. Hearin and D. F. Watson, “The dark side of galaxy colour,” Monthly
Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society 435, 1313-1324 (2013).

A. Leauthaud et al., “New Constraints on the Evolution of the Stellar-to-dark

Matter Connection: A Combined Analysis of Galaxy-Galaxy Lensing, Clus-


Bibliography


18)

19)

[20

[21

[22]

[23]

[24]

tering, and Stellar Mass Functions from z = 0.2 to z =1,” The Astrophysical
Journal 744, 159 (2012).

A. Cooray, “Halo model at its best: constraints on conditional luminosity
functions from measured galaxy statistics,” Monthly Notices of the Royal
Astronomical Society 365, 842-866 (2006).

X. Yang, H. J. Mo, and F. C. van den Bosch, “Galaxy Groups in the SDSS
DR4. III. The Luminosity and Stellar Mass Functions,” The Astrophysical
Journal 695, 900-916 (2009).

G. Kauffmann, S. D. M. White, and B. Guiderdoni, “The formation and
evolution of galaxies within merging dark matter haloes.,” Monthly Notices
of the Royal Astronomical Society 264, 201-218 (1993).

C. M. Baugh, “A primer on hierarchical galaxy formation: the semi-analytical
approach,” Reports on Progress in Physics 69, 3101-3156 (2006).

B. M. B. Henriques, P. A. Thomas, S. Oliver, and I. Roseboom, “Monte
Carlo Markov Chain parameter estimation in semi-analytic models of galaxy
formation,” Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society 396, 535-547
(2009).

M. Hirschmann, K. Dolag, A. Saro, L. Bachmann, S. Borgani, and A. Burkert,
“Cosmological simulations of black hole growth: AGN luminosities and down-
sizing,” Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society 442, 2304-2324
(2014).

R.-S. Remus, K. Dolag, and T. L. Hoffmann, “The Outer Halos of Very Mas-
sive Galaxies: BCGs and their DSC in the Magneticum Simulations,” Galaxies
5, 49 (2017).

Y. Dubois et al., “Dancing in the dark: galactic properties trace spin swings


Bibliography

{25}


27]

[28

[29

[30]

(3

along the cosmic web,” Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society
444, 1453-1468 (2014).

S. Peirani, Y. Dubois, M. Volonteri, J. Devriendt, K. Bundy, J. Silk, C. Pi-
chon, S. Kaviraj, R. Gavazzi, and M. Habouzit, “Density profile of dark matter
haloes and galaxies in the horizon—agn simulation: the impact of AGN feed-
back,” Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society 472, 2153-2169
(2017).

V. Springel et al., “First results from the IllustrisTNG simulations: matter
and galaxy clustering,” Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society
475, 676-698 (2018).

P. Torrey et al., “The evolution of the mass-metallicity relation and its scatter
in IllustrisTNG,” Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society 484,
5587-5607 (2019).

L. Lucie-Smith, H. V. Peiris, A. Pontzen, and M. Lochner, “Machine learning
cosmological structure formation,” Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical
Society 479, 3405-3414 (2018).

M. Mustafa, D. Bard, W. Bhimji, Z. Lukié, R. Al-Rfou, and J. M. Kratochvil,
“CosmoGAN: creating high-fidelity weak lensing convergence maps using Gen-
erative Adversarial Networks,” Computational Astrophysics and Cosmology
6, 1 (2019).

R. Stiskalek, D. J. Bartlett, H. Desmond, and D. Anbajagane, “The scatter
in the galaxy-halo connection: a machine learning analysis,” Monthly Notices
of the Royal Astronomical Society 514, 4026-4045 (2022).

B. Moews, R. Davé, S. Mitra, S. Hassan, and W. Cui, “Hybrid analytic and
machine-learned baryonic property insertion into galactic dark matter haloes,”
Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society 504, 4024-4038 (2021).


Bibliography


33]

34)

35)



[38]

[39]

Z. Dai, B. Moews, R. Vilalta, and R. Dave, “Physics-informed neural networks
in the recreation of hydrodynamic simulations from dark matter,” arXiv e-
prints p. arXiv:2303.14090 (2023).

R. Davé, R. Thompson, and P. F. Hopkins, “MUFASA: galaxy formation
simulations with meshless hydrodynamics,” Monthly Notices of the Royal As-
tronomical Society 462, 3265-3284 (2016).

P. F. Hopkins, “A new class of accurate, mesh-free hydrodynamic simulation
methods,” Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society 450, 53-110
(2015).

P. F. Hopkins, “A New Public Release of the GIZMO Code,” arXiv e-prints
p. arXiv:1712.01294 (2017).

B. D. Smith et al., “GRACKLE: a chemistry and cooling library for astro-
physics,” Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society 466, 2217-2234
(2017).

A. L. Muratov, D. Kere3, C.-A. Faucher-Giguére, P. F. Hopkins, E. Quataert,
and N. Murray, “Gusty, gaseous flows of FIRE: galactic winds in cosmologi-
cal simulations with explicit stellar feedback,” Monthly Notices of the Royal
Astronomical Society 454, 2691-2713 (2015).

D. Anglés-Alcdzar, C.-A. Faucher-Giguére, D. Kere3, P. F. Hopkins, E.
Quataert, and N. Murray, “The cosmic baryon cycle and galaxy mass as-
sembly in the FIRE simulations,” Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical
Society 470, 4698-4719 (2017).

D. Anglés-Alcézar, R. Davé, C.-A. Faucher-Gigueére, F. Ozel, and P. F. Hop-
kins, “Gravitational torque-driven black hole growth and feedback in cosmo-
logical simulations,” Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society 464,
2840-2853 (2017).


Bibliography

[40]

[41]



45,


47,

[48]

T. M. Heckman and P. N. Best, “The Coevolution of Galaxies and Super-
massive Black Holes: Insights from Surveys of the Contemporary Universe,”

Annual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics 52, 589-660 (2014).

E. Choi, J. P. Ostriker, T. Naab, and P. H. Johansson, “Radiative and
momentum-based mechanical active galactic nucleus feedback in a three-
dimensional galaxy evolution code,” The Astrophysical Journal 754, 125
(2012).

R. McKinnon, P. Torrey, M. Vogelsberger, C. C. Hayward, and F. Marinacci,
“Simulating the dust content of galaxies: successes and failures,” Monthly
Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society 468, 1505-1521 (2017).

M. R. Krumholz, C. F. McKee, and J. Twmlinson, “The Atomic-to-Molecular
Transition in Galaxies. II: H I and Hz Column Densities,” The Astrophysical
Journal 693, 216-235 (2009).

M. Schmidt, “The Rate of Star Formation.,” The Astrophysical Journal 129,
243 (1959).

J. Kennicutt, Robert C., “The Global Schmidt Law in Star-forming Galaxies,”
The Astrophysical Journal 498, 541-552 (1998).

P. F. Hopkins and E. Quataert, “An analytic model of angular momentum
transport by gravitational torques: from galaxies to massive black holes,”
Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society 415, 1027-1050 (2011).

D. Anglés-Alcézar, C.-A. Faucher-Giguére, E. Quataert, P. F. Hopkins, R.
Feldmann, P. Torrey, A. Wetzel, and D. KereS, “Black holes on FIRE: stellar
feedback limits early feeding of galactic nuclei,” Monthly Notices of the Royal
Astronomical Society 472, L109-L114 (2017).

Planck Collaboration et al., “Planck 2015 results. XIII. Cosmological param-
eters,” Astronomy & Astrophysics 594, A13 (2016).


Bibliography

[49]

[50]

[51]

[52]

53]


55)

[56

57,

N. S. M. de Santi, N. V. N. Rodrigues, A. D. Montero-Dorta, L. R. Abramo,
B. Tucci, and M. C. Artale, “Mimicking the halo-galaxy connection using
machine learning,” Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society 514,
2463-2478 (2022).

X. Xu, S. Ho, H. Trac, J. Schneider, B. Poczos, and M. Ntampaka, “A First
Look at Creating Mock Catalogs with Machine Learning Techniques,” The
Astrophysical Journal 772, 147 (2013).

C. C. Lovell, S. M. Wilkins, P. A. Thomas, M. Schaller, C. M. Baugh, G.
Fabbian, and Y. Bahé, “A machine learning approach to mapping baryons on
to dark matter haloes using the EAGLE and C-EAGLE simulations,” Monthly
Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society 509, 5046-5061 (2022).

Y. Jo and J.-h. Kim, “Machine-assisted semi-simulation model (MSSM): es-
timating galactic baryonic properties from their dark matter using a machine
trained on hydrodynamic simulations,” Monthly Notices of the Royal Astro-
nomical Society 489, 3565-3581 (2019).

H. M. Kamdar, M. J. Turk, and R. J. Brunner, “Machine learning and cos-
mological simulations - II. Hydrodynamical simulations,” Monthly Notices of
the Royal Astronomical Society 457, 1162-1179 (2016).

L. Breiman, “Random forests,” Machine learning 45, 5-32 (2001).

P. Geurts, D. Ernst, and L. Wehenkel, “Extremely randomized trees,” Ma-
chine learning 63, 3-42 (2006).

F. Pedregosa et al., “Scikit-learn: Machine Learning in Python,” arXiv e-
prints p. arXiv:1201.0490 (2012).

B. Catinella, D. Schiminovich, G. Kauffmann, S. Fabello, C. Hummels, J.
Lemonias, S. M. Moran, R. Wu, A. Cooper, and J. Wang, “The GALEX


Bibliography

[58]

[59]

[60]

[61]

[62]

[63]

[64]

Arecibo SDSS Survey. VI. Second data release and updated gas fraction scaling
relations,” Astronomy & Astrophysics 544, A65 (2012).

A. Saintonge et al., “xCOLD GASS: The Complete IRAM 30 m Legacy Survey
of Molecular Gas for Galaxy Evolution Studies,” The Astrophysical Journal
233, 22 (2017).

M. A. Lara-Lépez, A. Bongiovanni, J. Cepa, A. M. Pérez Garcia, M. Sdénchez-
Portal, H. O. Castafieda, M. Fernandez Lorenzo, and M. Povié, “Study of
star-forming galaxies in SDSS up to redshift 0.4. II. Evolution from the fun-
damental parameters: mass, metallicity and star formation rate,” Astronomy
& Astrophysics 519, A31 (2010).

M. Bothwell, R. Maiolino, R. Kennicutt Jr, G. Cresci, F. Mannucci, A. Mar-
coni, and C. Cicone, “A fundamental relation between the metallicity, gas
content and stellar mass of local galaxies,” Monthly Notices of the Royal As-
tronomical Society 433, 1425-1435 (2013).

R. Davé, K. Finlator, and B. D. Oppenheimer, “Galaxy evolution in cosmo-
logical simulations with outflows - II. Metallicities and gas fractions,” Monthly
Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society 416, 1354-1376 (2011).

F. Mannucci, G. Cresci, R. Maiolino, A. Marconi, and A. Gnerucci, “A funda-
mental relation between mass, star formation rate and metallicity in local and
high-redshift galaxies,” Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society
408, 2115-2127 (2010).

A. E. Reines and M. Volonteri, “Relations between Central Black Hole Mass
and Total Galaxy Stellar Mass in the Local Universe,” The Astrophysical
Journal 813, 82 (2015).

N. Haring and H.-W. Rix, “On the Black Hole Mass-Bulge Mass Relation,”
The Astrophysical Journal 604, L89-L92 (2004).

