Morphological and Physiological Responses of Different Accessions of Tomato (Solanum lycopersicum) and Luffa (Luffa acutangula and Luffa aegyptiaca) to Saline Stress

ERIKA BIANCA C. MENDOZA

UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES LOS BAÑOS

Master of Science in Horticulture

JUNE, 2022

ABSTRACT

Soil salinity, an existing problem in the Philippines, affects majority of the
provinces due to several reasons including sea level rise and aquifer overuse. Limited
research on vegetable growth in saline condition in the country made this study important.
Different NaC! concentrations were irrigated to selected accessions of tomato and luffa to
determine its effects in terms of morphological and physiological parameters. The study
was conducted using soil media mix-filled pots in a greenhouse and was laid out in RCBD
(accession x NaCl). The effect of NaCI concentrations on each accession during seedling
stage showed a general decreasing trend as the concentration increased except for
electrolyte leakage. Both crops already showed sensitivity at 50 mmol L⁻¹. In the four
accessions of tomato and three accessions of luffa, EW-TOM-002 and EW-LUF-003
showed the greatest tolerance based on the percent least reduction found in the parameters
used. Recommended parameters for future screening experiments in tomato are shoot and
root dry weights, while in luffa are main stem length and number of leaves.

Keywords: Salinity, tomato, luffa

CHAPTER I

INTRODUCTION

Soil salinity is one of the abiotic stresses known to negatively influence the
productivity of soil and yield of agricultural crops making it a significant threat to the
environment and world food production (Abbasi et al., 2015). In crop production, it was
estimated that salinity affects 30% of irrigated crops and 7% of dry land agriculture
worldwide (Schroeder et al., 2013). This is a particular problem in arid and semi-arid
regions wherein salinization caused by unsuitable water resource management have
reached 995 million ha of salt affected soils (Li et al., 2014; Ashraf et al., 2012). The
expanding salinity problem around the world signifies the need to identify tolerant

vegetable varieties that may be grown in these problematic areas.

In Asia, it was estimated that 43 million ha of salinized land is found in the dry
zone, majority of which is in Pakistan and India (FAO and ITPS, 2015). Saline soil in these
rice growing countries is a common problem in the coastal belts caused by occasional or
frequent sea water intrusion during tides leading to the accumulation of salts (Vinod et al.,
2013). Evapotranspiration in the dry season and rise of capillary water from groundwater
resources with poor drainage also contribute to resalinization (FAO and ITPS, 2015). In
the Philippines, around 400,000 ha of land are in coastal saline soils (PhilRice, 2001) and

more than half of the total number of provinces are affected by salt (BSWM, 2020). The

Bureau of Soils and Water Management has been conducting their soil tests around the

country to quantify and characterize the soil affected provinces.

There are two recommended options to alleviate salinity effects. One is to reclaim
the soil and second is to cultivate salt tolerant varieties (Vinod et al., 2013). The former
option is not recommended because most of the reclamation practices are costly, not very
effective and site specific (FAO and ITPS, 2015). The latter choice is more preferred due

to its low cost and more sustainable method as an adaptation to salt stress.

Among the crops produced in the country, tomato, and gourds such as luffa should
expand its growing areas based on its growth and yield potential. Tomato is one of the
major crops in the nation. Whereas luffa is one of the rootstock materials that provides
better scion performance when grafted to another species of Cucurbitaceae. In 2019,
tomato and gourds had a total production volume of 223,294 and 271,415 tons, respectively
(PSA, 2019). In terms of salinity, tomato is known to be sensitive while some gourds can

tolerate specific level of salts (Macchado and Serralheiro, 2017; Yetisir and Uygur, 2009).

In the Philippines, less information is known about the growth response and yield
of tomato and luffa in saline soil unlike rice. This led to fewer choice for crop rotation and
repetitive planting of rice. To address this problem, screening will be an essential step in
the assessment of varieties / genotypes / accessions. The selection will deliver preliminary
results needed in the breeding process and will provide significant parameters useful for

future screening trials. Ultimately, the results of the study will contribute to the availability

of crops other than rice which may be grown by farmers in saline affected areas in the

country.

In this study, tomato and luffa were screened for salinity tolerance under
greenhouse setting by drenching different concentrations of NaCl. Results were limited to
the chosen crop accessions provided by the East-West Seed Company. Assessments were
based on morphological and physiological traits. Likewise, the study shall not be used to
generalize the effects of salinity in tomato and luffa due to the accession, specific duration,
and nature of the experimental system. The significant effects of NaCl concentrations in

growth of tomato and luffa were utilized to determine the tolerant accessions.

OBJECTIVES

The general objective is to identify the tolerant accessions of tomato and luffa to saline

condition. The study specifically aims to:

1. Determine the effects of irrigated NaCl solutions at different concentration in plant
growth measured at seedling stage;

2. Evaluate plant growth in terms of above (shoot) and below ground (root)
morphological parameters;

3. Evaluate shoot developmental response using the physiological parameters;

4. Identify suitable parameters that will be useful for future salt-related screening
experiments; and

5. Classify the tolerance level (such as sensitive or tolerant) in response to salinity.

CHAPTER II

REVIEW OF LITERATURE

A good quality crop results from the combination of productive soil and vigorous
planting material. In the Philippines, where agriculture is still in need of further
development, one of the common problems is the availability of plants that could tolerate
stress if grown in salty soil - a soil quality that can develop from improper agricultural
practices. And it is much more common in low-lying coastal areas because of seawater
intrusion. Even wells constructed near the coast may contribute to salinity when used for
irrigation. This type of soil could be amended by different management practices which
could be costly for a Filipino farmer. Transgenic tolerant crops can also be developed,
however it will require investment on expensive equipment and longer development time.
There are available studies on salinity improvement in the country, but these are mostly
focused in rice cultivation and less on vegetable production. Therefore, the study on
screening tolerant accessions from tomato and luffa could provide recommendations based

on the performance of crops upon exposure to saline environment.
Soil Salinity

Salinity is one of the abiotic constraints that limit the plant growth negatively
impacting human demand for food. By estimates, 955 million ha of land is affected by
primary salt, whereas 77 million ha is from secondary salts (Metternicht and Zinck, 2003).

Furthermore, the estimated damage caused by salt accumulation per year is about 10

million ha (Pimentel et al., 2004). The expansion of agricultural land being destroyed by
salts can be promoted by other factors such as inefficient use of irrigation and fertilizers,
intensive farming practices with poor drainage and climate change. Understanding the
impact of soil salinity in crop production and determining practical approaches to alleviate

its effects are important.

By definition, a soil is called saline if it has a high concentration of soluble salts in
anionic forms like chloride (CI), sulfate (SO4”), nitrate (NO3*), bicarbonate (HCOs°),
carbonate (CO3*>), along with cationic form such as sodium (Na‘), potassium (K"*), calcium
(Ca?"), and magnesium (Sonon et al., 2015). In contrast, a sodic soil specifically has a high
amount of Na’. Saline soil has an electrical conductivity of the saturation extract at the root
zone greater than 4 dS m'! or 40 mmol at 25°C, and an exchangeable sodium of less than
15% (Amini et al., 2015; Shrivastava and Kumar, 2015). By visual diagnosis, white crust
forms on the soil surface of saline affected soil. Laboratory tests such as electrical
conductivity (EC) and total soluble salts (TSS) can be done to evaluate the extent of
problematic saline soil (Sonon et al., 2015). EC measures the ability of saline soil to

conduct electricity, while TSS quantifies the amount of soluble salt in soil saturated extract.

Two main types of salinity can develop based on the origin. Primary arises from
natural causes, while secondary salinity results from human activities. Excessive amounts
of salt from the weathering of rocks and irrigation with saline water are examples of
primary and secondary salinity, respectively (Amini et al., 2016). In terms of the soil

physical properties, an electrical conductivity greater than 1.5 dS m’' in soil solution or 0.5

dS m’ in irrigation water can promote the flocculation of fine clay particles beneficial for
soil aeration, root penetration, and root growth (Warrence et al., 2003). These positive
effects in enhancing the aggregation of soil are affected by other factors such as soil texture,
but despite its good influence a further increase in its value could be detrimental to the

growth of the plant.
Sodium and Chloride Ions

Among the soluble salts, Na” and Cl are major ions that can hamper the growth of
plants in saline soil. At normal conditions, the role of K* which cannot be fulfilled due to
low level can be alternately done by Na‘, except for enzymes that rely heavily on K*,
because at hydrated form these two ions are similar chemically and structurally (Amtmann
and Sanders, 1999; Maathius, 2014). CI’ is used in the stabilization of membrane potential,
and regulation of pH gradients and electrical excitability (White and Broadley, 2001).
Excessive amounts of these result in higher soil osmotic potential leading to restriction of
water for plant uptake. Disruption of stomatal regulation is promoted by the interference
of Na‘ in the uptake of K* ion resulting in water loss, at the same time chlorophyll

production forming chlorotic toxicity is due to Cl’ disturbance (Parihar et al., 2014).

Uptake of ions can proceed through symplastic and apoplastic pathway. The
transport in the plasma membrane and compartmentalization in the vacuole are mediated
by transporters, and the presence of several membrane transporter families allow for the
redistribution of Na* and CI over long distances (Isayenkov and Maathius, 2019). The

entry of salt is still a complex and enigmatic process that must be further studied. The

species and condition type have their distinct pathway and channels that would promote

the influx of ions into the plant cell.
Salinity Response of Luffa and Tomato

Luffa. Cucurbits consist of 118 genera and 825 species (Jeffrey, 1990). It is
subdivided into five families including Cucurbitaceae, and Luffa L. is one of its important
species (Whitaker and Davis, 1962). Luffa originated in India (Heiser and Schilling, 1990).
It has been studied that sponge gourd is a good source of nutrients such as carbohydrates,
vitamin C, and various minerals (Mg, Ca, Na, K, Fe, Cu, Zn, and Mn) all essential in human
diet (Wu et al., 2020). It is a tropical vine which can be easily grown in the Philippines
making these nutrients accessible for Filipinos. It would then be important to research more

on this crop to widen its capacity to adapt to abiotic stress such as salt stress.

In the study of Patel et al. (2017), luffa survived stress when exposed to salinity due
to the higher K* and lower Na* influx. Osmolytes and antioxidants were also aggravated
but promoted some level of protection to salt stress (Patel et a., 2017). In the study of
Yetisir and Uygur (2009), luffa showed the highest sodium absorption in its leaves when
compared to watermelon and other gourds, however it was revealed that Cucurbita and
Lagenaria are more tolerant to salinity stress than Luffa. Another research conducted in
sand culture showed that luffa can tolerate up to 6 dSm” of salts with negative growth of
plant, leaves and fruits observed beyond this level (Paliwal and Maliwal, 2015).
Furthermore, as Na* intake increased, other nutrients such as N, P, K, Ca, and Mg

decreased (Paliwal and Maliwal, 2015). In another experimental system, 0 to 150 mM NaCl

hydroponically used to different Cucurbitaceae genotypes showed that C. maxima x C.
moschata interspecific hybrid and bottle gourd are salt tolerant genotypes and possible
candidates as salt resistant rootstocks (Modarelli, 2020). It showed that the responses of
different cucurbit genotypes may vary but its potential to tolerate salinity stress will be

important in the selection and breeding trials.

Tomato. Solanaceae has more than 3000 species and this include tomato as the
only domesticated species from the genus Solanum with 13 species or subspecies
(Padmanabhan et al., 2016). It originated from South America and was first domesticated
in Mexico. Tomato is a good source of nutrients including Fe, vitamin A, B, and C (Sainju
et al., 2003). It is also rich in carotenoids such as lycopene, beta-carotene, gamma carotene,
phytoene, and other minor carotenoids which mainly act as antioxidants in the body
(Reecher, 1998). Since it can adapt to a wide range of climate, it can also be cultivated in
the country making its benefits easily accessible. However, the valuable nutrients from
tomato will only be guaranteed if its fruits can be harvested once the plant successfully

tolerated growing in stressful conditions like that of salinity stress.

According to Shahbaz et al. (2012), tomato is moderately tolerant to salinity stress
at all growth stages (seedling, vegetative, and reproductive). Threshold level based on
Maas (1986) is at 2.5 dS m’!, but there are other studies that showed a higher tolerance
level. In the study of Maggio et al. (2006), tomato exposed to salinity level of 2.5 to 15 dS
m'! showed a sharp increase in shoot and root ABA levels coinciding with the decreased

stomatal response to ABA, a different partitioning of Na’* ions in young and mature leaves,


and a significant increase in root to shoot ratio observed at approximately 9.6 dS m”! as the
tolerance threshold level. Response of tomato may also vary based on the cultivars used.
In an experiment that utilized five cultivars and examined at a range of 0 to 140 mM NaCl
showed that greater salt tolerance was related to the increased accumulation of Na* and Cl
and lower K‘ ions in the shoot (Alfocea et al., 1993). Exposure of hybrid tomato Radja to
0 to 140 mM NaCl showed that it can only tolerate a moderate level of 70 mM as shoot
biomass reduced by 30% compared to control (Alfocea et al., 1996). Since the response of
tomato may be affected by the cultivar, determining its tolerance level will be an important

factor in growing this type of crop in saline areas.

These studies indicating the tolerance level of different crops will be difficult to
compare due to the nature of experiment and the cultivars utilized. Morphological,
physiological, and biochemical aspects of the plant can then be measured to determine the

effect of salinity that would help in the selection and breeding of crops.

Plant Salt Stress Responses

Reduction or inhibition of growth can happen for two reasons: osmotic or water
deficit effect and salt-specific or ion-excess effect (Parihar et al., 2014). The former refers
to the lower ability to take up water leading to poor growth, while the latter causes injury
to the cell after entering the transpiration stream. The injurious effect of salinity leads to
the development of two-phase responses classification. First is the occurrence of shoot ion-
independent response, followed by ion-dependent response (Negrao et al., 2017). During

the first phase, the effect of salinity outside the plant on water relations can cause the


reduction in growth that takes place within minutes to days resulting in the closure of
stomata and inhibition of shoot cell expansion (Munns and Termaat, 1986). A second phase
from days to weeks where buildup of toxic ions in the shoot can cause premature
senescence or cell death (Munns and Tester, 2008). The first phase can still accommodate
the salt by expanding the vacuoles, whereas the second phase exceeds the
compartmentalization ability of the plant resulting in buildup of salts in the cytoplasm and
inhibition of enzyme activity (Parihar et al., 2014). The negative impact caused by the
movement of excessive soluble salts from the soil and the measurement of plant tolerance

can be assessed in terms of changes in plant morphology, physiology, and biochemistry.
Morphology

The level of damage caused by exposure of the plant to a salty environment can be
assessed based on its morphological features. This measure includes the fresh and dry
weight of the shoot and roots, plant height, root length, stem diameter, number of leaves,
and leaf area. Germination rate may also be affected prior to measurement of the said
parameters, wherein a lower germination was recorded along with the reduced emergence
of roots as salt level increased in cucumber genotypes until 200 mmol (Marium et al.,
2019). According to Parihar et al. (2014), several reasons such as low osmotic potential of
media, changes in enzyme activity caused by toxicity, alteration of protein metabolism,
disturbance of hormonal balance, and reduction of seed reserves contribute to low
germination. Another negative effect was observed in watermelon accessions with decrease

in shoot length and fresh and dry weights at higher salt concentrations similar to other


studies conducted using pepper, watermelon, gourd, eggplant, tomato, and cucumber
(Ekbic et al., 2017). Leaf number and stem diameter showed a general decrease in
measurement at 300 mmol, but response to increasing salinity dose may also vary

according to genotypes in cucumber (Topalova et al., 2019).

In terms of salinity effect at reproductive development and yield, rice grown in
salinity showed low fertility and pollen germination with reduction in tiller numbers,
panicle number, panicle length and spikelet number per panicle (Shereen et al., 2005; Zeng
and Shannon, 2000). Furthermore, stamen filament elongation and microsporogenesis can
be reduced, programmed cell death may be enhanced along with ovule abortion and
senescence of fertilized embryos during the reproductive stage (Shrivastava and Kumar,
2015). In the study of Zhang et al. (2016) and Hajiboland et al. (2010), reduction in growth
and yield can be attributed to reduction in photosynthesis, translocation of photosynthetic
products to the root, tissue expansion, cell division, leaf chlorophyll content, stomatal
resistance, and ion imbalance. Hence, understanding the growth of plants by analyzing its
physiology and biochemistry can provide a clearer rationale behind these morphological

changes.

Physiology and Biochemistry

Osmotic stress and adjustment. Osmotic stress is one of the two responses of
plants during salinity stress. It occurs when the Na* concentration in the soil around the
roots increases to the threshold level. It forms a low osmotic pressure promoting loss of

turgor and driving gradient for water uptake (Nuccio et al., 1999). The speed of onset is


rapid as it may take effect within days firstly affecting the formation of new shoots. Ionic
stress is another response by the plants, but it impacts the growth much later. According to
Munns and Tester (2008), ionic effect is only observed when species with low control to
Na’ transport are exposed to high salinity levels. Moreover, most studies focused on the
effect of Na‘ more than CI because toxicity due to the former occurs earlier than the latter

for most species.

Osmotic effect can be distinguished from ionic effect by comparing salt solutions
and iso-osmotic solutions of an inert osmoticum such as PEG (Zhang et al., 2010). If
germination is inhibited in PEG, then it is attributed to osmotic effect, on the other hand,
ionic effects can be attributed to the difference in germination of salt-treated relative to
PEG (Dodd and Donovan, 1999). For example, osmotic stress applied at two
developmental stages (vegetative and reproductive) at medium and high-level stress using
NaCl and PEG was employed in rice. It showed that application of stress at reproductive
stage showed lesser decrease in filled spikelets and 1000-grain weight than when applied
at vegetative stage (Castillo et al., 2007). Increase in Na‘ and decrease in K* signified that
aside from osmotic stress, ionic stress was experienced by the plant (Castillo et al., 2007).
But the authors concluded that longer duration is needed to further establish the importance
of osmotic vs ionic stress in rice. In terms of water relations, Plantago caronopus or buck’s
horn plantain grown hydroponically and exposed to increasing salinity water from 0 to
100% had decreased leaf osmotic potential primarily due to Na* and Cl (Koyro, 2006).
Similarly, lower leaf osmotic potential was recorded in Sorghum bicolor exposed to

increasing salinity up to 250 mM (Netondo et al., 2004). Also, cultivars of Brassica napus


exposed to the same NaCl level recorded decreased in osmotic potential accompanied by

increase in leaf Na* (Bandeh-hagh et al., 2008).

One of the strategies adopted by plants in response to osmotic stress is osmotic
regulation through higher accumulation of osmoprotectants (Singh et al., 2015). This
osmotic protection makes use of diverse organic compounds called compatible solutes or
compatible osmolytes that are uncharged, polar, soluble in nature, and do not interfere with
the cellular metabolism (Gupta and Huang, 2014). Examples of these are ammonium
compounds (polyamine and glycine betaine), sugars and sugar alcohols (mannitol and
sorbitol), and amino acids (proline and ectoine) (Singh et al., 2015). These
osmolytes/compatible solutes play a diverse role for plant survival. Basically, on the onset
of stress, plants will activate the osmoprotection system to confer tolerance. Cell turgor via
osmoregulation, replacement of inorganic ions, protection of cellular components, and
alleviation of ion toxicity are some of its functions (Zulfiagar et al., 2020). Moreover, it
stabilizes the thylakoid membranes to upregulate photosynthesis, improve the antioxidant

defense system, and protect key enzymes (Alam et al. 2014; Hasanuzzaman et al. 2014).

Plants exposed to salinity stress generally showed an increase in compatible solutes.
Proline content was observed to increase both in pepper (Capsicum annuum), Medicago
and Brassica species, and pistachio (Pistacia vera) under salinity stress (Gunes et al., 1996;
Mbarki et al., 2020; Pavlovic et al., 2019; Rahneshan et al., 2017). For salt-tolerant
cultivars of Oryza sativa, proline accumulated less than the salt-sensitive cultivars (Lutts

et al., 1996). Osmoprotectants can also be utilized to protect the plant from salinity stress


when applied externally. Trehalose application in maize increased the photosynthetic
pigments and nucleic acid content along with the other organic solutes such as sugars,
soluble proteins, and proline (Zeid, 2009). It was also found that accumulation of Na’ in
moderately halophilic bacterium Tetragenococcus halophila was prevented using glycine
betaine, carnitine, and choline (Robert et al., 2000). Compatible solutes play a massive role
to prevent the plant from wilting and dying, thus it has an important mechanism needed for

survival.

Ion toxicity and homeostasis. lon toxicity is the consequence of high salt uptake
and low essential nutrient intake. In Vicia faba, the enhanced level of Na‘ decreased the
Na’*/K* ratio (Gadallah, 1999). The higher ratio is detrimental as accumulation of Na* in
cell walls can lead to osmotic stress and death (Munns, 2002). A concentration of up to 160
mmol NaCl used in barley showed reduction in uptake of K* and Ca**, reduced
photosynthesis, chlorophyll degradation, and reduction in quantum yield of PSII electron
transport (Tavakkoli et al., 2011). In wheat seedlings, Triticum aestivum, the application
of different sources of salts such as NaCl, KCI, or mannitol at 130 mmol did not cause the
inhibition of root elongation provided that at a 2 mmol Ca”* is present in the medium,
however this contrasted with shoot elongation wherein any curtailing of water potential
resulted to inhibition (Kinraide, 1999). Reduced availability and/or competitive
interactions of ions can also result from toxicity. For instance, phosphorus can be reduced
because it precipitates with Ca”* ions at high salinity (Bano and Fatima, 2009). Na* can
lower the uptake of Ca’* and K* or with Cl reducing NO* uptake (Grattan and Grieve,

1998).


Na’ can act antagonistically with the uptake of K* from the soil. K* is essential for
it stimulates several metabolic processes such as photosynthesis, oxidative metabolism,
and protein synthesis by activating over 50 enzymes (Marschner, 1995). Na‘ also competes
with the uptake sites of K* such as low and high affinity transporters in the plasma
membrane, and cause membrane depolarization making the uptake of K* through the
inward-rectifying K* channels impossible while promoting K* leakage through the
depolarized-activated outward-rectifying channels (Shabala and Cuin, 2007). The use of
low and high affinity transporters depends on the level of K* in the soil. If the extracellular
K* is low, high K* uptake mechanisms are mediated by K* transporters, on the other hand,
a high extracellular K* uses the low affinity K* uptake (Gupta and Huang, 2014). Even the
synthesis of compatible solutes makes use of the ATP which reduces its availability needed

for high affinity K* uptake (Shabala and Cuin, 2007).

Quantification of plant tolerance to salinity through K*/Na* ratio has been
considered pivotal for plant survival (Gupta and Huang, 2014). But this contrasted with the
study of Shabala and Cuin (2007), explaining that it only measures the leaf/shoot tissue K*
and Na’ concentration failing to account for the intracellular compartmentation of these
ions. They further added that this measurement reflects the K* compartmentation in the
vacuole and not the cytosolic K* that is much needed for different metabolic processes.
Although K* level decreases due to salinity, it can still be increased based on the study
between Arabidopsis versus its salt tolerant relative Thellungiella halophila wherein K*

content was promoted by the mesophyll cells (Volkov et al., 2003).


Plants employ ion homeostasis to combat toxicity. If balance will not be attained
by expulsion or compartmentalization, the high apolastic levels of Na‘ and CI ions will
alter the aqueous and ionic equilibria leading to osmotic stress, ionic imbalance, and
toxicity that plant may either cease growth or die (Niu et al., 1995). To keep the
concentration of toxic ions and to promote accumulation of essential ions, plants can
regulate its ion flux. Cells use primary active transport (H* ATPases) and secondary active
transport (channels and co-transporters) to maintain high concentration of K* and low
concentration of Na* (Zhu, 2003). Compartmentalization of Na* ion to the vacuole is
through Na*/H* antiporter where two H* pumps are present namely the vacuolar type H*
ATPase (V- ATPase) and vacuolar pyrophosphatase (V-PPase) (Gupta and Huang, 2014).
Salt Overly Sensitive (SOS) proteins are also utilized during the signaling pathway. SOS1,
SOS2, SOS3 have distinct roles to promote ion homeostasis and salt tolerance. SOS1 acts
as a receptor or Na’ efflux regulator, SOS2 encodes for serine/threonine kinase and is
activated by salt stress due to Ca“, and SOS3 contains the myristoylated Ca* binding site

(Gupta and Huang, 2014).

In Arabidopsis, hyperosmolarity promotes the synthesis of ABA which is sensed
by a receptor for the transcription of AtNHX/ that encodes for the vacuolar Na‘/H*
exchanger. Na* enters the cytoplasm using high-affinity potassium transporter HKT1 or
through non-selective cation channels. Ca?* perception of Na* activates the SOS signal
transduction cascades. SOS3 binds with Ca?" then interacts with SOS2 which activates the

kinase. The activated kinase will then phosphorylate SOS! that will be responsible for the


extrusion of Na‘. SOS2 also interacts with the vacuolar H' ATPase and upregulates its

transport activity during the vacuolar compartmentalization.

Reactive oxygen species generation and antioxidant activity. The exposure of
plants to abiotic factors demands for a coordinated response from different cellular
organelles. But if these pathways are not in sync, electrons with high energy state are
transferred to molecular oxygen (O2) to form reactive oxygen species (ROS) such as singlet
oxygen (O2), superoxide radical (Oz), hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) and hydroxyl radical
(OH) (Miller et al., 2010). ROS is normally produced at optimal conditions in the
chloroplast, mitochondria, and peroxisomes where production and removal is strictly
controlled (Apel and Kirt, 2014). However, production is elevated during salinity stress
losing the equilibrium with scavenging activity. In the chloroplast, O2 and O2 can be
produced. Stomatal closure due to stress while plants are still exposed to sunlight promotes
the transfer of electron to a molecular oxygen generating Oz at PSI (Asada, 2006). On the
other hand, over reduction of the electron transport chain results in excitation of triplet-

state chlorophyll at P680 and light harvesting complex generating the O2 (Asada, 2006).

The likelihood of singlet oxygen formation can be reduced by the conversion of O2
to H2O2 through a membrane bound copper/zinc superoxide at PSI which is further
converted to H2O using a membrane-bound ascorbate peroxidase (Miller et al., 2010). In
another organelle, peroxisome, H2O2 and O can be produced in two different processes.
Glycolate in chloroplast is promoted by stomatal closure, and oxidation of glycolate by

glycolate peroxidase forms the H2O2 in peroxisome (Noctor et al. 2002; Karpinskiet al.


2003). While Oz is generated by xanthine oxidase in the matrix of peroxisome, and H2O2
is also promoted by the conversion of Ox to O2 and H2O2 using superoxide dismutase (del
Rio et al. 1996; Corpas et al. 2001). The major sites of ROS production in the
mitochondria are complex | and II of the electron transport chain where the ubisemiquinone
formed between the two complexes transfer the electron to oxygen that generate O2" then
reduced to H2O2 (Miller et al., 2010). Even though the mitochondria produce ROS, the
level of production is still low which could be due to the presence of alternative oxidase
(AOX) (Apel and Hirt, 2004). AOX catalyzes the tetravalent reduction of O2 by ubiquinone
which helps reduce the production of ROS by competing with cytochrome bel complex

for electrons (Apel and Hirt, 2004).

Enzymes can also trigger ROS production. NADPH oxidase promotes the
formation of ROS in the apoplast, plasma membrane, and endoplasmic reticulum. It
combines with ABA to generate H2O> resulting to ABA-induced stomatal closure, forms
Ox by transferring electron to Oz, and transport electron from CytP450 to form Oz (Hu et
al., 2006; Apel and Hirt, 2004; Das and Roychoudhurry, 2014). Cell wall also forms ROS
due to hyper oxidation of polyunsaturated fatty acids (Mittler, 2002; Das and
Roychoudhurry, 2014). If ROS is produced at high concentration, damage to biomolecules
such as lipids, proteins, and DNA can be expected. Changes in intrinsic membrane
properties including fluidity, ion transport, loss of enzyme activity, protein-cross linking,
inhibition of protein synthesis, DNA damage, and cell death may all occur (Sharma et al.,
2012). Photosynthetic pigments like chlorophyll and carotenoids are reported to be

degraded. In the study of Amirjani, 2011), chlorophyll a and b contents were reduced when


treated with 200 mM of NaCl. In mungbean, chlorophyll a and b, and carotenoid also
decreased in content at 120 mmol (Wahid et al., 2004). According to Mane et al. (2010),
the dominance of chlorophyll a over b at normal condition is diminished under salt stress

which could be attributed to membrane deterioration.

Despite the damage the ROS may induce, production of it at low level plays an
important role in several plant functions. It acts as secondary messenger to several
hormones such abscisic acid, auxin, gibberellin, salicylic acid, and jasmonic acid to
promote stomatal closure, root gravitropism, seed germination, lignin biosynthesis,
programmed cell death, hypersensitive responses, and osmotic stress (Sharma et al., 2012).
In the study of Ali et al. (2018), plant immune response using ROS, nitric oxide, Ca”* ions
are activated by fungal components like chitin to attack and restrict the pathogen from
further spreading. Also, the burst of ROS production such as hydrogen peroxide drives the
structural linking of proteins in the cell wall resulting in strengthened barriers against

pathogens (Scheel, 1998).

Environmental stress tolerance can be promoted using enzymatic and non-
enzymatic antioxidants that will scavenge the indigenously generated ROS (Ahmad et al.,
2010). Examples of enzymatic antioxidants are superoxide dismutase (SOD), catalase
(CAT), glutathione peroxidase (GPx), ascorbate peroxidase (APX), and glutathione
reductase (GR), while glutathione, ascorbic acid, a-tocopherol, carotenoids, and phenolic
compounds are the non-enzymatic antioxidants (Gupta and Huang, 2014; Waskiewicz et

al., 2014). The presence of antioxidants in each cellular compartment can be more than


one, for instance, cytosol can contain antioxidants such as APX, peroxiredoxin, GPx,
glycine-betaine, proline, polyamines, tocopherols, carotenoids, a-tocopherol, vitamin C
and flavonoids to scavenge H2O2 (Ahmad et al., 2010, Nobuhiro and Mittler, 2006; Bose
et al., 2013). Even though both antioxidant types are scavengers, they still differ in terms

of their method on how they detoxify the ROS.

According to Moussa et al. (2019), enzymatic antioxidant converts the oxidized
metabolic products to H2O2 then to water using different cofactors like iron, zinc, copper,
and manganese, whereas non-enzymatic antioxidants stop and terminate the free radical
chain reaction. Antioxidants such as SOD, ascorbate, and glutathione were found to
improve the viability of Paeonia suffruticosa pollen by maintaining the internal balance of
oxidative metabolism and reducing the level of oxidative damage (Ren et al., 2020).
Enzymatic and nonenzymatic antioxidants increased in proportion to the NaC] stress
imposed in Carrizo citrange, a salt-sensitive rootstock (Arbona et al., 2003). In Cucumber
mosaic cucumovirus-infected cucumber plants, antioxidant activity was found to be
promoted by treating the plant through foliar application with glycine betaine, chitosan and
its combination which is also due to the increased expression of regulatory defense genes
(Sofy et al., 2020). It was observed that CAT, APX, and POD (peroxidase) increased in
watermelon seedlings grafted in different rootstocks and exposed to salinity stress (Yan et
al., 2018). Similarly, SOD and peroxidase measured in cucumber cultivars showed increase

in activity under salt stress (Zhu et al., 2008).


Stress hormone release and regulation. As one of the plant's adaptive strategies,
different types of hormones are released and regulated. Just like any other responses,
hormone regulation includes signaling pathway wherein sensors, proteins, signaling
transducers, transcription factors, and stress responsive genes and metabolites can be found
(Zhu, 2002). There are different plant hormones, but abscisic acid (ABA), ethylene,
salicylic acid (SA), jasmonic acid (JA) and brassinosteroids are primary signals known to
function during salinity stress (Zipeng et al., 2020; Siddiqi and Husen, 2019). Some may

function individually, while others may act in concert with the other hormones.

It was previously mentioned that ionic imbalance results from high absorption of
Na’ ions, and this promotes the accumulation of cytosolic Ca”* ions. ABA plays an
important role by provoking the plasma membrane bound channels and integrating with
the secondary messenger Ca”* or promoting the release of Ca”* from storage banks (Edel
and Kudla, 2016). During stomatal closure, ABA produced in the vascular tissues of the
leaf is transported to guard cells resulting in reduction in turgor and volume; It was also
reported that ROS production via NADPH oxidases can be induced by ABA that would
trigger the release of Ca?" activation of anion channels that could serve as anion efflux
channels leading to membrane depolarization and inhibition of inward K* controlling
turgor for stomatal opening (Osakabe et al., 2013). The effect of ABA in stomata was
similarly observed in the study of Mulholland et al. (2003) using tomato, wherein increase
in salinity level resulted in an increase in ABA concentrations but had negative relationship
with stomatal conductance. Whereas poorer growth was found in ABA mutants due to its

inability to synthesize ABA during salinity stress. Adaptation to high salinity can also be


induced by application of exogenous ABA which was effective in sorghum treated with
150 mol m3! of salt (Amzallag et al., 1990). Accumulation of proteins and
osmoprotectants can also be observed, but high levels of ABA may still retard the growth
of plants (Ryu and Cho, 2015). Nevertheless, ABA promotion during salt stress will be

necessary for plant survival.

Ethylene is one of the indispensable stress hormones when plants are subjected to
stress. It is a gaseous hormone needed in regulation of cellular processes from germination
to photosynthesis, and modulating stress caused by salinity via maintaining homeostasis
and nutrients, inducing antioxidant defense, and elevation of nitrate and sulfates
assimilation (Riyazuddin et al., 2020). According to Tao et al. (2015) studies based on gene
mutation and transformation analysis showed that the whole biosynthesis and signal
transduction pathway of ethylene is part of plant’s tolerance and adaptation to salinity. 1-
aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylic acid (ACC), an ethylene precursor, can also be used to

promote plant tolerance by inducing ROS scavengers (Cao et al., 2007; Peng et al., 2014).

In the study of Lutts et al. (1996), ethylene production in leaves of rice cultivars
was higher in salt tolerant than salt-sensitive, and ACC was larger in tolerant cultivars
suggesting that lower ACC conversion to ethylene could be due to reduction in ACC
oxidase activity. In tomato, grown at different salinity levels showed increased total ACC
and ethylene production (Botella et al., 2001). However, there were reported studies
wherein ACC can negatively affect the germination of tomato by increasing the ACC prior

to accumulation of Na* and its accompanying stress, but this needs further investigation


since other works are saying that ethylene is not the main cause of plant growth inhibition

during salinity stress (Albacete et al., 2009; Ghanem et al., 2008; Shibli et al., 2007).

Salicylic acid (SA) is a phenolic type of plant hormone that acts as a signal molecule
in plant growth and plant defense against systemic acquired resistance and pathogen attack
(Klessig and Malamy, 1994). Studies have shown that application of SA to plants grown
under salt stress may promote resistance and growth. In barley, soaking in SA at pre-
sowing prior to NaCl treatment showed less Na‘, soluble proteins content, lipid
peroxidation level, and electrolyte leakage (El-Tayeb, 2005). Plant growth was promoted
using SA by inducing pre-adaptive response to salt stress as the photosynthetic pigments
were protected and membrane integrity maintained (El-Tayeb, 2005). In rice, similar
observation wherein lower accumulation of Na' and CI’ was promoted by application of
SA and was further recommended to be used in coastal and estuarine regions to increase
the rice production (Jini and Joseph, 2017). Tomato also showed positive results when
applied with 0.1 M SA then grown in 150 to 200 mM salts and had greater survival and
relative shoot growth (Stevens et al., 2006). Despite its promoting effects, studies made by
Arfan et al. (2007) showed no improvement at high salt concentration and Cao et al. (2009)
revealed protection of Arabidopsis in non-treated SA. Application of SA may not work

similarly in all crops, hence different reactions to it.

Another multifunctional hormone involved in plant growth and protection
processes are the jasmonates. Jasmonic acid (JA) and its cyclopentane derivatives

collectively known as jasmonates work in several developmental functions of plant against


pathogens and environmental stresses (Siddiqi and Husen, 2019; Pauwels et al. 2009; Seo
et al. 2011). JA levels was found to be higher in salt-tolerant cultivars than the sensitive
types with increased in JA as the level of salt concentration increased (Kang et al., 2005;
Moons et al. 1997b). In cucumber, JA was found to be promoted when applied with salt
stress (Radhakrishnan and Lee, 2013). Exogenous application of the hormone can also
alleviate stress in bittermelon by hyperaccumulation of soluble sugars, proteins, amino
acids, proline, and pyrogallol peroxidase with decrease activity of H2O>2 activity (Alisofi et

al., 2019).

The tolerance made by JA could be attributed to the allocation of carbon and
nitrogen metabolism to adjust the metabolite level and be utilized for growth (Alisofi et al.,
2019). But a study of Cherki et al. (2002) showed that soybean treated with 100 mM NaCl
had stunted growth even when sprayed with JA which could be affected by the tolerance
limit of the plant. Other plant hormones such as ABA may also be involved in JA-mediated
salt response. JA treatment was found to be accompanied by increase of ABA content to
counteract the NaCl induced GA reduction in rice and chard plants (Kim et. al., 2009;
Wang et al., 2020). But the synergistic effect between JA and ABA is still controversial
due to some studies showing antagonistic roles of JA in ABA dependent regulations and
inhibition of proteins in the presence of ABA in roots of rice (Moons et al., 1997b). Hence,
there could be different mechanisms applied by plants in response to stress using JA and

ABA.


A plant steroid hormone known as brassinosteroids (BR) plays a critical role in
various plant developmental processes including tolerance to abiotic stress (Ryu and Cho,
2015). Exogenous application of BR can alleviate the stress caused by salinity with some
of its enzymes needed for synthesis as part of plant salt adaptation (Zipeng et al., 2020).
Root injection and foliar spray application was found effective in cucumber under salt
stress by lowering its salt injury index to 40.2% and increasing the free-proline, soluble
sugar, and activity of enzyme (Qingmao et al., 2006). Also, the inhibitory effect of 250
mM NaCl in cucumber seedlings was reduced when brassinosteroids and ethylene was

added in the germination medium (Wang et al., 2011).

Lettuce plants showed a positive reaction with BR application wherein ethylene
and ACC were reduced while lower putrescine and two polyamines (spermidine and
spermine) levels in the roots were recorded (Serna et al., 2005). BR may also function in
crosstalk with ABA, as the latter rapidly accumulates to arrest the growth of seedling under
stress, while the former acts as a positive regulator by reducing the ABA signaling outputs
(Zhang et al. 2009; Ryu and Hwang 2013; Ryu and Cho, 2015). This would then promote
suppression of inhibition made by ABA. BR can also induce NO accumulation to reduce
oxidative damage which acts as ROS scavenger essential in plant adaptation (Zipeng et al.,
2020). Plant would therefore be able to resume its normal growth essential for survival

even if initially repressed by other hormones.


Amelioration of Soil Salinity

As salinity continues to negatively impact plant growth, strategies to improve the
quality of soil can be implemented. To diminish the amount of salt found in the soil,
strategies on managing leaching, drainage, and water table must be followed to reduce the
salt content of soil. Leaching needs enough water or leaching fraction to flush the dissolved
salts beyond the root zone, however too much leaching can promote loss of nutrients and
degradation of water bodies receiving the leachates (Cuevas et al., 2019). Drainage is also
needed to carry the excess salt water from leaching while preventing the upward flow of
salts and lowering the groundwater table. Installation of subsurface irrigation with retention
ponds at the end of the system or use of dry drainage where an available land for
evaporation of excess water can be established (Kitamura et al., 2006 and Konukcu et al.,
2006). A low water table will be advantageous because upward flux of salts will be

reduced.

Deep-rooted salt tolerant species can be grown as part of the rehabilitation process
as partial and short-term revegetation (Cuevas et al., 2019). But long-term use will result
in growth reduction. Sustainable agricultural systems will require time to fully understand
the management of saline soils. The basic management of soil as mentioned above is costly
in the case of the Filipino farmers. Crops grown in a season must survive the saline soil to
be harvested, but the availability of tolerant crops is still a hindrance that must be
addressed. These crops must be sturdy enough to withstand stress with minimal effect in

crop production. But prior to the development of these crops, screening methods are usually


done to determine which crops are suitable to initially grow in saline soil and be selected

as sources of tolerant traits.
Salt Tolerance Experimental System

In-vitro. Screening of tolerant cultivars can be done using different media.
Incorporation of agar based on the chemical components of MS (Murashige and Skoog)
media is commonly employed to study the performance of plants in-vitro. This type of
medium provides the macro and micronutrients, vitamins, amino acids, carbon sources,
growth regulators, and solidifying agents like agar (Saad and Elshahed, 2012). In-vitro
testing through tissue culture also provides a conducive environment for other purposes
such as plant propagation, disease elimination, plant improvement and secondary
metabolite production (Hussain et al., 2012). The procedure of using an explant for callus
formation is advantageous because production of several plantlets from a single explant in
a short period of time can be attained. In terms of salt tolerance assay, MS medium can be
supplemented with different concentrations of salts, thereafter, explants of different types
are inoculated. However, a sterile environment is a sheer requirement during media
preparation and explant inoculation. It must also be noted that the utilization of callus
explant may arise to clones with inherited characteristics different from its parents due to
somaclonal variation (George, 1993). Nonetheless, several studies showed that screening

in-vitro is possible using this technique.

Phenotype responses of 14 tomato genotypes grown in maximum concentration of

250 mM of NaCl using seeds was characterized in-vitro (Rashed et al., 2016). It was


observed that root length and plant weight decreased linearly with increasing NaCl content
(Rashed et al., 2016). Shoot apices and callus of 12 genotypes from three different tomato
species was exposed to NaC] ranging from 0 to 300 mM (Zaki and Yokoi, 2016). It showed
that each species had different responses in growth and physiology, root formation from
shoot apices may still be developed or inhibited along with the formation of callus, but Na*
and CI ions showed an increasing trend with increasing salt concentration (Zaki and Yokoi,
2016). Selection of tolerant species based on the results can then be further utilized for
breeding programs. Potato is another common crop subjected to salt tolerance screening.
Shoot tips are excised and inoculated in culture media containing 0 to 100 mM NaCl to
determine its effects based on various growth factors (Zaman et al., 2015). Decreasing
pattern of growth in all the parameters taken such as plant height, number of nodes, fresh
shoot weight, number of roots, and root length were observed, but a tolerant variety among

the eight potato varieties used emerged (Zaman et al., 2015).

Hydroponics. It is another soilless technique famous in commercial and home food
production. An excellent method to control the availability of nutrients during growth but
could be costly depending on what method will be used. It also requires the measurement
of pH, EC, and temperature to properly manage the nutrients. Among the usual nutrient
solutions used in salinity stress is the Hoagland solution. This is composed of salts as
source of essential nutrients, micronutrients, and Fe supplied with EDTA to form stable
complexes preventing it from precipitating (Barak, 2009). Hydroponics method is
categorized into different types with its own pros and cons. One can choose from five

methods such as the wick system, deep water culture, ebb and flow, drip method, and


nutrient film technique. Deep water culture is known to be used in salinity stress due to
simpler set-up and cheaper cost than the rest of the methods. Since it is acommon technique
to induce salt stress in different crops, it is widely used in screening of tolerant rice varieties
and other crop species. The method includes incremental addition of NaCl until final
concentration is met to prevent osmotic shock in plant samples. Purslane changed its
mineral component and morphology in response to salinity (Alam et al., 2016). Salt-
tolerance level of rice genotypes through the same method was followed by Kanawapee et
al. (2012) to measure the effect of salt stress in proline and chlorophyll content, but instead
of using Hoagland, they used a different solution called Yoshida nutrient solution as this
was previously used by other rice salinity experiment such that of Gregorio et al. (1997).
Although this method is famous in salinity experiments, some of the open issues found in
this soilless agriculture is the level/sources and its interaction among different nutrients
(Sambo, 2019). Hence, the antagonism or competition of nutrients for root uptake must

also be considered.

Soil-filled pots. Different types of substrates or potting media are available in the
market but determining its suitability for the experiment is another factor to consider. If
soilless media is not available due to its high cost, use of substrate mixture can be an
alternative. Perlite, vermiculite, peat, sand, and clay loam soil are some of the examples.
Each type has its unique physical and chemical properties, thus the need to distinguish
which type of substrate will be fitting to be utilized for salt treatments. According to
Sanchez et al. (2009), substrate can affect the growth and physiological response of plants

to salinity stress.


In citrus seedlings, those grown in sand had the highest salt tolerance, whereas
seedlings grown in clay-rich soil had the lowest tolerance to salt (Sanchez et al., 2009).
This could be attributed to the reduction in leaching fraction and increase in salt ion
accumulation in clay soil, and higher accumulation of salt in the roots which avoided
accumulation in leaves in sandy soil (Sanchez et al., 2009). This result was supported by
Gimeno et al. (2010) wherein rootstock seedlings were more salt tolerant in solution culture

and sand than clay-loam soil and perlite.

There are studies such that of Bres et al. (2016) which only used one type of
substrate, peat moss, irrigated with different concentrations of NaCl and showed that the
increasing level of salinity caused reduction in fresh weight, plant height, and leaf area of
pelargonium. Potting mix using pure sphagnum moss and perlite at 96:4 ratio was used as
a growth substrate for lavender plants and supplied with different concentrations of NaCl
(Paraskevopoulou, 2020). Plant growth variables showed a constant decrease at 100 and
200 mM showing signs of chlorosis followed by leaf and stem necrosis (Paraskevopoulou,
2020). Coastal area condition can also be mimicked by combining soil and sand. In the
study of Weber and D’ Antonio (1999), one-part soil and one-part sand was used as potting
media for Carpobrotus edulis and irrigated with different concentrations of seawater.
Another type of combination that can be utilized is 25% sand + 25% peat moss + 50% soil
improved the permeability and porosity for better water movement and leaching of
negative ions like Cl (Al Gehani and Ismail, 2016). These soil mixtures are of different
compositions which could affect the results of salt treated plants. It is therefore important

to determine its chemical properties prior to utilization.


The three methods can be used to simulate salt stress in plants; however, the
advantages and disadvantages can limit the usability of each method. In this study, soil
mixture media will be utilized as a closer simulation technique to field experiments.
Irrigation with different concentrations of NaCl will be used. Aside from choosing the
appropriate system, it is also important to consider the extent of salinity stress that includes
timing, level, and duration (Negrao et al., 2017). Plants of different genotypes respond

differently to salt; hence one cannot simply generalize the effects for all crops.

Quantification Methods of Salinity Effects

Based on Plant Growth and Water Relations

Relative root mass ratio. One of the primary responses of plants to salinity stress
is the changes in morphology, anatomy, and physiology of the roots. The ability of the
roots to be less affected than shoots lead to an increase in root/shoot ratio (Nirit, 2013).
The higher root to shoot ratio can be attributed to the lower transport of nutrients from the
root to the shoot, however the shoot may decrease its capacity to translocate assimilates
which can negatively affect the long-term growth and survival of the plant (Cheeseman
1988; Nirit, 2013). The change in allocation of biomass between roots and shoots can be
described using the relative root mass ratio (RMR) wherein a lower RMR means lower

allocation of biomass to the roots (Negrao et al., 2020).

Relative leaf area ratio. Due to osmotic stress, plants will immediately reduce its

cell expansion in leaves and roots along with the reduced rate of lateral bud development


and leaf emergence (Munns and Tester, 2008). It was further suggested that the reduction
of leaf area in response to stress would lower the use of water to conserve soil moisture
and prevent the increase of salt in the soil (Munns and Tester, 2008). Changes in area of
leaf can be observed by determining the relative leaf area ratio (RLAR), as it was
hypothesized that a lower RLAR value may be related to thicker leaves with greater volume

of tissues which sequester salts (Negrao et al., 2020).

Relative water fraction. Plants can tolerate a saline environment by reducing its
hydraulic conductance to decrease the transport of salty water into the shoots and reduce
water potential in the leaves (Vysotskaya et., 2010; Gama et al., 2009). The difference of
water content of plants in saline and non-saline conditions can be measured using the
relative water fraction that indicates the ability of the plant to maintain water despite the

stressful conditions (Negrao et al., 2020).

Salt tolerance indices. Some of the salt tolerance indices that could be taken are
salt injury index (SII), tolerance index (TOL), and stress tolerance index (STI). These
indices are used to measure the performance of different accessions and its correlations
with other traits. TOL and STI are usually used to measure the yield potential measured
under stress and non-stress conditions, but it could be used for many growth-related traits
(Fernandez, 1992). On the other hand, salt injury index by visual appearance classification

by Zhang et al. (2003).


Based on Physiological and Biochemical Aspects

Chlorophyll content. Chlorophyll is one of the important photosynthetic pigments
utilized during photosynthesis to provide energy for growth. The three steps in
photosynthesis are primary reaction, photosynthetic electron transport and
phosphorylation, and carbon assimilation (Li et al., 2018). Chl a and b are important in the
primary reaction for the absorption of different wavelengths, however the reason behind
the variation in leaf chl content among plant species, functional groups, and communities
in natural forest is still unknown (Li et al., 2018). During the synthesis of chl, soil plays an
important role in supplying the important elements such as N and P (Fredeen et al., 1990).
Moreover, water is an essential medium in delivering these nutrients and without it, chl
synthesis will be negatively affected resulting to chl decomposition and leaf yellowing (Li
et al., 2018). The response of the plant to salinity stress by measurement of chlorophyll
content can be accomplished through destructive and non-destructive ways. The in-vitro
technique makes use of an extraction solvent and spectrophotometer to measure the chl
content, whereas a non-destructive in-situ method provides the chl data with the use of

SPAD meter (Parry et al., 2014).

Electrolyte leakage. Stress can induce a specific reversible alteration of cell
membrane permeability resulting in efflux of electrolytes such a K* ions which is mediated
by plasma membrane cation channels when activated by ROS and often results in cell death
under severe stress (Ilik et al., 2018; Demidchick et al., 2014). The leakage can be detected

almost instantaneously and lasts for a few minutes when stress factor is applied


(Demidchick et al., 2014). The amount of electrolytes leaked from a tissue can be used to
determine the extent of damage and this could be measured by the electrical conductivity
of water which contains the affected tissue (Hatsugai and Katagiri, 2018). The degree of
damage can be estimated by comparing the conductivity of leaked ions between injured
and uninjured tissues (Mattsson 1996, McNabb and Takahashi 2000). Under moderate
stress, the efflux of K* promotes the catabolic processes and conserves the metabolic

energy for adaptation and repair (Demidchick et al., 2014).

Na and K concentration. A balanced Na‘ and K* ratio during salt stress is one of
the tolerance mechanisms of plants. Homeostasis between these two elements is not
maintained when Na* moves into the cytoplasm leading to the depolarization of the
membrane potential below the resting potential which activates the K* outward rectifier
channels allowing K* to be extruded (Assaha et al., 2017). Since K* is essential in various
physiological processes, the deficiency of K* due to high Na’ will therefore lead to growth
impairment. According to Very and Sentenac (2003), salt stress sensitivity is exclusively
attributable to K* deficiency with its concentration in soil usually in the micromolar range.
The accumulation of toxic Na’ ions in the plant should be measured as it is viewed crucial

for salt stress tolerance.

Compatible solutes content. Hyperosmotic conditions because of salt stress can
be alleviated by the accumulation of osmolytes. Some of the organic osmolytes that do not
disrupt the proper functioning of organelles and promote osmotic adjustment are called

compatible solutes usually found in non-vacuolar compartments of plant cells (Gagneul et


al., 2007). These osmolytes can be used to maintain turgor pressure and stabilize proteins
and other compartments during stress (Rath et al., 2020). Some of the compatible solutes
which could be measured in response to salt stress are proline, glycine betaine, sugars, and

polyols.

Antioxidant activity. Antioxidant defenses vary from species to species, and it can
exist in two forms as enzymatic (EA) or non-enzymatic antioxidants (NA) in the
intracellular and extracellular environment (Nimse and Pal, 2015). These two types work
differently when they interact with ROS. EA works by breaking down and removing the
free radicals, whereas NA interferes with the free radical chain reaction (Nimse and Pal,
2015). Superoxide dismutase, catalase, and glutathione reductase are under the enzymatic
antioxidants. Vitamin C, vitamin E, polyphenol, carotenoids, and glutathione as non-
enzymatic antioxidants. Anthocyanin can also be measured because it is an excellent

scavenger of free radicals (Gould, 2004).

The response of plants to salinity is dependent on many factors. The type of crops
and its genotypes, the experimental system and its duration, and the parameters to be
measured among others have interacting roles in determining the tolerance or susceptibility
of crop to salt stress. In the reviewed literatures, one of the identified gaps is on the study
of salinity tolerance using a variety of genotypes per species. This type of research would
contribute to the bank of knowledge useful in plant physiology and breeding. And
ultimately, it would improve the capacity of farmers to produce high yielding crops despite

the existing problematic saline soil.

CHAPTER II

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Time and Place of Study

The study was conducted at East-West Seed Company (EWSC) - Hortanova
Research Center located in Purok 3, Barangay Pagolingin Bata, Lipa City, Batangas. The

duration of the research was from April to September 2021.
Experimental Design

Tomato and luffa from Solanaceae and Cucurbitaceae families, respectively, were
prepared and set-up at different times in separate greenhouses. The experiment was laid
out in two-factor in randomized complete block design (RCBD) with treatment and
accessions as the factors. Each treatment was replicated thrice and had five samples per

replicate.
Screening Process

Two consecutive screening steps were executed in the experiment. During the dose-
response preliminary screening (1“ step), different levels of NaCl solution were irrigated
to a coded accession of tomato and luffa seedlings for 21 days from April to May. After
treatment application, plants were screened based on its survival percentage. The NaCl
dosage range, which showed the most plant survivors, was determined and recommended

for the salt tolerance evaluation. In this second step, treatment application for 14 days and


data gathering (based on morphology and physiology) for 3 days in tomato and eggplant
were separately done from May to June (tomato) and August to September (luffa).
Temperature from May to June averaged at 31.5°C while RH was 68%. In August to
September, the temperature average was 25.5°C while RH was 80%. The specific methods

applied in seedling preparation and treatment application were the following:

A. Seedling preparation

Seeds from different accessions (Table 1) of luffa and tomato were initially sown
in seedling trays. Water irrigation was continuously done until the day before treatment
application. Fertilizer was applied at two different periods, prior to transplanting and 7 days
before treatment application. Healthy seedlings of luffa at 7 days and tomato at 14 days
from transplanting were selected and transplanted in a 60-mm diameter black plastic pots.
A potting media mixture of 21 grams of coco coir: sand: peat moss with a 3:1:1 ratio,
respectively with pH of 5.8 for tomato, and a mixture of 21 grams of sand: peatmoss with

2:1 ratio with pH of 6.0 for luffa were used.

Table 1. List of accessions per crop subjected to salinity treatment.

Family Crop Entry No. Accession Code
1 EW-LUF-001
; 2 EW-LUF-002
Cucurbitaceae Luffa 3 EW-LUF-003
1 EW-TOM-001
2 EW-TOM-002
Solanaceae Tomato 3 EW-TOM-003
4 EW-TOM-004


B. Treatment application

For the NaCl solution, specific amounts of RCI Labscan sodium chloride 99% were
mixed with purified water according to the concentration in Table 2. The transplanted
seedlings were irrigated with 30 ml of saline solution per pot. For concentration higher than
25 mmol L’!, a daily increment of the same concentration was followed to avoid osmotic
shocks. After the treatment, seedlings were harvested and washed with tap water in
preparation for data collection. For reference, the electrical conductivity equivalent and pH
of NaCl concentration used per crop after 14 days of treatment application was presented

on Table 3.

Table 2. NaCl concentrations at dose-response preliminary screening and salt
tolerance evaluation.

NaCl (mmol L”')

Treatment No.

Dose-response screening Salt tolerance evaluation
1 0 0
2 25 50
3 50 100
4 100 200
5 200 N/A
6 400 N/A

Table 3. Electrical conductivity and pH of NaCl concentration in different growing
media of tomato and luffa 14 days after treatment application.

P Soil Media
NaCl Solution Tomato Luffa
mmol Lt pH mS cm™ pH mS cm? pH mS cm!
0 6.56 0 6.32 1 5.95 0
50 6.23 6 5.61 8 6.04 3
100 6.19 11 5.58 10 6.08 5
200 6.16 20 5.74 13 6.05 7


Data collection

A. Morphological indices
o Seedling survival rate
Quantification of seedlings that survived at the end of salt treatment was
determined using the formula:
Seedling survival (%) = total number of survived seedlings erioo
total number of seedlings
o Salt damage index
Visual appearance classification of salt tolerance using the method of Zhong
et al. (2019). The classified criteria of salt injury are:
Level 1: healthy + no damage symptoms of new and old leaves
Level 2: yellowing at margin and tip of old leaves + no symptoms
at younger leaves
Level 3: yellowing and drying, <1/3 of old leaves drying + some
drying at new shoots
Level 4: yellowing and drying, >1/3 of old leaves drying +
completely drying at new shoots
Level 5: symptoms of completely drying and abscission + drying at
main vine

i (index of damage grade x plant number)

9,
5(total number of plants) Ee)

Salt damage index (%) =


o Salt tolerance index
For comparison, the performance of other genotypes was compared to the

untreated treatment using the formula (Parihar et al., 2014).

Mean of genotype for a trait
Mean of untreated

Salt tolerance index =

B. Morphological parameters - number of leaves, main stem diameter, leaf area
ratio, main stem length/plant height, root length, shoot and root fresh and dry
weights.

o A digital caliper was used to determine the main stem diameter. For leaf
area ratio, the 3 and 4" leaves of tomato and 1° and 2™ leaves of luffa from
the bottom were selected for the measurement. Leaf samples were scanned
using an HP Deskjet Ink Adv 2060 K110 at 300 dpi then analyzed using
Rhizovision Explorer Ver 2.0.2. Stem length or plant height was measured
from the junction between the root and shoot up to the tip of the main stem.
Roots were carefully stretched up to its maximum length and measured
using a ruler. Furthermore, shoot and root fresh weights were quantified by
Ohaus Pioneer PA523 precision balance scale, while root and shoot dry

weights were oven dried through Memmert UM300 oven at 70°C for 48 hr.


C. Physiological measurement
o Assessment of membrane permeability was determined by electrolyte
leakage following the method of Korkmaz et al. (2007). Three 1-cm? in leaf
samples were collected from the individual plants. These were taken from
the youngest fully expanded leaves. After collection, cut leaf samples were
washed with distilled water then placed in stoppered vials with 20 ml
distilled water. The samples were incubated at room temperature for 24 hr.
on a shaker at 100 rpm. EC1 of the bathing solution was measured before
placing in an autoclave at 121°C for 20 mins to get EC2. Leakage was

calculated by using the formula and expressed in percentage:

EC1
Electrolyte leakage (%) = Fa. x 100

Data Analysis

Data collected from each crop were separately subjected to analysis of variance
(ANOVA) in RCBD with significance level of 5% using the statistical tool for agricultural
research (STAR). Significant differences detected between means were analyzed using
Least Significant Difference (LSD) Test. Normality of distribution and homogeneity of
variances were not met by some of the parameters such as shoot dry weight (tomato), root
fresh weight (luffa), and salt damage index (tomato and luffa) even after data
transformation. Hence, parameters that did not satisfy the assumptions of ANOVA were

analyzed using Friedman test through the Minitab Statistical Software.

CHAPTER IV

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Dose - Response Preliminary Screening

A representative accession from tomato and luffa was subjected to concentrations
0, 25, 50, 100, 200, and 400 mmol L’! of NaCl for 21 days. Survival at the highest
concentration (400 mmol L’!) resulted to 33% in tomato. Signs of wilting primarily in the
stem, leaves and shoot meristem showed that further extending of stress will ultimately kill
the remaining plant samples (Appendix A.1). On the other hand, the rest of the treatments
showed 100% survival. Low survival percentage was also found in luffa. The highest
treatment resulted to 0%, 200 mmol had 80%, while the rest had 100% (Appendix A.2).
The results of preliminary experiment wherein 0, 50, 100 and 200 mmol L" of NaCl

showed high plant survival were used in the next screening.

Salt Tolerance Evaluation of Tomato

Number of leaves. The number of leaves per accession in response to varying
concentrations of NaCl showed a significant interaction with p value = 0.0063 (Appendix
B.1). A general decreasing trend in the number of leaves was observed in all the accessions
subjected to salinity treatment (Figure 1). Appendix C.1. and C.2 indicated the mean
comparison of each accesion at the level of NaCl concentration and vice versa. In all the

concentrations, EW-TOM-003 had the least recorded number of leaves (Figure 2). Even

though it had the least leaf count, its number of leaves at 50 mmol L”! did not differ from
that of control. Moreover, EW-TOM-004 which had insignificantly different number of
leaves compared to EW-TOM-002 and 001 at 50 mmol L"! (Figure 2) it had the same
number of leaves with that of control. The insignificant difference between control and 50
mmol L" of NaCl is supported by the percent reduction recorded from the accessions. At
50 mmol L", reduction in the number of leaves was highest in EW-TOM-001 with 13%,
followed by EW-TOM-002 with 7%, and EW-TOM-003 with 5% while EW-TOM-004
increased by around 4%.

Leaves are essential in improving salinity tolerance because of the stomates for
photosynthesis and cells for compartmentation of salts. If a sensitive plant will
continuously grow in a saline soil, storage of excessive Na* and CI ions in the cells and
stomatal conductance will be reduced (Cuartero and Munoz, 1999). Based on the study of
Rahman et al. (2018) and Parvin et al. (2015), 60 mmol L”! was needed to initiate negative
change in the number of leaves. In the experiment, only two accessions (EW-TOM-001
and 002) showed a different response between control and 50 mmol L”!. The other two
accessions performed similarly with the results of Rosadi et al. (2014), wherein tomatoes
grown in salinity from 10 to 50 mmol L"! showed no significant reduction in the number
of leaves. Reduction in growth found in other tomato cultivars indicated the tolerance to
certain saline condition. The difference in response among all the accessions utilized

suggests that each accession may have higher sensitivity to salt than the other.


EW-TOM-001 EW-TOM-002
15 15
8 : 8 :
glee ° ‘ i 10 bs : - ‘
369 Ss
Zo HY
g 0 50 loo 150, 200g 8 Ea mM 9m en
2 NaCl (mamol L7}) a NaCl (mmol L*!)
EW-TOM-003 EW-TOM-004
15 15
8 8
5 10 @ a b b 8 10°? : . c
Ss ° 3s
B20 g 0
E 0 50 100 150-200 E 0 50 100 150-200
‘NaCl (mmol L!) NaCl (mmol L")

Figure 1. Effect of NaCl concentrations (0, 50, 100 and 200 mmol L’!) on the number of
leaves of tomato.

= EW-TOM-001 =EW-TOM-002 EW-TOM-003 EW-TOM-004

Number of leaves
oR RR WD wm SS
Bic
hace
EEE -
aaa
Hic
=
i -
Fic
me.
EE «-
EERE
fio
He

0 50 100 200
NaCl (mmol L*!)

Figure 2. Comparison of tomato accessions at each concentration of NaCl in terms of
number of leaves.


Leaf area ratio. The exposure of different accessions of tomato to increasing
concentrations of NaC] showed no significant interaction however, accessions were found
to be significantly different with each other (Appendix B.2). EW-TOM-003 had a LAR
(leaf area ratio) of 1.04 and is similar with EW-TOM-001 and EW-TOM-002 (Appendix
C.3). EW-TOM-004 had the lowest LAR and is significantly different from the rest of the
accessions. In this particular study, LAR was no affected by NaCl concentration unlike in
the studies of Bacha et al. (2017) and Knight et al. (1992) wherein there was a decline in
LAR seen with the increase in NaCl concentration that the tomato varieties used.

Total dry weight of the samples may have also influenced the overall LAR. Based
on Figure 3, 50 and 100 mmol L"! were not sufficient to differentiate its LAR to control.
These two concentrations may not be damaging enough to promote an obvious growth
retardation in leaf area within the treatment application period. However, both leaf area
and dry weight may react inversely to high levels of salt. It is because the capacity of the
plant to translocate the assimilates to the new developing leaves affects the cell expansion
according to Sarker and Hara (2004). While mass accumulation can be altered which may

result to changes in plant growth thereby affecting its dry weight (Knight et al., 1992).



06 b

Leaf area ratio (mm? mg")

0 50 100 150 200
NaCl (mmol L')

Figure 3. Effects of NaCl concentrations (0, 50, 100 and 200 mmol L”) in leaf area ratio
of tomato.

Plant height. Analyzing the combination of different accessions and NaCl levels did not
show significant interaction but main effects of accession and NaCl concentration were
highly significant with p-value < 0.001 (Appendix B.3). For the main effect of NaCl
(Appendic C.4), Figure 4 showed that plant height started to significantly decrease at 100
mmol L! onwards with 5.41% reduction compared to control. While tomato at 200 mmol
L" versus 0 mmol L"! declined by 18%. In terms of accessions’ main effect (Appendix C.
5), the tallest plant was EW-TOM-004 while the shortest was observed in EW-TOM-003
with 19% difference (Figure 5). EW-TOM-001 was shorter by 5% than EW-TOM-004.
EW-TOM-002 had 14% difference from the tallest accession. Since no interaction between
NaCl and accession was found, evaluating the response of each accession to the specific

level of NaCl was not determined.

Reduction in plant height is one of the most reliable indicators of the negative
impact of salinity in tomato (Cruz et al., 1990). However, the interaction effects between
accession and NaCl concentration was not observed in the study. This could be due to the
innate characteristics of accessions and/or shorter duration (14 days) of treatment
application that differences in height were not determined in the experiment. In the study
of Hajer et al., (2006) and Oztekin and Tuzel (2011) where significant differences in plant
height were detected, both studies exposed the tomato samples for a period longer than 14
days. Decline in growth may vary according to the variety of species, but the common
reduction as the saline concentration increases is a common observation among non-

halophytes.


Plant height (mm)
3 8

s
a

0 50 100 150 200
NaCl (mmol L*!)

Figure 4. Effect of NaCl concentrations (0, 50, 100 and 200 mmol L”') on the plant height
of tomato.

b he
: ‘ ;
0 : ce
EW-TOM-001 EW-TOM-002 EW-TOM-003 EW-TOM-004
Accessions

Plant height (mm)

>
a

Figure 5. Plant height of different tomato accessions.

Stem diameter. There was no significant interaction between accessions and NaCl
concentrations in stem diameter (Appendix B.4). Main effect of accessions (Appendix C.6)
and NaCI concentrations (Appendix C.7) were significant with p value <0.01. Regardless
of accession, stem diameter decreased as the saline level rose (Figure 6). Reduction
between point a in control and point b at 50 and 100 was at 7%. The highest NaCl
concentration had the greatest decline from the untreated at 13%. The tomato accession
with the thickest diameter was EW-TOM-001 (Figure 7). It was followed by EW-TOM-
002 with 15% difference. EW-TOM-004 was 20% thinner than EW-TOM-001. EW-TOM-
003 was 24% thinner than the thickest accession. The NaCl level at 50 mmol L! was
adequate to bring significant change in stem diameter (Figure 6).

Stem diameter is an essential morphological feature to assess because it is also used

to indicate plant water and carbon balance (Meng et al., 2017). According to Moghaieb et


al. (2012), stem diameter reflects the water supply taken up by the roots from the soil. In
salinity, the osmotic effect of soil may disturb the water uptake and ion accumulation in
tissues thereby altering different plant processes including cell expansion (Helaly et al.,
2017). The decreasing stem diameter upon exposure to increasing saline concentration was
also found in other salinity studies using tomato (Vieira et al.,2016; Zhang et al., 2016).
According to Helaly et al. (2017), tomato irrigated with 2000 to 8000 ppm or
approximately 30 to 140 mmol L” of saline solution resulted to thinner diameter. In the
actual experiment, the shorter diameter at 50 to 100 mmol L” coincided with the result of
the latter study. Similar results to Alsadon et al. (2013) were obtained, where tomato
subjected to 100 mmol L” of salt was 11% shorter than control close to the 13% difference
between 0 and 200 mmol L”!. Another study by Oztekin and Tuzel (2011), reported that
the diameter in their tolerant cultivar recorded a 5% and from the most sensitive cultivar a
21% difference between untreated and 200 mmol L”! of NaCl. These variation in reduction

allowed for the identification of the most tolerant cultivar in their study.


a
@ b b
4 e e
€ e
:
i
an
0 50 100 150 200
NaCl (mmol L*!)

Figure 6. Effect of NaCl concentration (0, 50, 100 and 200 mmol L"!) on the stem diameter
of tomato.

EW-TOM-001 EW-TOM-002 EW-TOM-003 EW-TOM-004
Accession

=

Stem diameter (mm)
vw

Figure 7. Stem diameter of different tomato accessions.

Shoot fresh weight. Accessions and NaCI treatments were found to have a highly
significant interaction at p-value = 0.0063 (Appendix B.5). The comparison of each

accession on the level of NaCl concentration (Appendix C.8) and vice versa (Appendix


C.9) showed that fresh weight of all the accessions grown in 50 mmol L"' had no significant
difference from the control except for EW-TOM-003 which had a higher fresh weight than
the control. Decreasing fresh weight were noted at 100 mmol L’! (Figure 8). But only
significant on 2 accessions (EW-TOM-002 and 003). This suggests that the tomato
accessions may still grow normally in terms of shoot fresh weight even if the saline level
is at 50 mmol L"!. However, a further increase in concentration would result to poor growth.
Figure 9 showed that EW-TOM-001 had the heaviest fresh shoot. This accession grown in

all levels of NaCl had the heaviest fresh shoot than all the other accessions.

Among all the accessions, decline in weight between 0 and 50 mmol L”! was only
observed in EW-TOM-001 with 7%. The rest of the accessions increased its shoot fresh
weight with 9%, 23%, and 8% for EW-TOM-002, 003, and 004, respectively (Figure 8).
Since the difference between 50 and 100 mmol L” vs control were found insignificant in
majority of the accessions (Figure 8), shoot fresh weight decline at 200 mmol L*! compared
to untreated revealed that EW-TOM-001, 002, 003, and 004 had 32%, 34%, 16%, and 17%,
respectively.

Shoot fresh weight is one of the recommended evaluation standards for salinity
stress at vegetative growth (Pailles et al., 2020; Negrao et al., 2017). This morphological
parameter is also an indicator of water content within the plant cell (Park and Kim, 1993).
With the known detrimental effect of salinity to the osmotic potential of soil, water
availability may have contributed to the overall shoot fresh weight of the accessions. As

the salt concentration increased, reduction in cell elongation and stunted plant growth may


be expected (Loreto et al., 2003; Babu et al., 2012). There was also a clear stunting of plant
growth with a decrease in shoot fresh weight of tomato in the study of Hajer et al. (2006),
and Scholberg and Locascio (1999). Tomato grown in 0 to 60 mmol L" of salt showed
more than 60% decline in shoot fresh weight compared to control according to Al-Busaid
et al. (2009). A large difference from the 8% decline found in the experiment at 50 mmol
L'!. In the study of Rupali (2018), a considered tolerant tomato cultivar ‘Abhinav’ had
34.12% reduction while a sensitive cultivar ‘Naina’ had 45.85% difference between 0 and
100 mmol L”! of NaCl. The reduction in the experiment at 200 mmol L"! was closed to the
previous study wherein EW-TOM-002 and 001 had 34% and 32%, respectively. But these
accessions were considered more sensitive in terms of shoot fresh weight because it had

twice the amount of reduction than the other two accessions.

EW-TOM-001 EW-TOM-002
> 8 rd a 0 b = 8 a a
By, & e Bi,
26 Zo ° ° ;
B4 a4 ° .
52 52
Zo 3 0
ta 0 50 100 150 200 = 0 50 100 150 200
3 3
2 NaCl (mmol L!) 2 NaCl (mmol L!)
a a

EW-TOM-003 EW-TOM-004
a? a 8
4° - e m4” e e
2 £2
s s
0 & 0
& 0 50 100 150 200 0 50 100 150 200
3 fs
£ NaCl (mmol L”}) 8 NaCl (mmol L:!)

a

Figure 8. Effect of NaCl concentrations (0, 50, 100 and 200 mmol L”') on the shoot fresh
weight of tomato.


= EW-TOM-001 = EW-TOM-002 EW-TOM-003 EW-TOM-004

a

7 a a
@ b l
26 b by
z . a
Bs _ be dn J bby
3 e ag L bo?
a4 i
é 1
e3
£2
a



0 50 100 200

NaCl (mmol L-!)
Figure 9. Comparison of shoot fresh weight of tomato accessions at each concentration of
NaCl.

Shoot dry weight. The data was analyzed through Friedman Test (nonparametric test)
wherein the p-value for accessions and NaCl concentration showed 0.034 and <0.001,
respectively (Appendix D.1 and D.2). Dry weight of tomato shoots declined by 9% from 0
to 50 mmol L"!, 25% from 0 to 100 mmol L”!, and 48% between control and 200 mmol L”
| (Figure 10). Reduction in weight in the highest treatment was almost half the weight of
control. On the other hand, by ranking the median dry weights of each accession, EW-
TOM-001 ranked 1% followed by EW-TOM-0003, 004, and 002 (Figure 11). Although it
could not be determined statistically which among the accessions had the highest dry
weight, it may still be inferred that there was a 14% gap between the heaviest (EW-TOM-

001) and lightest accession (EW-TOM-002).


09 7

0 50 100 150 200
NaCl (mmol L-!)

Figure 10. Effect of NaCl concentrations (0, 50, 100 and 200 mmol L”) on the shoot dry
weight of tomato.


a 07
Pt 0.6
‘Bos
Boa
E 03
0.2
0.1


EW-TOM-001 EW-TOM-002 EW-TOM-003 EW-TOM-004
Accession

Figure 11. Shoot dry weight of different tomato accessions.
Root length. The ANOVA for root length showed no interaction in NaCl concentrations

and accessions with p-value = 0.1384 (Appendix B.6). Neither the accessions nor the NaCl

levels main effect was significant with p value = 0.1032 and 0.2603, respectively. Root


measurement requires careful and proper handling to prevent its delicate roots from getting
damage. However, the process of cleaning the root samples may have contributed to the
experimental error resulting to the insignificance of data in the ANOVA. Appendix A.5
showed the scanned root samples taken from each accession irrigated with different NaCl

levels.

Root fresh weight. The experiment showed a significant interaction between NaCl
concentrations and accessions (p value = 0.0149) (Appendix B.7) for root fresh weight.
Pairwise mean comparison of NaCl concentrations in different accessions (Appendix C.10)
revealed a significant decreasing root fresh weight among all the accessions as the level of
NaCl increased. All the accessions on Figure 12 had prominent reduction at 50 mmol L”!,
with greater decline in weight at 200 mmol L”!. The comparison of accession at each level
of NaCl (Appendix C.11) presented that among all the accessions, EW-TOM-001
repeatedly exhibited the significantly heaviest root fresh weight from 0 to 200 mmol L"
(Figure 13). At 50 mmol L"!, it showed that the significant percent decrease in weight
compared to control was recorded highest from EW-TOM-004 with 35%, followed by EW-
TOM-003 with 34%, EW-TOM-001 with 23% and EW-TOM-002 with 15%.

Tolerance to salinity can be measured based on the changes in root growth. Roots
have a vital role for plant coping mechanism as its growth and architecture change in
response to stress (Lovelli et al., 2012). Under salinity, root fresh weight may either
increase or decrease in response to the water available for plants. Schwarz and Grosch

(2003) and Hajer et al. (2006) reported a reduction in root fresh weight of tomato subjected


to salinity. It was also found that growing tomatoes in 0 to 160 mmol L” of salt resulted to
lighter root fresh weight (Kayess et al., 2020). Furthermore, a 30% reduction in root fresh
weight in tomato after growing in 100 mmol L” of salt for three weeks was observed by
Albacete et al. (2008). This value is close to the reduction found in EW-TOM-004 with
35% and EW-TOM-001 with 34%. In the study of Kayess et al. (2020), the comparison of
ten tomato genotypes showed that at 40 mmol L”! of NaCl, the lowest reduction was 11%

while the highest was 51% compared to control.

EW-TOM-001 EW-TOM-002

we

Now
N
ca

°
°

0 50 100 150 200
NaCl (mmol L')

0 50 100 150 200
NaCl (mmol L-!)

Root fresh weight (g)
Root fresh weight (g)

EW-TOM-003 EW-TOM-004

we
rr

Ba Bh

B26 b b B26 b

2 ‘ c  =@ Gol :
z 1 e = 1 be .
4s €

£0 £o

3s 0 50 100 150 200 3 0 50 100 150 200

% NaCl (mmol L-!) % NaCl (mmol L*)

Figure 12. Effect of NaCl concentrations (0, 50, 100 and 200 mmo! L”) on the root fresh
weight of tomato.


®EW-TOM-001 ®EW-TOM-002 EW-TOM-003 EW-TOM-004



a
b be
c a
I b s
15 : eG bb »5
2a,
1 Bi mH | ®
os [| |
° |
0 50 100 20


Root fresh weight (g)

NaCl (mmol L”)

Figure 13. Comparison of root fresh weight of tomato accessions at each concentration of
NaCl.

Root dry weight. The analysis of variance with p-value = 0.0021 showed a significant
interaction between NaCl concentration and accession for root dry weight (Appendix B.8).
In the comparison of means (Appendix C.12), a decline in weight from 50 mmol L”
onwards was apparent in all the accessions with 200 mmol L’! averaging the lowest (Figure
14). In the comparison of accessions at each level of NaCl (Appendix C.13), EW-TOM-
001 consistently recorded a heavier root dry weight from 0 to 100 mmol L”! (Figure 15).
At 50 mmol L”, there is a drastic decrease in root dry weight of accessions EW-TOM-004
and EW-TOM-001, however, all accessions did decrease significantly. EW-TOM-004 had
a reduction of 36%, EW-TOM-001 with 32%, EW-TOM-003 with 22%, and EW-TOM-

002 with 14%.


Tomato cultivars grown and irrigated with saline water at 25 to 60 mmol L” of salt
concentration recorded a lighter root dry weight than control (Hajer et al., 2006). Other
researchers also supported the same observation in tomato (Bonorata et al., 2021 and
Siddiky et al., 2015). A commercial tomato rootstock exhibited a 62% reduction in dry
weight at 60 mmol L”! compared to 15 mmol L"! of NaCl (Bonarota et al., 2021). Tomato
cultivar ‘Amani’ had significantly lower weight at 50 mmol L” than untreated with 31%
(Shiyab et al., 2013). The comparison of tomato cultivars showed that at 60 mmol L”!
compared to control, the 11% reduction from ‘Plitz’ made it more tolerant than the
susceptible type ‘Grace’ with 44% (Hajer et al., 2006). In this study, based on root dry
weight, EW-TOM-003 could be more tolerant to salinity with 14% reduction compared
with the rest of the accessions.

Roots are essential to support and promote salt tolerance in tomato. According to
Hajer et al. (2006), plants with larger root system that can promote better water and nutrient
uptake may be selected and used as salt tolerant rootstocks. Increase in root growth was
found in alfalfa plants. Vaughan et al. (2002) reported that there was stimulation in root
mass density when alfalfa plants were grown in a hydroponically saline solution. The
promotion of root growth could be attributed to the fact that soil compaction was not
present which could promote growth of roots while also combating the effect of salt stress.
Signifying that the mechanism of salt damage was different between soilless and soil-filled
saline condition (Tu and Tan, 1991; Grzesiak, 2006; Tavakkoli et al., 2011). Aside from
experiment type, another factor to consider is the duration of treatment wherein salinity

tolerance in some tomato cultivars varied according to age (Hajer et al., 2006).


EW-TOM-001 EW-TOM-002
03 03
S38 S
= 02 b 2 02
5 o b FE) é b ; :
g 01 pe g 01 ° © e
Bo Fo
3 0 50 100 150 200 3 0 50 100 150 200
4 NaCl (mmol L!) 4 NaCl (mmol L-!)
EW-TOM-003 EW-TOM-004
03 03
cS oo
S02 4 02a
302 : ; 302 5 .
Bor - e Bol y
bd e
Fo Bo
Ss 0 50 100 150 200 3 0 50 100-150-200
rs NaCl (mmol L!) Z NaCl (mmol L!)

Figure 14. Effect of NaCl concentrations (0, 50, 100 and 200 mmol L”) on the root dry
weight of tomato.

mEW-TOM-001 =EW-TOM-002 EW-TOM-003 EW-TOM-004

0.25
a
i 02
C}
= ea a
Bos | a i ED a
id Le Tac b a
ts b 2b a
gs OL T ab b
3 i L i Tae
2 iy
0.05 |
0 50 100 200

NaCl (mmol L*!)

Figure 15. Comparison of root dry weight of tomato accessions at each concentration of
NaCl.


Electrolyte leakage. A significant interaction between accessions and NaCl concentrations
was found (Appendix B.9) at p value = 0.0267 with regards to electrolyte leakage.
Comparison of electrolyte leakage means among NaC] levels within accession (Appendix
C.14) showed a direct relationship between NaCl concentration and percent leakage
(Figure 16). All the accessions showed greater leakage as NaCl increased. At 50 mmol L'!
of NaCl, electrolyte leakage from all accessions were significantly greater from the control.
In terms of identifying the differences between accessions within NaCl level (Appendix
C.10), EW-TOM-001 without NaCl had the the lowest leakage among the rest of the
accessions (Figure 17). Although, EW-TOM-001 recorded the least leakage at control, it
had the greatest percentage leakage difference between control and 50 mmol L"! with 49%,
followed by EW-TOM-004 with 37%, EW-TOM-003 with 36%, and EW-TOM-002 with
28%. When concentration of NaCl was increased from 50 to 100 mmol L”', EW-TOM-001
and EW-TOM-004 increased the percentage leakage by 24% and 15%, respectively
whereas the other accessions increased but not significantly.

Leakage of electrolytes is a measure of plant tolerance to certain stress and can be
used in the selection of salt-tolerant plants (Ashraf and Ali, 2008). It is an important
measure because it evaluates the membrane damage caused by salinity. Ors et al. (2021)
found that tomato used in their study showed enhanced leakage from 0 to 150 mmol L”! of
NaCl. Other researchers described a similar higher leakage in lettuce with 27.5%
(Hnilickova et al., 2019) and in cucumber with more than 45% (Khan et al., 2013) between
0 and 50 mmol L”. In 16 muskmelon cultivars, ‘Gongi’ cultivar had the highest increase

in leakage at 120 mmol L"! of NaCl compared to control by 45.35% and deemed as most


sensitive to salt stress (Shafiee et al., 2019). This leakage is close to that of EW-TOM-001
with 40%. Although the type of ions during electrolyte leakage measurement was not
identified in the actual experiment, Demidchik et al. (2014) reported that ion leakage is
mainly related to the efflux of K' from the cells and other cations that move to balance the
efflux of K*. It is therefore recommended to maintain high cytosolic K* for plants to
tolerate high NaCl concentration (Shabala et al., 2006). However according to Demidchik
et al. (2014), high levels of electrolyte leakage may also signify a naturally high level of
K* that could be abundant in plant cells. Hence, electrolyte leakage must not be the sole

basis for the selection of tolerant species.

EW-TOM-001 EW-TOM-002
150 : 150
= 100 c 2 = 100 . b M
B ooo ? °
Z 50 £ 50
20 zo

AA

Zo so 100 «150 00's BC 50 100 ©1500
g NaCl (mmol L-!) g NaCl (mmol L-!)
a a

EW-TOM-003 EW-TOM-004
= 150 a _~ 150 ,
x : b x b b s
= 100 4 c a re ® ° :
2 50 ° & soe
3 3
3 3
2 ? o (0
Zo 50 100-150-200 So 50 100-150-200
8 NaCl (mmol L-!) g NaCl (mmol L:!)
a Fs

Figure 16. Effect of NaCI concentrations (0, 50, 100 and 200 mmol L"') on the electrolyte
leakage of tomato.


®EW-TOM-001 =EW-TOM-002 EW-TOM-003 EW-TOM-004

apa
come +t
a2: 7 a7 3 Ba
b " a
aaa il 5
t
) | |
0 50 100 200

NaCl (mmol L7!)

Electryolyte leakage (%)
Sse ee es

°

Figure 17. Comparison of electrolyte leakage of tomato accessions at each concentration
of NaCl.

Salt damage index. The visual assessment of salt injury in tomato showed that treatment
effects were significant in terms of accession (Appendix D.3) with p-value = 0.004. The
salt damage index (SDI) of each accession suggested that the lower the SDI, the lesser was
the injury caused by salt. The response of each accession to saline concentration revealed
that EW-TOM-003 and 004 earned the highest SDI of 40%, while EW-TOM 001 and 002
had 38 and 22%, respectively (Figure 18). Based on median ranking, EW-TOM-002 had
the least damage. No difference was found between NaCI concentrations (Appendix D.4).

In the study of Zhu et al. (2008), the comparison of two cucumber cultivars
suggested that the performance of each cultivar differed in terms of SDI with one
outperforming the other. The visual diagnosis of crop through salt damage index may also
vary according to crop being studied as different versions were used in rice (Gregorio et

al., 1997) and cucumber (Zhang et al., 2003). Some grading guidelines are specific to the


type of crop. The extent of damage or the description per level is also another factor to
consider when determining which guideline must be used. Salt damage in tomato was more
differentiated in terms of accessions than NaC] concentrations. For better results, it would
be recommended to have at least three evaluators acting as replicates since this parameter
involves a qualitative type of measurement or better yet that this be used with quantitative

parameters that could be attributed to its visual damage.

EW-TOM-001 EW-TOM-002 EW-TOM-003 EW-TOM-004
Accessions


Salt damage index (%)
euszsSnzsead

Figure18. Salt damage index of each accession to saline condition.

Salt tolerance index. The correlation of parameters analyzed through Pearson correlation
(Appendix E.1) showed some significant relationships with p-value < 0.05 and 0.01. For
leaf area ratio index and root length, none of the parameters showed significant correlation.
The correlation ranged from 0.021 to 0.845. The highest correlation value was between
shoot and root dry weights, whereas the lowest was between leaf area ratio and root fresh

weight. Based on the results, number of leaves, plant height, stem diameter, shoot and root


fresh weights, shoot and root dry weights, and electrolyte leakage were used as basis for
tolerance in the study.

The association of these indices is important to provide recommendation on which
parameters are expected to change in relation to the other. Correlations between these SDI
were also observed by Alsadon et al. (2015). They reported that the parameters in response
to saline condition was correlated with yield and was utilized in yield improvement and in
selection program. Another correlation analysis by Wu et al. (2019) using Brassica napus
showed positive relationship between indices for salt tolerance including root length.
However, SDI of root length did not show any significant relationship with the other

parameters probably due to the extent of damage during handling or data gathering.

Salt Tolerance Evaluation of Luffa

Number of leaves. The analysis of variance for number of leaves did not show significant
interaction between NaCl concentrations and accessions (Appendix B.10) with p-value =
0.1586. Significant main effects of NaCl concentrations and accessions (p-value < 0.01)
were found to differentiate the number of leaves in luffa (Appendix C. 16 and 17). Figure
19 showed that regardless of the accession utilized, a significantly decreasing number of
leaves resulted from growing luffa in increasing saline concentration from 0 to 200 mmol
L"!. Number of leaves in NaCl concentrations at 50, 100, and 200 mmol L’! was lower than
control by 10%, 19%, and 35%, respectively. The comparison of number of leaves per
accession showed that EW-LUF-003 had significantly more leaves than EW-LUF-001 and

002 with 13% difference (Figure 20).


Leaves are primarily used by the plant for photosynthesis. The senescence and
abscission during salt exposure negatively contributes to the total number of leaves
available to produce photosynthates. According to Modarelli et al (2020), Parida et al.
(2002), and Munns (2011), leaf senescence and abscission were also accelerated by the
degradation of tonoplast and chlorophyll molecules during stress. In the study of Topalova
et al. (2019), several cucurbit genotypes exposed to salinity from 100 to 300 mmol L"
reduced its number of leaves. Same results were obtained from the studies of Wang et al.
(2006) and Zhu et al. (2008). The observed 35% difference in the number of leaves between
untreated and 200 mmol L"! was closed to the observation of de Oliveira et al. (2017),
wherein cucumber subjected to 63 days of salinity at 62.5 mmol L’! of fertigation with
saline water had the highest reduction of 31.2%. In the study of Khan et al. (2013),
cucumber exposed for 14 days in 50 mmol L" revealed a 50% reduction in the number of
leaves compared to control. In purslane accessions subjected to 240 mmol L"! of salinity
for 60 days, ‘AcS’ increased by 3.65% while ‘Ac13’ the most sensitive decreased with
36.73% (Alam et al., 2016). These studies reported decline in the number of leaves as the
concentration of saline solution increased. It was also revealed that each accession may
respond differently, this was observed in the experiment but not due to the specific NaCl

concentration used.


Leaves are primarily used by the plant for photosynthesis. The senescence and
abscission during salt exposure negatively contributes to the total number of leaves
available to produce photosynthates. According to Modarelli et al (2020), Parida et al.
(2002), and Munns (2011), leaf senescence and abscission were also accelerated by the
degradation of tonoplast and chlorophyll molecules during stress. In the study of Topalova
et al. (2019), several cucurbit genotypes exposed to salinity from 100 to 300 mmol L?
reduced its number of leaves. Same results were obtained from the studies of Wang et al.
(2006) and Zhu et al. (2008). The observed 35% difference in the number of leaves between
untreated and 200 mmol L"! was closed to the observation of de Oliveira et al. (2017),
wherein cucumber subjected to 63 days of salinity at 62.5 mmol L” of fertigation with
saline water had the highest reduction of 31.2%. In the study of Khan et al. (2013),
cucumber exposed for 14 days in 50 mmol L"! revealed a 50% reduction in the number of
leaves compared to control. In purslane accessions subjected to 240 mmol L’! of salinity
for 60 days, ‘Ac5’ increased by 3.65% while ‘Ac13’ the most sensitive decreased with
36.73% (Alam et al., 2016). These studies reported decline in the number of leaves as the
concentration of saline solution increased. It was also revealed that each accession may
respond differently, this was observed in the experiment but not due to the specific NaCl

concentration used.


9 a
8 b
7 c
a Orr,
5 Ce CT d
S 5
Ba
y3
0 50 100 150 200
NaCl (mmol L*!)
Figure 19. Effect of NaCl concentrations (0, 50, 100 and 200 mmol L”') on the number of
leaves of luffa.
A a
7 b uy
: 4
EW-LUF-001 EW-LUF-002 EW-LUF-003
Accessions

Figure 20. Number of leaves of different luffa accessions.

Leaf area ratio. There was no significant interaction effect between accessions and NaCl

levels (Appendix B.11) on leaf area ratio (LAR) of luffa. There were only significant


differences found within the NaCl concentrations but not in the accessions (Appendix
C.18). Figure 21 illustrated a decreasing trend as the level of NaCl increased. Although
LAR decreased by 24% from 0 to 200 mmol L", the decline in value was insignificant.
Differences were not observed between 0 but at 50 mmol L”! and in higher concentrations.
Exposure of luffa to saline stress was not negatively affected in terms of LAR upon the
comparison of control with 50, 100 and 200 mmol L”! of NaCl.

The LAR results contrasted with the study of Chen et al. (2020) wherein a 50 mmol
L'! promoted the leaf area decline in cucumber. Leaf area of melon was significantly
reduced at 40 mmol L"! (Rouphael et al., 2012). Likewise, bottle gourd showed the highest
reduction in leaf area and plant dry weight with 48.14% and 46.27%, respectively when
compared to squash, cucumber, and bitter gourd irrigated for 17 days with 25 mmol L"! of
salt (Najib et al., 2018). The total dry weight contributes to the LAR. Dry weight may be
negatively affected as suppression of photosynthates and closure of stomates can occur
during saline stress (Chen et al., 2020; Rouphael et al., 2012). The period of stress is
another factor wherein Chen et al. (2018) observed that 15 to 20 days of saline exposure
can promote the accumulation of salts at toxic level in cucumber. However, lower leaf area
can also be an adaptive mechanism of plant to decrease its transpiration reducing the need
to take water from the soil. This effect can retain the movement of toxic ions from the roots

thereby limiting the accumulation in the shoot (Ruiz-Sanchez et al., 2000).


Leaf area ratio (mm?mg"!)
vow

0 50 100 150 200
NaCl (mmol L')

Figure 21. Effect of NaCl concentrations (0, 50, 100 and 200 mmol L"!) on the leaf area
ratio of luffa.

Main stem length. Length of the main stem showed a positive interaction for accession
and NaCl concentration at p-value = 0.0028 (Appendix B.12). General result for the
comparison of accession at each level of NaCl (Appendix C.19) had a decreasing main
stem length (MSL) as the treatment increased. Figure 22 showed the decreasing trend in
all accessions with increasing NaCl concentrations. At 50 mmol L”, the reduction in length
compared to control in EW-LUF-001 was 30%, EW-LUF-002 with 36%, and EW-LUF-
003 with 11%. NaCl concentration at 100 and 200 mmol L" significantly retarded the
growth of all the luffa accessions used.

According to Modarelli et al. (2020), shoot generally slows in growth as
concentration of salt increases. Inhibition of cell division and expansion are the

consequences of growing plants in saline condition (Rahneshan et al., 2018; Zhu, 2001;


Munns, 2002). But the severity of damage can also be affected by the developmental stage
of crop. Growth retardation caused by salinity can easily be recognized in luffa in terms of
MSL. All the accessions exposed to different concentrations of NaCl had slower growth
compared to the untreated. In the study of Modarelli et al. (2020) varying responses in stem
length by 30 different genotypes of Cucurbitaceae grown in 150 mmol L’! NaCl were
found. In the comparison of different cucurbit species, bitter gourd as the most tolerant had
the least reduction of 24.88% while bottle gourd had 79.33% after exposing to 75 mmol L”
' of salt for 17 days (Najib et al., 2018). In another study using cucumber, growing at 50
mmol L"! for 14 days resulted to a reduction of 53% compared to control (Khan et al.,
2013). Plant height in perennial ryegrass declined by 62.2% for tolerant and 67.5% for
sensitive groups at 300 mmol L” of NaCl for 10 days (Song et al., 2017). The disparity
between the main stem length of each accession or variety resulted to the identification of

a sensitive and tolerant type.


EW-LUF-001 EW-LUF-002
800 800
£600 © 5 5 E 600 4
$ 400 es . © 400 © b rc
5 200 e 5 200 ® ‘ d
go Eo
g 0 50 100150 200 50 100 ©=-150--200
2 NaCl (mmol L!) 2 NaCl (mmol L-!)
EW-LUF-003
800 4
600 © :
$400 . 7
5 200 .
§ o
g 0 50 100 150 200
2 NaCl (mmol L*)

Figure 22. Effect of NaCl concentrations (0, 50, 100 and 200 mmol L”!) on the main stem
length of luffa.

= EW-LUF-001 =EW-LUF-002 | EW-LUF-003
700 a
A 600

a

| a
© ; a
2 400 ie

b
7 oo
§ 500 t » of ab
i
0 50 100 200

NaCl (mmol L*!)

Figure 23. Comparison of main stem length of luffa accessions at each concentration of
NaCl.


Main stem diameter. No interaction effect of accessions and NaCl concentrations was
found in the main stem diameter with p-value = 0.4579 (Appendix B.13), but main effect
of accession was significant at p-value = 0.0005 (Appendix C.21). Figure 24 revealed that
EW-LUF-003 had the thickest diameter among the three accessions followed by

insignificantly different EW-LUF-001 and 002 with a difference of only 10% from EW-

LUF-003.
4.5
a
4 b b
$35
&
5 3
§ 2.5
E 2
1s
ay
0.5
EW-LUF-001 EW-LUF-002 EW-LUF-003
Accessions

Figure 24. Stem diameter of different luffa accessions.

Shoot fresh weight. Shoot fresh weight had a significant interaction between accessions
and NaCl concentrations at p-value = 0.0021 (Appendix B.14). The comparison of means
for accession at each level of NaCl (Appendix C.23) showed a general decreasing trend in
weight as the concentration of NaC] in the growing medium increased except for EW-LUF-
002 (Figure 25). For EW-LUF-002 and 003 it would take 100 mmol L"! of NaCl before a

significant decrease in fresh weight could be observed. Unlike in EW-LUF-001 there is


already a significant difference in shoot fresh weight at 50 mmol L!. The mean comparison
of NaCl at each level of accession (Appendix C.22) revealed that EW-LUF-003 showed
the heaviest weight among the three accessions from 0 to 100 mmol L"! (Figure 26). In
terms of reduction, EW-LUF-002 did not lose weight while EW-LUF-001 and 003 resulted
to lighter weight at 50 mmol L" than their control samples with 18% and 8%, respectively.
Even at 200 mmol L"!, EW-LUF-002 showed the least reduction with 39% while EW-LUF-
001 had 56% and EW-LUF-003 had 55%.

One of the negative effects of salinity is the reduction of soil osmotic potential
which could interfere with the water uptake of plant. Fresh weight can be an indicator of
the plant water content during stress. As observed in the experiment, the reduction in fresh
weight depended on the accession and level of salinity. Two of the accessions showed that
more than 50 mmol L"! was needed to significantly reduce their fresh weights. This was
similar to the cucumber genotypes that had lighter fresh weight recorded at 150 and 200
mmol L” of salt (Marium et al., 2019). In another related study, ‘Crispa’, a lettuce cultivar
recorded a reduction 25% and 58% after growing in 50 and 100 mmol L”! of NaCl for 30
days (Ekinci et al., 2012). Grafted ‘Kardosa/Atinbas’ and ungrafted ‘Citirex’ melo showed
that the former had 28.8% whereas the latter had 68.5% reduction in fresh weight grown
in 80 mmol L" of salt solution for 35 days (Ulas et al., 2010). This difference contributed
to the description of the grafted melo as more tolerant than the ungrafted. Hence, the luffa

accession that showed the least reduction was considered tolerant.


EW-LUF-001 EW-LUF-002

S
3S

Shoot fresh weight (g)
o wn
°
é
a
Shoot frseh weight (g)
°

50 100 150 200
NaCl (mmol L*)

°
°

50 100 150 200
NaCl (mmol L*!)

EW-LUF-003

b

0 50 100 150 200
NaCl (mmol L-!)

Shoot fresh weight (g)
°

Figure 25. Effect of NaCl concentrations (0, 50, 100 and 200 mmo! L"') on the shoot fresh
weight of luffa.

@EW-LUF-001 =EW-LUF-002  — EW-LUF-003

0 a

8 a
B71 b i | a
BS c bE b
Es i » ol



0 50 100 200

Accessions

Figure 26. Comparison of shoot fresh weight of luffa accessions at each concentration of
NaCl.


Shoot dry weight. Accessions x NaCl concentrations showed significant interaction on
shoot dry weight (Appendix B.15) at p-value = 0.0057. Figure 27 showed that significant
reduction in shoot dry weight could readily be observed from 0 to 50 mmol L”! of NaCl in
all the accessions used (Appendix C.24). The comparison of accessions at each level of
NaCl (Appendix C.25) presented that at 50 mmol L', EW-LUF-003 and 002 had a
significantly higher response than 001 (Figure 28). However, at higher concentrations,
none of the accessions differ from each other. At 50 mmol L”! comapred to control, EW-
LUF-002 had the lowest decline in weight with 15% followed by EW-LUF-003 with 17%,
and EW-LUF-001 with 25%.

The general observation of decreasing shoot dry weight as the NaCI concentration
increased was also found in the study of Yetisir and Uygur (2009) using luffa exposed from
0 to 160 mmol L"! of salt. In rice, 100 mmol L! showed 24% decrease in dry weight
compared to control (Morales et al., 2012). In cucumber, 120 mmol L"! of NaCl showed a
deleterious effect (Ahmad et al., 2018). Different accessions of ‘Messina’, a forage legume,
subjected to 100 mmol L"! of NaCl for 28 days showed different tolerance to salt with
losses of >40% recorded from the susceptible ones such as ‘SA4000’ and ‘SA40076’,
whereas no difference in reduction was found in the tolerant accessions (such as ‘SA36981’
and ‘SA39909”) (Rogers et al., 2011). The tolerant check in rice recorded a 14% difference
in shoot dry weight after growing in 60 mmol L"! of NaCl for 10 days (Kargbo et al., 2019).
A change near to the 15% reduction from EW-LUF-002. The study of Chen et al. (2020)

using cucumber revealed that a strong decrease in plant dry mass was due to the sensitivity


of photosynthesis and stomatal conductance to Na* concentration. This effect was more

prevalent in higher concentrations where greater reduction was observed.

EW-LUF-001
2a
Bis b °
2 0
$ 0 50 100 150
8 NaCl (mmol L*!)
n

i

eS r
one

Shoot dry weight (g)
°

EW-LUF-002
= 2 a
Sis E ¢
d Zz . d
fy
g 0.5
200 = 0 50 100 150 200
3 NaCl (mmol L-!)
a
EW-LUF-003
b
d
50 100 150-200
NaCl (mmol L7!)

Figure 27. Effect of NaCl concentrations (0, 50, 100 and 200 mmol L”) on the shoot dry

weight of luffa.


= EW-LUF-001 = EW-LUF-002 EW-LUF-003

18 a
16 boo
| 7

a
b
50 100


Shoot dry weight (g)
°
be

NaCl (mmol L”)

Figure 28. Comparison of shoot dry weight of luffa accessions at each concentration of
NaCl.

Root length. The analysis of variance for root length showed neither significant interaction
(p-value = 0.2433) nor main effect for NaCl concentrations and accessions (Appendix
B.16). None of the salt treatments and accessions showed significantly different response
in terms of root length. In this study, the process of cleaning the root samples may have
negatively contributed to the probability of acquiring significant differences between

treatments.

Root fresh weight. Friedman test for root fresh weight showed that treatment effects for
accessions were not different with p-value = 0.205 (Appendix D.5). In terms of NaCl
concentration, the lowest and highest root fresh weight came from 0 and 200 mmol L”!

(Appendix D.6) with p-value = 0.002. Figure 29 presented a lighter fresh weight of luffa


roots as the NaCl increased from 0 to 200 mmol L”. Similar results were obtained by
Akinci and Simsek (2004) using cucumber seedlings grown in saline treatment from 0 to
150 mmo! L"!. Other researchers reported the same observation in cucurbits (Yildirim et
al., 2008; Al-Harbi and Burrage, 1993). The lower reduction in root fresh weight relative
to other genotypes adds to the tolerance of plant to salinity. This was evident in the study
of Singh et al. (2017) using lentil genotypes that showed tolerance by having lower decline
in root fresh weight compared to the other genotypes upon exposing to 120 mmol L"! of
NaCl for 30 days. However, varying responses may be expected depending on the type of
species used. In another study using grafted melon subjected to 80 mmol L”! of salt, the un-
grafted one had higher root fresh matter which could be attributed to the expansion of root
growth for greater root surface in response to saline stress and restricted mineral nutrients
(Ulas et al., 2019). In this parameter, the specific response of each accession to NaCl
concentration was not determined, however it can be concluded that the root fresh weights

of the accessions used were lightest at the highest salt concentration.


2.5

i

Root fresh weight (g)

0 50 100 150 200
NaCl (mmol L*')

Figure 29. Effect of NaCl concentrations (0, 50, 100 and 200 mmol L’') on the root fresh
weight of luffa.

Root dry weight. The ANOVA for root dry weight had significant interaction between
accessions and NaCl concentrations (Appendix B.17) at p-value = 0.0336. The comparison
of NaCl concentrations in each accession (Appendix C.26) showed that significant
reduction in weight could already be observed at 50 mmol L”' in all the accessions (Figure
30). However, dry weight for EW-LUF-001 from 50 to 200 mmol L"! were not statistically
different unlike that of EW-LUF-002 and 003 with lighter root dry weight at higher
concentrations. The comparison of accession at each level of NaCl (Appendix C.27)
revealed that at EW-LUF-002 could still perform better than EW-LUF-001 and 003 at 50
mmol L", but not at higher salt levels (100 and 200 mmol L"') (Figure 31). In terms of

percent reduction in weight from 0 to 50 mmol L"!, EW-LUF-002 and 003 had comparable


values with 30% and 29%, respectively. Whereas EW-LUF-001 had the most reduction in
dry weight with 38%.

Low root dry weight of all accessions at increasing concentrations of NaCl proved
the negative influence of salt to roots. In Khan eta al.’s (2013) study cucumber also had
lighter root dry weight at 50 mmol L’' compared to control. During saline stress hypoxia
may be experienced by roots due to the ability of salts to lower soil porosity while
increasing the bulk density. At this point, ethylene may accumulate and restrict the growth
of roots (Akram et al., 2007). Through the stress period, plant growth especially the roots
that are directly in contact with the saline soil can be negatively affected. Amaranth
genotypes showed reduction in root dry weight with 43% in A. hypochondiras compared
to a non-significant drop of 17% from A. tricolor after salinization of 25 mmol L" for 14
days (Omami and Hammes, 2004). In wild beet accessions, exposure to 300 mmol L”! of
saline solution for 30 days resulted to 35.2% reduction from the most sensitive accession
“WB1026’, and less reduction from the more tolerant wild beet ‘WB1013’ and ‘WB1021’
with 30.5% and 27.1%, respectively (Hussin, 2018). Almost similar decrease in root dry
weight of wild beet was also found in luffa accessions with 30% and 29% from EW-LUF-
002 and 003, respectively. Hence, low decline in root dry weight can influence the

tolerance of crops to salinity as reported in the other studies.

EW-LUF-001
goa
e012 b b
ol ‘s
Py
an’)
Boo 50 100150
8 NaCI (mmol L*!)
[4
02 a

S
e

Root dry weight (g)
°

EW-LUF-002
gets =
e @
Fo
20 «=F o 50 100 ~—-150
3 NaCl (mmol L~!)
&
EW-LUF-003
b
@ © he
é e
50 100-150-200
NaCl (mmol L*!)



Figure 30. Effect of NaCl concentrations (0, 50, 100 and 200 mmol L’!) on the root dry

weight of luffa.
= EW-LUF-001

0.25
3°
Bos
E
Bo
E
zy

= EW-LUF-002

EW-LUF-003

cl (mmol L” -

Figure 31. Comparison of root dry weight of luffa accessions at each concentration of

NaCl.


Salt damage index. A significant p-value = 0.009 resulted from the analysis of salt damage
index (SDI) through Friedman test (Appendix D.7). The results also showed that the SDI
of luffa had an increasing response as the concentration of NaCl increased (Figure 32). The
visual assessment of salt damage through SDI suggested that after two weeks, greater
injury was found at higher concentration. SDI of control was only 19.5% while 32.5% was
recorded at 200 mmol L’! of NaCl. Moreover, no treatment effect was detected in the
accessions of luffa (Appendix D.8). NaCl concentrations from 0 to 200 mmo! L" irrigated
to luffa were not enough to show significantly different visual damage specific to the

accession.


Salt damage index (%)
= =- PP ww
wo S&S & SB

°

0 50 100 150 200
NaCl (mmol L')

Figure 32. Salt damage index of luffa accessions to different NaCl concentrations.

Salt tolerance index. Correlation between salt tolerance indices was established based on

the results of Pearson correlation (Appendix E.2). A highly significant correlation was

observed in shoot fresh and dry weight, root dry weight, leaf number and main stem length.


Salt damage index. A significant p-value = 0.009 resulted from the analysis of salt damage
index (SDI) through Friedman test (Appendix D.7). The results also showed that the SDI
of luffa had an increasing response as the concentration of NaCl increased (Figure 32). The
visual assessment of salt damage through SDI suggested that after two weeks, greater
injury was found at higher concentration. SDI of control was only 19.5% while 32.5% was
recorded at 200 mmol L”! of NaCl. Moreover, no treatment effect was detected in the
accessions of luffa (Appendix D.8). NaCl concentrations from 0 to 200 mmol L" irrigated
to luffa were not enough to show significantly different visual damage specific to the

accession.


Salt damage index (%)
wu Sa 8S RSS

°

0 50 100 150 200
NaCl (mmol L"')

Figure 32. Salt damage index of luffa accessions to different NaCl concentrations.

Salt tolerance index. Correlation between salt tolerance indices was established based on

the results of Pearson correlation (Appendix E.2). A highly significant correlation was

observed in shoot fresh and dry weight, root dry weight, leaf number and main stem length.


For leaf area, it only had significant relationship with shoot fresh weight. For root length,
none of the parameters showed significant correlation.

All the observed significant relationships showed a positive direction of correlation.
The range of association (r-value) was found between 0.008 to 0.948 with the highest from
the number of leaves and main stem length, while the lowest correlation were between
main stem diameter and root fresh weight. Root fresh weight and root length had very few
significant correlations probably due to the destructive effect of root washing. The salt
tolerance indices with significant correlations can be used in predicting the salt tolerance
of luffa in the study. The following parameters such as number of leaves, shoot fresh
weight, shoot and root dry weights, main stem length and main stem diameter may be used
as inficator for salt tolerance. Related with the results, biomass was also found to be closely

associated with salt tolerance in Cucurbita rootstocks (Ulas et al., 2019).

CHAPTER V

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION

Saline condition reduces soil productivity by obstructing its usability in crop
production. Washing of soil and creating drainage canals are some of the possible methods
to remediate salt affected soils, however it would entail costs and maintenance that will
also be a problem to our Filipino farmers. To create a much more effective way to deal
with salinity, crops tolerant to specific levels of salt concentration must be identified and

recommended to be used.

Four accessions of tomato and three accessions of luffa were grown in pots and
irrigated with different levels of NaCI solution (0, 50, 100, 200 mmol L”!) for 14 days.
Morphological (number of leaves, leaf area ratio, plant height/main stem length, main stem
diameter, shoot and root fresh weights, shoot and root dry weights, and indices: salt damage
index and salt tolerance index) and physiological parameter (electrolyte leakage) were used
to assess its response to saline stress. Based on the results of the experiment, application of
NaCl solution at different concentrations showed a decreasing trend in all the accessions
of tomato and luffa. A common response of plant with low tolerance to extreme saline
condition. Most of the parameters revealed sensitivity at 50 mmol L’! which was used as

basis in determining which among the accessions had better growth.

The morphological and physiological parameters utilized did not consistently

suggest the best performing accession. Some of the parameters were able to detect the


differences between means, however, there were other measurements that did not have any
significant interactions. Despite this result, a tolerant accession was still selected upon
ranking the accessions per parameter based on their percent reduction in growth in response
to saline stress. The correlation of morphological and physiological indices was also

utilized as basis for determining the most tolerant accession.

In tomato, EW-TOM-002 is considered as the most tolerant amongst the accessions
primarily due to its smaller change in shoot and root fresh weights, root dry weight, and
lower electrolyte leakage. The ability of the plant to relatively lower the negative effects
of saline stress in terms of promoting root growth would be beneficial as the roots grow,
provide support, and supply nutrients to the whole plant even with the presence of salts. In
relation to better roots, the lower electrolyte leakage can also promote higher chance of
survival during seedling stage as membrane damage will be lower as compared to the other

accessions.

In luffa, EW-LUF-003 is the most tolerant based on the lower reduction in shoot
and root dry weights and main stem length, along with the higher number of leaves. These
parameters were the most noticeable in the growth of luffa as the other accessions had
retarded growth and fewer leaves. Better root growth was also observed in the plant itself
with heavier shoot dry weight promoted by the development of more leaves. The capacity
of this accession to promote the growth of its vines along with the emergence of new leaves
will be essential to sustain the photosynthesizing capacity of the plant, even with the

observed advanced chlorosis of older leaves which could be attributed to salt stress.


Unfortunately, EL was not measured in luffa. The machine broke down and the

procurement of material became a problem due to COVID travel restrictions.

Different set of parameters for tomato and luffa may be used in future salt-related
experiments based on the results of correlation analysis. The greatest correlation values
were observed between shoot and root dry weights, and main stem length and number of
leaves in tomato and luffa, respectively. For the remaining accessions of tomato and luffa,
these were considered as less tolerant than EW-TOM-002 and EW-LUF-003. In spite of
the selection of tolerant accesions, it was still evident in the experiment that growing these
accessions in increasing saline concentrations promoted poorer physiological and
morphological response than under non-saline condition. Nonetheless, the selected
accessions would be essential in the breeding and production of cultivars with better

tolerance to salt stress.


RECOMMENDATION

Few recommendations may be done in the next salt-screening experiment. If root
parameters will be utilized, the composition of soil media must be considered as it may
influence the difficulty of washing the root samples. Soil media composed of fibers like
coco coir and peat moss may be avoided. Morphological parameters such as shoot and root
dry weights for tomato, and number of leaves and main shoot length in luffa are suggested
to be used based on its high correlation. If salt damage index will be utilized, the number
of evaluators must be replicated for higher precision. And, given that physiological analysis
was less explored, electrolyte leakage and relative chlorophyll content are advised for
further use. Multiple regression analysis for the different parameters used would be ideal
to see the contribution of the parameters to the crop tolerance. More accessions may also
be used in order to have a wider accession to chose from and observe the crop responses to

salinity.

LITERATURE CITED

ABBASI, G.H., AKHTAR, J., AHMAD, R., JAMIL, M., ANWAR-UL-HAQ, M., ALI,
S., AND IJAZ, M. (2015). Potassium application mitigates salt stress differentially
at different growth stages in tolerant and sensitive maize hybrids. Plant Growth
Regulators, 76:111—-125. DOI: 10.1007/s10725-015-0050-1.

AHMAD, H., HAYAT, S., ALI, M., GHANI, M.I. AND ZHIHUI, C. (2018). Regulation
of growth and physiological traits of cucumber (Cucumis sativus L.) through various
levels of 28-homobrassinolide under salt stress conditions. Canadian Journal of
Plant Science, 98: 132-140 DOI: 10.1139/cjps-2016-0404.

AHMAD, P., JALEEL, C.A., SALEM, M.A., NABI, G., AND SHARMA, S. (2010).
Review article: Roles of enzymatic and nonenzymatic antioxidants in plants during
abiotic stress. Critical Reviews in Biotechnology, 30(3): 161-175.

AKINCI, I.E. AND SIMSEK, M. (2004). Ameliorative Effects of Potassium and Calcium
on the Salinity Stress in Embryo Culture of Cucumber (Cucumis sativus L.). Journal
of Biological Sciences, 4: 361-365.

AKRAM, M., MALIK, M.A., ASHRAF, M.Y., SALEEM, M.F., AND HUSSAIN, M.
(2007). Competitive seedling growth and K/Na ratio in different maize (Zea mays |.)
Hybrids under salinity stress. Pakistang Journal of Botany, 39(7):2553-2563.

ALAM, M.A., JURAIMI, A.S., RAFIL, M.Y., HAMID, A.A., ASLANI, F. AND HAKIM,
M.A. (2016). Salinity-induced changes in the morphology and major mineral nutrient
composition of purslane (Portulaca oleracea L.) accessions. Biological Research,
49:24. DOI:10.1186/s40659-016-0084-5.

ALAM, M.M., NAHAR, K., HASANUZZAMAN, M., AND FUJITA, M. (2014).
Trehalose-induced drought stress tolerance A comparative study among different
Brassica species. Plant Omics, 7:271-283. DOI:10.13140/2.1.2883.1366.

ALBACETE, A., MARTINEZ-ANDUJAR, C., GHANEM, M. E., ACOSTA, M.,
SANCHEZ-BRAVO, J., ASINS, M. J., CUARTERO, J., LUTTS, S., DODD, I.C.,
AND PEREZALFOCEA, F. (2009). Rootstock-mediated changes in xylem ionic and
hormonal status are correlated with delayed leaf senescence, and increased leaf area
and crop productivity in salinized tomato. Plant Cell Environment, 32, 928-938.
DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-3040.2009.01973.x.

ALBACETE, A., GHANEM, M.E., MARTINEZ-ANDUJAR, C., ACOSTA, M. AND
SANCHEZ-BRAVO, J. (2008) Hormonal changes in relation to biomass partitioning
and shoot growth impairment in salinized tomato (Solanum lycopersicum L.) plants.
Journal of. Experimental Botany, 59: 4119-4131.


ALFOCEA, E.P., BALIBREA M.E., SANTA CRUZ, A. AND ESTAN, M.T. (1996).
Agronomical and physiological characterization of salinity tolerance in a commercial
tomato hybrid. Plant Soil, 180, 251-257. DOI: 10.1007/BF00015308.

ALFOCEA, F.P., ESTAN, M.T., CARO, M. AND BOLARIN, M.C. (1993). Response of
tomato cultivars to salinity. Plant Soil,150, 203-211. DOI: 10.1007/BF00013017.

AL GEHANI, I.A. AND ISMAIL, T.M. (2016). Effect of soil amendment on growth and
physiological processes of rocket (Eruca sativa |.) grown under salinity conditions.
Australian Journal of Basic and Applied Science, 10(1): 15-20.

AL-HARBI, A. R. AND BURRAGE, S.W. (1993). Effect of NaCl salinity on growth of
cucumber Cucumis sativus L. grown in nft. Acta Horticulturae, 323, 39-50 DOI:
10.17660/ActaHortic.1993.323.2.

AL-KARAKI, G.N., HAMMAD, R., AND RUSAN, M. (2001). Response of two tomato
cultivars differing in salt tolerance to inoculation with mycorrhizal fungi under salt
stress. Mycorrhiza 11:43-47.

ALI, M., CHENG, Z. AHMAD, H. AND HAYAT, S. (2018). Reactive oxygen species
(ROS) as defenses against a broad range of plant fungal infections and case study on
ROS employed by crops against Verticillium dahliae wilts. Journal of Plant
Interactions, 13, no. 1, 353-363 DOI: 10.1080/17429145.2018.1484188.

ALISOFI, S., EINALI, A. AND SANGTARASH, M.H. (2020). Jasmonic acid-induced
metabolic responses in bitter melon (Momordica charantia) seedlings under salt
stress. The Journal of Horticultural Science and Biotechnology, 95:2, 247-259, DOI:
10.1080/14620316.2019.1663135.

ALSADON, A., IBRAHIM, A., WAHB-ALLAH, M.A., ALI, A.A. AND SADDER, M.T.
(2015). Tomato under salinity stress: Correlation between growth and yield
components and responsive genes. Acta Horticulturae 1081(1081):111-119.
DOI:10.17660/ActaHortic.2015.1081.11.

ALSADON, A., SADDER, M. AND WAHB-ALLAH, M. (2013). Responsive gene
screening and exploration of genotypes responses to salinity tolerance in tomato.
Australian Journal of Crop Science. 7. 1383-1395.

AMINI, S., GHADIRI, H., CHEN, C. AND MARSCHNER, P. (2016). Salt-affected soils,
reclamation, carbon dynamics, and biochar: a review. Journal of Soils and Sediments
16, 939-953. DOI: 10.1007/s1 1368-015-1293-1.

AMIRJANI, M.R. (2011). Effect of salinity stress on growth, sugar content, pigments and
enzyme activity of rice. International Journal of Botany, 7:73-81.

AMTMANN, A., AND SANDERS, D. (1999). Mechanisms of Na (+) uptake by plant
cells. Advances in Botanical Research 29, 75-112.


AMZALLAG, G.N., LERNER, H.R. AND MAYBER, A.P. (1990). Exogenous ABA as a
modulator of the response of sorghum to high salinity. Journal of experimental
botany, 41, 12: 1529-1534. DOI: 10.1093/jxb/41.12.1529.

APEL, K. AND HIRT, H. (2004). Reactive oxygen species: metabolism, oxidative stress,
and signal transduction. Annual review of plant biology, 55(1), 373-399. DOI:
10.1146/annurev.arplant.55.031903.141701.

ARFAN M., ATHAR H. R., AND ASHRAF M. (2007). Does exogenous application of
salicylic acid through the rooting medium modulate growth and photosynthetic
capacity in two differently adapted spring wheat cultivars under salt stress? Plant
Physiology. 6, 685-694. DOI: 10.1016/j.jplph.2006.05.010.

ASADA, K. (2006). Production and scavenging of reactive oxygen species in chloroplasts
and their functions. Plant Physiology 141, 391-396.

ASHRAF, M.Y., AWAN, A.R. AND MAHMOOD, K. (2012). Rehabilitation of saline
ecosystems through cultivation of salt tolerant plants. Pakistan Journal of Botany,
44: 69-75.

ASHRAF M. AND ALI Q. (2008). Relative membrane permeability and activities of some
antioxidant enzymes as the key determinants of salt tolerance in canola (Brassica
napus L.). Environmental and Experimental Botany, 63: 266-273.

ASSAHA, D., UEDA, A., SANEOKA, H., AL-YAHYAI, R., AND YAISH, M. W. (2017).
The role of Na+ and K+ transporters in salt stress adaptation in glycophytes.
Frontiers in physiology, 8, 509. DOI:10.3389/fphys.2017.00509.

BACHA, H., TEKAYA, M., DRINE, S., GUASMI, F., TOUIL, L., ENNEB, H., TRIKI,
T., CHEOUR, F., AND FERCHICHI, A. (2017). Impact of salt stress on morpho-
physiological and biochemical parameters of Solanum lycopersicum cv. Microtom
leaves. South African Journal of Botany 108: 364-369. DOI:
10.1016/j.sajb.2016.08.018.

BANDEH-HAGH, A., TOORCHI, M., MOHAMMADI, A., CHAPARZADEH, N.,
SALEKDEH, H. AND KAZEMNIA, H. (2008). Growth and osmotic adjustment of
canola genotypes in response to salinity. Journal of Food, Agriculture &
Environment 6(2): 201-208.

BANO, A. AND FATIMA, M. (2009). Salt tolerance in Zea mays (L.) following
inoculation with Rhizobium and Pseudomonas. Biology and Fertility of Soils 45:
405-413.

BARAK, P. (2009). Essential elements for plant growth hydroponics. Retrieved from
https://soils.wisc.edu/facstaff/barak/soilscience326/hydropon.htm.


BABU, M.A., SINGH, D., AND GOTHANDAM, K.M. (2012). The effect of salinity on
growth, hormones and mineral elements in leaf and fruit of tomato cultivar PKM1.
Journal of Animal and Plant Sciences, 22:159-164.

BAZRAFSHAN, A.H. AND EHSANZADEH, P. (2014). Growth, photosynthesis, and ion
balance of sesame (Sesamum indicum L.) genotypes in response to NaCl
concentration in hydroponic solutions. Photosynthetica 52, 134-147.

BONAROTA, M.S., BARRIOS-MASIAS, F.H., AND SINGLETARY, L. (2021),
Combatting Salinity: Evaluation of Tomato Rootstocks Under Mild and Severe Salt
Stress, Extension, University of Nevada, Reno FS-21-08.

BOSE, J., MORENO, A.R. AND SHABALA, S. (2013). Review paper ROS homeostasis
in halophytes in the context of salinity stress tolerance. Journal of experimental
botany, 65(5): 1241-1257. DOL: 10.1093/jxb/ert430.

BOTELLA, M.A., DEL AMOR, F., AMOROS, A., SERRANO, M., MARTINEZ, V.
AND CERDA, A. (2001). Polyamine, ethylene and other physico-chemical
parameters in tomato (Lycopersicon esculentum) fruits as affected by salinity.
Physiologia plantarum, 109(4): 428-43. DOI: 10.1034/j.1399-3054.2000.100409.x.

BRES, W., BANDURSKA, H., KUPSKA, A., NIEDZIELA, J. AND FRASZCZAK, B.
(2016). Responses of pelargonium (Pelargonium hortorum L.H. Bailey) to long-term
salinity stress induced by treatment with different NaCl doses. Acta Physiologiae
Plantarum, 38:26. DOI: 10.1007/s11738-015-2048-8.

BSWM.. (2020). National mapping, characterization, and development of spatial database
for the coastal areas affected by salinity. Retrieved from
http://oswm.da.gov.ph/program/salinity/.

CAO Y., ZHANG Z. W., XUE L. W., DU J. B., SHANG J., XU F., YUAN S., LIN, AND
HLH. (2009). Lack of salicylic acid in Arabidopsis protects plants against moderate
salt stress. Z. Naturforschung C 64, 231-238. DOI: 10.1515/znc-2009-3-414.

CASTILLO, E.G., TUONG, T.P., ISMAIL, A.M. AND INUBUSHI, K. (2007). Response
to salinity in rice: comparative effects of osmotic and ionic stresses. DOI:
10.1626/pps.10.159.

CHANG CHIEN, S.W., LIAO, J.H., WANG, M.C., AND MANNEPALLI, MLR. (2009).
Effect of Cl-, SO4(2-), and fulvate anions on Cd2+ free ion concentrations in
simulated rhizosphere soil solutions. Journal of Hazardous Materials. 172(2-3):809-
17. DOI: 10.1016/j.jhazmat.2009.07.076.

CHEESEMAN, J.M. (1988). Mechanisms of salinity tolerance in plants. Plant Physiology
87(3):547-50. DOI: 10.1104/pp.87.3.547.


CHEN, T.-W., GOMEZ PINEDA, I. M., BRAND, A. M., AND STUTZEL, H. (2020).
Determining Ion Toxicity in Cucumber under Salinity Stress. Agronomy, 10(5), 677.
MDPI AG. DOI: 10.3390/agronomy 10050677.

CHERKI, G., AHMED, F., AND KHALID, F. (2002). Effects of salt stress on growth,
inorganic ions and proline accumulation in relation to osmotic adjustment in five
sugar beet cultivars. Environmental and Experimental Botany, 47:39-50.

CORPAS, F.J., BARROSO J.B. AND DEL RIO L.A. (2001). Peroxisomes as a source of
reactive oxygen species and nitric oxide signal molecules in plant cells. Trends in
Plant Science 6: 145-150.

CUARTERO, J. AND MUNOZ, R.F. (1999). Tomato and salinity. Scientia
Horticulturae,78: 834125. DOI: 10.1016/S0304-4238(98)00191-5.

CUEVAS, J., DALIAKOPOULOS, I.N., DEL MORAL, F., HUESO, J.J. AND TSANIS,
LK. (2019). A Review of Soil-Improving Cropping Systems for Soil Salinization.
Agronomy 9, 295; DOI: 10.3390/agronomy9060295.

CRUZ, V., CUARTERO, J., BOLARIN, M.C. AND ROMERO, M. (1990). Evaluation of
characters for ascertaining salt stress responses in Lycopersicon species. Journal of
the American Society for Horticultural Science, 115: 1000-1003.

DASGAN, H.Y., AKTAS, H., ABAK, K., AND CAKMAK, I. (2002). Determination of
screening techniques to salinity tolerance in tomatoes and investigation of genotype
responses. Plant Science, 163:695—703.

DAS, K. AND ROYCHOUDHURY, A. (2014). Reactive oxygen species (ROS) and
response of antioxidants a ROS-scavengers during environmental stress in plants.
Frontiers in environmental science, 2(53). DOI: 10.3389/fenvs.2014.00053.

DEL R{O, L.A., PALMA, J.M., SANDALIO, L.M., CORPAS F.J., PASTORI G.M.,
BUENO P. AND LOPEZ-HUERTAS, E. (1996). Peroxisomes as a source of
superoxide and hydrogen peroxide in stressed plants. Biochemical Society
Transactions, 24:434-438.

DEMIDCHIK, V., STRALTSOVA, D., MEDVEDEV, S.S., POZHVANOV, G.A.,
SOKOLIK, A., AND YURIN, V. (2014). Stress-induced electrolyte leakage: the role
of K+-permeable channels and involvement in programmed cell death and metabolic
adjustment, Journal of Experimental Botany, 65(5)1259-1270. DOI:
10.1093/jxb/eru004.

DE OLIVEIRA, FDA., DE SOUZA NETA, M.L., MIRANDA, N.D.O., SOUZA, A.A.T,
OLIVEIRA, M.K.T. AND DA SILVA, D.D. (2017) Strategies of fertigation with
saline water for growing cucumber in a greenhouse. Revista Brasileira de
Engenharia Agricola e Ambiental, 21(9): 606-610. DOI: 10.1590/1807-
1929/agriambi.v21n9p606-610.


DIAZ-LOPEZ, L., GIMENO, V., LIDON, V., SIMON, I, MARTINEZ, V., AND
GARCIA-SANCHEZ, F. (2012). The tolerance of Jatropha curcas seedlings to NaCl:
an ecophysiological analysis. Plant Physiolpgy and Biochemistry, 54:34-42.

DODD, G.L., AND DONOVAN, L.A. (1999). Water potential and ionic effects on
germination and seedling growth of two cold desert shrubs. American Journal of
Botany, 86: 1146-1153.

EDEL, K.H. AND KUDLA, J. (2016). Integration of calcium and ABA signaling. Curr.
Opin. Plant Biology, 33(83-91).

EKBIC, E., CAGIRAN, C., KORKMAZ, K., KOSE, M.A. AND ARAS, V. (2017).
Assessment of watermelon accessions for salt tolerance using stress tolerance
indices. Ciéncia e Agrotecnologia, 41(6):616-625. DOI: 10.1590/1413-
70542017416013017.

EKINCI, M., YILDIRIM, E., DURSUN, A. AND TURAN, M. (2012). Mitigation of Salt
Stress in Lettuce (Lactuca sativa L. var. Crispa) by Seed and Foliar 24-
epibrassinolide Treatments. Hortscience, 47(5):63 1-636. 2012.

EL-FADEL, M. DEEB, T. ALAMEDDINE, I., ZURAYK, R. AND CHAABAN, J. (2018).
Impact of groundwater salinity on agricultural productivity with climate change
implications. International Journal of Sustainable Development And Planning. DOI:
13. 445-456. 10.2495/SDP-V13-N3-445-456.

EL-TAYEB, M. (2005). Response of barley grains to the interactive e.ect of salinity and
salicylic acid. Plant Growth Regulators, 45: 215-224. DOI: 10.1007/s10725-005-
4928-1.

FAO AND ITPS. (2015). Status of the world’s soil resources (SWSR) — Main report. food
and agriculture organization of the United Nations and intergovernmental technical
panel on soils, Rome, Italy.

FERNANDEZ, G.C.J. (1992). Effective selection criteria for assessing plant stress
tolerance. Proceedings of the international symposium on adaptation of vegetable
and other food crops in temperature and water stress. Taiwan. pp. 257-270.

FREDEEN, A. L., RAAB, T. K., RAO, I. M., AND TERRY, N. (1990). Effects of
phosphorus nutrition on photosynthesis in Glycine max (L.) Merr. Planta, 181: 399-
405. DOI: 10.1007/BF00195894.

GADALLAH, M.A.A. (1999). Effects of proline and glycine betaine on Vicia faba
response to salt stress. Biology Plant, 42:249-257.

GAGNEUL, D., AINOUCHE, A., DUHAZE, C., LUGAN, R., LARHER, F.R., AND
BOUCHEREAU, A. (2007). A reassessment of the function of the so-called


compatible solutes in the halophytic Plumbaginaceae Limonium latifolium. Plant
Physiology, 144 (3) 1598-1611. DOI: 10.1104/pp.107.099820.

GAMA, P.B.S., TANAKA, K., ENEJI, A.E., ELTAYEB, A.E., AND EL SIDDIG, K.
(2009). Salt-induced stress effects on biomass, photosynthetic rate, and reactive
oxygen species-scavenging enzyme accumulation in common bean. Journal of Plant
Nutrition 32: 837-854.

GEORGE, E.F. (1993). Plant tissue culture: current status and opportunities eastern press,
eversley.

GHANEM, M. E., ALBACETE, A., MARTINEZ-ANDUJAR, C., ACOSTA, M.,
ROMERO-ARANDA, R., DODD, I. C., LUTTS, S., AND PEREZ-ALFOCEA, F.
(2008). Hormonal changes during salinity-induced leaf senescence in tomato
(Solanum lycopersicum L.). Journal of Experimental Botany, 59: 3039-3050. DOI:
10.1093/jxb/ern153.

GIMENO, V., JAMES, P. SYVERTSEN, F.B., MARTINEZ, V. AND GARCIA-
SANCHEZ, F. (2010). Growth and mineral nutrition are affected by substrate type
and salt stress in seedlings of two contrasting citrus rootstocks, Journal of Plant
Nutrition, 33:(10) 1435-1447, DOI: 10.1080/01904167.2010.489982.

GOULD, K.S. (2004). Nature's swiss army knife: The diverse protective roles of
anthocyanins in leaves. Journal of Biomedicine And Biotechnology, 314-320.
DOI:10.1155/S1110724304406147.

GRATTAN, S.R. AND GRIEVE, C.M. (1998). Salinity-mineral nutrient relations in
horticultural crops. Scientia Horticulturae, 78 (1-4): 127-157. DOI:10.1016/S0304-
4238(98)00192-7.

GREGORIO, G.B., SENADHIRA, D. AND MENDOZA, R.D. (1997). Screening rice for
salt tolerance. IRRI. Retrieved from
http://rkb.irri.org/ricebreedingcourse/documents/Screening_manual.pdf.

GRZESIAK, M.T. (2009). Impact of soil compaction on root architecture, leaf water status,
gas exchange and growth of maize and triticale seedlings. Plant Root, 3: 10-16.

GUNES, A., INAL, A. AND ALPASLAN, M. (1996). Effect of salinity on stomatal
resistance, proline, and mineral composition of pepper, Journal of Plant Nutrition,
19:2, 389-396. DOT: 10.1080/01904 169609365129.

GUPTA, B. AND HUANG, B. (2014). Review article mechanism of salinity tolerance in
plants: physiological, biochemical, and molecular characterization. Hindawi
publishing corporation International Journal of Genomics, Article ID 701596.
DOI:10.1155/2014/701596.


HAJER, A.S., MALIBARI, A. A., AL-ZAHRANI, H. S. AND ALMAGHRABI, O.A.
(2006). Responses of three tomato cultivars to sea water salinity 1. Effect of salinity
on the seedling growth. African Journal of Biotechnology, 5 (10): 855-861.

HAJIBOLAND, R, ALIASGHARZADEH, A., LAIEGH, S.F. AND POSCHENRIEDER,
C. (2010). Colonization with arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi improves salinity
tolerance of tomato (Solanum lycopersicum L.) plants. Plant Soil, 331: 313-327.

HASANUZZAMAN, M., ALAM, M., RAHMAN, A., HASANUZZAMAN, M., NAHAR,
K., AND FUJITA, M. (2014). Exogenous proline and glycine betaine mediated
upregulation of antioxidant defense and glyoxalase systems provides better
protection against salt-induced oxidative stress in two rice (Oryza sativa L.) varieties.
BioMed Research International. DOI:10.1155/2014/757219.

HATSUGAI, N. AND KATAGIRI, F. (2018). Quantification of plant cell death by
electrolyte leakage assay. Bio-protocol 8(5): e2758. DOI: 10.21769/BioProtoc.2758.

HELALY, A.A., GODA, Y., EL-REHIM, A.S.A., MOHAMED, A.A. AND EL ZEINY,
OAH. (2017). Effect of irrigation with different levels of saline water type on husk
tomato productivity. Advances in Plants and Agricultural Research, 6(4):114-120.
DOI: 10.15406/apar.2017.06.00223.

HNILICKOVA H., HNILICKA F., ORSAK M., AND HEJNAK V. (2019). Effect of salt
stress on growth, electrolyte leakage, Nat and K+ content in selected plant species.
Plant, Soil and Environment, 65: 90-96.

HUSSAIN, A., QARSHI, I.A., NAZIR, H. AND ULLAH, I. (2012). Plant tissue culture:
current status and opportunities, recent advances in plant in vitro culture, annarita
leva and laura m. r. rinaldi, Intechopen. DOI: 10.5772/50568.

HU, X., ZHANG, A., ZHANG, J., AND JIANG, M. (2006). Abscisic acid is key inducer
on hydrogen peroxide production in leaves of maize plants exposed to water stress.
Plant Cell Physiology, 47: 1484-1495. DOI:10.1093/pep/pcl014.

HUSSIN, S. (2018). Genotypic variations in salt tolerance of some egyptian wild beet
accessions. Arab Universities Journal of Agricultural Sciences. 26. 1225-1237. DOI:
10.21608/ajs.2018.28386.

ILIK, P., SPUNDOVA, M., SICNER, M., MELKOVICOVA, H., KUCEROVA, Z.,
KRCHNAK, P., FURST, T., VECEROVA, K., PANZAROVA, K.,
BENEDIKTYOVA, Z., AND TRTILEK, M. (2018). Estimating heat tolerance of
plants by ion leakage: a new method based on gradual heating. New Phytologist,
218(3):1278-1287. DOI: 10.111 1/nph.15097.

ISAYENKOV, S.V. AND MAATHIUS, F.J.M. (2019). Plant salinity stress: many
unanswered questions remain. Frontiers in Plant Science, 10:80. DOI:
10.3389/fpls.2019.00080.


JAKLI, H.M. AND TRANKNER, M. (2019). Critical leaf magnesium thresholds and the
impact of magnesium on plant growth and photo-oxidative defense: a systematic
review and meta-analysis from 70 years of research. Frontiers in Plant Science, 10:
1-15. DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2019.00766.

JEFFREY, D. (1990). Appendix: An outline classification of the Cucurbitaceae. In: Bates,
D.M., Robinson, R.W., Jeffrey, C. Biology and utilization of the Cucurbitaceae.
Ithaca and London: Cornell University. 449-463.

JIANG, C., JOHKAN, M., HOHJO, M., TSUKAGOSHI, S., AND MARUO, T. (2017). A
correlation analysis on chlorophyll content and SPAD value in tomato leaves.
Horticulture Research, 71: 37—42. DOI:10.20776/S 18808824-71 -P37.

JINI, D. AND JOSEPH, B. (2017). Physiological mechanism of salicylic acid for
alleviation of salt stress in rice. Rice science, 24 (2): 97-108. DOI:
10.1016/j.rsci.2016.07.007.

JIN, Z., ZHILONG, B. AND YANA, L.I. (2008). Physiological and growth responses of
two different salt-sensitive cucumber cultivars to NaCl stress. Soil Science and Plant
Nutrition, 54:3, 400-407, DOT: 10.1111/j.1747-0765.2008.00245.x.

KANAWAPEE, N., SANITCHON, J., LONTOM, W. AND THREERAKULPISUT, P.
(2012). Evaluation of salt tolerance at the seedling stage in rice genotypes by growth
performance, ion accumulation, proline and chlorophyll content. Plant Soil,
358:235-249. DOI: 10.1007/s11104-012-1179-6.

KANG, D., SEO, Y., LEE, J.D., ISHII, R., KIM, K.U., SHIN, D.H., PARK, S.K., AND
LEE, I. (2005). Jasmonic Acid differentially affects growth, ion uptake and abscisic
acid concentration in salt-tolerant and salt-sensitive rice cultivars. Journal of
Agronomy and Crop Science, 191:273-282.

KARGBOS.S., SHOWEMIMO F.A., PORBENI J.B.0. AND AKINTOKUN P.O. (2019).
Response of rice genotypes to salinity under hydroponic conditions. Agro-Science,
18 (3), 11-18. DOI: 10.4314/as.v18i3.3.

KARPINSKI, S., GABRYS, H., MATEO, A., KARPINSKA, B. AND MULLINEAUX,
P.M. (2003). Light perception in plant disease defense signaling. Current Opinion in
Plant Biology, 6: 390-396.

KAYESS, O., RAHMAN, L., AHMED, K., KHAN, R., HOSSAN, S., HOSSAIN, S.,
KHANAM, M. AND PAL, D.C. (2020). Effect of Salinity Stress on Different Root
and Shoot Traits of Selected Tomato Cultivars. Asian Journal of Advanced Research
and Reports, 8(1): 1-9. DOI: 10.9734/AJARR/2020/v8i130188.

KHAN, M.M., AL-MASOUDI, R.S.M., AL-SAID, F., AND KHAN, I. (2013). Salinity
Effects on Growth, Electrolyte Leakage, Chlorophyll Content and Lipid Peroxidation


in Cucumber (Cucumis sativus L.). International Proceedings of Chemical,
Biological and Environmental Engineering, 55. DOI: 10.7763/IPCBEE.

KINRAIDE, TB. (1999). Interactions among Ca2+, Nat and K+ in salinity toxicity:
quantitative resolution of multiple toxic and ameliorative effects. Journal of
Experimental Botany, 50(338): 1495-1505, DOI:10.1093/jxb/50.338.1495.

KIM, S.K., SOHN, E.Y., LEE, I. AND JOO, G.J. (2009). Influence of Jasmonic acid on
endogenous gibberellin and abscisic acid in salt-stressed chard plant. Journal of
Environtal. Biolgy, 30: 333-338.

KITAMURA, Y., YANO, T., HONNA, T., YAMAMOTO, S. AND INOSAKO, K.
(2006). Causes of farmland salinization and remedial measures in the Aral Sea Basin-
Research on water management to prevent secondary salinization in rice-based
cropping system in arid land. Agricultural Water Management, 85: 1-14.

KLESSIG, D.F. AND MALAMY, J. (1994). The salicylic acid signal in plants. Plant
Molecular Biology, 26: 1439-1458. DOI:10.1007/BF00016484.

KNIGHT, S.L., ROGERS, R.B., SMITH, M.A.L. AND SPORAER, L.A. (1992). Effects
of NaC] salinity on miniature dwarf tomato ‘Micro-Tom’: J. Growth analyses and
nutrient composition. Journal of Plant Nutrition, 15:11, 2315-2327, DOI:
10.1080/01904169209364476.

KONUKCU, F., GOWING, J.W. AND ROSE, D.A. (2006). Dry drainage: A sustainable
solution to waterlogging and salinity problems in irrigation areas? Agricultural
Water Management, 83: 1-12.

KORKMAZ, A., UZUNLU, M., AND DEMIRKIRAN, A.R. (2007). Acetyl salicylic acid
alleviates chilling-induced damage in muskmelon plants. Canadian Journal of Plant
Science, 87: 581-585.

KOYRO, H.W. (2006). Effect of salinity on growth, photosynthesis, water relations and
solute composition of the potential cash crop halophyte Plantago coronopus (L.).
Environmental and Experimental Botany, 56(2): 136-146. DOI:
10.1016/j.envexpbot.2005.02.001.

LI, J., PU, L., HAN, M., ZHU, M., ZHANG, R. AND XIANG, Y. (2014). Soil salinization
research in China: Advances and prospects. Journal of Geographical Sciences,
24(5): 943-960. DOI:10.1007/s1 1442-014-1130-2.

LI, Y., HE, N., HOU, J., XU, L., LIU, C., ZHANG, J., WANG, Q., ZHANG, X. AND WU,
X. (2018). Factors influencing leaf chlorophyll content in natural forests at the biome
scale. Frontiers in Ecology and Evolution, 6:64. DOI: 10.3389/fevo.2018.00064.


LORETO, F., CENTRITTO, M., AND CHARTZOULAKIS, K. (2003). Photosynthetic
limitations in olive cultivars with different sensitivity to salt stress. Plant Cell
Environment, 26:595-601.

LOVELLI, S., PERNIOLA, M., DI TOMMASO, T., BOCHICCHIO, R., AND AMATO,
M. (2012). Specific root length and diameter of hydroponically grown tomato plants
under salinity. Journal of Agronomy, 11(4), 1.

LUTTS, S., KINET, JM. AND BOUHARMONT, J. (1996). Ethylene production by
leaves of rice (Oryza sativa L.) in relation to salinity tolerance and exogenous
putrescine application. Plant Science, 116(1): 15-25. DOI:10.1016/0168-
9452(96)04379-8.

MAAS, E. V. (1986). Salt tolerance of plants. Journal of Applied Agricultural Research,
1: 12-26.

MAATHUIS, F.J.M. (2014). Sodium in plants: perception, signaling, and regulation of
sodium fluxes. Journal of Experimental Botany, 65(3): 849-858.
DOI:10.1093/jxb/ert326.

MACHADO, R.M.A. AND SERRALHEIRO, R.P. (2017). "Soil Salinity: Effect on
Vegetable Crop Growth. Management Practices to Prevent and Mitigate Soil
Salinization" Horticulturae 3(2): 30. DOI: 10.3390/horticulturae3020030.

MAGGIO, A., RAIMONDI, G., MARTINO, A., AND DE PASCALE, S. (2006). Salt
stress response in tomato beyond the salinity tolerance threshold. Environmental and
Experimental Botany, 59(3): 276-282. DOI: 10.1016/j.envexpbot.2006.02.002.

MANE, A.V., KARADGE, B.A., AND SAMANT, J.S. (2010). Salinity induced changes
in photosynthetic pigments and polyphenols of Cymbopogon nardus (L.) Rendle.
Journal of Chemical and Pharmaceutical Research, 2:338-347.

MARIUM, A., KAUSAR, A., SHAH, S.M.A., ASHRAF, M.Y., AKHTAR, N., AKRAM,
M. AND RIAZ, M. (2019). Assessment of cucumber genotypes for salt tolerance
based on germination and physiological indices. Dose-response: an international
journal. DOI: 10.1177/1559325819889809.

MARIUM, A., KAUSAR, A., ALI SHAH, S. M., ASHRAF, M. Y., AKHTAR, N.,
AKRAM, M., AND RIAZ, M. (2019). Assessment of Cucumber Genotypes for Salt
Tolerance Based on Germination and Physiological Indices. Dose-response: a
publication of International Hormesis Society, 17(4), 1559325819889809. DOI:
10.1177/1559325819889809.

MARSCHNER, H. (1995). The mineral nutrition of higher plants. Academic Press,
London.


MATTSSON, A. (1996). Predicting field performance using seedling quality assessment.
New Forests. 13: 223-248.

MENG, Z., DUAN, A., CHEN, D., DASSANAYAKE, K.B., WANG, X., LIU, Z., LIU,
H. AND GAO, S. (2017). Suitable indicators using stem diameter variation-derived
indices to monitor the water status of greenhouse tomato plants. PLoS ONE 12(2):
e0171423. DOL: 10.1371 /journal.pone.0171423.

MBARKI, S., SKALICKY, M., VACHOVA, P., HAJIHASHEMI, S., JOUINI, L.,
ZIVCAK, M., TLUSTOS, P., BRESTIC, M., HEJNAK, V. AND KHELIL, A.Z.
(2020). Comparing salt tolerance at seedling and germination stages in local
populations of Medicago ciliaris L. to Medicago intertexta L. and Medicago
scutellata L. Plants, 9, 526; DOI: 10.3390/plants9040526.

MCNABB, K. AND TAKAHASHI, E. (2000). Freeze damage to loblolly pine seedlings
as indicated by conductivity measurements and outplanting survival. Auburn
University Southern Forest Nursery Management Cooperative. Research Report 00-
4.

METTERNICHT, G.I. AND ZINCK, J.A. (2003). Remote sensing of soil salinity:
potentials and constraints. Remote Sensing of Environment, 85(1): 1-20. DOI:
10.1016/S0034-4257(02)00188-8.

MILLER, G., SUZUKI, N., YILMAZ, S.C. AND MITTLER, R. (2010). Reactive oxygen
species homeostasis and signaling during drought and salinity stresses. Plant, cell &
environment, 33(4): 453-467.

MODARELLI, G.C., ROUPHAEL, Y., DE PASCALE, S, OZTEKIN, G.B., TUZEL, Y.,
ORSINI, F., AND GIANQUINTO, G. (2020). Appraisal of salt tolerance under
greenhouse conditions of a Cucurbitaceae genetic repository of potential rootstocks
and scions. Agronomy, 10, 967.

MOGHAIEB, R.E.A., SAENEOKA, H. ITO, J. AND FUJITA, K. (2012). Characterization
of salt tolerance in tomato plant in terms of photosynthesis and water relations. Soil
Science and Plant Nutrition, 47:2, 377-385, DOI:
10.1080/00380768.2001.10408400.

MOONS, A., PRINSEN, E., BAUW, G., AND VAN MONTAGU, M. (1997B).
Antagonistic effects of abscisic acid and jasmonates on salt stress-inducible
transcripts in rice roots. Plant Cell, 9:2243-2259.

MORALES, S.G., TELLEZ, L.I.T., MERINO, F.C.G., CALDANA, C., VICTORIA, D.E.
AND CABRERA, B.E.H. (2012). Growth, photosynthetic activity, and potassium
and sodium concentration in rice plants under salt stress. Acta Scientiarum.
Agronomy Maringa, 34(3): 317-324.


MULHOLLAND, B., TAYLOR, I.B., JACKSON, A.C. AND THOMPSON, A.J. (2003).
Can ABA mediate responses of salinity stressed tomato. Environmental And
Experimental Botany, 50(1): 17-28. DOI: 10.1016/S0098-8472(02)001 10-7.

MUNNS, R. (2002). Comparative physiology of salt and water stress. Plant Cell
Environment, 25:239-250.

MUNNS, R. (2011). Plant Adaptations to Salt and Water Stress. Advances in Botanical
Research. 57, 1-32.

MUNNS, R., HUSAIN, S., RIVELLI, A.R., JAMES, R.A., CONDON, A.G.T.,
LINDSAY, M.P., LAGUDAH, E.S., SCHACHTMAN, D.P. AND HARE, R.A.
(2002). Avenues for increasing salt tolerance of crops, and the role of physiologically
based selection traits. In: Horst W.J. et al. (eds) Progress in Plant Nutrition: Plenary
Lectures of the XIV International Plant Nutrition Colloquium. Developments in Plant
and Soil Sciences, 98. Springer, Dordrecht. DOI: 10.1007/978-94-017-2789-17.

MUNNS, R., AND TERMAAT, A. (1986). Whole-plant responses to salinity. Australian
Journal of Plant Physiology, 13: 143-160.

MUNNS, R. AND TESTER, M. (2008). Mechanisms of salinity tolerance. Annual Review
of Plant Biology 59: 651-681.

MITTLER R. (2002). Oxidative stress, antioxidants and stress tolerance. Trends Plant Sci.
7(9):405-10. DOI: 10.1016/s1360-1385(02)02312-9.

NAJIB, M.O.G., YAHYA, A., AND MOHD FIRDAUS, I. (2018). Assessing Salinity
Tolerance Level of Four Cucurbitaceae Species using Growth and Mineral Ion
Content (Nat and C]-) as Indicators. Trans. Malaysian Society of Plant Physiology,
25.

NASRIN, S. AND MANNAN, A.M. (2019). Impact of salinity on seed germination and
seedling growth of tomato. Journal of Bioscience and Agriculture Research, 21(01):
1737-1748. DOI: 10.18801/jbar.210119.212.

NEE, M. (1990). The domestication of Cucurbita (Cucurbitaceae). Economic Botany,
44(3): 56-68.

NEGRAO, S., SCHMOCKEL, S. M., AND TESTER, M. (2017). Evaluating physiological
responses of plants to salinity stress. Annals of Botany, 119(1), 1-11. DOI:
10.1093/aob/mew191.

NETONDO, G.W., ONYANGO, J.C. AND BECK, E. (2004). Sorghum and salinity I.
response of growth, water relations, and ion accumulation to nacl salinity. Crop
science, 44(3): 797-805. DOI: 10.2135/cropsci2004.7970.


NIMSE, S.B. AND PAL, D. (2015). Free radicals, natural antioxidants, and their reaction
mechanisms. RSC Advances, 5:27986-28006. DOI: 10.1039/C4RA13315C.

NIRIT, B. (2013). Effects of salinity on root growth. Retrieved from
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/328517646.

NIU, X., BREESAN, R.A., HASEGAWA, P.M. AND PARDO, J.M. (1995). lon
Homeostasis in NaCl Stress Environments. Plant Physiology, 109: 735-742.

NOBUHIRO S, AND MITTLER R. (2006). Reactive oxygen species and temperature
stresses: a delicate balance between signaling and destruction. Physiolia Plantarum,
126: 45-51.

NOCTOR, G., VELJOVIC-JOVANOVIC, S., DRISCOLL, S., NOVITSKAYA, L. AND
FOYER, C.H. (2002). Drought and oxidative load in the leaves of C3 plants: a
predominant role for photorespiration? Annals of Botany, 89, 841-850.

NUCCIO, M.L., RHODES, D., MCNEIL, S.D., AND HANSON, A.D. (1999). Metabolic
engineering of plants for osmotic stress resistance. Current Opinion in Plant Biology,
2:128-134.

OMAMI, E.N. AND HAMMES, P.S. (2004). Salt tolerance of amaranth as affected by
timing of salinity stress initiation. Agricultural Water Management. Retrieved from
https://repository .up.ac.za/bitstream/handle/2263/26640/Complete.pdf?sequence=1
1.

ORS, S., EKINCI, M., YILDIRIM, E., SAHIN, U., TURAN, M. AND DURSUN, A.
(2021). Interactive effects of salinity and drought stress on photosynthetic
characteristics and physiology of tomato (Lycopersicon esculentum L.) seedlings.
South African Journal of Botany, 137: 335-339. DOI: 10.1016/j.sajb.2020.10.031.

OSAKABE, Y., SHINOZAKI, K.Y., SHINOZAKI, K. AND TRAN, L.S.P. (2013). ABA
control of plant macroelement membrane transport systems in response to water
deficit and high salinity. New Phytologist, 202(1): 35-49.

OZTEKIN, G.B. AND TUZEL, Y. (2011) Comparative salinity responses among tomato
genotypes and rootstocks. Pakistan Journal of Botany, 43(6): 2665-2672.

PADMANBHAN, P., CHEEMA, A. AND PALIYATH, G. (2016). Solanaceous fruits
including tomato, eggplant, and peppers. Encylopedia of food and health. DOI:
10.1016/B978-0-12-384947-2.00696-6.

PAILLES, Y., AWLIA, M., JULKOWSKA, M.M., PASSONE, L., ZEMMOURI, K.,
NEGRAO, S., SCHMOCKEL, S.M., AND TESTER, M. (2020). Diverse Traits
Contribute to Salinity Tolerance of Wild Tomato Seedlings from the Galapagos
Islands. Plant Physiology, 182: 534-546.


PALIWAL, K.V. AND MALIWAL, G.L. (1972). Effects of Salts on the Growth and
Chemical Composition of Okra (Abelmoschus Esculentus) and Sponge-Gourd
(Luffa Cylindrica)., Journal of Horticultural Science, 47(4):517-524. DOI:
10.1080/00221589.1972.11514495.

PARASKEVOPOULOU, A.T., KARANTZI, A.K., LAKOPOULOS, G., LONDRA, P.A.
AND BERTSOUKLIS, K. (2020). The effect of salinity on the growth of lavender
species. Water, 12, 618; DOI: 10.3390/w12030618.

PARIDA, A.K., DAS, A.B. AND DAS, P. (2002). NaCl stress causes changes in
photosynthetic pigments, proteins, and other metabolic components in the leaves of
a true mangrove, Bruguiera parviflora, in hydroponic cultures. Journal of Plant
Biology, 45: 28-36.

PARIHAR, P., SING, S., SING, R., SINGH., V.P. AND PRASAD, S.M. (2014). Effect of
salinity stress on plants and its tolerance strategies: a review. Environmental Science
and Pollution Research, 22:4056—-4075. DOI: 10.1007/s11356-014-3739-1.

PARK, I.S. AND KIM, D.I. (1993). Significance of fresh weight to dry cell weight ratio in
plant cell suspension cultures. Biotechnology techniques, 7(9): 627-630.

PARRY, C., BLONQUIST, J. M., AND BUGBEE, B. (2014). In situ measurement of leaf
chlorophyll concentration: analysis of the optical/absolute relationship. Plant Cell
and Environment, 37, 2508-2520. DOI: 10.111 1/pce.12324.

PARVIN, K., AHAMED, K.U., ISLAM, M.M. AND HAQUE, MLN. (2015). Response of
Tomato Plant Under Salt Stress: Role of Exogenous Calcium. Journal of Plant
Sciences, 10: 222-233. DOI: 10.3923/jps.2015.222.233.

PATEL, N., ANCHALKAR, K., VARUNJIKAR, M., PARABAND, M., AND SINGH, S.
(2017). Effect of salinity on antioxidant, proline and ion content in Luffa acutangula.
Trends in biocsciences, 10(6).

PAUWELS, L., INZE, D., AND GOOSSENS, A. (2009). Jasmonate-inducible gene: what
does it mean? Trends in Plant Science, 14:87-91.

PAVLOVIC, I., MLINARIC, S., TARKOWSKA, D., OKLESTKOVA, J., NOVAK, O.,
LEPEDUS, H., BOK, V.V., BRKANAC, S.R., STRNAD, M. AND SONDI-B.S.
(2019). Early Brassica crops responses to salinity stress: a comparative analysis
between chinese cabbage, white cabbage, and kale. Frontiers in Plant Science,
10:450. DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2019.00450.

PENG, J., LI, Z., WEN, X., LI, W., SHI, H., YANG, L., ZHU, H. AND GUO, H. (2014).
Salt-induced stabilization of EIN3/EIL1 confers salinity tolerance by deterring ROS
accumulation in Arabidopsis. PLoS Genetics, 10:e1004664. DOI:
10.1371 /journal.pgen.1004664.


PHILRICE. (2001). Management of salt affected soils for rice production. Rice technology
bulletin. ISSN 0117-9799 No. 40. Retrieved from http://www.pinoyrice.com/wp-
content/uploads/management-of-salt-affected-soils-for-rice-production-1 .pdf.

PIMENTEL, D., BERGER, B., FILIBERTO, D., NEWTON, M., WOLFE, B.,
KARABINAKIS, E., CLARK, S., POON, E., ABBETT, E., AND NANDAOPAL,
S. (2004). Water Resources: Agricultural and Environmental Issues. BioScience, 54:
909-918.

PSA. (2019). Selected statistics on agriculture. ISSN-2012-0362. Retrieved from
https://psa.gov.ph/sites/default/files/Selected%20Statistics%200n%20Agriculture%
202019.pdf.

QINGMAO, S., SHIQING, S. AND ZHIGANG, Z. (2006). Exogenous brassinosteroid
induced the salt resistance of cucumber (Cucumis sativus L.) seedlings. Institute of
Agricultural Information, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, 39(9): 1872-
1877.

RADHAKRISHNAN, R. AND LEE, I. (2013). Regulation of salicylic acid, jasmonic acid
and fatty acids in cucumber (Cucumis sativus L.) by spermidine promotes plant
growth against salt stress. Acta Physiologiae Plantarum, 35: 3315-3322. DOI:
10.1007/s1 1738-013-1364-0.

RAHNESHAN, Z, FATEMEH, N. AND MOGHADAM,, A.A. (2018). Effects of salinity
stress on some growth, physiological, biochemical parameters and nutrients in two
pistachio (Pistacia vera L.) rootstocks, Journal of Plant Interactions, 13(1): 73-82,
DOI: 10.1080/17429145.2018.1424355.

RAHMAN, M., HOSSAIN, M., HOSSAIN, K., SIKDER, M., SHAMMI, M.,
RASHEDUZZAMAN, M., HOSSAIN, M., ALAM, A. AND UDDIN, M. (2018).
Effects of NaCl-Salinity on Tomato (Lycopersicon esculentum Mill.) Plants in a Pot
Experiment. Open Agriculture, 3(1), 578-585. DOI: 10.1515/opag-2018-0061.

RASHED, M.R.U., ROY, M.R., PAUL, S.K., AND HAQUE, M.M. (2016). In vitro
Screening of salt tolerant genotypes in tomato (Solanum lycopersicum L.). J
Horticultural Science, 3: 186. DOI: 10.4172/2376-0354.1000186.

RATH, H., SAPPA, P.K., HOFFMANN,T., SALAZAR, M.G., REDER, A., STEIL, L.,
HECKER., M, BREMER, E., MADER, U. AND VOLKER, U. (2020). Impact of
high salinity and the compatible solute glycine betaine on gene expression of Bacillus
subtilis. Environmental microbiology, 3266-3286 DOI: 10.1111/1462-2920.15087.

REN, R., LI, Z., ZHANG, L., ZHOU, H., JIANG, X. AND LIU, Y. (2020). Enzymatic and
nonenzymatic antioxidant systems impact the viability of cryopreserved Paeonia
suffruticosa pollen. Plant Cell Tissue and Organ Culture. DOI: 10.1007/s11240-020-
01794-6.


REECHER, G.R. (1998). Nutrient content of tomato and tomato products. Proceedings of
the Society for Experimental Biology and Medicine, 218(2): 98-100. DOI:
10.3181/00379727-218-44282a.

RIYAZUDDIN, R., VERMA, R., SINGH, K., NISHA, N., KEISHAM, M., BHATI, K.K.,
KIM, S.T. AND GUPTA, R. (2020). Ethylene: A Master Regulator of Salinity Stress
Tolerance in Plants. Biomolecules, 10(6): 959. DOI:10.3390/biom 10060959.

RIVELLI, A.R., DE MARIA, S., PIZZA, S., AND GHERBIN, P. (2010). Growth and
physiological response of hydroponically-grown sunflower as affected by salinity
and magnesium levels. Journal of Plant Nutrition, 33: 1307-1323.

ROBERT, H., LE MARREC, C., BLANCO, C. AND JEBBAR, M. (2000). Glycine
betaine, carnitine, and choline enhance salinity tolerance and prevent the
accumulation of sodium to a level inhibiting growth of Tetragenococcus halophila.
Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 66 (2) 509-517; DOI:
10.1128/AEM.66.2.509-517.2000.

ROBINSON, R.W. AND D.S. DECKER-WALTERS. (1997). Cucurbits. New York Cab
International. 226p. Crop Production Science in Horticulture n°.6.

ROGERS, M., COLMER, T., NICHOLS, P., HUGHES, S., FROST, K., CORNWALL,
D., CHANDRA, S., MILLER, S. AND CRAIG, A. (2011). Salinity and waterlogging
tolerance amongst accessions of messina (Melilotus siculus). Crop and Pasture
Science, 62: 225-235. DOI: 10.1071/CP10270.

ROMHELD, V., AND KIRKBY, E.A. (2010). Research on potassium in agriculture:
Needs and prospects. Plant Soil, 335:155-180.

ROSADI, B., SUHANDY, D., MASATERU, S. AND TUSI, A. (2014). The effect of ec
levels of nutrient solution on the growth, yield, and quality of tomatoes (Solanum
lycopersicum) under the Hydroponic System. Journal of Agricultural Engineering
and Biotechnology, 2(1):7-12. DOI:10.18005/JAEB0201002.

ROUPHAEL, Y., CARDARELLI, M., REA, E. AND COLLA, G. (2012). Improving
melon and cucumber photosynthetic activity, mineral composition, and growth
performance under salinity stress by grafting onto Cucurbita hybrid rootstocks.
Photosynthetica, 50: 180-188. DOI: 10.1007/s1 1099-012-0002-1.

RUIZ-SANCHEZ, M.C., DOMINGO, R., TORRECILLAS, A., AND PEREZ-PASTOR,
A. (2000). Water stress preconditioning to improve drought resistance in young
apricot plants. Plant Science, 156: 245-251.

SETH, R. (2018). Assessment of salinity tolerance in tomato cultivars grown in
Maharashtra, India.. Annals of Plant Sciences, 7: 2259. 10.21746/aps.2018.7.5.9.


RYU, H. AND CHO, Y.G. (2015). Plant hormones in salt stress tolerance. Journal of Plant
Biology, 58:147-155. DOI:10.1007/s12374-015-0103-z.

RYU, H., AND HWANG, I. (2013). Brassinosteroids in plant developmental signaling
networks. Journal of Plant Biology, 56: 267-273.

SAAD, A.M. AND ELSHAHED, A.M. (2012). Plant tissue culture media. recent
advances in plant in vitro culture, annarita leva and laura m. r. rinaldi, Intechopen.
DOI: 10.5772/50569.

SHIYAB, S.A., SHATNAWI, M.A., SHIBLI, AL SMEIRAT, N.G., AYAD, J. AND
AKASH, M.W. (2013) Growth, nutrient acquisition, and physiological responses of
hydroponic grown tomato to sodium chloride salt induced stress. Journal of Plant
Nutrition, 36:4, 665-676. DOI: 10.1080/01904167.2012.754037.

SAINJU, U.M. DRIS, R., AND SINGH, B. (2003). Mineral nutrient of tomato. v.1(2):176-
183, Journal of Food, Agriculture & Environment. Retrieved from
https://worldveg.tind.io/record/37623/.

SAMBO, P., NICOLETTO, C., GIRO, A., PII, Y.. VALENTINUZZI, F., MIMMO, T.,
LUGLI, P., ORZES, G., MAZZETTO, F., ASTOLFI, S., TERZANO, R. AND
CESCO, S. (2019). Hydroponic Solutions for Soilless Production Systems: Issues
and Opportunities in a Smart Agriculture Perspective. Frontiers of Plant Science.
doi:10.3389/fpls.2019.00923.

SANCHEZ, F.G. AND SYVERTSEN, J.P. (2009). substrate type and salinity affect
growth allocation, tissue ion concentrations, and physiological responses of Carrizo
citrange seedlings. HortScience, 44(5): 1432-1437.
DOI:10.21273/HORTSCI.44.5.1432.

SARKER, B.C. AND HARA, M. (2004). Quantitative analysis of relative growth rate
based on leaf growth characteristics and evapotranspiration of eggplant and tomato
under periodic water deficit at reproductive stage. Journal of Applied Horticulture,
6(2):76-81.

SAVE, R., OLIVELLA, C., BIEL, C., ADILLON, J. AND RABELLA, R. (1994).
Seasonal patterns of water relationships, photosynthetic pigments and morphology
of Actinidia deliciosa plants of the Haywards and Tomouri cultivars. Agronomie, 2,
121-126.

SCHEEL, D. (1998). Resistance response physiology and signal transduction. Current
Opinion in Plant Biology, 1: 305-310.

SCHROEDER, J. DELHAIZE, E., FROMMER, W.B., GUERINOT, MLL.,
HARRISON, M.J., HERRERA-ESTRELLA, L., HORIE, T., KOCHIAN, L.V.,
MUNNS, R., NISHIZAWA, N.K., TSAY, Y.F., AND SANDERS, D. (2013). Using


membrane transporters to improve crops for sustainable food production. Nature,
497:60-66.

SCHOLBERG, J.M.S. AND LOCASCIO, S.J. (1999). Growth Response of Snap Bean and
Tomato as Affected by Salinity and Irrigation Method. Hortscience, 34(2):259-264.

SCHWARZ, D. AND GROSCH, R. (2003). Influence of nutrient solution concentration
and a root pathogen (Pythium aphanidermatum) on tomato root growth and
morphology. Scientia Horticulturae, 97: 109-120.

SERNA, M., COLL, Y., ZAPATA, P.J., BOTELLA, M.A., PRETEL, M.T. AND
AMOROS, A. (2015). A brassinosteroid analogue prevented the effect of salt stress
on ethylene synthesis and polyamines in lettuce plants. Scientia Horticulturae, 185:
105-112. DOI: 10.1016/j.scienta.2015.01.005.

SEO, J.S., JOO, J., KIM, M.J., KIM, Y.K., NAHM, B.H., SONG, S.I., CHEONG, J.J.,
LEE, J.S., KIM, J.K., AND CHOI, Y.D. (2011). OsbHLH148, a basic helix-loop-
helix protein, interacts with OsJAZ proteins in a jasmonate signaling pathway
leading to drought tolerance in rice. Plant Journal, 65:907-921.

SETH, R. (2018). Assessment of salinity tolerance in tomato cultivars grown in
Maharashtra, India. Annals of Plant Sciences, 7(5): 2259.
DOI:10.21746/aps.2018.7.5.9.

SIDDIKY, M., KHAN, M. AND UDDIN, K.M. (2015). Performance of tomato
(Lycopersicon esculentum Mill.) germplasm to salinity stress. Bangladesh Journal
of Botany, 44(2):193-200 DOI:10.3329/bjb.v44i2.38507.

SHABALA, S. AND CUIN, T.A. (2007). Review Potassium transport and plant salt
tolerance. Physiologia Plantarum, 133: 651-669. DOI: 10.1111/j.1399-
3054.2007.01008.

SHABALA, S., DEMIDCHIK, V., SHABALA, L., CUIN, T.A., SMITH, S.J., MILLER,
A.J., DAVIES, J.M., AND NEWMAN, L.A. (2006). Extracellular Ca2+ ameliorates
NaCl-induced K+ loss from Arabidopsis root and leaf cells by controlling plasma
membrane K+-permeable channels. Plant Physiology, 141, 1653-1665.

SHAHBAZ, M., ASHRAF, M., AL-QURAINY, F. AND HARRIS, P.J.C. (2012). Salt
tolerance in selected vegetable crops. Critical Reviews in Plant Sciences, 31:303—
320.

SHARMA, P., JHA, A.B., DUBEY, R.S. AND PESSARAKLI, M. (2012). Reactive
oxygen species, oxidative damage, and antioxidative defense mechanism in plants
under stressful conditions. Journal of Botany, 2012(217037): 26 pages.
DOI:10.1155/2012/217037.


n

HAFIEE, H., HAGHIGHI, M, AND FARHADI, A. (2019). Evaluation of responses of
Iranian melon cultivars to salinity stress. Journal Of Crop Production and
Processing, 9(1): 51-63.

n

HEREEN, A., MUMTAZ, S., RAZA, S., KHAN, M.A. AND SOLANGI, S. (2005).
Salinity effects on seedling growth and yield components of different inbred rice
lines. Pakistan Journal of Botany, 37(1): 131-139.

n

HIBLI, R. A., KUSHAD, M., YOUSEF, G. G., AND LILA, M. A. (2007). Physiological
and biochemical responses of tomato microshoots to induce salinity stress associated
with ethylene accumulation. Plant Growth Regulators, 51, 159-169. DOI:
10.1007/s10725-006-9158-7.

n

HRIVASTAVA, P. AND KUMAR, R. (2015). Soil salinity: A serious environmental
issue and plant growth promoting bacteria as one of the tools for its alleviation. Saudi
Journal of Biological Sciences, 22(2): 123-131. DOI: 10.1016/j.sjbs.2014.12.001.

n

DDIQI, K.S. AND HUSEN, A. (2019). Plant response to jasmonates: current
developments and their role in changing environment. Bulletin of the National
Research Centre, 43, 153. DOI: 10.1186/s42269-019-0195-6.

n

INGH, M., KUMAR, J., SINGH, S., SING, P.V. AND PRASAD, S.M. (2015). Roles of
osmoprotectants in improving salinity and drought tolerance in plants: a review.
Reviews in Environmental Science and Biotechnology, 14: 407-426.
DOI:10.1007/s11157-015-9372-8.

SINGH, D., SINGH, C.K., KUMARI, S., TOMAR, R.S.S., AND KARWA, S. (2017)
Discerning morpho-anatomical, physiological and molecular multiformity in
cultivated and wild genotypes of lentil with reconciliation to salinity stress. PLOS
ONE, 12(12): e0190462. DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0190462.

SOFY, A. R., DAWOUD, R. A., SOFY, M. R., MOHAMED, H. I., HMED, A. A., AND
EL-DOUGDOUG, N. K. (2020). Improving regulation of enzymatic and non-
enzymatic antioxidants and stress-related gene stimulation in Cucumber mosaic
cucumovirus - infected cucumber plants treated with glycine betaine, chitosan and
combination. Molecules, 25(10), 2341. DOI: 10.3390/molecules25 102341.

SONON, L.S., SAHA, U. AND KISSEL, D.E. (2015). Soil salinity testing, data
interpretation and recommendations. Agricultural and Environmental Services
Laboratories. Retrieved from
https://secure.caes.uga.edu/extension/publications/files/pdf/C%201019_3.PDF.

SONG, X., WANG, S., AND JIANG, Y. (2017). Genotypic Variations in Plant Growth
and Nutritional Elements of Perennial Ryegrass Accessions under Salinity Stress.
Journal of the American Society for Horticultural Science, 142(6), 476-483.


STA. CRUZ, A., RODRIGUEZ, M.M.M., ALFOCEA, F.P., ARANDA, R.R. AND
BOLARIN, M.C. (2002). The rootstock effect on the tomato salinity response
depends on the shoot genotype. Plant Science, 162(5): 825-831.

STEVENS, J., SENARATNA, T. AND SIVASITHAMPARAM, K. (2006). Salicylic acid
induces salinity tolerance in tomato (Lycopersicon esculentum cv. roma): associated
changes in gas exchange, water relations and membrane stabilisation. Plant Growth
Regulators, 49: 77-83. DOI: 10.1007/s10725-006-0019-1.

TAO, J.J., CHEN, H.W., MA, B., ZHANG, W.K., CHEN, S.Y. AND ZHANG, J.S. (2015).
The Role of ethylene in plants under salinity stress. Front. Plant Science, 6:1059.
DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2015.01059.

TAVAKKOLI, E. FATEHI, F., COVENTRY, S., RENGASAMY, P., AND
MCDONALD, G.K. (2011). Additive effects of Na+ and Cl- ions on barley growth
under salinity stress, Journal of Experimental Botany, 62(6): 2189-2203, DOI:
10.1093/jxb/erq422.

TERZANO, R. AND CESCO, S. (2019). Hydroponic solutions for soilless production
systems: issues and opportunities in a smart agriculture perspective. Frontiers in
Plant Science, 10:923. DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2019.00923.

TOPALOVA, E., BOHM, V., TUZEL, Y., OZTEKIN, G.B., VELKOV, N., PETKOVA,
V. AND KAPPEL, N. (2019). Response of some cucurbit genotypes to salinity stress.
Acta Horticulturae, 1257. DOI: 10.17660/ActaHortic.2019.1257.12.

TU, J.C. AND C.S. TAN. (1991). Effect of soil compaction on growth, yield and root rots
of white beans in clay loam and sandy loam soil. Soil Biology and Biochemistry, 23:
233-238.

ULAS, F., AYDIN, A., ULAS, A. AND YETISIR, H. (2019). Grafting for Sustainable
Growth Performance of Melon (Cucumis melo) Under Salt Stressed Hydroponic
Condition. European Journal of Sustainable Development, 8(1): 201-210. DOI:
10.14207/ejsd.2019.v8n1p201.

ULLAH, N., BASIT, A., AHMAD, I., ULLAH, I., SHAH, S.T., MOHAMED, H.I., AND
JAVED, S. (2020). Mitigation the adverse effect of salinity stress on the performance
of the tomato crop by exogenous application of chitosan. Bulletin of the National
Research Centre, 44, 181. DOI: 10.1186/s42269-020-00435-4.

VADIM, D., STRALTSOVA, D., MEDVEDEV, S.S., POZHVANOV, G.A., SOKOLIK,
A., AND YURIN, V. (2014). Stress-induced electrolyte leakage: the role of K+-
permeable channels and involvement in programmed cell death and metabolic
adjustment. Journal of Experimental Botany, 65(5): 1259-1270. DOI:
10.1093/jxb/eru004,


VAUGHAN, L.V., MACADAM, J.W., SMITH, S.E. AND DUDLEY, L. (2002). Root
growth and yield of differing alfalfa rooting populations under increasing salinity
and zero leaching. Crop Science, 42: 2064-2071.

VIEIRA, I.G.S., NOBRE, R.G., DIAS, A.S., AND PINHEIRO, F.W.A. (2016). Cultivation
of cherry tomato under irrigation with saline water and nitrogen fertilization. Soil,
Water and Plant Management, 20 (1). DOI: 10.1590/1807-
1929/agriambi.v20n1p55-61.

VERY, A.A. AND SENTENAC, H. (2003). Molecular mechanisms and regulation of K+
transport in higher plants. Annual Review of Plant Biology, 54: 575-603. DOI:
10.1146/annurev.arplant.54.031902.134831.

VINCENT, A., VICTOR, F., JACAS, J., GARCIA-AGUSTIN, P., AND GOMEZ-
CADENAS, A. (2003). Enzymatic and non-enzymatic antioxidant responses of
carrizo citrange, a salt-sensitive citrus rootstock, to different levels of salinity. Plant
and Cell Physiology, 44(4): 388-394, DOI:10.1093/pep/peg059.

VINOD, K.K., KRISHNAN, S.G., BABU, N.N., NAGARAJAN, M. AND SINGH, A.K.
(2013). Chapter 10 improving salt tolerance in rice: looking beyond the conventional.
Salt stress in plants: signalling, omics and adaptations. DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4614-
6108-1_10.

VOLKOV, V., WANG, B., DOMINY, P.J., FRICKE, W., AND AMTMANN, A. (2003).
Thellungiella halophila, a salt-tolerant relative of Arabidopsis thaliana, possesses
effective mechanisms to discriminate between potassium and sodium. Plant Cell
Environment, 27: 1-14.

VYSOTSKAYA, L., HEDLEY, P., SHARIPOVA, G., DMITRIY, V., KUDOYAROVA,
G., MORRIS, J. AND JONES, H. (2010). Effect of salinity on water relations of wild

barley plants differing in salt tolerance. AoB plants. plq006. DOI:
10.1093/aobpla/plq006.

WAHID, A., HAMEED, M. AND RASUL, E. (2004). Salt-induced injury symptom,
changes in nutrient and pigment composition, and yield characteristics of mungbean.
International Journal of Agriculture and Biology, 6(6).

WANG, S., GUO, S., LI, J., HU, X. AND JIAO, Y. (2006). Effects of salt stress on the

root growth and leaf water use efficiency of cucumber seedlings. Ying Yong Sheng
Tai Xue Bao,17(10): 1883-8.

WANG, B., ZHANG, J., XIA, X. AND ZHANG, W.H. (2011). Ameliorative effect of
brassinosteroid and ethylene on germination of cucumber seeds in the presence of

sodium chloride. Plant Growth Regulators, 65, 407. DOI: 10.1007/s10725-011-
9595-9.


WANG, J., SONG, L., GONG, X., XU, J., AND LI, M. (2020). Functions of jasmonic acid
in plant regulation and response to abiotic stress. International Journal of Molecular
Science, 21, 1446.

WARRENCE, N.J., BAUDER, J.W. AND PEARSON, K.E. (2003). Basics of salinity and
sodicity effects on soil physical properties. Department of Land Resources and
Environmental Sciences, Montanta State University-Bozeman.

WASKIEWICZ, A., BESZTERDA, M. AND GOLINSKI, P. (2014). Chapter 7 -
nonenzymatic antioxidants in plants oxidative damage to plants antioxidant networks
and signaling, 201-234. DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-12-799963-0.00007-1.

WEBER, E. AND D’ANTONIO, C.M. (1999). Germination and growth responses of
hybridizing Carpobrotus species (Aizoaceae) from coastal California to soil salinity.
American Journal of Botany, 86(9): 1257-1263.

WHITAKER, T.W., AND DAVIS, G.N. (1962). Cucurbits: botany, cultivation and
utilization. New York: Interscience, 250.

WHITE, P.J. AND BROADLEY, M.R. (2001). Chloride in soils and its uptake and
movement within the plant: a review. Annals of Botany, 88: 967-988. DOI:
10.1006/anbo.2001.1540.

WU, H., ZHAO, G., GONG, H., LI, J., LUO, C., HE, X., LUO, S., ZHENG, X., LIU, X.,
GUO, L., GUO, J., CHEN, J., AND LUO, J. (2020). A high-quality sponge gourd
(Luffa cylindrica) genome. Horticultural Research, 7, 128. DOI: 10.1038/s41438-
020-00350-9.

WU, H., GUO, J., WANG, C., LI, K., ZHANG, X., YANG, Z., LI, M. AND WANG, B.
(2019). An effective screening method and a reliable screening trait for salt tolerance
of Brassica napus at the germination stage. Frontiers in Plant Science, 10:530. DOI:
10.3389/fpls.201 9.00530.

XIONG, D., CHEN, J., YU, T., GAO, W., LING, X., LING, Y., PENG, S. AND HUANG,
J. (2015). SPAD-based leaf nitrogen estimation is impacted by environmental factors
and crop leaf characteristics. Scientific Reports, 5, 13389. DOI: 10.1038/srep13389.

YAN, Y., WANG, S., WEI, M., GONG, B. AND SHI, Q. (2018). Effect of different
rootstocks on the salt stress tolerance in watermelon seedlings. Horticultural Plant
Journal, 4 (6): 239-249. DOI: 10.1016/j.hpj.2018.08.003.

YETISIR, H., AND V. UYGUR. (2009). Plant growth and mineral element content of
different gourd species and watermelon under salinity stress. Turkish Journal of
Agriculture and Forestry, 33: 65-77.


YILDIRIM, E. TURAN, M. AND GUVENC, I. (2008). Effect of Foliar Salicylic Acid
Applications on Growth, Chlorophyll, and Mineral Content of Cucumber Grown
Under Salt Stress, Journal of Plant Nutrition, 31:3, 593-612.

ZAKI, H. AND YOKOI, S. (2016). A comparative in vitro study of salt tolerance in
cultivated tomato and related wild species. Plant biotechnology, 33(5), 361-372.
DOI: 10.551 1/plantbiotechnology.16.1006a.

ZAMAN, M.S., ALI, G.M., MUHAMMAD, A. AND FAROOQ, K. (2015). In vitro
Screening of Salt Tolerance in Potato (Solanum tuberosum L.) Varieties. Sarhad
Journal of Agriculture, 31(2): 106-113.

ZEID, I.M. (2009). Trehalose as osmoprotectant for maize under salinity-induced stress.
Research Journal of Agriculture and Biological Sciences, 5(5): 613-622.

ZENG, L. AND SHANNON, M.C. (2000). Salinity effects on seedling growth and yield

components of rice. Crop science crop breeding, genetics & cytology. DOI:
10.2135/cropsci2000.404996x

ZHANG, H, IRVING, L.J, MCGILL, C, MATTHEW, C., ZHOU, D., AND KEMP, P.
(2010). The effects of salinity and osmotic stress on barley germination rate: sodium

as an osmotic regulator. Annals of Botany, 106(6):1027-35. DOI:
10.1093/aob/meq204.

ZHANG, P., SENGE, M. AND DAI, Y. (2016). Effects of salinity stress on growth, yield,
fruit quality and water use efficiency of tomato under hydroponics system. Reviews
in Agricultural Science, 4: 46- 55. DOI: 10.783 1/ras.4.46.

ZHANG, S.S., CAI, Z.Y., AND WANG, X.L. (2009). The primary signaling outputs of
brassinosteroids are regulated by abscisic acid signaling. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 106:4543—4548.

ZHANG, Y.Q., LIU, S.Q., YANG, F.J. AND LI, D.F. (2003). Study on screening of salt-
tolerant watermelon stock and mechanism of salt-tolerance. Acta Agriculturae.
Boreali-occidentalis Sin., 12: 105-108.

ZHONG, Y.P., QI, X.J., CHEN, J.Y., LI, Z., BAI, D.F., WEI, C.G., AND FANG, J.B.
(2019). Growth and physiological responses of four kiwifruit genotypes to salt stress
and resistance evaluation. Journal of Integrative Agriculture, 18(1): 83-95. DOI:
10.1016/S2095-3119(18)62011-8.

ZHU, J.K. (2001). Plant salt tolerance. Trends Plant Science, 6:66—72.

ZHU, J.K. (2002). Salt and drought stress signal transduction in plants. Annual review of
plant biology, 53. 247-73. DOI: 10.1146/annurev.arplant.53.091401.143329.


ZHU, J.K. (2003). Regulation of ion homeostasis under salt stress. Current Opinion in
Plant Biology, 6: 441-445. DOI: 10.1016/S1369-5266(03)00085-2.

ZHU, J., BIE, Z. AND LI, Y. (2008). Physiological and growth responses of two different
salt-sensitive cucumber cultivars to NaCl stress. Soil Science and Plant Nutrition,
54: 400-407.

ZHU, J., BIE, Z., HUANG, Y. AND HAN, X. (2008). Effect of grafting on the growth and
ion concentrations of cucumber seedlings under NaCI stress. Soil Science & Plant
Nutrition, 54: 895-902. DOI: 10.1111/j.1747-0765.2008.00306.x.

ZIAD, M., ZAHER M.A.J. AND AHMED, S.A. (2019). Nonenzymatic exogenous and
endogenous antioxidants, free radical medicine and biology, kusal das, swastika das,
mallanagouda shivanagouda biradar, varaprasad bobbarala and s. subba tata,
IntechOpen. DOI: 10.5772/intechopen.87778.

ZIPENG, Y., XIANGBO, D., LU, L., SHAOJUN, D., ZHAOJUN, D., AND GUANGMIN,
X. (2020). how plant hormones mediate salt stress responses, Trends in Plant
Science, 25(11): 1117-1130. DOI: 10.1016/j.tplants.2020.06.008.

ZULFIQAR, F., AKRAM, N.A. AND ASHRAF, M. (2020). smoprotection in plants under
abiotic stresses: new insights into a classical phenomenon. Planta, 251, 3. DOI:

10.1007/s00425-019-03293-1.
