Morpho-Physiological Features, Yield Attributes and Suitability of Grain Soybean (Glycine max (L.) Merrill) Varieties for Vegetable Soybean Consumption as Affected by Planting Dates

ZOILO ROY R. PEREZ

UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES LOS BAÑOS

Master of Science in Horticulture

JANUARY, 2022

ABSTRACT

Planting date plays a significant role in determining crop performance since sowing
outside the optimal time contributes significantly to yield reductions. The objectives of this
study were to determine the phenological, morpho-physiological, and yield characters of
five soybean varieties (Ryokko, Manchuria, Tiwala 12, Tiwala 8, and Tudela) in response
to four planting dates (March 5, March 25, April 15, and May 6), assess their correlation,
and relate these traits to the meteorological conditions during their growth period. The field
experiment was done in Santa Maria, Laguna from March to July 2021 arranged in RCBD
which was replicated four times. With respect to the phenology, days to flowering, days to
full-seed stage, and days from R1 to R6 stage were significantly affected by the interaction
of sowing date and variety favoring the second planting. Among the morpho-physiological
traits, the number of nodes, plant weight, straw weight, pod length and width, and height
of lowest pod were significantly influenced by planting date by variety interaction. As per
the yield components, significantly higher responses in terms of the number of pods and
marketable pods plant⁻¹, pod weight plant⁻¹, 100-pod weight, percentage of 4-seeded pods,
2-seeded pods, 1-seeded pods, and combined 4-,3-, and 2-seeded pods, seed length, seed
width, seed weight plant⁻¹, 100-seed weight, daily production rate, pod yield, seed yield,
and harvest index were accounted during the second planting. All the five varieties
obtained the highest final pod and seed yield when grown under the March 25 planting.
Final pod and seed yield declined as the growing degree units accumulated throughout
growth duration decreased, temperature extremely increased, and precipitation started to
increase at the later planting dates which might probably be coupled with lower intercepted
solar radiation due to denser cloud cover wherein the third planting (April 15) and fourth
planting (May 6)-grown plants were exposed. Tudela outperformed the other varieties
based on the yield parameters, however, Tiwala 8 was evaluated as the overall most
suitable genotype based on several criteria for vegetable soybean close-to-ideal plant type
and surpassed the true vegetable soybean variety (Ryokko). Prevailing weather conditions
coinciding the soybean growth potentially influenced the length of time to achieve
flowering and to reach the full-seed stage which is ready for harvesting of fresh green pods.
The major determinants of yield were pod and seed weight plant⁻¹ (r = 0.96 to 0.99), days
to R6 stage (r = 0.90 to 0.95), and number of pods plant⁻¹ (r = 0.86 to 0.93), whereas harvest
index were strongly associated with pod and seed size. Appropriate timing of planting
should be discerned to effectively limit the concurring environmental stresses, hence,
achieving favorably higher yield.

Keywords: Planting date, variety, vegetable soybean, yield

CHAPTER I
INTRODUCTION

Soybean is considered as the most important seed legume for having a high protein
content and has a potential for vegetable consumption aside from the typical grain soybeans
which are highly commercialized as sources of edible oil for industrial purposes and mainly
as a source of protein in livestock and poultry feed. Soybean varieties with large seed size
and high sucrose level with good flavor are desirable traits in the production of vegetable
soybean. Edamame is a large-seeded type of soybean normally harvested when the seeds
reach the R6 developmental stage and have expanded to fill 80% to 90% of the pod width
(Konovsky et al., 1994). Mentreddy et al. (2002) reported that the vegetable soybean has
better taste and consumer preference than the mature seed produced from grain soybean
varieties and was characterized by Rackis (1978) to have increased digestibility and larger
seed size.

Edamame’s green immature beans are prepared as fresh or frozen and can be cooked
in a similar manner with sweet peas or lima bean which can be stir-fried or added tostews
and soups (Rao et al., 2002). Edamame is a good source of plant-based protein, it possesses
complete proteins with 18 amino acids including all the essential amino acids (Velasquez
and Bhathena, 2007), is rich in phytochemicals beneficial to human health such as
isoflavones which are potentially reducing cancer and related ailments, serves as an
antioxidant according to Simonne et al. (2000), Franke et al. (1994), and Wang and

Murphy, (1994) and also revealed potential for addressing chronic diseases such as the

hypocholesterolemic effects of soy phytoestrogen both on animal and human studies
(Caroll & Kurowska, 1995).

The consideration of implementing the appropriate timing of planting is crucial in
favoring seed emergence and in providing a conducive environment for optimum growth
and development of soybean. The effects of planting dates particularly on grain soybean
has been well recognized; however, fewer research has been dedicated on edamame
soybeans (Zhang et al., 2010). The effects of planting date on soybean yield can vary
substantially due to the differences in environmental conditions principally due to amount
and distribution of rainfall (Egli and Cornelius, 2009). In addition, Li et al. (2014) and Hu
and Wiatrak (2012) revealed that the effect of planting date on soybean growth and
development patterns causes changes on the fresh pod yield and chemical seed composition
such as carbohydrate, lipid, and protein content. As featured by Ocampo (2020), edamame
was already produced commercially by growers in Cabanatuan City, Nueva Ecija,
Philippines. Commercialization of edamame poses an opportunity for production under
actual Philippine settings, and thus the Department of Agriculture has urged for vegetable
soybean production due to its significant demand in the export market. Our locally
developed grain soybeans can be potentially repurposed to be consumed in the same manner
as edamame as these varieties are known to adapt and withstand the existing climatic
conditions in the country. There is a a current need to develop locally bred grain soybeans
for vegetable soybean consumption in the Philippines. This study aimed to assess the
phenological, morpho-physiological, and yield attributes and suitability of grain soybean

varieties for vegetable soybean consumption as influenced by different planting dates.

Significance of the Study

The study on the development of locally developed grain soybean varieties suited
for vegetable soybean consumption in the Philippines creates a gap for devising adaptable
technologies in order to explore its potential. Given this opportunity, the researcher wants
to exploit the potentials of our locally developed grain soybean varieties namely: a.) NSIC
IPB variety, Tiwala 8, b.) Tudela, c.) IPB variety, Tiwala 12, d.) farmer variety, Manchuria,
and e.) commercial true vegetable soybean variety, Ryokko (Kaneko Seed Co., Ltd., Japan)
in terms of their yield, morpho-physiological characteristics, and seed and pod
characteristics closest to true vegetable soybean traits which is edamame. It also aims to
assess the performance of these varieties grown in different planting dates under Santa
Maria, Laguna conditions. The result of this study will contribute in the careful selection of
our locally available grain soybean varieties applied to a soybean improvement program aimed
at development of superior quality edamame cultivars with improved maturity

characteristics and reliable adaptation to the Philippine climatic conditions.

Objectives of the Study

General Objectives:

The general objective of this study was to assess different locally developed grain
soybean varieties namely: a.) NSIC IPB variety, Tiwala 8, b.) Tudela, c.) IPB variety,
Tiwala 12, d.) farmer variety, Manchuria, and e.) commercial true vegetable soybean
variety, Ryokko (Kaneko Seed Co., Ltd., Japan) for vegetable soybean consumption grown

under different planting dates.

Specifically, the study sought to:

Determine the phenological traits, morpho-physiological attributes, and yield components
of different soybean varieties in response to different planting dates;

Relate the effect of meteorological conditions during the growing period of different
soybean varieties to its phenological traits, morpho-physiological attributes, and yield
components;

. Assess the correlation between the phenological traits, morpho-physiological attributes,
and yield components;

Distinguish the planting dates suitable for optimum soybean production; and

. Identify which among the grain soybean varieties can be potentially utilized for vegetable

soybean consumption.

Conceptual Framework

Independent Variables

Dependent Variables

Soybean Varieties
Ryokko
Manchuria
Tiwala 8
Tiwala 12
Tudela

PoE bb ae

Planting Dates (2021)

1. March 5
2. March 25"
3. April 15%
4. May 6

Process

Soil Sampling and Analysis
Planting materials (seeds)
Field establishment
Fertilization
Pest and Weed Management
Fresh Green Pod Harvesting
(Full Seed/R6 Stage)
« Agrometerological Data from
SARAI Project Phase II
Automatic Weather Station

o Temperature

o Relative Humidity
o Precipitation
°

Growing Degree Days

Phenological Traits

a. Number of Days to First Flowering (RI Stage)
b. Number of Days to Harvesting (R6 Stage)

c. Number of Days Between RI to R6 Stage

Morpho-Physiological Attributes

Percentage Seed Emergence (%)

Plant Height at R1 and R6 Stage

Number of Nodes Plant “' at R1 and R6 Stage
Fresh and Dry Plant Weight (g)

Fresh and Dry Straw Weight (g)

Height of Lowest Pod (cm)

Pod length, width, and thickness (mm)

mmeoaorp

Yield and Yield Components

Number of Pods and Marketable Pods Plant !
Percentage of Marketable Pods Plant ~!

Fresh and Dry Pod Weight Plant "' (g)

100-Fresh and Dry Pod Weight (g)

Percentage of 4-, 3-, 2-, and 1-Seeded Pods (%)
Percentage of total 4-, 3-, and 2-Seeded Pods (%)
Seed Length and Width (mm)

Fresh and Dry Seed Weight Plant “' (g)
100-Fresh and Dry Seed Weight (g)

j. Fresh and Dry Pod Yield (kg ha')

k. Fresh and Dry Seed Yield (kg ha"')

1. Daily Production Rate (kg ha’')
m.
n.

rrameaogs

. Harvest Index in terms of Fresh and Dry Pods (%)
Harvest Index in terms of Fresh and Dry Seeds (%)

Vegetable Soybean Suitability

Repurposing of locally available grain soybean varieties
leading to the development of superior quality vegetable
soybean cultivars with improved growth and yield
characteristics and reliable adaptation to the local
climatic conditions as influenced by disitnct planting
dates suitable for optimum production.

Figure 1. Conceptual framework showing the underlying processes and the relationship
between the independent and dependent variables in the study.

CHAPTER II

REVIEW OF RELATED LITERATURE

This chapter conveys a retrospective presentation of previously written research
materials and related literatures that confer significance and association to the study

undertaken.
Overview: Vegetable Soybean

Vegetable soybean (Glycine max (L.) Merrill) is locally called utaw in Philippines,
edamame in Japan, mao dou in China, poot kong in Korea and tua rae in Thailand as well
as several common English terms used in literatures including edible soybean, fresh green
soybean, garden soybean, immature soybean, large-seeded soybean, and green-mature
soybean (Lumpkin and Konovsky, 1991). China is believed to be the origin of soybean as
mentioned in the seventh century BC Chinese text, Shijing (Book of Odes), yet the earliest
known evidence of vegetable soybean consumption is dated from 1275 A.D. in Japan as
reported by Shurtleff and Aoyagi (2009). It was only from the past 30 years that edamame
has been popularized, grown, and accepted in the United States for vegetable consumption
as part of their diet. Fehr et. al. (1971) categorized vegetable soybean as either large-seeded
amounting to 3300-5500 seeds per kilogram primarily used for manufacturing soy food
products or as small-seeded types (9900-16500 seeds per kilogram) for sprouting and has

a distinct timing of harvest which is at between R6 and R7 growth stages. The same growth

stages were described by Shanmugasundaram et al. (1991) for vegetable soybeans
specifically at the R6 indicating the reproductive stage.

To meet the size standard for edamame, 100 seeds must weigh more than 30 g as
an acceptable weight. Though currently, the University of Arkansas’ advanced edamame
germplasm consist of seeds ranging from 20 — 28 g / 100 seed at maturity but there are
breeding lines in the pipeline that exceed 30 grams/100 seed. Konovsky et. al. (1994)
reported that Grade A edamame requires 90% of the pods harvested to be containing two
or three seeds per pod and the number of pods with only one seed inside should strictly be
below 10% of the amount of pods yielded.

Carson et. al. (2011) reiterated that the number of seeds per pod was pronouncedly
affected by the cultivar as well as the time of sowing and the corresponding matury group
it belongs to, thus, indicating the importance of genotype on seeds per pod distribution.
Since the seed size and the number of seeds per pod are the primary determinants for
vegetable soybean classification, market in Japan has also specified secondary cirteria
listed as follows: around <175 pods must be contained in a 500 g frozen pod packet; dark
green-colored fresh pods; grey pubescence; pods must contain 2 or more seeds without
blemishes; pods must measure >5.0 cm and >1.4 cm in length and width, respectively; grey
or light-colored hilum; and of utmost importance, soybean must possess standard flavor,
aroma, texture and sweet taste indicating >10% sucrose level. Contrary to fresh green pods,
seeds from matured pods can vary in color from yellow or green to brown or black.
Shanmugasundaram and Yan (2010) characterized the different ways that vegetable

soybeans can be marketed: 1.) as fresh pods that are still attached to the stem, 2.) as fresh

pods detached from the stem, 3.) fresh shelled green beans, 4.) frozen green pods, and 5.)
frozen green beans or seeds.

Since edamame is a food-grade soybean that requires acceptable attributes to enter
vegetable soybean market chain, commercial standards were meticulously taken into
account. Apart from the food-grade standards set by the market which deals with the
primary edamame product, it is also crucial to characterize the ideal plant type which can
potentially cater a favorable set of traits intended for the quality edamame production.
According to Shanmugasundaram et al., (1991), the following traits are considered to be a
nearly ideal plant type : 1.) Delayed flowering > 40 days; 2.) Ten to fourteen nodes on the
mainstem; 3.) Longer period to R6 stage; 5.) 15-20 pods/plant; 6.) Pod width of > 1.4 cm;
7.) Pod length of > 5.0 cm; 8.) Predominantly (= 75%) 2- or more seeded pods; 9.) Bright
green pod and seed coat color; 10.) Grey pubescence; 11.) Grey or light brown hilum; 12.)
Easy to strip pods; 13.) Height of the lowest pod must be at least 10 cm; 14.) Weight of
100 seeds must be > 30 g; 15.) Pods must be free from undesirable pigmentation and spots..
Aside from the standing soybean plant characteristics enumerated above, Funatsuki et al.
(2006); IDA (1990); Rackis (1978); Shanmugasundaram et al. (1989); and Watanabe
(1988) reported that pods should be crescent-shaped > 5 cm long, consisting of two to three
seeds per pod, the seed should have increased digestibility, firm in texture, and sweet

flavor.

Distinguishing Vegetable Soybean from Grain Soybeans

The World Vegetable Center, formerly known as the Asian Vegetable Research and
Development Center (AVRDC) has genebanks housing 15,316 Glycine accessions and
those classified as vegetable soybean account for 13% of the Glycine max collection (Nair
and Easdown, 2013). These are products of selections from local landraces and the
consequent transfer of desirable characteristics from agronomic or grain soybean
accessions. The most common distinguishing feature of vegetable soybean from grain
soybeans is the seed size. Vegetable soybeans are large-seeded type of soybean which can
weigh around >30 g per 100 dry seeds. Unlike vegetable soybeans, grain soybean varieties
were grown, and seeds were used primarily for oil production. However, grain soybeans
can be harvested at their green pod stage and marketed similar to vegetable soybeans as
observed in countries like Nepal, China, Taiwan and Thailand (Shanmugasundaram and
Yan, 2010). Similarly, in the Philippines, local small-scale growers in some areas of
Batangas and Laguna has been growing and harvesting small-seeded grain soybeans,
locally known as utaw, for their green pods which appears to be almost physiologically
matured. These fresh green pods undergo threshing and then are boiled which are sold in
the wet market and ambulant vendors. Unfortunately, traditional soy food chain has been
diminishing in which a lot of consumers even in these provinces are now not familiar with
utaw (Enicola, 2020).

As examined by Konovsky et. al. (1994), vegetable soybean protein levels were

significantly higher than grain soybeans accessions, but it was also found out that larger

seeds contain higher percentage of oil and less protein than smaller seeds. Since edamame
is suitable for vegetable consumption, it is important to characterize immature soybeans
with large seed size, clear hilum, thin seed coat, high contents of sugar and free amino acids
in order to achieve the nutty, buttery, beany, and sweet taste as well as tender texture for a
desirable perception while eating.

Recently, consumer’s attitude towards vegetable consumption has been modified
in most countries through time attributed by introduction of new, high-quality vegetable
soybeans. Vegetable soybean tastes slightly sweeter in contrast to the grain type that is oily
and slightly bitter (Shanmugasundaram and Yan, 2010). Unlike the grain soybeans which
has no preferred pubescence appearance, for vegetable soybeans, grey pubescence is sought
after due to the good pod appearance when cooked. Japan, where edamame is popular,
farmers as well as local growers can spot the difference in large-seeded vegetable soybean
with its good taste and flavor which separates them from the grain soybeans. Private seed
companies tend to exploit this trait in developing productive and palatable vegetable
soybean varieties. As to their identity, the color of the dry seed coat ranges from yellow to

green, brown, and black (Kitamura, 2001).

Nutritional Components and Health Attributes

Vegetable soybean was considered to be beneficial in human health. China is
believed to be the origin of soybean as mentioned in the seventh century BC Chinese text,
Shijing (Book of Odes), yet the earliest known evidence of vegetable soybean consumption

is dated from 1275 A.D. in Japan as reported by Shurtleff and Aoyagi (2009). Vegetable

soybeans in the USA during 1950s were considered better than grain soybeans for human
consumption (Weber, 1956).

Since different soybean genotypes vary in their seed coat solor, it can pose health
benefits due to the pigments present. Kim et al. (2006); Nizamutdinova et al. (2009); and
Takahata et al. (2001) noted that seed coats colored black and brown potentially
accumulate pigment molecules such as anthocyanins and procyanidins which have been
reported to aid in counteracting cardiovascular disorder, cholesterol-related health
problems, prevent inflammation, and scavenge harmful radicals that form in the body.

Notable health benefits of vegetable soybeans include high amounts of protein (237
ml contains 17 grams of protein), fiber (237 ml contains 8 grams of fiber), calcium, beta
carotene, isoflavones (genistein and daidzein), and linolenic acid (Alleman et al., 2000;
Kris Etherton et al., 2000; Simonne et al., 2000). According to Meydani et. al. (1991),
vegetable soybeans are low in saturated fats (Meydani et al., 1991) as compared to grain
soybeans which posseses high amounts of oligosaccharides, complex carbohydrates
causing flatus in human consumers. This distinct characteristic of vegetable soybeans in
terms of having lower amounts of oligosaccharides evidently resulted to better digestibility
as revealed by Hymowitz and Collins (1974). In addition, the high protein, fiber, calcium,
vitamin A, and antioxidant content (USDA, 2011) in edamame make it a nutritious
vegetable with a sweet flavor (Alleman et al., 2000; Miles et al., 2000). These attributes
makes vegetable soybeans attractive to health conscious consumers due to favorable
nutritional benefits as well as desirable flavor. Edamame is good source of plant-based

protein which possesses complete proteins with 18 amino acids including all the essential


amino acids, substantial amount of isoflavones as well as sucrose which are all good for
the human diet (Velasquez and Bhathena, 2007; Li et al., 2012). In addition to proteins,
vegetable soybeans are abundant sources of fat, iron, phosphorus, calcium, riboflavin,
thiamine, vitamins A, B1, E and C, dietary fiber and folic acid in comparison with the sweet
green peas (Pisum sativum L.) Vegetable soybean has a lesser amount of flatulence
producing starches than that of the grain soybean. Similar with the grain soybean, vegetable
soybean also possesses anti-nutritional factors. Trypsin inhibitor (TT) activity is lesser in
vegetable soybean compared to grain soybean. One third of the TI activity remains in
vegetable soybean after boiling for 5 min. Pod appearance, flavor, texture and nutritional
value, following that order, are the five most significant indicators of quality and
acceptability of vegetable soybean (Masuda, 1991).

Food nutritional studies concerning nutritional components of vegetable soybeans
revealed potential on addressing chronic diseases such as hypocholesterolemic effects of
soy phytoestrogen both on animal and human studies (Caroll & Kurowska, 1995), soybean
as a protein diet and plasma cholesterol reduction (Sirtori, et al, 1993), phytoestrogen
combatting breast cancer (Clarke et al, 1996), cancer risk reducing properties of iso-
flavonoids (Liu et. al., 1996), medicinal properties of saponins (Koratkar et. al., 1996) and
quercetin as modulator of cellular neoplastic phenotype in human cells (Avila et. al., 1996),
and the xenobiotic effect of genistein belonging to soya flavonoids (Barnes et. al., 1996).
In relation to these enumerated health-related benefits, notable demand is set for vegetables

soybean worldwide as reported by Duppong and Hatterman- Valenti (2005).

Fresh vegetable soybean seeds can provide 35% to 38% protein and 5% to 7% lipid
on fresh weight basis according to Mentreddy et al. (2002). He also reported that soybean
seeds have the capability to produce isoflavones to which sources are highly limited
naturally. This compound was considered bioceuticals that tends to prevent the build-up of
arterial plaques, reduce breast cancer by blocking the cancer-causing effects of human
estrogen, prevent prostate cancer by hindering cell growth, fight osteoporosis by
stimulating bone formation and inhibiting bone resorption (Bolla, 2015).

Morse (1950) and Kapoor et al. (1977) characterized vegetable-type soybean
varieties with superior qualities than grain-type cultivars in terms of flavor, texture. In
addition, it has been reported that vegetable soybean cultivars have lower trypsin inhibitor
activity (Deodhar et al. 1973; Gupta & Deodhar, 1975; Mohamed et al., 1991), thus, having
distinct advantage over grain soybeans due to less risk in terms of anti-nutritional factors.
Masuda (1991) found that vegetable soybean contains a (32 yg per g lipid); B (trace); y
(1038 xg per g lipid) and 5 (148 1g per g lipid) tocopherol at 25 and 40 days after flowering
(DAF). During the mature stage or at 75 DAF, the four tocopherol contents rose to 109,
62, 1109, and 402 pg per g lipid, respectively. At the green stage, the entire tocopherol
content is around 12 yg per seed (40 DAF) whereas at 75 DAF, the total tocopherol content
was increased by 83 yg per seed. As crop reached maturity, tocopherol, protein and TI
activity eventually increases. Consequently, sucrose concentration tends to accumulate at
the vegetable stage and follows significant decline as crop matures. This would affect the
green soybean consumer acceptability and marketability. Hence, harvesting vegetable

soybean cultivars at the right stage of maturity is crucial to achieve the acceptable flavor.

Shanmugasunduran and Yan (2000) noted that delayed timing of harvesting leads to
restricted sucrose content and further affects bean quality and marketability.

What makes edamame stand out from other grain soybean varieties is its nutritional
component considering other factors such as occurrence of trypsin inhibitors, levels of
lipids and protein, and other anti-nutritional factors. According to Montri et al. (2006),
vegetable soybean such as edamame as compared to grain soybean or agronomic soybean
varieties, is consist of minute levels of trypsin inhibitors, relatively lower indigestible
oligosaccharides, favorably higher vitamin content, and higher levels of antioxidants such

as phytic acid.

Cultivar Selection and Crop Establishment

Potential growers need suitable and established locally adapted varieties which can
perform well under Philippine environmental conditions to repurpose these grain soybean
varieties into the schemes of vegetable soybean consumption. Nair and Easdown (2013)
highlighted in their paper with regards to soybean genetic resources in relation to vegetable
soybean that breeders of this crop are generally interested in traits related to high pod yield,
pod size and color, seed size and color, seed number per pod, seed appearance, high sugar
content and flavor, early maturity, high nodulation, and ease of mechanical harvesting
(Nair and Easdown,2013). Improving the taste and appearance of vegetable soybean and
expanding its market appeal up to the international market are the main objectives of the

breeding programs in Japan. Efforts in undermining the suitability of our locally adapted

grain soybean varieties in the Philippines to vegetable soybean consumption creates an
opportunity not only for domestic consumption but also for pushing its export potential.

In terms of the proper method in sowing soybean seeds, Ashlock et al. (2000) noted
that caution should be taken when planting edamame as the seed requires absorbtion of up
to 50% moisture by weight before it germinates. Starting from the onset of seed growth, it
is essential to aim for rapid and uniform plant stand establishment to achieve highly
vigorous seedlings and further plant performance. Among the factors affecting the
anticipated plant stand and performance, seed size is one trait that can be considered ahead
of time and be easily manipulated since the projected plant biomass will be influenced by
the amount of start-up reserves the seed already possesses (Clark and Peck, 1968). It is
supported by the findings of Fehr and Probst (1971) stating that seed size was positively
correlated with soybean yield potential. By contrast, Green et. al. (1965) reported that the
small seeds obtained from soybeans which undergone delayed planting germinated more
rapidly and had higher emergence percentages compared to large seeds produced by the
same variety. Edamame’s field establishment can be negatively affected by poor
germination (Crawford and Williams, 2019; Williams et al., 2012). Poor emergence in
vegetable soybean is attributed to poor germination, longer length of hypocotyl and root
during emergence and sensitivity to planting depth found to be higher compared to grain-
type soybeans (Zhang et al., 2013).

Edaphic factors are also of utmost importance considering that plants highly rely
on the available nutrient elements may it be those that are indigenous in the soil or those

whice are applied to the soil according to the appropriate fertilizer recommendation and


specific crop nutrient requirement. Favorable soil for edamame production requires pH of
6.0 (Miles et al., 2006). In terms of nitrogen fertilization, 56 to 112 kg of nitrogen per
hectare is recommended for inoculated and not inoculated seed, respectively. Miles et. al.
(2000) reported that Bradyrhozobium japonicum can be inoculated to seeds if the
designated field for experiment is not yet planted with soybean or any other nitrogen-fixing
species since these plant species belonging to the family Leguminosae forms association
with soil organisms featured by having nitrogen-fixing nodules within the root system. If
the soil has a history of planting legumes, edamame will only require adequate amounts of
phosphorus and potassium in accordance with the result of the soil analysis prior to land
preparation and crop establishment. In terms of the fertilization program, the The World
Vegetable Center, formerly known as the Asian Vegetable Research and Development
Center (AVRDC) suggested for vegetable soybean production a basal application of 20-30
kg ha"! of nitrogen and 60 kg ha"! of P2Os and 80 kgha"'of K20 into the soil as reported by
Lal et al. (2001). Whereas at the flowering stage, it is recommended to apply 20 kg ha"! of
N together with 25 kg ha‘! of K20 particularly during the first side dressing. Afterwards,
it is also suggested to apply an additional 20 kg ha"! of nitrogen at the onset of pod-filling
phase in order to promote further seed seize increment until it reached the full-seed stage
wherein the seeds occupy the pod cavity fully and tight which is an indication of readily
hearvestable fresh green pods for vegetable soybean consumption.

One of the main factors in soybean growth and development is its phototropic
attribute, as their reproductive growth stages are mostly triggered by longer hours of

darkness (Gamer and Allard, 1920). Phototropism is highly considered in assesing yield

potential since the plant will reach optimum yield when photosynthetic materials contribute
to produce maximum seed potential. Though soybeans are influenced by the eventual
daylength in a given environment, genotypes can procure a differential sensitivity to
delayed planting and phototropism (Johnson et al., 1960). Polson (1972) also reported that
early maturing varieties were found to be sensitive to phototropism. Furthermore, as the
relative maturity increases, the soybean reproductive growth stages become increasingly
more sensitive to long nights (Johnson et al., 1960; Major et al., 1975). The time of floral
set of edamame from different maturity groups largely depend on the elevation to which
they are cultivated as well as the photoperiodic conditions (Cregan and Hartwig, 1984). In
the US, there are numerous research that provides evidence that vegetable soybean
suitability is based on where they are grown. Variations in the suitability of different
cultivars to a specific location is due to the response of soybean to photoperiodism as
reported by Board and Settimi (1986).

According to Kaur et. al. (2015), the optimum root zone temperature in growing
soybean ranges from 25-30 °C which favors nodulation and nodule functioning. This
variable can be dictated by the prevalent temperature brought by certain environmental
conditions coinciding with the sowing date, hence, causing optimal utilization of the
climatic factors such as temperature, humidity, day length and including anthesis time
adaptation with proper temperature (Hashemi, 2001). Proper irrigation management are
crucial at the beginning of the reproductive stages (R1) as assesed by Tacker and Vories
(2000). In addition, adequate soil moisture prior to full bloom is essential to reach full yield

and seed-size potential (Ashley and Ethridge, 1973). In terms of taking into consideration

the probable impacts of pest incidence in the field, Lorenz et al. (2000) and Faske et. al.
(2014) reiterated that monitoring and control of pest eventually becomes increasingly more
critical beginning at the R1 reproductive growth stage.

As compared to early-season responses, vegetable soybean will become smaller in
terms of height than the grain type at R6 stage. Interestingly, varieties with smaller canopy
tend to be more beneficial when harvested using mechanical harvesters (Mbuvi and
Litchfield, 1994). So, in this case, height of the plants as well as lowest pod height are
significant traits in the selection of cultivars for commercial production. In contrast, if
harvesting is made by hand, usually plant size and lowest pod height does not, but when
the crop is to be mechanically harvested, plant size and lowest pod height turns out to be
an important factor in maintaining harvest efficiency. In connection, studies of Zandonadi
et al., (2010) demonstrated that tall plants can have a negative effect on harvest efficiency.
Pods that are bright green with gray pubescence, measuring 5.0 cm long and 1.4 cm wide
containing two or brighter green seeds, have light buff or gray hila commands higher prices
in the market (Shanmugasundaram, 1996; Wu et al., 2000).

While different varieties adapt differently at various environmental conditions, crop
phenology and growing season play a vital role in determining soybean yield. Hence,
posing a crucial need for developing locally adapted accessions and concomitant cultural
management practices. A varietal yield stability and appropriate management study for
quality organic edamame production conducted by Sharma (2013) proposed critical
pointers for edamame growers: 1.) Availability of regionally adapted high quality seed; 2.)

Well drained, moist, warm (12-15 °C), friable, well aerated, moderately fertile soil with pH

6.0-6.5; 3.) First week of June is proper time for planting under defined spacing based on
available nutrient and crop management practices; 4.) Locally produced quality seeds are
needed to ensure intended plant population and marketable quality production; 5.) Weed
free well aerated root zone is needed for activation of beneficial soil micro-organism to
support healthy growth right from germination and seedling emergence; 6.) Vigilance to
ensure adequate moisture in root zone throughout growing season to optimize vegetative
growth and maximize reproductive development is critical for successful production; 7.)
High fertility and excessive moisture results in poor yield; 8.) Plant spacing and crop
management should encourage production of 3-4 productive branches maintaining high
percent of 2-3 bean type pods. Three to four plants per 30 cm in rows spaced 45-60 cm
apart provides the right production environment under medium fertility to yield quality
pods even more than 20 tons/ha; 8.) Some varieties have a relatively longer period for
harvesting tender green sweet pods. The harvest period can be prolonged by management
of nutrient and soil moisture accordingly. Availability of adequate soil moisture can
significantly increase the size of tender and sweet beans, thus adding market value; 10.)
Pods should be harvested when the beans fully develop but are still soft and sweet.
Depending on variety, consumers’ taste, and market demand, harvesting should be done
before pods lose high quality attributes. Hand picking of pods on standing plant, or
harvested plant or harvesting plant and leaving pods intact on stem are ways of harvesting

depending on choice of producer and consumers.


Planting Date Intervention

Knowing how to maximize yield potential by undertaking various aspects of
soybean production is essential to attain producers’ economic efficiency. One influential
cultural practice of soybean production is the element of planting date. Cartter and Hartwig
(1963), in their studies on soybean management, concluded that planting date was the most
crucial cultural factor to be considered. Findings of Shegro et al., (2010) revealed that there
were significant differences for different varieties, planting dates, as well as their
interaction in terms of growth and yield parameters. Due to delay in planting dates, the
consequences were delayed flowering and hastened maturity, but these events depended
on varieties of soybean. Another effect of delayed planting date was reduced leaf are per
plant and leaf area index. The aforementioned results indicated that different varieties and
the corresponding sowing dates brings influence on soybean growth and yield. The effect
of planting dates may vary from year to year depending on the variation in terms of
environmental conditions such as rainfall amount, intensity, and distribution. However,
several soybean planting dates-related research covering a span of 35 years (Pendleton and
Hartwig, 1973; Johnson, 1987; Heatherly and Elmore, 2004) can be summarized indicating
that planting dates in May provided maximum yield but it eventually declined when
practicing delayed planting after early June of the year. The steady decline in yield after
the critical planting date could be a response to changes in the plant and in its environment.
Delayed planting resulted in shorter vegetative and flowering/pod set periods, but the seed-

fill duration was not consistently shorter (Cartter and Hartwig, 1963; Egli et al., 1987;


Wilcox and Frankenberger, 1987; Egli and Bruening, 2000; Bastidas et al., 2008). In the
case of grain soybeans, planting date is an important factor affecting soybean grain yield
and grain quality (Li et al., 2014). While variation in soybean planting date is expected to
impact the pattern of soybean growth and development, very few reports have been
examined in vegetable soybean (Zhang et al. 2010). Even though delayed planting may
cause a decline in yield, shorter plants with fewer nodes (Beaver and Johnson, 1981; Egli
and Bruening, 2000; Bastidas et al., 2008) may not necessarily limit yield if the crop
produces enough leaf area to maximize solar radiation interception (Egli, 1993).

Distinct effects of delayed planting in soybean yield can also be attributed to the
prevailing lower soil temperatures which causes delay in seed emergence due to retarded
metabolic activity of the seed (Andales et. al., 2000) and reduced canopy development
(Kane et. al., 1997). Grain yields were evidently higher from earlier planted soybean due
to longer duration of vegetative and reproductive stages (Chen and Wiatrak, 2010). In
addition, grain yield in soybean can also be associated with the length of flowering, pod
set, and seed filling as reported by Egli and Bruening (2000). Carter (1974) observed that
as planting date was delayed, the tendency is for the plant to develop fewer nodes as well
as recorded fewer pods per plant, especially at the upper nodes, fewer seeds per pod and
smaller seed size. Plant height was also decreased with delayed planting dates. It agrees
with Leffel (1961), Smith et al. (1961), and Kruse et al. (1976) which reported that yield is
reduced as planting date is delayed. This yield reduction is believed to be a consequence
of the shortening of the period of reproductive stage of soybean, especially the seed filling

stage.


One remarkable set of findings from the National Climatic Data Center indicated
that soybean yield reduction was manifested by delayed planting due to its tendency to
shift reproductive growth into a less favorable environment, particularly lower
temperatures, and in terms of solar radiation and rainfall amount and distribution
(http://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/oa/nedc.html, cited 3 Apr. 2008; verified 3 Feb. 2009). In
support to this claim, crop simulations using SOYGRO showed that declining solar
radiation was a major cause of the reduced yields due to delayed plantings (Egli and
Bruening, 1992).

Boote et al. (1998) revealed that lower temperatures influenced the overall yield of
soybean due to a corresponding decline in photosynthetic events, most pronouncedly when
temperature drops to 20 °C and added that cold stress could slow down plant development,
lengthening the growth cycle, thus, extending its maturity period.

Late planting dates, as accounted by Egli and Bruening (2000), were studied to be
causing decline in reproductive nodes and lesser pods. Yet, the length of seed filling stage
was not affected or reduced, thus, fewer seeds with a relatively larger size were produced
given sufficient leaf area for light interception.

Flowering and maturity of vegetable soybeans could be influenced by temperature
and latitude as soybean is sensitive to both environmental conditions (Jiang et al., 2014;
Santachiara et al., 2017). As noted in several studies (Salmeron ef al., 2014; Weller and
Ortega, 2015; Santachiara et al., 2017), different periods of maturity were observed among
varieties that exhibit variations in latitudinal adaptations. Maturity can also be influenced

by the actual temperature in the crop environment. In the case of relatively higher


temperatures, the tendency is to hasten the growth of soybean and consequently reducing
the period of grain filling stage.

In relation to the chemical composition of the seeds, there were changes in the
content of protein, oil, carbohydrate, and other chemical components in seed as well as its
influence on the growth and development patterns of soybean as affected by planting dates
(Hu and Wiatrak, 2012; Kumar et al., 2006). The large seed size of vegetable soybean varieties
contributes to the resulting weight of 100 seeds indicating larger impacts on protein and oil content
which are two economically important components of soybean seed (Mentreddy, et. al., 2002), thus,
posing a need for proper selection ad breeding of various soybean genotypes. Bellaloui et al.
(2011) demonstrated that early planting enhanced seed oil content by 16% than that of late
planting under irrigated conditions, whereas at late planting, oil content was found to be
reduced (Kumar et al., 2006; Tremblay et al., 2006). Also, different temperature under a
specific planting date affected the oil content of soybeans especially during the seed filling
stage (Kane et al., 1997; Muhammad et al., 2009).

In the studies just conducted recently by Ogles, et. al. (2016), they found out that
there was pronounced reduction in yield between years and documented that this might be
associated to fluctuations in environmental conditions, more specifically atmospheric
temperature during early soybean reproductive growth. Yes, relatively higher temperatures
may positively affect soybean growth but extremely higher temperatures particularly more
than 30 °C can detrimentally affect pollen viability and seed weight during the reproductive
stages due to altered pollination as reported by Hatfield et al. (2011) and Siebers et. al.

(2015).


With regards to the capacity of soybean genotypes for pod production, Board and
Hall (1984) found out that late maturing cultivars can yield more pods than early maturing
cultivars most probably due to less vegetative growth before the onset of reproductive stage
of growth and development. Suboptimal daylengths caused reduction in vegetative growth,
thereby reducing the photosynthetic area required to nourish the developing seed. Since
there was inadequate start-up for the young plant inside the developing seed, it reflected
on the eventual restricted seed weight, number of seed per pod, and seed quality as also
reported by Kantolic and Slafer (2001).

Kane et al. (1997) and Muhammad et al. (2009) found out that delayed planting
tends to increase protein content across years and cultivars. In contrast, Tremblay et al.
(2006) revealed that delayed planting did not affect the soybean protein content when
planted from mid-May to mid-June. The focus of those studies mentioned were more on
the yield and quality of grain soybeans. There is less information available for vegetable
soybeans specifically on fresh pod yield and seed quality (Li et al., 2014). Physiologically
speaking, the reduction in marketable yield of vegetable soybean in response to late sowing
can be pointed out to the following reasons: (1) a shorter season length that leads to overall
reduction in growth; (2) short days accompanied by low radiation and low temperature
which results into slower growth ra rates and lower pod set, and (3) a dramatic reduction
on the relative duration of key phenological stages resulted from reduced photoperiod

(Kantolic and Slafer, 2001; Calvino et al., 2003).


Timing of Harvest

Harvesting of vegetable soybeans follows a different system compared to
commercial grain soybeans due to the strict consideration in terms of maturity. It is
described as time specific, laborious, and time consuming (Mebrahtu and Mullins, 2007).
Conventional grain soybean harvest methods are not actually applicable to edamame since
the pods are selected, carefully observed, and stripped off the plants at the R6 reproductive
growth stage up to R7 stage as described by Shanmugasundaram et al. (1991). The R6 stage
is characterized as the stage when one of the pods in the four uppermost nodes contains a
full-size bean lasting from 9 to 30 days as reported by Fehr et al. (1971). Given this
requirement for vegetable soybean standards for harvesting pods, the commercial industry
in US uses a modified green pod picker to harvest edamame (Miles et al., 2000). The
determination of the R6 stage is critical to ensure quality and yield of edamame.

Shanmugasundaram (1996) pointed that the best time for harvesting green beans
was when the pods are still green, immature, and tight with fully developed immature green
seeds. This stage corresponds to the R6 stage of soybean development. (Fehr and
Caviness, 1977). Hence, the R6 stage is very crucial for ensuring good yield of beans that
are of good quality. Among physical characteristics, the appearance and size of fresh pods
and seeds significant.

In terms of determining consumer acceptability and the corresponding
marketability of vegetable soybeans, Mbuvi and Litchfield (1995) observed that the time

of harvesting seems to be a critical factor. The optimum time for harvesting fresh green


soybean to attain desirable product quality with maximum yield is collectively correlated
to maturity, yield, and quality parameters. (Lee and Hwang, 1998). In addition, Mbuvi and
Litchfield (1995) reported that seed color, texture, and seed size are affected by the
development time which is dictated by the timing of harvest.

To be keen in the details of the proper timing of harvesting edamame, Purcell et al.
(2014), provided a desciption of the R6 reproductive growth stage. Its onset takes place
when the seed completely covers the white membrane found inside the pod with a span of
18 days. The quality of edamame seeds does not commend only upon harvesting but must
be provided with postharvest interventions such that after harvest, the pods should be
precooled at 0 — 2.8 °C to maintain flavor until the pods or shelled beans are subjected to
blanching and preserved either via quick freezing, freeze drying, or roasting (Tsay and
Sheu, 1991).

Determining the appropriate timing of harvest can be difficult to assess for growers
since the quality characteristics for fresh green soybeans among different varieties vary.
Mbuvi and Litchfield (1995) detailed in their study that early harvesting tends to decrease
pod yield and seed quality due to insufficient time potentially allotted for accumulating
photosynthates. On the other hand, late timing of harvesting can detrimentally affect the
market and consumer acceptability characters such as bean texture, flavor, and color.

The timing of harvest in vegetable soybean is very important since sucrose
concentration increases in the early stages which peaks at or after 35 days after floral set.
(Chiba, 1991; Zhang et al., 2015). There is a short window for optimal harvesting which is

just between 35-39 days after flowering. Sugar levels usually drops after harvest mostly at


high temperature which is therefore imperative to take measure in preserving bean quality
by means of cooling and high humidity storage. (Chiba, 1991). Konovsky (1994) revealed
that the amount of sugar in fresh green soybeans is at the optimum level days before
edamame reaches R6. The sugar content reflecting the flavor component of the beans, is
considered as the most important factor when dealing with its consumer acceptability,

preference, and marketability together with texture, color, nutrition, and size.


CHAPTER III

MATERIALS AND METHODS

This chapter covers the methodologies employed in this study namely time and
place of study, experimental design and treatments, access to meteorological data, soil
sampling technique and laboratory analysis, land preparation, harvesting methods, data

gathering procedure, data processing, and statistical analysis.

Time and Place of Study

A field experiment was conducted in Santa Maria, Laguna from March to July
2021. Santa Maria is a northwestern town of Laguna located at 14.509179° N latitude,

121.406877° E longitude at an elevation of 31 meters above sea level.

Treatments and Experimental Design

Five soybean varieties characterized and summarized in Table 1 namely: a.) Tiwala
8, b.) Tudela, c.) Tiwala 12, d.) Manchuria, and e.) Ryokko (Kaneko Seed Co., Ltd., Japan)
were obtained from the Legume Section, Institute of Plant Breeding, University of the
Philippines Los Baiios and were sown in four different planting dates in 2021 (PD1 = March
5, PD2 = March 25", PD3 = April 15", and PD4 = May 6"). The field experiment was

arranged in a Randomized Complete Block Design (RCBD) replicated four times.

Table 1. Brief description of the five test soybean varieties.


COMMERCIAL RYOKKO TIWALA 8 | TIWALA 12 | MANCHURIA TUDELA
NAME (EDAMAME)
Variety Name _ | Ryokko Philippine IPB Sy1996- | Manchuria Tudela
Seed Board | 27-23 (farmer’s (farmer’s
Soya 6 variety) variety)
(PSB SY6)
Growing Seasons | Widely Highly Recommende | Location- Planted at
and Areas produced in recommend | d for planting | specific barangay
Japan ed variety in Region IV- | adaptation in Tudela and
for planting | A inrotation | Bukidnon and Cebolin
Currently in with rice, Neg. Occidental, | in Trento,
grown in some | Mindanao corn and particularly Agusan del s
parts of and Luzon | vegetables; as | during the wet during dry ar
Batangas, during the intercrop in season; wet season.
Central Luzon, | dry season. | coconut, better yielding Recommend
and com, coffee, | during the dry in all areas.
Cabanatuan Recommen | and season in DA-
ded high vegetables; CVIARC
Recommended | yielding generally, and DMMMSU.
in all areas variety for | must be
short-day planted in Farmer’s variety
planting in | drained areas. | in Surigao and
rainfed, Davao provinces
hilly areas. | If planted
during the
wet season,
excessive
vegetative
growth may
result in
reduced
yield, and
high
humidity may
result in poor
seed quality.
Planting
should be

timed so



COMMERCIAL RYOKKO TIWALA 8 | TIWALA 12 | MANCHURIA TUDELA
NAME (EDAMAME)
maturity
takes place
during the
dry months
Seed Yield Fresh pod 2.4tons/ha | 1,598.20kgs_ | 2.7 thha— 2.4 tha—
yield: during wet | per ha in Average of 2 Average of 2
season, Region IV-A | wet season trials | wet season
6.2 to 11.4 tha trials
; 2.1 tons/ha | 900 kgs per | 2.03 tha—
Seed yield: 2.0 | during the ha in Region | Average of 2 2.2 vha—
mm Nore VI dry season trials | Average of 4
dry season
Yields more cial
than 2.5
tons/ha if
irrigated
during the
dry season
Seed and Pod | Seed color: | Seed color: | Seed color: Seed color: Seed color:
Characteristic | Bright green | Yellow and | Yellow, dull | Yellow, shiny Black, shiny
seed and seed | small with | seed coat seed coat with seed coat wit
coat brown with clear clear/light clear hilum
hilum color | hitum brown hilum
. Seed weight: Seed weight:
Seed he weight Seed weight: | 13.59 g per 100 | 10.05 g per
> 30 g per 10 23.10 g per seeds (average 100 seeds
seeds 100 seeds of wet and dry (average of
seasons) wet and dry
seasons)
Pod color:
Pod color: Pod color: Light yellow Pod color:
Bright green | brown with | Pod color: with white Brown
pods with grey | reddish tan pods with pubescence
pubescence brown light brown
pubescence

pubescence



COMMERCIAL RYOKKO TIWALA 8 | TIWALA 12 | MANCHURIA TUDELA
NAME (EDAMAME)
Pod width: Pod Pod Pod shattering: | Pod shatterin
21.4cm shattering: | shattering: Resistant Resistant
Susceptible | Highly
Pod length: > | to pod resistant
5.0 cm shattering
during very
Pod shattering: | dry
Resistant harvesting
| periods
Growth habit | Maturity: 65 to | Maturity: Maturity: 97 | Maturity: 78 to | Maturity: 86
70 day in 91 to 98 to 104 days 96 days after 101 days afte
tropical areas__| days afer after emergence emergence
while emergence | emergence
100 days after
sowing in
temperate
countries
Lodging: Lodging:
Resistant ea
Reaction to Pest | Generally Leafhoppers: | Cercospora leaf | Cercospora
and Diseases resistant to Resistant spot: Resistant | leaf spot:
major pest and during dry Resistant
diseases of Rust rating: season during dry
soybean Resistant season
Rust rating:
Bacterial Resistant during | Rust rating:
pustule: dry season Resistant
Resistant during dry
Bacterial season
pustule:
Resistant during | Bacterial
dry season pustule:
Resistant
during dry

season



COMMERCIAL RYOKKO TIWALA 8 | TIWALA 12 | MANCHURIA TUDELA
NAME (EDAMAME)
Seed Quality Carbohydrate | Field Field Field Field
42.4 to 48.1% | weathering: | weathering: weathering: weathering:
Susceptible | Susceptible Susceptible Susceptible
Protein:
34.2-35.4% Purple seed | Purple seed Purple seed Purple seed
way stain: stain: stain: stain:
a 15% Susceptible | Susceptible Susceptible Susceptible
Sucrose: Seed ; Seed 7 Seed storability: Seed -
5.94-12.2% storability: | storability: Poor storing storability:
sucrose Better seed | Poor storing Poor storing
storability
(Xu et al., | than
2006) ‘Tiwala 6.” | High lunasin
. content High protein
High content.
protein &
lunasin
content
Processing Vegetable Soymilk Most Benchmark Traditionally
Quality soybean from this preferred variety for the | marketed foi
consumption variety has | variety for processing and | the producto
marketed as . characteristi tofu and manufacture of | of tausi.
fresh pods still cs similanty tokwa soymilk, taho,
attached to the Manchuria making and is | and tokwa.
stem, as fresh | and ‘Tiwala also good for
pods detached | 6’ with its :
from the stem, | protein production of
as fresh shelled | content vegetable
green beans, similar to soybeans
frozen green ‘Tiwala 6.’ | because of its
pods, and as large seeds.

frozen green
beans or seeds.

Source: Legume Section, Institute of Plant Breeding,
University of the Philippines Los Bafios


Soil Sampling and Analysis

Sampling areas were indicated in the 600 m?-experimental site. Spot soil samples
were then collected from each sampling area at 60 cm depth using shovel and spade and
were placed in clean containers. Quartering was done by mixing the spot soil samples
thoroughly to achieve homogenization. Soil samples were then forwarded to the
Department of Agriculture Region IV-A, Regional Soils Laboratory, Lipa City for soil
laboratory routine analysis including the amount of organic matter, pH, phosphorus,

potassium, and soil texture.

Land Preparation

Furrows and hills intended for crop establishment were set in the field wherein one
block was composed of two rows. Each experimental unit represented as plot was
composed of two rows each measuring 0.50 m width x 1.75 m length which was spaced
0.50 m apart. An alley was also provided between blocks and each bed within a block was
0.50 m apart. Each hill was planted with five seeds within the rows with 0.25 m distance
between each hill. Further growth of the seeds into seedlings was followed with thinning

to two plants which served as the source of each measurement to be recorded.


Nutrient Management

The fertilizer incorporated into the soil was a light dressing of 20 bags ha’! of
organic fertilizer particularly chicken manure and 55 kg ha" of urea (46-0-0) such that the
fertilizer is two inches below and slightly to the side of the seed upon sowing. This is based
from the fertilizer recommendation indicated in the result of the soil routine analysis
provided by the Department of Agriculture Region IV-A, Regional Soils Laboratory, Lipa

City as shown in Appendix P.

Harvesting

Soybean plants were harvested by cutting down at the ground level with a sharp
blade and were bagged. The optimum time for harvesting vegetable soybeans at R6 stage
(although non-synchronous due to differences in maturity time of each variety) was when
the pods are still green, immature, and tight with fully developed immature green seeds
that fills the pod cavity at one of the four upper nodes on the main stem with a fully
developed leaf (Fehr and Caviness, 1977). The harvested plants were then subjected to data
gathering. As reference for the timing of harvesting the soybean pods, the description of

the vegetative and reproductive stages of soybean development was shown in Table 2.


Table 2. Vegetative and reproductive growth stage of development descriptors for soybean.

Stage Stage Description

No.

VE Emergence Cotyledons above the soil surface.

VC Cotyledon Unifoliate leaves unrolled sufficiently so the leaf
edges are not touching.

vi First-node Fully developed leaves at unifoliate nodes.

v2 Second-node Fully developed trifoliolate leaf at node above
the unifoliate nodes.

V3 Third-node Three nodes on the main stem with fully developed
leaves beginning with the unifoliate nodes.

V(n) —_nth-node n number of nodes on the main stem with fully
developed leaves, beginning with the unifoliate
nodes. n can be any number beginning with 1 for V1,
first-node stage.

RI Beginning bloom One open flower at any node on the main stem

R2 Full bloom Open flower at one of the two uppermost nodes on
the main stem with a fully developed leaf.

R3 Beginning pod Pod 5 mm (3/16 inch) long at one of the four
uppermost nodes on the main stem with a fully
developed leaf.

R4 Full pod Pod 2 cm (3/4 inch) long at one of the four
uppermost
nodes on the main stem with a fully developed leaf.

RS Beginning seed Seed 3mm (1/8 inch) long in a pod at one of the four
uppermost nodes on the main stem with a fully
developed leaf.

R6 Full seed Pod containing a green seed that fills the pod cavity
at one of the four uppermost nodes on the main stem
with a fully developed leaf.

R7 Beginning maturity One normal pod on the main stem that has reached
its mature pod color.

R8 Full maturity Ninety-five percent of the pods have reached their

mature pod color. Five to 10 days of drying weather
are required after RX before the soybeans have less
than 15 percent moisture.

Source: FEHR,W. R., CAVINESS, C. E., BURMOOD, D. T., & PENNINGTON, J. S.
(1971). Stage of development descriptions for soybeans, Glycine max (L.) Merrill. Crop
Science, 11, 929. https://doi.org/10.2135/cropscil971.0011183X001100060051x



Data Gathered

Meteorological Data

Weather data including daily mean temperature, maximum temperature, minimum
temperature, relative humidity, and amount of precipitation covering the period of March
to July 2021 were collectively requested from SARAI Project Phase II 2.2 Automatic
Weather Station. From the available maximum and minimum temperature data, growing

degree days was computed using the equation (McMaster & Wilhelm, 1997):

GDD = [(Maximum Daily Temperature + Minimum Daily Temperature) / 2] — T Base

GDD is the thermal units known as growing degree days while T Base is defined
as the base air temperature below which the plant does not advance in any growth using a
base temperature of 10°C (Barreiro, 2008). Growing degree days is usually preferred over
calendar days since crop development is more pronouncedly relying upon the acquired heat
units and additionally, it varies less than calendar days in terms of predicting the time to
harvest a crop according to Sammis et al. (1985).

Given the daily accumulated GDD summarized in Figure 10 and detailed values,
the actual accumulated growing degree units within the growth and development of each
experimental unit was computed by utilizing the data of days to first flowering (R1 Stage)

and the days to harvesting (R6 Stage). The exact dates of the said phenological parameters


were carefully recorded to easily locate the corresponding GDD units covering the growing
period from sowing to harvesting. For GDD accumulated at R1 stage, the daily GDD from
sowing until R1 stage (beginning bloom) characterized by having one open flower at any
node on the main stem were summed up across all varieties under different planting dates.
In terms of GDD accumulated at R6 stage, the total daily GDD was accounted for starting
from sowing up to full seed stage attributed by evident pods containing a green seed that
fills the pod cavity at one of the four uppermost nodes on the main stem with a fully

developed leaf for all varieties under different planting dates.

Number of Days to First Flowering (R1 Stage)

Number of days to first flowering was counted starting from the sowing date until

at least 50% of plants attained the R1 stage as described in Table 2.

Number of Days to Harvesting (R6 Stage)

Arrival of R6 stage for consumption at green pod stage was accounted as the
number of days starting from the sowing date until at least 50% of plants exhibited pods
with a green seed that fills the pod cavity at one of the four upper nodes on the main stem

with a fully developed leaf.


Percentage Seed Emergence (%)

Seed emergence count was recorded when plants have at least one fully unfurled
trifoliate leaf. As described by Crawford and Williams (2019), soybean seedlings are
considered emerged when hypocotyls are completely free of the soil surface. The total
number of emerged seeds was divided by the total number of seeds sown in each bed. This

was multiplied by 100 to obtain the percentage emergence.

Plant Height at R1 and R6 Stage (cm)

Measurement of plant height was obtained starting from the base directly in contact
with the soil to the apex of the shoot. Plant height was measured from ten sample plants
first during the R1 (beginning bloom) stage wherein there is at least one open flower at any
node on the main stem. The final plant height was taken upon R6 stage (full seed) when
pods contain a green seed that fills the pod cavity at one of the four upper nodes on the

main stem with a fully developed leaf.

Number of Nodes at R1 and R6 Stage

The total number of nodes on the mainstem was counted at R1 and R6 stage.


Height of Lowest Pod (cm)

Measurement of the height of lowest pod was taken from the closest and first pod

to the base of the plant. Lowest pod height values were averaged for each plot.

Pod Size (mm)

The length, width, and thickness in centimeters of ten pods per replication were

measured using a digital caliper as described in Figure 1.

Figure 2. Measurement of green soybean pod dimension. L = pod length, W = width, and
T = thickness (Sirisomboon et al., 2007)

Number of Pods Plant!

Using ten sample plants per plot, the total number of pods attached to each plant

was counted.


Number and Percentage (%) of Marketable Pods Plant!

Pods that were completely green without yellow pigments and spots as well as those
with two or more seeds each were considered as standard or marketable pods, while pods
with one or, without seeds, and those that are diseased, with discoloration, mechanically
damaged, small-seeded, insect damaged, and abnormal pods were classified as non-
marketable pods. To obtain the percentage marketable pods, the number of marketable

pods per plant was divided by the total number of pods per plant multiplied by 100.

Fresh and Dry Pod Weight Plant' (g)

The total weight of fresh pods from ten sample plants per plot were measured using

an electronic weighing scale.

Weight of 100 Fresh and Dry Pods (g)

One hundred randomly selected fresh pods harvested from each plot were weighed

using an electronic weighing scale.

Percentage of 4-Seeded Pods (%)

Pods containing four fully developed seeds were counted and were divided by the

total number of pods obtained from each plant and was multiplied by 100.

4l

Percentage of 3-Seeded Pods (“%)

Pods containing three fully developed seeds were counted. The total number of

three-seeded pods were divided by the total number of pods obtained from each plant and

was multiplied by 100.

Percentage of 2-Seeded Pods (%)

Those pods containing two fully developed seeds were counted. The total number

of two-seeded pods was divided by the total number of pods harvested from each plant and

was then be multiplied by 100.

Percentage of 1-Seeded Pods (%)

Those pods containing one fully developed seed were counted. The total number of

single-seeded pods was divided by the total number of pods for each plant and was then

multiplied by 100.

Percentage of 2-, 3-, and 4-Seeded Pods (%)

Pods containing two, three, and four fully developed seeds were counted. The total

number of two-, three-, and four-seeded pods were divided by the total number of pods


obtained from each plant and was multiplied by 100.

Seed Size (mm)

Size of ten shelled fresh seeds from each replication was measured by taking their

respective length and width in centimeters using an electronic caliper.

Fresh and Dry Seed Weight Plant" (g)

The total weight of fresh seeds per plant were measured using an electronic

weighing scale.

Fresh and Dry Weight of 100 seeds (g)

Marketable pods were shelled to obtain the fresh seeds to account for the 100-seed

weight. The seeds were then weighed using an electronic weighing scale.

Yield

Yield data was obtained by multiplying the harvestable pod and seed weight per
plant by the final plant stand according to the number of soybean plants per plot and the

plot size. Initial fresh weight of pods and seeds per plant were recorded firstly. Fresh


weights of seed subsamples were recorded, then subsamples were oven dried at 70°C for
72 hours, and dry weights were recorded following oven-drying. Yield was computed

following the formula:

a. Fresh Pod Yield (kg ha’)

[Fresh pod yield (kg ha!) = final plant stand ha! x fresh pod weight plant}

b. Fresh Seed Yield (kg ha’)

[Fresh seed yield (kg ha!) = final plant stand ha~! x fresh seed weight plant}

c. Dry Pod Yield (kg ha’)

[Dry pod yield (kg ha” !) = final plant stand ha! x dry pod weight plant!

d. Dry Seed Yield (kg ha )

[Dry seed yield (kg ha” !) = final plant stand ha”! x dry seed weight plant!

Daily Production Rate (kg ha’)

DPR= Fresh Pod Yield
Days to Harvesting (R6 Stage)

Harvest Index

Harvest index is the relationship between seed yield and biological yield (Gardner
et al., 1985). Harvest index is also a measure of the efficiency of plants in producing seed.
It is defined as the ratio of grain yield to total aboveground biomass. This was computed

in different manners using following the formula:

a. Harvest Index in Fresh Pod Basis (%)

HI = Fresh Pod Weight Plant! X 100

Fresh Plant Weight

b. Harvest Index in Fresh Seed Basis (%)

HI = Fresh Seed Weight Plant? X 100

Fresh Plant Weight

c. Harvest Index in Dry Pod Basis (%)

HI = Dry Pod Weight Plant! X 100

Dry Plant Weight

d. Harvest Index in Dry Seed Basis (%)

HI = Dry Seed Weight Plant? X 100

Dry Plant Weight


Statistical Analysis

Data of phenological traits, morpho-physiological attributes and yield components
gathered from the five soybean varieties across four different planting dates were combined
and analyzed using Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) to test the significance in Randomly
Complete Block Design (RCBD). Treatment means were differentiated using Tukey's
Honest Significant Difference (HSD) Test for multiple comparisons at 95% confidence
interval (p < 0.05) for all the traits with a significant difference. Pearson Correlation
Analysis of the soybean plant characters were also performed. To facilitate statistical
analysis of the variables, the collected data were processed using STAR - Statistical Tool

for Agricultural Research software (STAR, version 2.0.1, 2014. IRRI, Los Bafios, Laguna).


CHAPTER IV

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

This chapter presents results from the data gathered and interpreted after
performing the experimentation process. Discussions of the observations through analysis
of the corresponding results are reflected in order to determine the overall output of the

research conducted.

Meteorological Conditions

Upon termination of the field experiment, the researcher’s request for relevant
meteorological data needed to support this study was approved by the SARAI Project Phase
II 2.2 Automatic Weather Station in the province of Laguna and the project personnel in
charge with the database provided the summarized weather data including daily mean
temperature, maximum temperature, minimum temperature, relative humidity, and amount
of precipitation covering the period of March to July 2021 collectively. From the available
maximum and minimum temperature data, growing degree days was computed with a base

temperature of 10°C (Barreiro, 2008) using the equation (McMaster & Wilhelm, 1997):

GDD = [(Maximum Daily Temperature + Minimum Daily Temperature) / 2] — T Base


Mean, Maximum & Minimum Temperature (°C)

Figure 3 shows the graphical monthly mean, maximum, and minimum temperature
records throughout the same period of time. The highest mean temperature of 29.7°C was
observed in the month of May followed by June with 29.0°C while March obtained the
lowest mean temperature with 27.6°C. In terms of the mean maximum temperature, it
follows almost the same trend with the mean temperature by having the highest maximum
temperature record of 34.6°C during the month of May followed by June with 33.7°C while
March exhibited the lowest maximum temperature with 32.2°C. The minimum temperature
report was also shown in the graph with almost the same pattern as the two aforementioned
weather parameters except that the highest observation from May with 25.3°C was
followed by the months of April and June with the same observation of 24.6°C. March also
recorded the lowest minimum temperature with 23.7°C. Moreover, May exhibited the
largest difference of mean temperature from the maximum and minimum temperature with
an absolute value of 4.9°C and 4.4°C, respectively, while the month of March recorded the
smallest difference with an absolute value of 3.6°C and 3.9°C, respectively. The recorded
daily mean, maximum, and minimum temperature values provide a set of information
indicating that temperature varies from time to time within the day and that a monthly
summary can generate a trend which helped the researcher to relate these weather
parameters to soybean growth and yield traits particularly when summarized within the

exact planting date from sowing to harvesting of the soybean plants under field experiment.


=== Mean Temperature = =@ = =Mean Maximum Temperature —===>Mean Minimum Temperature


34.6

C


TEMPERATURE

March April May June July
CALENDAR MONTH

Figure 3. Monthly mean temperature, mean maximum temperature, and mean minimum
temperature (°C) records throughout the experimental period (March to July 2021).

Relative Humidity (%)

Hopkins (2009) defined relative humidity as the ratio of the actual water content of
air to the maximum amount of water that can be held by air at that temperature. It can also
be expressed in percentage as the ratio of the actual or ambient vapor pressure to the
saturation vapor pressure. To provide a more comprehensive report on relative humidity,
these daily records were summarized by obtaining the average values for each month
covering the field experiment as presented in Figure 4. The highest relative humidity was
recorded in the month of July with 92% while the lowest occurred during March. Based on
the chart, it can be implied that relative humidity consistently increased all throughout the

study timeframe from the month of March to July with a mean monthly increment of 1.5%


while the change in relative humidity from the month of April to May and from the month
of May to June both showed 2% increment which were relatively higher than the relative
humidity transition from the month of March to April and from the month of June to July
with an increment of only 1%. Based on the daily relative humidity records, the extreme
values were observed during the 3" and 18'" of May with 74% and 76%, respectively being
the lowest extremes and during the 13" of May, 8" and 25" of June similarly with 96%
being the highest extreme relative humidity accounted. It seems that the daily records
during the month of April exhibited the slightest variation while the month of May

diurnally varied the most compared to the other months.

== Mean Monthly Relative Humidity

88%

86%

84%

RELATIVE HUMIDITY

82%

80%
March April May June July
CALENDAR MONTH

Figure 4. Monthly mean relative humidity (%) records throughout the experimental period
(March to July 2021).


Precipitation (mm)

The daily amount of rainfall record throughout the period of experiment featured
May 15" with the highest amount of rainfall followed by July 29 and June 11" with
65.8mm, 58.4 mm, and 48.4 mm, respectively. These three dates were in different months
but the next three leading amount of incident precipitation were all observed in the month
of June. The most number of days with no precipitation at all was tallied during the months
of March and April with 26 and 24 days, respectively, while the least number of days
without rainfall occurred during the month of June with only 15 days. Figure 5 described
the total monthly amount of rainfall. The month of June showed the highest rainfall
amounting to 200.2 mm followed by the month of May with 159.2 mm, each characterized
with larger amount of rainfall than March, April, and July records combined. The trend of
total monthly rainfall consistently increased from March until June from 6.4 mm up to
200.2 mm with a mean monthly increment of 64.7 mm but eventually declined by 75.4 mm
difference when July ended. The mean monthly increment all through the experimental
period was 67.3 mm which was almost similar to the mean of the difference of the first
four months (64.7 mm). The amount of rainfall obtained from March to July 2021 recorded
a total of 500.6 mm which consequently provided a monthly mean of 100.12 mm. Kane et.
al. (1997) noted that when the soybean plant reaches the seed filling stage, rainfall becomes
the most crucial environmental input leading to the promising linkage of the reproductive
growth stages to the production of optimum yield with respect to the understanding of

water stress and water demands of this crop.


=#=Total Monthly Precipitation

200.2
= 200
159.2

Heo 124.8


PRECIPITATION (mm)

64 19
——~

March April May June July
CALENDAR MONTH

Figure 5. Monthly amount of precipitation (mm) records throughout the experimental period
(March to July 2021).

Growing Degree Days

Growing degree days is used to assign values specifically heat values with respect
to each day or 24-hour period that has occurred (Spoden, 2015). The heat values of the
days are accumulated to provide an estimate of the total amount of seasonal growth as well
as the actual development of the crop, thus, making growing degree days preferred over
calendar days since crop development is more pronouncedly relying upon the acquired heat
units and is effective in predicting the time to harvest a crop according to Sammis et al
(1985). When summed together, these thermal times are termed as a thermal calendar.

GDD was quantified using the available maximum and minimum temperature data.


Daily GDD records throughout the experimental period (March to July 2021) were
accounted. The highest GDD was accounted from May 7" with 22.2 followed by June qn
with 21.7 while the lowest observations were evident in March 2"! and March 17" with
recorded units of 15.15 and 15.3, respectively. The graph shows that significantly higher
fluctuations of GDD can be observed at the beginning and at the middle of the months
while the closest oscillations of GDD units are present near the end of the months.

Figure 6 displays the monthly total accumulated GDD. The month of May garnered
the highest accumulated GDD with 618.1 followed by July with 587.5 which was very
close to June having a total of 581.4. On the other hand, the month of March obtained the
least amount of GDD with 540.7 which similarly recorded the lowest monthly mean,
maximum, and minimum temperature across the growing period. It was accurate with the
account of Hatfield and Prueger (2015) which states that the phenological processes
occurring in certain crops are associated with daily air temperature. The association of the
eventual atmospheric temperature with the accumulated GDD can also be linked to the
seasonal growth of crops indicating that crops tend to require certain amount of GDD to
reach a certain growth stage. Thus, allowing the growers to predict the appropriate time to
harvest the pods in the case of soybean. Overseeing the amount of accumulated GDD tends
to be useful in identifying optimal timing for certain agricultural practices particularly in
the course of soybean production. It can serve as a reliable basis to understand that
significantly large variations can occur between locations and between years due to
changes in weather patterns, thus, giving thermal units the advantage into a more effective

identification of certain growth stages.


=Total Monthly GDD


618.1

620 ee
g
E 600 587.5
2 5814 és
= 580 ee
© 560 552
é 540, Ya
5 540 @
-4
o



March April May June July

CALENDAR MONTH

Figure 6. Monthly accumulated growing degree days records throughout the experimental
period (March to July 2021).

Given the daily accumulated GDD summarized and detailed values in Appendix J
(March), K (April), L (May), M (June) & N (July), the actual accumulated growing degree
units was computed within the growth and development of each experimental unit by
utilizing the data of days to first flowering (R1 Stage) and the days to harvesting (R6 Stage).
The exact dates of the said phenological parameters were keenly recorded in order to easily
locate the corresponding GDD units covering the growing period from sowing to
harvesting. For GDD accummulated at R1 stage, the daily GDD from sowing until R1 stage
(beginning bloom) characterized by having one open flower at any node on the main stem
were summed up among all varieties under different planting dates. In terms of GDD

accumulated at R6 stage, the total daily GDD was accounted starting from sowing up to


full seed stage attributed by evident pods containing a green seed that fills the pod cavity
at one of the four uppermost nodes on the main stem with a fully developed leaf for all
varieties under different planting dates.

Figure 7 shows the accumulated GDD from sowing until R1 stage. Among the
Tiwala 8 planting dates, the highest accumulated GDD was noted in March 25 (PD2)
followed by April 15 (PD3) with 800.2875 and 770.4, respectively. March 5" (PD1), on
the other hand, obtained the lowest GDD with 719.475. For Tudela, March 25" also
obtained the most heat units accumulated with 910.125 followed by May 6" with 757.3125.
March 5", with the lowest GDD had a larger difference from the one obtaining the highest
GDD compared to Tiwala 8 plantings. The same ranking of planting dates based on
accumulated GDD from Tudela was observed in Tiwala 12 accessions, however, it
garnered a relatively lower set of values. For Manchuria variety, March 25" (PD2) tallied
the highest GDD while March 5" (PD1) had the lowest value but relatively higher than
Tiwala 12’s observation during March 5" planting date. Lastly, Ryokko follows the
ranking which was observed in Tiwala 8 variety, but it is evident that all accumulated GDD

records for all of its planting dates happened to be the lowest among all observations.



= 800
Pa
a
Z 600
a
<
a
2 400
©
> > gp
PLL ELSES LS SESS
oe res sys res cy os.
e

es oy se aS OS wae
PLANTING DATE X VARIETY

Figure 7. Growing degree days accumulated at first flowering (R1 stage)

In terms of GDD accumulated at R6 stage as shown in Figure 8, March 25" (PD2)
resulted to the highest thermal units for all varieties. Among these varieties, Tudela
acquired the highest thermal units until R6 stage with 1840.65 followed by Tiwala 8 with
1694.925 while the variety with the least GDD was Ryokko which received only 1327.05
which was still lower than all the accumulated GDD of Tiwala 8, Tudela, Tiwala 12, and
Manchuria across the four different planting dates. Tiwala 8, Tudela, Manchuria, and
Ryokko obtained the lowest GDD during the 4" planting date. Among all varieties and
planting dates, the highest accumulated GDD was observed in Tudela planted in March
25" followed by Tiwala 8 planted in March 5". On the other hand, the lowest GDD was

observed in Ryokko which was sowed in May 6" followed by those sowed in March 5",



a
© 1400
<
5 1200
©
= 1000
eB
< 800
Qa
2 600
o
YI ISS SSESESS
x He ag QP Gh VE Bh QP GN
S 3 FPF GFF PH PIPL SF
v9 & ws ae SY PS Ks

PLANTING DATE X VARIETY

Figure 8. Growing degree days accumulated at full-seed stage (R6 stage)

Figure 9 displays the heat units starting from the beginning bloom phase (R1 Stage)
to the full-seed stage (R6 Stage) accumulated by the five varieties across all planting dates.
This phenological parameter quantifies the amount of GDD while the soybean plant was
undergoing reproductive processes until the full-seed phase wherein one of the pods in the
four uppermost nodes contains a full-size bean, pods are still green, immature, and tight
with fully developed immature green seeds. GDD accumulated was accounted to be
highest for all varieties during the March 25" planting except for Tudela which recorded
its highest acquired GDD in March 5" (PD1). May 6" planting garnered the lowest GDD
similarly for all varieties followed by April 15" planting which was also evident for all
varieties. March 5" planting accounted the second highest GDD among all varieties except
for Tudela which ranks first across all planting dates and across all observations outside

the variety itself.



a
E 1000
a
E
° 800
Zz
G
<2)
= 400
EB
E
ia) 200
a
o


SES ESEEEE ES
PP” DB” ge” yo” VD”
& Sw FF KELL IS FSS
S) oes S) Pas
Fes PLS PPS PP Ss

PLANTING DATE X VARIETY

Figure 9. Growing degree days accumulated between R1 to R6 stage

Pendleton and Hartwig (1973) highlighted that the optimum yield of soybean can
be obtained from varieties that exhibit a total growth cycle utilizing most of the available
growing season. In contrast, Johnson (1987) noted that certain adapted cultivars vary in
terms of their total growth cycle by 20 to 30 days, yet still produced similar optimum yield.
Aside from the accumulated growing degree units, generating yield requires other
environmental factors as well as genetic factors, thus, creating a potential variation in yield
across different planting dates. Findings of Egli and Cornelius (2009) pointed out that the
potential differences in yield can be attributed to the tendency of later planting dates to
inefficiently establish adequate canopy before transitioning from vegetative to
reproductive growth phase, thus, minimizing the capability of the plant to generate

photosynthates commencing from the pod formation to pod-filling phase and subsequently


to the beginning of seed development and full-seed stage (R6). Grain filling is believed to
be a highly yield-determining phase which can be influenced by the timing of planting. If
the grain filling stage was managed to commence earlier and to lengthen the period, the
tendency is for the soybean plant to accumulate higher incident solar radiation, total

precipitation, thermal units resulting to the amelioration of soybean yield.

Soil Properties

Soil samples collected from the field were sent to Department of Agriculture
Region IV-A, Regional Soils Laboratory, Lipa City for laboratory analysis particularly
routine analysis including the amount of organic matter, pH, phosphorus, potassium, and
soil texture. The result was summarized in Appendix BB. Upon analysis, it was found out
that the soil in the experimental site was classified as loam texture through Bouyoucos
hydrometer test method. The soil test indicated a pH of 5.7 via Potentiometric method.
Using ammonium acetate extraction followed by atomic emission spectroscopy, the soil
was detected to have high concentrations of exchangeable K2O amounting to 501ppm. On
the other hand, P2Os concentrations accounted in the analysis was 26ppm via Olsen UV-
Vis method. In addition, the organic matter content of the soil was estimated to be 2.324%
by the method, Walkley-Black, UV-Vis. Organic matter is an important source of organic
nitrogen, one of the major elements essential to plant. Organic matter should be present in
the topsoil to provide nitrogen to plants and to facilitate microbiological activities.

According to the Department of Agriculture, 1% organic matter is sufficient while


amounts exceeding 3% may result in toxic effects for certain crops including legumes. The
2.324% OM detected in the site soil fell under the range optimum for crop production. The
soil laboratory provided a nutrient requirement and fertilizer recommendation for soybean
production. It was indicated that the nutrient requirement for soybean based on the soil
analysis was 25 kg ha! N with only limited amounts of K2O and P2Os. The fertilizer
recommendation to be incorporated into the soil was a light dressing of 20 bags ha’! of
organic fertilizer and 55 kg ha"! of urea (46-0-0) such that the fertilizer is two inches below
and slightly to the side of the seed.

Additionally, the Municipal Planning and Development Office of Santa Maria,
Laguna provided several relevant information attributed to its soil status. The municipality
has several soil types, six of which are predominant. These are Sampaloc Clay, Coralan
Clay, Quinga Clay Loam, Dita Clay, Bugarin Clay, and Tropudalf Eutropepts. These soil
types were known to be ideal in terms of crop production. Chemical analysis of different
soil series in Santa Maria including one sampled from the same land used in this study has
been obtained by the Department of Agriculture for reference of the municipality. The
resulting soil acidity was 6.0 which was close to 5.7, pH finding of the chemical analysis
of the researcher’s soil sample. Soil pH is an indication of relative availability of essential
plant nutrients, thus, implying that the soil tested has well balanced amount of nutrient
elements making them available for the plant’s demand. With respect to phosphorus
amount, Eutropepts — Tropudalfs soil series was found to contain adequate amount suitable
for legume production. The natural pH of less than 5.5 connotes to the lower availability

of phosphorus which is mainly controlled by pH. Fortunately, the relatively adequate P2Os


concentrations shown by the analysis, 26ppm, was an ideal soil nutrient concentration for
soybean production (Miles et al., 2006). With the physical and biological properties of the
soil as well as the physiography and climate, one can determine the potential capability of

the land for agricultural development.

Phenological Traits

Number of Days to First Flowering (R1 Stage)

The combined analysis of variance revealed that variety, planting date and their
interaction significantly influenced the number of days until first flowering as shown in
Figure 10. Tudela and Tiwala 8 planted in March 25" (PD 1) were recorded with the longest
period until first flowering among all observations (42.45 and 47.5 days, respectively),
whereas, Ryokko sown under PD4 flowered within 28 days which was the earliest time of
flowering. There was a significant reduction in the number of days to flowering measured
for all the varieties during the first, third, and fourth planting as compared to the second
planting (March 25"). Zargar et al. (2011) highlighted that delayed planting dates can
accelerate flowering and the consequent reproductive growth which in tum negatively
affects yield. When planted earlier, longer growing season which follows longer period to
flower allows soybean plants to accumulate higher dry matter by exhibiting more
vegetative growth. Chen and Wiatrak (2010) as well as Egli and Bruening (2000) revealed

that longer duration of flowering caused by earlier sowing leads to higher grain yields. The


significant differences detected among varieties in terms of the number of days to flowering
is in agreement with the findings of Akande et al. (2009) as well as Inouye and
Shanmugasundaram’s (1983) featuring some soybean cultivars in Japan. Shegro et al.
(2010) reported that delay in flowering was caused by late planting dates employed. Board
& Hall (1984) and Kantolic & Slafer (2001) revealed that early maturing genotypes tend
to flower prematurely when planting is delayed, thus, exposing the soybean plants to
suboptimal photoperiod. This condition can cause minimized photosynthetic capacity and
significant reduction of seed weight and seed number since there is only limited supply of
photosynthates allocated to developing pods and seeds. Saitoh et al. (1999) reported that
the eventual reduction in pod setting is a consequence of the competition for assimilates

between the vegetative and reproductive growth stages as affected by timing of sowing.

(Number of days to R1 stage =*—GDD

50 a 2000
3 45 1800
<
5 40 1600 a
z35 1400 2
© 30 1200 B
g 25 1000 &%
= 20 soo &
te 1S 600 Q
lS)
a 10 400 9
E 5 200

0 0
Zz Ss SHEP INS Ss SES Ss eS KS re OLS

a ¥ o. >

FF? rE ae RS rye co rey RFR

tr aS oe we PS sos < We ¥ att eS oe “

PLANTING DATE X VARIETY

Figure 10. Number of days after planting to first flowering (R1 stage) of the five soybean
varieties as influenced by different planting dates


Number of Days to Harvesting (R6 Stage)

This phenological trait was characterized by having pods with green seed that fills
80-90% of the pod cavity at one of the four uppermost nodes on the main stem with a fully
developed leaf. Kumagai (2020) and Wilcox et al. (1987) highlighted the importance of the
duration of the full-seed stage since appropriate sowing time can extend this period in order
to maximize the cumulative radiation and amount of precipitation to be acquired by the
soybean plant which positively affects the seed-filling phase due to adequate accumulation
of dry matter and consequently exhibit a significant increase in yield.

Statistical analysis on this trait portrayed that planting date and variety exhibited
highly significant effects on the days to harvesting (R6 stage) as well as their interaction at
probability level of 1% as presented in Figure 11. Among all observations, Tudela planted
on March 25" exhibited the longest duration to full-seed stage (95 days) while Ryokko
sown on May 6" had the earliest harvesting time (58 days). There was a significant decline
in the number of days to harvesting in the third and fourth planting after the second planting
for all the varieties. Similar days to harvesting were observed in Tiwala 12 sown in PD1
and Manchuria sown in PD3 as well as in Tiwala 8 under PD1, Manchuria under PD2, and
Tudela under PD3. In addition, during the second and third planting date, Tiwala 12
exhibited the same number of days to R6 stage. Following the best record exhibited by
Tudela under PD2 and PD1 was Tiwala 8 grown in PD2 which was significantly higher
than the rest of the sowing dates.

Soybean final yield was found to be strongly positively correlated to the period of

R6 stage as reported by Bekele and Alemahu (2011) which gives an advantage in yield to


longer-season varieties such as Tudela, Tiwala 8, and Manchuria as compared to Ryokko
and Tiwala which reached the full-seed stage earlier. In this study, Tudela was
characterized as the late-maturing variety while Ryokko and Tiwala 12 were early-
maturing. Tudela sown in March 25" and May 6" exhibited a numerical difference of 10.75
days while Ryokko and Tiwala 12 sown in March 25" and May 6" showed a difference of
5.75 and 4.5 days, respectively. In support to the findings stated above, Bakal (2017)
revealed that as sowing is delayed, the time it takes to harvest the soybean pods is
shortened. This report added that in general, growth cycle period of late-maturing
genotypes can be reduced more due to late planting than early-maturing genotypes.

George (1990) featured in his study that harvesting was delayed as temperature
decreases potentially due to the extended periods of vegetative growth ranging from 23%
to 64%. Aside from extremely high temperatures, Heatherly (1996) also highlighted that
restricted soil moisture and lower amount of precipitation caused late-maturing soybean
cultivars to delay its reproductive period.

Chiba (1991) reported that the narrow window for appropriate timing of harvesting
is between 35-39 days after the onset of flowering. This harvest window needs to be taken
into account keenly since after harvest, sugar levels declines rapidly and this eventual
decline is amplified by the recurring high temperatures, thus, it poses a need to preserve
the seed quality after harvest through post-harvest technologies such as cooling and high
humidity storage. Given this critical fate of beans after harvest, the timing of harvesting
should be carefully observed to achieve consumer acceptability and marketability of fresh

green pods.


In Thailand environmental settings, true vegetable soybeans are set to be harvested
approximately 65-70 days after sowing phenotypically when pods are completely occupied
by the seeds, but still fresh green preferably purchased by consumers either in fresh pod
form or as frozen green beans (Sarutayophat, 2011). In this study, the true vegetable
soybean cultivar (Ryokko) was harvested within 58 to 68.5 days. Those planted in March
25" exhibited the longest duration (68.5 days) which is in agreement with the performance
of the vegetable soybeans grown in Thailand. Moreover, all grain soybean varieties grown
in this study exceeded 70 days to achieve R6 stage ranging from 73.25 to 85.75 days for
Manchuria, 71 to 80.5 days for Tiwala 12, 78.25 to 88 days for Tiwala 8, and 83 to 95 days
for Tudela. This set of results is justifiable since these grain soybean varieties are later-

maturing compared to Ryokko which commence flowering and reach R6 stage earlier.

Number of days to R6 stage ====GDD

~ 100 2000
3 90 800
g 1
& 80 1600 1
2 70 1400
© 60 1200
= Nn}
a 50 1000 =
s &
< 40 s00 ©
A a
% 30 600 a
P 20 400 0
2 0 200
5° 0
5 SSDS DD VD DV VV ODD DDD a hk
ZS SLES HI SIKH SE SEFEESEEES
ROC ROE Oe ORR TOO OR ORCS
ys NR SL OF VS Ne ey
SD PPP FP PH” HG GS FF SP aS
yr aes Ts M7 Was © eS “

PLANTING DATE X VARIETY

Figure 11. Number of days to harvesting (R6 stage) of five soybean varieties as influenced
by different planting dates and the growing degree days accumulated at R6 stage


Number of Days Between RI to R6 Stage

It is relevant to account this phenological parameter since it quantifies the period
that the soybean plant spends for certain reproductive events including the onset of
flowering, full bloom, beginning pod, full pod, beginning seed and until the full-seed phase.
Optimum yield of soybean can be obtained from varieties that exhibit a total growth cycle
utilizing most of the available growing season (Pendleton and Hartwig (1973).

The analysis of variance showed that the planting date, variety, and their interaction
significantly affected the number of days between RI to R6 stage at 0.01 level of
probability. As shown in Figure 12, Tudela grown under PD1 spent the longest duration
from R1 to R6 stage while those planted in the second, third, and fourth planting exhibited
a significant decline in the R1 to R6 duration. Furthermore, Ryokko and Manchuria showed
similar response under PD1 and PD2 as well as between PD3 and PD4, yet the number of
days to harvesting significantly decreased after the second planting for both varieties.

Findings of Egli and Cornelius (2009) pointed out that the disadvantages of later
planting dates include formation of inadequate canopy before shifting to reproductive
growth phase, thus, limiting the synthesis of assimilates from flowering crossing pod
formation and pod-filling phase and subsequently to seed development and seed-filling.
Seed-filling is considered to be a highly yield-determining phase which can be influenced
by the timing of planting (Egli and Bruening, 2000). In this study, Tudela sown on March
25" showed the longest days covering the reproductive stages. Variations in this trait are

presented in Tables 7 and 8 where important highlights that might be reflected in other


traits especially in the yield components are also shown. Ngalamu et al. (2013) found out
that soybean yield is more affected by changes from flowering to R6 stage or until
physiological maturity compared with the period from germination to the onset of
flowering. Thus, this phenological parameter is considered as significant when dealing with

the decisions of the growers about timing of sowing.

[Number of days between RI to R6 stage —=e=—GDD

60 2000





GDD AT R6 STAGE

NUMBER OF DAYS BETWEEN RI TO R6 STAGE

Sy VV PDD SD?
Ss = S eS ois ‘s& SIE ESS Se RES, es

yo NY oP yo NY oye NY re
oo rr Ss ros os” SS SS’, Loe
Pas s PPS S SWS SW S

PLANTING DATE X VARIETY

Figure 12. Number of days between flowering to harvesting of five soybean varieties as
influenced by different planting dates and the growing degree days accumulated from R1
to R6 stage


Morpho-Physiological Attributes

Percentage Seed Emergence (%)

Percentage seed emergence of soybean plants was significantly affected by the
variety and planting date, however, there was no significant interaction detected between
these factors on this trait. Comparing the varieties as shown in Figure 13, Tiwala 12
obtained the highest percentage emergence (97.1%) followed by Manchuria with 94.1 %,
whereas, Ryokko exhibited the poorest emergence (76.8%). Among the four planting dates
as presented in Figure 14, the best emergence rate was observed during the May 6" planting
(93.1%). There was a significant reduction in the emergence rate as evidently observed in
the second and third planting compared to the first sowing and consequently increased
during the fourth planting.

Casteel (2011) highlighted that soybean emergence, usually taking 14-21 days, is
naturally epigeal since its hypocotyl is required to pull the cotyledons out to reach the soil
surface, thus, causing mechanical resistance between the emerging seed and the soil.
Although some soybean seeds successfully emerged, snapped hypocotyls were observed
in the field experiment done probably due to inadequate resources or reserves (energy)
which are intended to be spent to promote pull of cotyledons out of the soil. This event
leads to significant seedling mortality which might adversely affect the plant stand.

Environmental conditions are crucial factors that may also affect seed germination.

One of which is the prevailing lower soil temperature which causes delay in seed


emergence due to retarded metabolic activity of the seed (Andales et. al., 2000) and reduced
canopy development (Kane et. al., 1997). Favorable emergence rates occur in soybean if
exposed under soil temperatures between 25 and 35° C (Hopper et al. 1979). Aside from
temperature, soil moisture is also worth noting given that seeds essentially undergo
imbibition of at least half their weight in water to facilitate germinate as reported by Casteel
(2011). Soybean seeds must have more than 10% moisture upon sowing in order to avoid
damage leading to unviable seeds. Soil moisture is positively correlated to seedling
development. Thus, higher rainfall amount plays an important role in promoting soybean
germination except when heavy rains occur and is followed by soil crusting (Johnson and
Wax, 1979). Lack of water after planting tend to minimize seed emergence since the initial
soil moisture might be enough for the imbibition process alone.

Based on Appendix P, the soil texture in the experimental field was characterized
as loam. Morrison and Xue (2006) evaluated the effect of soil texture and seed size on
emergence rates. They revealed that large-seeded cultivars tend to emerge easily from
heavier soils like clayey, whereas small seeds can emerge more favorably from light-
textured soils including sandy, sandy loam, and loam soils. Higher water holding capacity
present in heavy soils permits larger seeds to adequately imbibe water which favors
germination. Small seeds tend to emerge easier from light-textured soils since there is
lower mechanical resistance present (Arndt 1964, Morrison and Xue 2006).

In this study, Ryokko exhibited the lowest germination rate after 21 days probably
because of its large seeds subjected to lighter-textured soil. Heavy-textured soil might

instead favor Ryokko’s germination due to its high water holding capacity and


consequently better water imbibition. Berger-Doyle (2014) reported that large-seeded
varieties encounter higher difficulties to emerge due to the resistance of the hypocotyl
against the soil as it is pulled out of the surface especially if large seeds are sown too deep.
Relatively smaller-seeded varieties namely Manchuria, Tiwala 8, Tiwala 12, and Tudela
contrarily showed higher percentage germination in loam (light-textured soil) compared to

Ryokko.


PERCENTAGE SEED EMERGENCE (%)

Ryokko Manchuria Tiwala 12 Tiwala 8
VARIETY

Figure 13. Percentage seed emergence (%) of five soybean varieties under different
planting dates (2021) grown in Santa Maria, Laguna

a
b
F| :
March Sth March 25th April 15th May 6th
PLANTING DATE

2 ° 0
re s &

PERCENTAGE SEED EMERGENCE (%)
Z

Figure 14. Percentage seed emergence (%) under four planting dates (2021) of five soybean
varieties grown in Santa Maria, Laguna

Plant Height at R1 and R6 Stage (cm)

As a relevant determinant of final pod and seed yield, plant height is considered as
an integral morphological trait since it represents the amount of biomass produced through
its growth duration. Thus, optimizing the growth of soybean plants as expressed in plant
height accounts the provision of site intended for both vegetative and reproductive organs.
Longer period of phenological cycle utilizing most of the available growing season
potentially produces taller soybean plants due to the maximized accumulation of dry
matter, hence, consequently achieving higher yield as reported by Berger-Doyle (2014)
who found positive correlation (r = 0.60; p-value = 0.001) between plant height and yield.

Analysis of variance depicted that the planting dates and varieties significantly


affected the plant height at R1 stage at p < 0.01, but without significant interaction
(Appendix B). Figure 16 showed that plants sown on March 25" produced the tallest plants
while the third and fourth sowing date (statistically similar response) exhibited a significant
height reduction compared to the second sowing date. Among all genotypes as indicated
in Figure 15, Tudela recorded the tallest plants and Ryokko was the shortest variety when
the plant reached the blooming stage.

On the other hand, plant height at R6 stage were significantly influenced by the
sowing dates and soybean varieties at p < 0.01 (Appendix C). Although, there was no
interaction effect detected between planting date and variety. The mean plant height at the
full-seed stage (Figure 18) showed that soybean plants on the March 25" planting were the
tallest and the fourth planting date produced the shortest plants. On the other hand, in terms
of varieties, the tallest plants was seen in Tudela upon reaching the harvesting stage of
green pods. Among all observations, Tudela planted on March 25" exhibited the tallest
height of 103.9 cm while Ryokko sown during the fourth planting obtained the lowest
height of 38.9 cm.

In this study, significant differences between the five varieties were detected in
plant height both at R1 and R6 stage as well as when planting dates were compared using
Tukey’s Honest Significant Difference test. Similarly, Ahmed et al. (2010) reported that
plant height differed between genotypes G-2 (67.7 cm) and TGx 1740-2F (40.3 cm),
concluding that this observed variation was due to their genetic makeup. Similarly, Ahmed
et al. (2010) noted that there was no significant interaction effect in terms of plant height

between planting date and genotype. The variability in plant height between the genotypes


observed in this study is in accordance with the findings of Malik et al. (2006) and
Mebrahtu and Devine (2008), and Shegro et al. (2010) highlighting that genotypic
morphology such as plant height was influenced by differences in genetic background.

In terms of the effect of sowing dates, Bastidas et al. (2008) tracked a negative
response of plant height to delayed planting. Muhammad (2016) observed similar reduction
in plant height as sowing was delayed but exhibited increase in height by 19 cm when
planting was advanced by seven weeks from mid-June. When planting was delayed,
signficant reduction in height consequently causes a decline in biomass yield.

The phenological parameters including the number days to R1 and R6 stage was
found to be strongly positiviely correlated (0.87 and 0.95, respectively) to the plant height
both at R1 and R6 stage. Tudela, which spent the longest time to flower compared to the
rest of the varieties ranging from 33.75 to 47.5 days and the variety which reached the full-
seed stage (R6) most rapidly by 83 to 95 days also became the tallest variety with height
ranging from 58.6 to 68.5 cm at RI stage and measuring between 91.4 to 103.9 cm at R6
stage. In constrast was Ryokko, which spent the shortest time to flower compared to the
rest of the varieties ranging from 28 to 33.75 days and the variety which reached the full-
seed stage (R6) the fastest by 58 to 68.5 days became the shortest variety at R1 stage (32.7
to 45.1 cm) and at R6 stage (38.9 to 53.3 cm). When planted earlier, longer growing season
which follows longer period to flower allows soybean plants to accumulate higher dry

matter by exhibiting more vegetative growth.

=]
Ss

A
~ 60
w
8 d
= 50
a
% 40 €
B
<
&
E 30
gC
a
2 20
Z
=)
a
Ryokko Manchuria Tiwala 12 Tiwala 8 Tudela

VARIETY

Figure 15. Plant height at R1 stage (cm) of five soybean varieties under different planting
dates (2021) grown in Santa Maria, Laguna.

g
~ 60
S

c

& 50
a
~ 40
=
<
a
& 30
o
B20
rs
4 10
J
a


March Sth March 25th April 15th May 6th

PLANTING DATE

Figure 16. Plant height at R1 stage (cm) under four planting dates (2021) of five soybean
varieties grown in Santa Maria, Laguna.



PLANT HEIGHT AT R6 STAGE (cm)

Ryokko Manchuria Tiwala 12 Tiwala 8 Tudela
VARIETY

Figure 17. Plant height at R6 stage (cm) of five soybean varieties under different planting
dates (2021) grown in Santa Maria, Laguna.

PLANT HEIGHT AT R6 STAGE (cm)
S
rt

March Sth March 25th April 15th May 6th
PLANTING DATE

Figure 18. Plant height at R6 stage (cm) under four planting dates (2021) of five soybean
varieties grown in Santa Maria, Laguna.


Number of Nodes Plant! at R1 and R6 Stage

A significant interaction was detected on the number of nodes plant at R1 stage
between the planting dates and varieties as presented in Figure 19. The number of nodes
plant! were significantly lower in the first, third, and fourth planting date (statistically
similar response) with respect to those sown during PD2 for Tudela and Tiwala 8. Whereas
in Ryokko and Manchuria, it was the first sowing date which recorded the highest number
of nodes plant’. Overall, significantly greater nodes plant were produced in the second
planting and Tudela produced significantly more nodes plant’! than the other varieties.

Furthermore, at R6 stage, the combined analysis of variance (Appendix B) showed
that varieties, planting date and their interaction were highly significant at 0.01 level of
probability in terms of the number of nodes plant “'. Similar to the observation at R1 stage,
Figure 20 revealed that Tudela grown under the second sowing date exhibited the highest
number of nodes plant" followed by those subjected to the first planting. The number of
nodes plant" significantly declined in the first, third, and fourth planting date compared to
those sown during PD2 for all the varieties except Ryokko which recorded significantly
more nodes plant’ during the first planting than the rest of the sowing dates.

Whigham and Minor (1978) reported that the number of nodes can be affected by
the differences in day length. Before the onset of flowering, the nodes are being established
on the mainstem of the soybean plant during vegetatitve growth and flowering is triggered
when the day length becomes shorter than the critical value depending on the genotype.

The extended cumulative photoperiod due to longer period spent before reaching the


reproductive phase increased the number of nodes per plant, thus, increasing the number
of pods and seeds per unit area. Late-maturing varieties respond more pronouncedly in
photoperiod than early maturing varieties. The timing of sowing essentially plays a role in
the formation of nodes as reported by Bastidas et al. (2008) which exhibited that earlier
planting promotes higher nodes primarily on the mainstem but showed shorter internodes
between the 3rd and 9"" node. Heatherly and Elmore (2004) revealed that sowing date
influences plant size before blooming phase. Increase in plant height can be attributed to
the higher production of nodes when subjected to earlier planting (Wilcox and
Frankenberger, 1987; Bastidas et al., 2008). Carter (1974) highlighted in their study that as
planting date was delayed, soybean plants tend to develop fewer nodes leading to fewer

pods per plant, fewer seeds per unit area and smaller seed size.

[|Number of nodes plant -1 at Ri Stage  ——GDD

Fes 2000
Qo
< 1800
£12
2 1600 py
z Q
z 10 1400 2
cans 1200 &
z 1000 &
ww 6 &
rs soo
a
By 600 Q
Z 2 400 0
S 200
&
§ co VV SV VSN PDD DD :
5 SMS SEPM MS OL LS OOS SPS. Ss s

Foo are PP PF oor ae HP? HF re Gr WP WP VP

wi «ey 2h KS Fo [aes

Or PPT EOL S ae "eS Hee Rue

PLANTING DATE X VARIETY

Figure 19. Number of nodes plant *! at R1 Stage of five soybean varieties as influenced by
different planting dates and the growing degree days accumulated at R1 stage



—<=GDD
Fa]

Q 20 a 2000
7 1800
Z 1600 iy
g 1400 2
a 1200 %
z 1000 &
me 800 g
a 600 Q
°

S 400 9
is}


ray

a

=

P

z

PLANTING DATE X VARIETY

Figure 20. Number of nodes plant “! at R6 Stage of five soybean varieties as influenced by
different planting dates and the growing degree days accumulated at R6 stage

Fresh and Dry Plant Weight (g)

Highly significant differences at p < 0.01 in terms of fresh and dry plant weight
were accounted among the soybean varieties grown as well as across the planting dates
employed in this study and their corresponding interaction effects as shown in Figure 21
and 22. Tudela planted in PD2 exhibited the highest fresh and dry plant weight followed
by those grown under the first planting date. Similarly, the fresh and dry plant weight were
significantly lower in the first, third and fourth planting as compared to the response during
PD2 consistently for all the varieties tested. Overall, significantly bulkier and heavier
shoots were produced in the second planting and when growing Tudela compared to the

other cultivars.


= Fresh plant weight (g) «#=GDD

400 a 2000

XX SSS S,
¥ SSS Ss ©
GDD AT R6 STAGE

TESS ©
YMA ~*

WH

Ss
i
> a:
ss

Sy PS
Ss Ss & Ss os oS ee & S SSS Ae ee os SF

we rye 9 S) ww wv ~
eee. PSS roe AA See Res SO ee

res PLS cS is
we res Y

PLANTING DATE X VARIETY

Figure 21. Fresh plant weight (g) of five soybean varieties as influenced by different
planting dates and the growing degree days accumulated during its growth period

=Dry plant weight (g) —#—GDD

= 140 1800
= 120 1600 wy
i 1400 2
Bie cd 500 6
d d i
a 80 1000 =
Z 0 soo &
= 40 i 600 Q
4] h h 400 9
p20 | g | 200
0 6 0
) Sy VV VP DPD? OD? x
KY SS s = Oe Ss oP SI SESESEEESES
Peer er ve sy ee? gd wr gr? VP _ GP pw? _y”
Se re. ao ss Sor FF Pe FF FMP
FHP SAM CAM SS es

PLANTING DATE X VARIETY

Figure 22. Dry plant weight (g) of five soybean varieties as influenced by different planting
dates and the growing degree days accumulated during its growth period


Fresh and Dry Straw Weight (g)

In terms of the fresh straw weight, varieties and the interaction of planting date and
variety significantly affected the soybean plants. However, analysis of variance showed
that there was no significant effect due to planting dates. Dry straw weight, on the other
hand, was significantly influenced by the varieties and planting dates, in contrast with the
fresh straw weight, and was also detected with significant interaction between these factors
(Figure 24). Similarly, the fresh and dry straw weight significantly declined during the
second, third and fourth planting compared to the amount of biomass produced during the
first planting date consistently for all the varieties tested. Among all observations as shown
in Figure 23, the highest fresh and dry biomass producer in terms of straw weight was
Tudela sown in PD1 (161.8 and 51.4 g, respectively). In general, significantly heavier
straws were generated in the first planting and Tudela compared to the other genotypes.

Concerning the response of soybean plants in terms of plant and straw weight,
Tacarindua et al. (2013) reported that the total aboveground dry matter were negatively
affected by rising air temperature in the environment. This finding revealed that the
synchronous increase of vapor pressure deficit with increased temperature strengthened the
temperature effects on dry matter production. Aside from the effects of air temperature,
reduced ambient carbon dioxide and low light intensity were also attributed to the negative
influence of extremely high temperatures to aboveground dry matter. Quantitatively, it was
also also highlighted that the aboveground dry matter significantly declined due to rising

temperatures from 11% to 27% in two different years. This dry matter accumulation


eventual decline was detected between the beginning of blooming phase and early seed-
filling which follows the pod development phase. Photosynthesis is one of the most
important physiological processes that a plant undergoes, and it is significantly affected by
heat stress (Crafts-Brandner and Salvucci, 2002). Damage to photosynthetic capacity due
to heat stress is observed mostly on C3 plants than C4 (Yang et al., 2006). Since the
aboveground dry biomass were adversely affected, this can also lead to the reduction of
pod number per plant, seed weight, seed number per pod, thus, resulting to a relatively
lower harvest index.

Purcell et al. (2002) highlighted that soybean plant biomass exhibited positive
linear relationship with the cumulative intercepted photosynthetically active radiation
particularly until the cumulative PAR amounted to 400 MJ, however, the final biomass

tends to decline when the solar radiation level exceeds this value.

[=Fresh straw weight (zg) —*=—GDD

180 2000
= 160 1800
es
E 0 1600
3 120 1400 2
id 1200
S 100 Ss
A 1000
sS 80 &
[= soo &
kay 60 600 &
m 40 8
a 400 ©
% 20 200

VV VV IV PDS SP SD?
SS Ss & Ss SSIS. As SLES SLPS
xs v

vv Oo” od

s eo WY we ae rN
SSS SKS Ky cr os x os oe FF FPL S
Bes SPP SA SS Mes

PLANTING DATE X VARIETY

Figure 23. Fresh straw weight (g) of five soybean varieties as influenced by different
planting dates and the growing degree days accumulated during its growth period


[=D straw weight (g) —e—GDD

60 2000
= 1800
~ 50 1600
a ry
5 40 1400 2
a 1200 &
3 S
= 30 1000
3 d soo &
& 20 600 @
a N : a
x 10 a 400 9
a 200

0 0

r Wr a ye vv eae 2 NO) - Ey ~~

= . iy So % sy oS s oy - ‘iS SS ¥ os oe
Pyas S we es Mya s yas

PLANTING DATE X VARIETY

Figure 24. Dry straw weight (g) of five soybean varieties as influenced by different planting
dates and the growing degree days accumulated during its growth period

Height of Lowest Pod (cm)

First pod height must be taken into consideration by soybean researchers and
growers due to its practical advantage when the soybean plants are set to be mechanically
harvested especially when managing a large population density and a large area (Zandonadi
et al., 2010). Plant height and first pod height improves the harvesting efficiency and
minimizes the losses and mechanical damages inflicted in the produce, hence, making this
morphological trait a significant consideration for the selection of genotypes intended for
commercial production. The result of combined analysis of variance across the four sowing
dates involving five soybean varieties showed that the planting date by variety interaction

significicantly influenced the first pod height at p < 0.01 as shown in Figure 25.


Variability in terms of the height of lowest pod was present in the onsite research
of Muhammad et al. (2007). This variability in the first pod height of different soybean
varieties was evaluated under different environmental settings, it was reported that late-
maturing genotypes tend to have higher first pod height, however, any significant
interaction effect involving genotypes and environment was never detected in the study.

In terms of mechanical harvesting, it was revealed by Liebenberg (2012) that lowest
pod height less than 12 cm may result to seed and pod losses. The short-season varieties
namely Ryokko and Tiwala 12 would possibly have incurred losses in the production of
marketable pods due to the possible injuries or damages on pods.

Hamilton (2007) and Zhang and Kyei-Boahen (2007) reported that the growing-
season length of the varieties exhibited a significantly positive effect on plant height and
first pod height. The long-season varieties were found to produce significantly taller plants
with higher height of lowest pod compared to the short-season varieties.

Moreover, Ogles et al. (2016) reported in their study dealing with edamame cultivar
evaluation in Central Alabama that the height to lowest pod (measured from ground to
lowest node on the plant with a pod) was found to have correlation with plant height both
at R1 and R6 stage. Soybeans with greater height tend to develop higher first node with an
attached pod since its mainstem is more developed.

To prove this claim by Ogles et al. (2016), the researcher of this study analyzed the
relationship between the plant height and lowest pod height of the varieties used in this
study grown under different planting dates. Pearson correlation analysis revealed a

significant correlation at p < 0.01 between the first pod height and plant height at R1 stage


and R6 stage with 0.5466 and 0.886, respectively. It was found out that the plant height at
the green pod stage or the full-seed phase is more highly associated to lowest pod height

than the plant height recorded at the onset of flowering.

Height of lowest pod (cm) =#=GDD

a 2000

GDD AT R6 STAGE

RMS ©

SSS ©
MMA =>

WMA, =>

HEIGHT OF LOWEST POD (cm)

— -
+ ie

\y vy
SPS Roe SIMS = SIESLES Pg go. Ss s

RS * FP VPP PM Prey ~ OS oe »
FPP PPL ISP PIS SOI LES ro
Sas ‘was < Wass Has

PLANTING DATE X VARIETY

Figure 25. Height of lowest pod (cm) of five soybean varieties as influenced by different
planting dates and the growing degree days accumulated during its growth period

Pod Size in terms of Length, Width, and Thickness (mm)

Pod dimensions serve as an important morphological characteristic in the
optimization of vegetable soybean yield since the pods are harvested on their fresh green
stage when one of the pods in the four uppermost nodes contains a full-size bean and is

considered as a relevant descriptor since pod size is a function determining the soybean


final yield. Pod size in terms of length, width, and thickness are believed to be affected by
the environment particularly by the amount of precipitation acquired by the soybean plant.

The combined analysis of variance (Appendix D) revealed that significant
interaction was measured for pod length between the planting dates and varieties at p<0.01.
Considering all of the experimental units as presented in Figure 26, Ryokko grown under
March 25" planting performed the best in terms of pod length (68.1 mm), whereas, the
shortest pod was accounted in May 6'"-sown Tudela measuring 40.175 mm. All records of
pod length in Ryokko across all sowing dates and in Tudela grown under PD1 to PD4 were
relatively higher and lower than the rest of the observations. For all the soybean varieties
tested, the second planting produced significantly longer pods than the first, third, and
fourth planting.

Highly significant interaction effect between the planting dates and varieties at p <
0.01 were detected in terms of pod width (Appendix D). Accordng to Figure 27, the mean
pod width at various sowing dates showed that Ryokko grown under each planting date
produced the highest pod width. Among all observations, Ryokko planted on March 25%
(PD2) exhibited the highest pod width measuring 15 mm while Tudela sown during the
May 6" planting obtained the lowest measurement (8.85 mm). As similarly observed in
terms of pod length and being consistent for all the varieties, the second planting produced
significantly wider pods than the first, third, and fourth planting.

Pod thickness exhibited significant planting date and variety effect, however, there
was no significant interaction effect detected between these factors (Appendix D). The

mean pod thickness measured among all observations was 7.50 mm varying by 1.30%. The


coefficient of variation computed in pod thickness was relatively lower than that of pod
width (1.75%) indicating that the measurement of pod width varies more compared to pod
thickness. Tukey’s multiple range test revealed that Ryokko obtained the thickest pods
while Tudela generated the lowest measurement of pod thickness consistently across all
four planting dates (Figure 28) and featuring the second planting with significantly higher
pod thickness than the other sowing dates (Figure 29).

Hurburgh (2001) reported that less than ideal sowing time often leads to either
inadequate or extremely high rainfall with respect to the needs of the soybean plant during
pod-filling phase. Potential consequences include the production of fewer seeds per pod
and declined seed weight per plant and per hectare basis, however, optimum precipitation
that is concomitant with the season leads to the development of larger seed size, thus,
increasing the pod dimensions which is favorable to improve the yield.

Frank and Fehr (1981) highlighted in their set of studies regarding soybean yield as
associated to pod dimensions and pod weight that pods tend to achieve maximum length
and width ranging from 15 to 20 days after pollination, although, pod dimensions can be
further improved when there is an optimum amount of rainfall that overlaps the pod
development and the seed-filling stage. Weight of 100 seeds, additionally, can reach its
maximum values in 35 to 55 days after flowering (Li et al., 2003).

With respect to the position of the nodes containing the pods, Al-Tawaha (2010)
found out that the seeds which developed at the lower part of a soybean plant produced
larger pod length and width compared to those developed at the upper part of the plant

which concerns the translocation of the assimilates to different plant organs.


[=)Pod length(mm) =—*=GDD


w

Ps
$

y
S
GDD AT R6 STAGE

POD LENGTH (mm)
s

PLANTING DATE X VARIETY

Figure 26. Pod length (mm) of five soybean varieties as influenced by different planting
dates and the growing degree days accumulated during its growth period

§ ‘
SY SY SY SV SM DP DP PPP
SEES SSSEEEES OS S Sy sss
PM Fer MMM Kye

SPH SH Ma’ Fes Pre

(Pod width(mm) = *=GDD

c d 1800

is}

POD WIDTH (mm)
S
Ss
GDD AT R6 STAGE

Sy

RS »
ov Ss ees “3

RR
Py
PLANTING DATE X VARIETY

Figure 27. Pod width (mm) of five soybean varieties as influenced by different planting
dates and the growing degree days accumulated during its growth period

CF BO st ie eo



Yield and Yield Components

Number of Pods, Marketable Pods, and Percentage of Marketable Pods Plant"!

Highly significant interactions between planting date and variety were detected on
the number of pods plant at p < 0.01 (Appendix E). Based on Figure 30, the best pod
production was performed by Tudela under March 25" (PD2) planting followed by PD1,
PD3, and PD4 growing the same variety, whereas, the lowest response in terms of pod
number per plant was evident in Ryokko grown under May 6" (PD4) and the remaining
planting dates. In general, March 25" was the highest pod-producing timing of sowing
consistently among all varieties followed by PD1 and PD3 while May 6" planting resulted
to the lowest number of pods plant. A significantly lower number of pods plant! was
produced in the first, third, and fourth planting for all the varieties as compared to the
second planting.

Furthermore, the interaction between the sowing date and variety significantly
affected the number of marketable pods plant”! at p < 0.01 as shown in Appendix E. The
best production of standard pods was exhibited by Tudela under March 25" planting
followed by the same variety planted in PD1, PD3, and PD4, whereas, the lowest response
was seen in Ryokko grown under PD4. Overall, the highest number of marketable pods
plant" were produced by genotypes sown on March 25", while planting observed in March

st, April 15", and May 6" significantly declined compared to the first planting.


In terms of the percentage of marketable pods plant’, analysis of variance revealed
that this yield trait was also significantly influenced by the interaction of the timing of
sowing and variety probability level of 1% (Appendix E). Figure 32 depicted that among
all observations from the experimental plots, Ryokko, Tiwala 12 and Tiwala 8 subjected to
the first planting, second planting’s Manchuria, Tiwala 12 and Tiwala 8, Tiwala 12 grown
under the third planting, and Tiwala 12 produced from the last planting exhibited the
highest percentage of marketable pods plant’! ranging from 94 to 96.25%.

Based on the results presented above, significant differences were present among
the five varieties experimented under different planting dates in terms of the number of
pods plant! between the genotypes. This observed variability is in agreement with the
findings of Magyarosi and Sjodin (1976) which reported that the number of pods plant”!
was highly affected by the degree of the production of the number of pods per node and
the number of nodes during the harvesting period. It can be implied from this finding that
greater number of nodes arising from a soybean plant promotes higher production of pods.
Along with the number of seeds pod’! and pod weight plant", the number of pods plant!
are considered as the most highly contributing factors in determining the final pod and seed
yield as supported by the accounts of Ouattara and Weaver (1995), Malik et al. (2006), Oz
et al. (2002), Mukhekar et al. (2004), Mondal et al. (2011), and Al-Hadi (2017). It can be
implied that pod number plant’ could be considered as an effective selection tool for
vegetable soybean yield.

On the other hand, timing of sowing also serves as a crucial management factor that

can alter the resulting pod and seed yield of soybean with respect to the number of pods


plant! produced. Bakal et al. (2017) emphasized the effect of planting dates to soybean
yield through the distinct changes and fluctuations in temperature, rainfall, and
photoperiod. Their research on the effect of growing seasons on some agronomic and
quality characteristics of soybean varieties in the Mediterranean Region in Turkey provided
a general conclusion that delayed planting negatively influence the duration of vegetative
and reproductive stages and number of pods which led to seed yield decline.

Early sowing date increased the number of pods on the main stem as well as in the
primary and secondary branches, hence, significantly increased the total number of pods
plant compared to the delayed planting date (Pedersen and Lauer, 2004).

Whigham and Minor (1978) reported that the number of pods was highly
responsive to the differences in day length and increasing temperature but only up to a
certain optimum level (30-35°C). As flowering is approaching, the nodes are being
established on the mainstem during vegetative growth and flowering is promoted when the
eventual temperature settles its optimum level and when day length becomes shorter than
the critical value depending on the genotype. Higher number of nodes that develop on the
mainstem means higher number of locations to produce flowers which consequently
become pods. The extended cumulative solar radiation and GDD due to longer period spent
before reaching the reproductive phase promotes the production of nodes, thus, improving
the number of pods and seeds per unit area. Declined vegetative growth due to shorter days
to enter and pass through the reproductive phase is expected to reduce the photosynthetic
area which is required for developing pods (Board & Hall, 1984). In addition, Cox et al.

(2008), Pedersen and Lauer (2003), Ray et al. (2008); Robinson et al. (2009) reported that


late planted soybean accessions had shorter plant, lower number of nodes categorized as
productive (nodes with emerging and developing flowers), and lower pods per plant (Cox
et al., 2008; Pedersen and Lauer, 2003; Ray et al., 2008;Robinson et al., 2009).

The significant decline in pod and seed yield due to less-than-ideal timing of
planting can be attributed to the tendency of later planting dates to inefficiently establish
adequate canopy before transitioning from vegetative to reproductive growth phase, hence,
minimizing the capability of the plant to generate photosynthates starting from the pod
formation, pod-filling, seed development and until full-seed stage as supported by the
research undertaken by Egli and Cornelius (2009). Carter (1974) observed that as planting
date was delayed, the tendency is for the plant to develop fewer nodes and fewer pods per
plant, especially at the upper nodes, fewer seeds per pod and smaller seed size.

Chand (1999) and Rajanna et al. (2000) reported that taller plants exhibit the higher
advantage to produce higher number of nodes and number of pods plant’. It was in
accordance with the actual findings of this study. To prove the claim highlighted by Chand
(1999) and Rajanna et al. (2000), the researcher of this study analyzed the relationship
between the plant height at R1 and R6 stage and number of pods plant’! of the varieties
used in this study grown under different planting dates. Pearson correlation analysis
revealed a significant correlation (0.7463 and 0.8978) at p < 0.01 between plant height at
RI stage and R6 stage, respectively, and pod number. It was found out that the plant height
at the full-seed phase is more highly correlated to number of pods plant”! than the plant

height recorded at the onset of flowering.


|Number of pods plant-1  —#—GDD
a

200 2000
iL 180 1800
2 160 1600 ww
= 140 1400
& 120 1200 B
= 100 of ef 1000 &
& 7 &
So 80 Y Y 800
B60 G h 8 Y 600 Q
@ Fs N oO
S40 j Gg S N F g 400
2 20 a Z N N a g 200

0 0
Sy VV IS oS? 3
SSS. OS CSS KS wy SS PS Ry PIS. os
¥ 4 ee & SS Ye es HF” ge? GF VP MY ?
ss Pe PE SF < SEs PLP SF PP SF
TVs Hs «ss Mes Ty FS or eS

PLANTING DATE X VARIETY

Figure 30. Number of pods plant “! of five soybean varieties as influenced by different
planting dates and the growing degree days accumulated during its growth period

[Number of marketable pods plant-1  —*=GDD

_ 200 A 2000

& 180 1800

< 160 1600 gy

= Q

o 140 1400 <

3 120 7 1200 &

3 100 ef 7 1000 &

2 80 y g f soo &

B60 Y Y 8 ZA 600 @

is Yh nas Y a

240.484. AN gh 400 ©

z=, iBN YN hi Y

= 20 aG N a y N Y N 200

org a 0

= » oh sv > op > >

E Ss LSS. oS SS, * AOL s £. s SS Ss ss PLS
FKP Me Sew Py MP ye

Poe” ~ OS PSS SP KP PPS

BOS ‘ asks Lak S Sto PHL SKA S

PLANTING DATE X VARIETY

Figure 31. Number of marketable pods plant *' of five soybean varieties as influenced by
different planting dates and the growing degree days accumulated during its growth period


==Percentage of marketable pods plant-1  —#=GDD
_ 100 2000
rs 2 a ‘ 1800
Z 9s 5 1600 &
pas =

= b f 1200 &
ere i ;
Bugs be S
) Z 1000 #
9 Y Y &
as Y g soo &
S) YZ Y 600 a
& J Y 40 8
& 80 gy Y 8
a Y Y 200
5 75 0
2 SDPSSOI IS SMO SESSEEEEPSPS

SS & ri COURS 2 my a Oy s RY Ps ee ED Ne So a3 ues =

¥ Vv > Ow FFs we au oo” Wr SS Ge >

SIR ROIRS & FF PPS SF VP FOS
BPG S or a < ae ES SA KSAT S

PLANTING DATE X VARIETY
Figure 32. Percentage of marketable pods plant “' of five soybean varieties as influenced

by different planting dates and the growing degree days accumulated during its growth

Fresh and Dry Pod Weight Plant-' (g)

Fresh and dry pod weight plant “' were both significantly affected by the different
planting dates employed in this study, test varieties, and their interaction as presented in
Figure 33 and 34. Significant decrease in fresh and dry pod weight plant “! were observed
in the first, third, and fourth planting compared to the first planting for all the varieties
tested while Tudela, across all sowing dates, produced significantly greater fresh and dry
pod weight plant" , hence, outperforming the other varieties. In the first, third, and fourth
planting, Tudela obtained the highest fresh pod weight plant’! and the other varieties were
significantly different from each other. Whereas in the third planting, Tudela recorded the
highest fresh pod weight plant! as well, however, Manchuria and Tiwala 8 were

statistically similar in response. In terms of the dry pod weight plant”, Tudela also recorded


the highest response for all the sowing dates. Moreover, during the first and second
planting, Manchuria and Tiwala 12 garnered statistically similar dry pod weight plant’.
Fresh pod weight plant results can be attributed to the number of pods plant’! as well as
the pod length, width, and thickness since pod weight is a function of the number of nodes,
number of pods in a plant and pod size. In Japan, the potential final pod and seed yield of
edamame in field conditions was affected by the planting dates employed due to
unfavorable climatic conditions such as low temperature, extremely high temperature,
extended period of exposure to high temperature, excessive rainfall, and too humid
conditions). Given these adverse environmental settings, the number of pods that set in a
plant and fresh pod weight significantly declined and consequently affected the final fresh
pod yield due to delayed planting with respect to the optimum timing with desirable

prevailing agrometeorological inputs (Zhang et al., 2013).

[==]Fresh pod weight plant -1(g) —#=GDD
a


2 200 1800
p. 180 1600 8
Zz 160 1400
5 140 e 1200
eae 1000 &
& 100 Y N
5 80 g \ 800 &
= : 600 3
ES _ uy Y \ N 40 8
A YN \ :
9 20 “ZN N 200
zo 0
a \ Sb dvb $ $>
a = ke ro & OS SS, SS S& DLL S vee s ot cs i

aR or ve Oy BP NY ag? ao? PS NY aa? 8 WP WY wo? 00”
es ee oe e S Sow Pe SSK ve eS oe s

PLANTING DATE X VARIETY

Figure 33. Fresh pod weight plant “' (g) of five soybean varieties as influenced by different
planting dates and the growing degree days accumulated during its growth period


Dry pod weight plant -1 (g) —===GDD

DRY POD WEIGHT PLANT * (g)

NAN ES
WMA >
ERRORS a
own eee
sssesse
GDD AT R6 STAGE

PLANTING DATE X VARIETY

Figure 34. Dry pod weight plant “' (g) of five soybean varieties as influenced by different
planting dates and the growing degree days accumulated during its growth period

100-Fresh and Dry Pod Weight (g)

The analysis of variance showed that the planting date by variety interaction
significantly affected the 100-fresh and dry pod weight at 0.01 level of probability. Figure
35 portrayed the effect of different planting dates on different grain soybean varieties and
a true vegetable soybean (Ryokko) as the benchmark variety in terms of 100-fresh pod
weight. As shown, Ryokko generally obtained the highest 100-fresh and dry pod weight.
Soybean plants sown in the second, third, and fourth planting had a significant decline 100-
fresh and dry pod weight with respect to the effect of the second planting for all the varieties

tested. Although Ryokko sown under the fourth planting date recorded the best 100-fresh


pod weight in this particular timing of sowing, similar response was detected with Tiwala
12 subjected to the first and second planting. Furthermore, Manchuria from the first and
second planting and Tiwala 8 from the third and fourth planting also exhibited similar 100-
fresh pod weight. In terms of the 100-dry pod weight, Tiwala 12 grown under the first
planting outperformed the rest unlike the 100-fresh pod weight which exhibited the best
performance by Ryokko sown in the second planting. Statistically similar 100-dry pod
weight were measured in second planting’s Tiwala 12 and Ryokko grown under the third
and fourth sowing. Manchuria from the first and second planting and Tiwala 8 subjected
to the third and fourth planting also recorded similar 100-dry pod weight which was also
evident in the 100-fresh pod weight measurements. It can be observed from both 100-fresh
and dry pod weight that overall, the measurements covering the first, third, and fourth
planting significantly decreased as compared to the first planting.

The resulting weight of 100 pods is simply a function of the corresponding
dimensions of pods such as length, width, and thickness measurements. Soybean plants
which produce pods with larger size tend to have better 100-pod weight and it is one of the
yield parameters which determine the yield. However, soybean yield relies not only to pod
size and 100-pod weight mainly but also to the amount of pod production in a plant. In this
study, the largest pod measurements and 100-pod weight were recorded in Ryokko but it
was outperformed by the other four varieties in terms of the number of pods plant", thus,
Ryokko gained the lowest pod weight plant”.

Frank and Fehr (1981) highlighted in their set of studies regarding soybean yield as

associated to pod dimensions and pod weight that pods tend to achieve maximum length


and width ranging from 15 to 20 days after pollination, although, pod dimensions can be
further improved when there is an optimum amount of rainfall that overlaps the pod
development and the seed-filling stage. A significant increase in rainfall can also improve
the 100-seed weight since this trait is dependent on pod size. This parameter is an important
consideration as far as vegetable soybean yield is concerned as it is harvested on the green
pod stage. Li et al. (2003) also highlighted that the weight of 100 seeds can reach its

maximum value within 35 to 55 days after flowering.

100-fresh pod weight (g) —=6=GDD

240 b a 2000
& 220 1800
= 200 1600
Zz 180 1e)
aie 1400 2
= 140 k yk 1200
isn] 120 rr, p 1000 &
© 100 Y Y a LS
f= Y Y soo &
Bz 80 Y Y 600 &
iB 60 Y gy a
© 40 g Y 400 9
x 20 Y Z 200
Ro 0
wy
E SSS x &” S (SHIH SEES S Ss Ss os
ss ore ey AY ye? oy oy rs. RK
Hg PPG SW” FPS es PS Rs Fs

LP SS SPP s TPS S © Oe <

PLANTING DATE X VARIETY

Figure 35. 100-fresh pod weight (g) of five soybean varieties as influenced by different
planting dates and the growing degree days accumulated during its growth period


100-dry pod weight (g) —=5==GDD

a 2
=” b z 2000
> 0 “A 1800
es ; : 1600 wy
z @ x 1400 2
a0 fg f off 1200 &
= 40 Y Z hg, . 1000 &
an y y :
B 30 Y Y Y 800 <
2 Y Y g 600 &
a2 Y Z| YA a
9 Y Y Y 400 9
> 10 Y Y g 200
fat Y Y Y
a 0 0
2 > ey p y
s * Ss, & SS SS & SS Ss oo SS § ESS 8

o RY \ ~ vy e s
fee oe KS PRS r Re OS oe SPS

« wes ras s ass

PLANTING DATE X VARIETY

Figure 36. 100-dry pod weight (g) of five soybean varieties as influenced by different
planting dates and the growing degree days accumulated during its growth period

Percentage of the Number of Seeds Pod! (%)

The number of seeds per pod is one of the relevant yield-determining characters
that dictates the marketability and profitability of vegetable soybeans. Konovsky et. al.
(1994) reported that Grade A vegetable soybean requires 90% while Shanmugasundaram
et al., (1991) requires 75% of the pods harvested to be containing more than two seeds per
pod and the number of pods with only one seed inside should strictly be below 10% of the
amount of pods produced. These standards are generally preferred and acquire premium
prices in the Asian markets (Shanmugasundaram et al., 1991).

Highly significant interaction between planting date and variety as well as the main

effect of variety was detected in soybean plants in terms of the percentage of four-seeded


pods (Appendix F). However, planting date did not significantly influence the percentage
of pods containing four seeds. Tiwala 12 obtained the highest percentage of four-seeded
pods which was significantly higher than how much Manchuria produced across all the
sowing dates. This trait is an important consideration with respect to yield since an increase
in the number of pods which contain 4 seeds will manifest an increase in pod length, pod
weight plant’', seed weight plant’, daily production rate, and pod and sed yield. Essentially,
having 4-seeded pods in soybean harvest means having more marketable pods as those

with two or more seeds.

—==Gpp
a 1800
SY 1600 ga
\ 1400 2
N 1200 &
b N P S
. N Y 1000 es
G N Y 00 &
g N Z 600 Q
Y \ g 400 ©
Y N ceocHY cece 2

PLANTING DATE X VARIETY

Figure 37. Percentage of four-seeded pods (%) of five soybean varieties as influenced by
different planting dates and the growing degree days accumulated during its growth period


Highly significant differences at p < 0.01 in terms of the percentage of three-seeded
pods were accounted among the soybean varieties grown as well as across the planting
dates employed in this study, whereas their corresponding interaction showed no
significance effect (Appendix F). Further analysis using Tukey’s multiple range test of
comparing the varieties revealed that Tiwala 12 (77 to 87.5%) and Tiwala 8 (76.5 to
83.75%) similarly had the highest percentage of three-seeded pods. In addition, Manchuria,
Tudela, and Ryokko exhibited significantly lower percentage of three-seeded pods
compared to Tiwala 12 and Tiwala 8. In terms of the percentage of pods containing three
seeds as observed in the four planting dates, the first and second planting recorded
statistically similar best response and consequently showed a significant decline when
soybean plants were grown under the third and fourth planting. Given the measurements
based on the percentage of pods containing three and four seeds, it was assessed that
Manchuria produced a number of three-seeded pods that was 23.14 times greater than its
four-seeded pods while Tiwala 12 obtained 19.44 times higher three-seeded pods compared
to its four-seeded pods. Only Tiwala 12 and Manchuria produced four-seeded pods among
the varieties. Percentage of 3-seeded pods serves as a crucial yield characteristic with
respect to yield since an increase in the number of pods which contain three seeds tends to
accordingly increase pod weight plant", seed weight plant", daily production rate, and pod
and seed yield as well as the number of marketable pods characterized as those pods with
more than two seeds. Most favorable yields are dependent on higher percentage and
production of two and three-seeded pods rationally due to higher contributions in the final

yield of pods with higher pod weight and size measurements. Based on the results, it can


be implied that three-seeded pods prevailed among all number of seeds per pod since
among Manchuria (71 to 75%), Tiwala 12 (77 to 87.5%), Tiwala 8 (76.5 to 83.75%), and
Tudela (63 to 65.5%), majority of the pods contained three seeds. Higher percentage of
three-seeded pods is a favorable trait targeted by growers and consumers as reported by
Kelley and Sanchez (2005), Mebrahtu and Devine (2008), and Montri et al. (2006)
featuring preference of consumers in different markets of large-seeded beans with two or
more beans per pod, bright, green-colored pods, and they tend to purchase the beans that
are still intact with pods. Guo (2002) revealed that the production of lower three-seeded
pods by later maturing varieties was due to the extended exposure to extremely high heat
temperature for an extended period, thus, longer time of exposure to heat stress-conforming
environment. These events potentially resulted to slowing down of seed development and
seed abortion between R1 and RS stage, thus, generating fewer three-seeded pods.


PERCENTAGE OF 3-SEEDED PODS (%)

Ryokko Manchuria Tiwala 12 Tiwala 8
VARIETY

Figure 38. Percentage of three-seeded pods of five soybean varieties under different
planting dates (2021) grown in Santa Maria, Laguna.


=
B68
2 a 2
2 66
a
a b
2 64
5 c
m 62
<
y
& 60
Ss)
a
A. 58
March Sth March 25th April 15th May 6th

PLANTING DATE
Figure 39. Percentage of three-seeded pods under four planting dates (2021) of five
soybean varieties grown in Santa Maria, Laguna.

The interaction between planting date and variety and mainly variety significantly
affected the number of seeds per pod in terms of the percentage of two-seeded pods at 1%
level of probability, however, ANOVA showed that planting date did not significantly
affect this soybean pod characteristic. Among all observations, Ryokko tallied a
significantly large difference of percentage of two-seeded pods compared to the other
varieties across all planting dates, although across the four plantings, Ryokko recorded
statistically similar response. For Manchuria, Tiwala 12, and Tiwala 8, similar percentage
of two-seeded pods were also accounted for all sowing dates.

The percentage of 2-seeded pods is an integral component of soybean yield since
most favorable yields are dependent on higher percentage and production of two and three-
seeded pods rationally due to higher contributions in the final yield of pods with higher

pod weight and size measurements. Pods that contain two seeds is also one of the major


preference factors of consumers and processors of vegetable soybean as Kelley and
Sanchez (2005), Mebrahtu and Devine (2008), and Montri et al. (2006) reported that
consumers prefer large-seeded beans with two or more beans per pod, bright green-colored
pods, and they tend to purchase the beans that are still intact with pods. Although Ryokko
recorded a large gap of percentage difference, it is worth to consider that this parameter is
expressed only in percentage and does not directly imply that other varieties are inferior
from Ryokko in terms of pod production and their ability to establish the vegetative growth,
to optimize biomass production, and to undergo high dry matter accumulation.

Zhang et al. (2010) presented in their findings that the reduction in marketable pod
yield of edamame by 34 to 55 kg ha"'d"! due to delayed planting date can be attributed to
the resulting lower number and percentage of two-seeded and three-seeded pods. With the
prevailing contribution of three- and two-seeded pods in determining final yield, it can be
proposed that genotypes which produce higher number and percentage of three- and two-
seeded pods are conferred with advantage especially when sowing is delayed.

Ogles et al. (2016) reported that late maturing varieties usually produce higher
percentage of two-seeded pods compared to early maturing varieties. Early maturing
genotypes tend to initiate the onset of flowering prematurely when exposed to suboptimal
photoperiod, thus, minimizing the photosynthetic capacity of the plant since vegetative
phase is shortened. Further consequences of premature flowering include the significant
decline in seed weight and seed number per pod due to limited photosynthates that are
meant for the physiological development of pods and seeds simultaneously as reported by

Board and Hall (1984) and Kantolic and Slafer (2001).


= Percentage of two-seeded pods (%)  ——GDD
1S 8 A a a 2000
= 1800
A 60 1600
S) Q
is 1400 2
Bas 1200 &
S
a 1000 =
H 30 soo &
a
5 600 8
als 400
g 200
Eo o:
fa DDD DD MV MVS MV MVPS? SSP DP ch p
gS SSS OS SIS SS SES oS es So oS
eo nie os 7 NN 2 a ¥ *y)
aS FPL IMLS PPM FS KLIS ss Pv
Was Ss Pyrase s° yas Pers

PLANTING DATE X VARIETY

Figure 40. Percentage of two-seeded pods (%) of five soybean varieties as influenced by
different planting dates and the growing degree days accumulated during its growth period

The percentage of one-seeded pods was significantly influenced by the planting
date by variety interaction at probability level of 1% (Appendix F). Figure 41 revealed that
Manchuria and Tudela grown under the third and fourth planting produced the highest
number and percentage of pods with only one seed, while the response on this trait
significantly declined during the first and second planting for all the test varieties including
Ryokko and Tiwala subjected to the third and fourth planting.

Based on the analysis of four-, three-, two-, and one-seeded pods, all of the
experimental plots rendered a percentage of two- or more seeded pods that was greater than
75%. However, Konovsky et. al. (1994) set a more strict standard for Grade A edamame
percentage of two- or more seeded pods which requires 90% as well as setting the number

of pods with only one seed strictly to less than 10%. Using this stricter criteria, it can be


implied from the observartions that Manchuria (88%) and Tudela (87%) under April 15%
planting and May 6'" -grown Manchuria (87.75%), Tiwala 8 (89.75%) and Tudela
(86.25%) exhibited less than 90% two- or more seeded pods. Moreoever, Manchuria (12
and 12.25%, respectively), Tiwala 8 (10.25%), and Tudela (13 and 13.75%, respectively)
planted during PD3 and PD4 produced more than 10% pods with only one seed inside the
pod cavity. The rest of the experimental plots produced more than 10% one-seeded pods.
Higher percentage of one-seeded pods is undesirable for vegetable soybean production in
terms of the resultant yield since it can minimize the pod length, 100-pod weight, pod

weight plant’, and harvest index.

== Percentage of one-seeded pods (%)  —==—GDD

Is a 2000

GDD AT R6 STAGE

°
RM =
Wl >

Ss i S = Os SSMS s S CLES SS cs Pos

4PERCENTAGE OF 1-SEEDED PODS (%)

PF gp? B® BG NY gy? VB VG NY gv? VP y_ GP WY so?”
FF RS Rea ¥ Fo FF Fw WV
ve es Fs or eS es PF OS es Sy

PLANTING DATE X VARIETY

Figure 41. Percentage of one-seeded pods (%) of five soybean varieties as influenced by
different planting dates and the growing degree days accumulated during its growth period


Pods containing two, three, and four fully developed seeds were accounted in five
soybean varieties and its response to different planting dates was presented in Figure 42
since the combination of these number of seeds per pod represents the amount of
marketable or standard pods as set by Shanmugasundaram et al. (1991). The result of the
combined analysis of variance revealed that the interaction between planting date and
variety significantly affected the percentage of four-, three-, and two-seeded pods at p <
0.01. Among all observations, Tiwala 12 planted during PD1 and PD2 rendered the most
desirable percentage of four-, three-, and two-seeded pods (96.25%) while Tudela grown
under PD3 and PD4 got the lowest response with 87 and 86.25%, respectively. Considering
the interaction between sowing date and variety, the highest percentage of four-, three-,
and two-seeded pods were similarly exhibited by Ryokko, Tiwala 12 and Tiwala 8 grown
under the first and second planting as well as Tiwala 12 both sown in the third and fourth

planting and the rest were significantly lower than the aforementioned experimental plots.

S Percentage of four-, three-, and two-seeded pods (%) <@==GDD

Z 100 2000

So 98 1800 ,,,
5 9% a gh A 1600 g
B94 S 1400 &
B92 Y Z b 1200 2
2 90 G g 1000 &
oes =
g g g be 800 &
o 8% y Y 600 A
Go 84 gy Y 400 a
z= 2 Y Y 200 9
& 80 0

1S}

Z

ey

EI

PLANTING DATE X VARIETY

Figure 42. Percentage of four-, three-, and two-seeded pods (%) of five soybean varieties
as influenced by different planting dates and GDD accumulated during its growth period


Mondal et al. (2011) and Al-Hadi (2017) reported that higher seed yield were
significantly correlated to the higher number of pods plant! and seeds pod', and pod
weight. Soybean plants tend to produce pods with two or more seeds when the phenological
cycle is longer and higher accumulated growing degree days is acquired by the crop.
Mukhekar et al. (2004) revealed that yield traits including percentage of two or more-
seeded pods and number of pods plant’! exhibited the highest contribution to the seed yield
and can be viewed as highly reliable soybean yield determinants.

According to Carson (2011), consumers in Japan are keenly selective in vegetable
soybean characters and they are recorded as a net fresh green pod exporter in the world.
They prefer beany flavor large-seeded pods which contain at least two seeds per pod.

Kelley and Sanchez (2005), Mebrahtu and Devine (2008), and Montri et al. (2006)
also highlighted that desirable vegetable soybeans should possess flowery flavored-large-
seeded pods with bright green color and marketed as fresh green beans, fresh pods still
attached to the stem and as frozen green beans (Kelley and Sanchez, 2005; Mebrahtu and
Devine, 2008; Montri et al., 2006). One-seeded pods are usuall have flat pods since only a
single seed occupies the entire pod, thus, making it substandard.

Ogles et al. (2016) reported that late maturing varieties usually produce higher
percentage of two-seeded pods compared to early maturing varieties. Early maturing
genotypes tend to initiate the onset of flowering prematurely when exposed to suboptimal
photoperiod, thus, minimizing the photosynthetic capacity of the plant since vegetative
phase is shortened. Further consequences of premature flowering include the significant

decline in seed weight and seed number per pod due to limited photosynthates that are


meant for the physiological development of pods and seeds simultaneously as reported by
Board and Hall (1984) and Kantolic and Slafer (2001). On the other hand, early maturing
varieties tend to generate higher percentage of 3-seeded pods than late maturing varieties.
This claim was proved by the findings of Kantolic and Slafer (2001) stating that there was
a significant negative correlation between the percentage of 3-seeded pods and days to full-
seed stage (R6).

According to the accounts of Van Roekel (2016) in optimizing soybean yields, seed
number is primarily determined by the amount of assimilates processed and allocated to
the seeds between R1 (onset of flowering) and RS stage (beginning of seed development)
divided by the minimum amount of photosynthate adequately required to prevent the
abortion of a single seed. Pod formation and abortion of blooms relies upon the supply of
photosynthates to comply with the demand of the developing pod and seeds
simultaneously. The effect of environmental conditions now plays a vital role in
determination of seed number, allocation of photosynthates, and pod development and
production especially when favorable growth conditions coinciding with this timeframe
(RI to RS stage) is satisfied. In soybean production, the photosynthates serve as the source
wherein at favorable set of growth conditions potentially, in turn generates higher yield
conforming the sink.

Producing pods which contain four seeds is not always at the advantageous side of
soybean production as Van Roekel (2016) also reported that varieties recording more seeds
per pod particularly more 4-seeded pods tend to require higher photosynthates per pod to

allow efficient pod development. In return, the soybean plant tends to bear fewer number


of pods due to increased allocation of assimilates in the relatively high number of 4-seeded
pods. Nevertheless, Van Roekel (2016) found out that amidst producing lower number of
pods, the final number of seeds per unit area, all pods in a plant combined, is approximately
similar with the same plant population.

Carter (1974) reported that as planting date was delayed, soybean plants develop
fewer nodes, fewer pods per plant, fewer seeds per pod and smaller seed size. Suboptimal
daylengths and accumulated GDD resulted to the reduction in vegetative growth, thereby
reducing the photosynthetic area required to nourish the developing seed. Thus, minimizing
and slowing down the production of seeds per pod and per entire plant basis. Since there
was inadequate processed assimilates in the seed, it leads to restricted seed weight and
number of seeds per pod as reported by Kantolic and Slafer (2001).

The number of seeds per pod aids in the marketability of the harvested pods.
Nevertheless, it is difficult to focus on just the percentage of pods containing four, three,
two, or one seeds and combination of marketable number of seeds in a pod. Instead of
considering just one component of seed number, it is more sensible to account these yield
components as the total number of seeds per unit area as well as the total number of pods
to more efficiently quantify soybean yield. Soybean plants tend to adjust its photosynthate
allocation process which dictates its yield potential depending on the environmental
growing conditions present. Seed number determination (per unit area) can be
comprehensively understood as a subset of the ability of the crop to support its organs and

in this case, it is to support certain amount of seeds in a plant.


Seed Length and Width (mm)

Van Roekel (2016) reported that seed size is a function of the rate of seed growth
and the length of time it takes the seed to undergo full-seed development as it occupies the
pod cavity and reach the R6 stage for biomass accumulation and partitioning by crossing
reproductive processes such as blooming commencement, pod development, beginning of
seed development and pod-filling. Seed growth is highly associated to seed size dimension
such as length and width. It is important to quantify these seed characteristics since it
contributes in determining the final soybean yield and in the marketability of the vegetable
soybean based on certain standards in terms of seed size.

A significant interaction was detected on the seed length between the planting dates
and varieties as presented in Appendix D. The seed length was significantly lower in the
first, third, and fourth planting date (statistically similar response) compared to those sown
during the second planting for all the varieties (Figure 43). Significantly longer seeds were
produced in the second planting and Ryokko generated significantly higher seed length
than the other varieties, whereas, planting on May 6" generally obtained the shortest seeds.

Seed width, on the other hand, was also significantly affected by the interaction of
planting date and variety at p < 0.01 (Appendix D). Upon comparison of varieties, it can
be reported that Ryokko obtained the highest seed width ranging from 10.775 to 12.075
while Tudela obtained the narrowest seed measurement (6.725 to 7.05 mm). Ryokko and
Tiwala 8 exhibited significantly bigger seeds in width in the second planting and

significantly declined when plants were subjected to the first, third, and last planting while


the seeds produced from Manchuria, Tiwala 12, and Tudela were measured with similar
width across all the timing of sowing.

In the study conducted by Berger-Doyle (2014), it was highlighted that seed size in
terms of length and width was highly heritable (r = 0.89) ranging from r = 0.73 to 0.95.
This heritability index indicated that seed size is mainly genetically determined, however,
environmental conditions might still influence the resulting seed size. Gupta et al. (1981)
also reported heritability index in soybean seed size ranging from r = 0.42 to 0.81.
Monitoring desirable characters in legumes such as seed size with high heritability can be
a useful tool in soybean breeding to allow effective selection of lines which are based on
phenotypic parameters even without using more advanced breeding technologies such as
molecular markers. Cober et al. (1997) found out that mean estimated heritability index of
several soybean genotypes ranged between 26 to 50% in terms of seed sizes. Although
significant heritability in seed weight was reported from the previous findings, Kilen
(1980) revealed that paternal seed size showed no significant changes in the final seed size
measurements of the offspring. The genes manipulating the final seed size of soybean
genotypes upon full-seed phase are not yet fully deciphered, but Tuteja and Vodkin et al.
(2008) studied the potential impact of certain genes conforming on seed coat and trichrome
pigmentation on the resulting seed weight measurement in a smaller scale and in a larger
unit area.

Alternatively, LeRoy et al. (1991) detected a significant genetic by environment
interaction effect on the resulting seed size of soybean. Stresses dealing with moisture level

in the soil brought by the corresponding rainfall amounts exhibited its largest impact during


seed-fill phase from seed development to seed-filling of pod cavity. Drought stress resulted
to lower seed size since the seeds were unable or restricted to acquire adequate amount of
water which led to a decline in photosynthetic output as reported by Roach and Wulff
(1987). This decline in photosynthates is most probably due to the restricted amount of
water which is a crucial reactant in the process of photosynthesis. Additionally, the
resulting decrease in seed weight per unit area, seed abortion, lower individual seed weight,
lower number of seeds per unit area, and seed yield can be an outcome of the inhibition
and disorder of processes namely carboxylation and remobilization of photosynthetic
products coinciding the reproductive phase from R1 to R6 stage. (Egli & Yu, 1991).

Similarly, Hurburgh (2001) reported that the amount of precipitation acquired by
the soybean plant in the reproductive phase particularly from the onset of flowering to the
full-seed development produced seeds with larger size measurements. Pedersen and Lauer
(2004) and Cox et al. (2008) accounted that there is no significant differences in terms of
seed length and width as affected by different sowing dates. Contrarily, Ray et al. (2008)
and Robinson et al. (2009) reported statistically higher seed size when soybean plants were
grown in early planting dates as compared to later timing of planting.

Van Roekel (2016) highlighted that seed size is a function of the rate of seed growth
and the length of time it takes the seed to undergo full-seed development as it occupies the
pod cavity and reach the R6 stage for biomass accumulation and partitioning. Seed growth
is highly associated to seed size dimension such as length and width. Although being
genetically determined, seed growth in terms of length and width can be maximized by

exposure to favorable temperatures coinciding the reproductive phase as well as adequate


precipitation amount which can manufacture seeds with higher seed mass. This cannot be
fully optimized if there is no extension of seed-filling period. Seed number is not highly
influenced by the favorable temperatures and rainfall since these environmental conditions
primarily deal with seed growth rate involving increment of seed size and not in terms of
number. Seed size can be negatively affected by an extreme shortage in rainfall and
irrigation water connoting drought stress and extremely high temperature and extended
exposure to this initiating heat stress which potentially inhibits the extension of seed-filling
phase. Thus, lowering seed size and seed yield.

A developing seed manifests its photosynthetic demand with respect to its growth
rate. In this study, larger-seeded varieties such as Ryokko and Tiwala 12 hypothetically
exhibited more efficient rates of seed growth and assimilate requirement in order to keep
the seeds from possible abortion of higher number of flowers. It is worth noting that if
large-seeded genotypes are subjected to equal photosynthetic rates and reproductive
partitioning, it can still generate similar quantities of final total seed weight as compared
to smaller-seeded genotypes. However, one of the crucial consequences is the production
of lower number of seeds per unit area. Late planting dates, as accounted by Egli and
Bruening (2000), were studied to be causing decline in reproductive nodes and lesser pods.
Yet, the length of seed filling stage was not affected or reduced, thus, fewer seeds with a

relatively larger size were produced given sufficient leaf area for light interception.


[=5eed length (mm) —=GDD

SEED LENGTH (mm)
S

GDD AT R6 STAGE

VV VV DDD DD a ok
LOM ILM NID’ HD ws OP
CORRE ORR URC OR RCS
FL PPT SPL I LEO LS

ES wre < wes

PLANTING DATE X VARIETY

Figure 43. Seed length (mm) of five soybean varieties as influenced by different planting
dates and the growing degree days accumulated during its growth period

Seed width (mm) —s=GDD

SEED WIDTH (mm)
S
s

GDD AT R6 STAGE

RIN SS NA 6
IEE SS =
ME SSS >
RQ

SDS DDS DS DV NV DV SV DV PDP DPD SP s
SHPMHOM IK ISIS SSSSESPES
FEE ESE EPS Seo SOOO:
G © G
Soe FSH Re™ FESS

ay
&,

PLANTING DATE X VARIETY

Figure 44. Seed width (mm) of five soybean varieties as influenced by different planting
dates and the growing degree days accumulated during its growth period


Fresh and Dry Seed Weight Plant (g)

Fresh and dry seed weight plant “' were significantly affected by different planting
dates employed in the study, test varieties, and the corresponding interaction between these
factors at p < 0.01 as shown in Figure 45 and 46. The highest fresh and dry seed weight
plant! was exhibited by Tudela followed by Tiwala 8 grown in the second planting.
Consistent to all the varieties tested, significant decline in fresh and dry seed weight plant
' were observed in the first, third, and fourth sowing compared to the second planting.
Among the varieties, Ryokko and Tiwala 12 produced the lowest amount of seeds even
though these varieties recorded the best seed length and width with respect to the other
varieties. Tudela, Tiwala 8 and Manchuria outperformed Ryokko and Tiwala 12 in terms
of the number of pods plant”! , hence, generating a higher total seed weight plant’.

Seed weight plant” results can be attributed to the number of pods plant’! as well
as the seed length and width since seed weight is a function of the number of pods in a
plant and seed size. The relationship of the number of pods per plant, seed length, seed
width, and fresh pod weight plant, number of nodes and plant height at R6 stage to the
fresh seed weight plant"! of the varieties used in this study grown under different planting
dates was analyzed using Pearson correlation analysis. A strongly positive significant
correlation (0.8842) at p < 0.01 between number of pods plant! and fresh seed weight
plant! was detected. Fresh seed weight plant' was found to have a weak negative
association (-0.4467) with seed length. Fresh seed weight plant’! was also associated with
seed width and detected a moderately negative relationship (-0.5493). In terms of fresh pod

weight and number of nodes, strongly positive correlation (0.978 and 0.8446, respectively)


was computed with association to fresh seed weight plant’. Plant height at R6 stage and
days to harvesting showed a strongly positive correlation (0.8545 and 0.9034, respectively)
with fresh seed weight plant’'. Growing degree days accumulated at R6 stage and R1 to R6
stage was also tested and found a strongly positive correlation of 0.8858 and 0.7707,

respectively with fresh seed weight plant’.

Fresh seed weight plant -1 (g) «<GDD
a


‘ : 2

f 4 <

de 1200

6 ef Chad

50 y) - BI
20 N N

Ss vy PS
> as s OSS & & is S Se & SSS & Ss
°

eS & Se Vg Ow = OM ee oN oO"
FF a0 DP o> ¥ ¥. > oy ¥ cS J ¥
roy oS LS cA Peas ow Oe ° es Ry Lees

PLANTING DATE X VARIETY

Figure 45. Fresh seed weight plant“! (g) of five soybean varieties as influenced by different
planting dates and the growing degree days accumulated during its growth period


[=Dry seed weight plant-1 (g) —#—GDD
55 a 2000

GDD AT R6 STAGE

SSS

MESSY =
WMA >

ous
a -

DRY SEED WEIGHT PLANT * (g)
BRS

oy a oY OY OY OV OY OV
LE OE ES ODS
VO sor or or MY ®
FF er VL MS or eS
PF PP PF Pg KF gS
Merah Sel sera Ses
PLANTING DATE X VARIETY

Figure 46. Dry seed weight plant“! (g) of five soybean varieties as influenced by different
planting dates and the growing degree days accumulated during its growth period

100-Fresh and Dry Seed Weight (g)

Highly significant interaction between planting date and variety was measured in
terms of the 100-fresh and dry seed weight at p < 0.01 (Appendix G). Among all
observations, the highest 100-fresh and dry seed weight was measured in Ryokko grown
under the second planting and Tiwala 12 subjected to the first planting, respectively,
whereas, the lowest measurement was accounted in Tudela grown under May 6" planting.
Significantly higher fresh and dry 100-seed weight was accounted in the second planting
for all the varieties compared to the first, third, and fourth planting except in Tiwala 12
grown under the first planting which exhibited a significantly higher 100-dry seed weight

than the succeeding plantings.


Al-Hadi (2017) reported that soybean varieties which produce seeds with smaller
seed size exhibit lower seed weight, yet consequently achieve relatively higher seed yield
per unit area than genotypes with higher seed seize and seed weight. This claim can be
explained by the varieties in this study which recorded higher 100-seed weight, however,
lower number of pods plant! was generated. This is congruent with the relatively lower
fresh and dry seed yield achieved by Ryokko which acquired the highest 100-fresh seed
weight (ranging from 66.9 to 85.625 g) and 100-dry seed weight amounting within 22.9 to
33.825 g as well as with Tiwala 12 which obtained the second highest 100- fresh seed
weight (ranging from 35.725 to 45.575 g) and 100-dry seed weight which amounted to a
range of 14.4 to 18.2 g.

Pedersen and Lauer (2004) highlighted in their study that earlier and optimum
timing of sowing in soybean obtained longer duration of growth which results to a relative
higher tendency to accumulate assimilates as the main determinants of increase in mean
seed weight as compared to late sowing dates. Optimum planting date and lengthier growth
period provides more favorable amount of growing degree units and climatic input such
temperature and rainfall to the plants. The initial increment in seed weight during seed
developmental processes is mainly affected by the dry mass accumulation and allocation
of photosynthates while the significant decrease in seed weight as it approaches the end of
reproductive stage and until maturation is attributed to the eventual reduction in seed
moisture. Any increase in seed weight confers an increase in 100-seed weight which was
also reported by Hamzeh et al. (2004) and Shafigh et al. (2006) where 1000-seed weight

of soybean genotypes varied significantly due to variations in seed size. Khan et al. (2007)


also reported that 1000-seed weight of soybean decreased when grown under late planting
date due to significant decline in photoperiod and temperature which led to minimizing the
period of seed-filling process

Mondal et al. (2011) reported that higher seed yield was significantly correlated to
the seed size, pod weight, higher number of pods plant! and number of seeds pod",
however it is negatively associated to 100-seed weight. Contrarily, Guo (2002) found out
that 100-green seed weight was significantly correlated with pod yield and can be utilized
as a selection tool in optimizing vegetable soybean yield. These set of findings probably
differed because of the differences in the genotypes studied. In the study of Mondal et al.
(2011), mixed large-seeded and small-seeded genotypes were under observation while Guo
(2002) evaluated only vegetable type of soybeans which are large-seeded varieties. Mondal
et al. (2011) potentially observed negative association of 100-seed weight and seed yield
since the lower pod and seed production inherent trait of vegetable soybean that leads to
lower final yield might affected the correlation analysis due to mixed genotypes used,
although it has higher 100-fresh seed weight than grain varieties. On the other hand, Guo
(2002) clearly detected strong positive correlation of 100-seed weight and seed yield since
only vegetable soybeans which are large-seeded genotypes are studied, thus, having less
prone to variations in the correlation analysis. Hence, any amount of increase in 100-fresh
seed weight leads to an increase in final yield as well. Guo (2002) added that higher 100-
fresh seed weight is inherent in early maturing genotypes such as Ryokko in this study.
Vegetable soybean genotypes tend to produce higher 100-seed weight since late maturing

genotypes undergo extremely high temperature stress under an extensive exposure during


the reproductive phase. Contrarily, early maturing genotypes can avoid severe heat stress
especially during seed-filling stage from seed development to full occupation of seeds in
the pod cavity, hence, producing higher 100-fresh weight derived from higher individual
fresh seed mass. It is essential to highlight that the weight of 100 seeds tend to reach its
maximum measurement from 35 to 55 days after flowering (Li et al., 2003).

Hundred-seed weight is a yield trait which can be directly affected by seed size in
terms of length and width since this trait is simply the totality of 100 individual seed mass.
The extent of the final seed yield is not always dependent on the recorded 100-seed weight
since the percentage of 2 or more-seeded pods, number of pods plant’, and seed weight
plant’! exhibited the highest contribution to the seed yield and can be viewed as highly
reliable soybean yield determinants as reported by Mukhekar et al. (2004). The association
of 100-seed weight in determining yield could be disadvantageous and ineffective if the
research involves different genotypes which have varying phenological, morpho-
physiological, and yield attributes.

Hatfield et al. (2011) reported that temperatures exceeding 30°C particularly during
the reproductive phases particularly between R1 to R6 stage exhibit detrimental effects on
pollen viability which leads to seed abortion and seed number decline as well as seed
weight which directly influences 100-seed weight measurement.

A developing seed manifests its photosynthetic demand with respect to its growth
rate. In this study, larger-seeded varieties such as Ryokko and Tiwala 12 hypothetically
exhibited more efficient rates of seed growth and assimilate requirement in order to keep

the seeds from possible abortion of higher number of flowers. It is worth noting that if


large-seeded genotypes are subjected to equal photosynthetic rates and reproductive
partitioning, it can still generate similar quantities of final total seed weight as compared
to smaller-seeded genotypes. However, one of the crucial consequences is the production
of lower number of seeds per unit area. Late planting dates, as accounted by Egli and
Bruening (2000), were studied to be causing decline in reproductive nodes and lesser pods.
Yet, the length of seed filling stage was not affected or reduced, thus, fewer seeds with a

relatively larger size were produced given sufficient leaf area for light interception.

g
140 1 m a
120 7 ? 1000 2
100 G G ry 800
Y g 600 @
ee Y Y 400 8
40 Y Y
20 Y g 200

100-FRESH POD WEIGHT PLANT * (g)
s

ND D DDS VD VV VDDD DDD wa
ESEEPEESS SSS SESE SS Ruy 8 Pen
eg? ee coe ery RS RRS »
> er < x > e a
wa Se Ry FPS ee PPK
PLANTING DATE X VARIETY

Figure 47. 100-fresh seed weight (g) of five soybean varieties as influenced by different
planting dates and the growing degree days accumulated during its growth period


100-dry seed weight (g) —#=GDD

Yh
m
n

SDDS DS SD DV SV VD DDD SD? > ‘a
PPA PP LMM INN LN OLS’ L = ss es

1 2
ss

a
N
\


wv

s
$

y
S

GDD AT R6 STAGE

S

RSS

IN
MESS —-

100-DRY POD WEIGHT PLANT “ (g)
° s :

9” ae” WV” 3@ oy @” 0" 2" AY oO” 2” AY 2
8" oY oF FP SS OM y oF FP FS OS
F FHF F FM PKI SK OL FFE SS

BQ PP PS FF FS EF PULP OS SE SKS FS
ws S we 4 ES < wee ae

PLANTING DATE X VARIETY

Figure 48. 100-dry seed weight (g) of five soybean varieties as influenced by different
planting dates and the growing degree days accumulated during its growth period

Yield

a. Fresh and Dry Pod Yield (kg ha")

There was a significant interaction between planting date and variety that was
measured in the resulting fresh and dry pod yield at p < 0.01 (Appendix H). Among all
observations in the study, Tudela grown under the second planting achieved the highest
fresh and dry pod yield which amounted to 29951 and 9584 kg ha", respectively, whereas
Ryokko sown in the fourth planting generated the lowest yield (4525 and 1549 kg ha",

respectively). Significant declines were accounted in the third and fourth planting as well


as those subjected to the first planting in terms of both the fresh and dry pod yield compared
to those soybean plants sown in the second planting consistently for all the varieties tested.
Furthermore, the first sowing generated yields that were significantly higher than the last
two batches of sowing which produced statistically similar amounts of yield for all the
genotypes.

In terms of the fresh pod yield as shown in Figure 49, it is also worth noting the
extent of the reductions in yield across the planting dates. When dealing with the
performance of Tudela, March 25" (PD2) produced a fresh pod yield that was 1.34 times
higher than March 5" (25.51% reduction), 1.54 times greater than April 15 (35.31%
reduction), and 1.53 times as many as May 6" (34.58% reduction). With respect to the
response of Tiwala 8, March 25" (PD2) produced a fresh pod yield that was 1.40 times
higher than March 5" (28.66% decrease), 1.624 times greater than April 15" (38.43%
decrease), and 1.621 times as many as May 6" (38.32% decline). In the case of Manchuria,
March 25" (PD2) produced a fresh pod yield that was 131.18% higher than March 5“
(23.77% decline), 143.77% greater than April 15" (30.44% decline), and 158.59% as many
as May 6" (36.94% decline). With regards to the performance of Tiwala 12, March 25"
(PD2) produced a fresh pod yield that was 143.34% higher than March 5" (30.23%
difference), 199.15% greater than April 15 (49.79% difference), and 211.63% as many as
May 6" (52.75% decline). Referring to Ryokko, March 25" (PD2) produced a fresh pod
yield that was 1.72 times higher than March 5 (42.03% decline), 2.02 times greater than

April 15" (50.38% reduction), and 2.13 times as many as May 6" (53.01% decline).


Yield reductions were also accounted in the dry pod yield across sowing dates as
presented in Figure 50. Concerning the yield performance of Tudela, March 25 (PD2)
produced a dry pod yield that was 1.34 times higher than March 5" (25.27% reduction),
1.53 times greater than April 15" (34.81% reduction), and 1.51 times as many as May 6"
(33.97% reduction). With respect to the yield response of Tiwala 8 to different sowing
dates, March 25" (PD2) produced a dry pod yield that was 1.41 times higher than March
5" (29.21% reduction), 1.62 times greater than April 15" (38.43% reduction), and 1.62
times as many as May 6" (38.32% decline). With regards to Manchuria, March 25" (PD2)
produced a dry pod yield that was 141.51% higher than March 5" (29.33% decline),
153.9% greater than April 15'* (35.02% decline), and 169.77% as many as May 6 (41.11%
decline). In terms of Tiwala 12 production, March 25" (PD2) achieved a dry pod yield that
was 123.88% higher than March 5" (19.28% decrease), 182.88% greater than April 15"
(45.32% decrease), and 204.41% as many as May 6" (51.08% decrease). Finallly for
Ryokko, March 25'" (PD2) produced a dry pod yield that was 1.46 times higher than March
5" (31.69% decrease), 1.94 times greater than April 15" (48.7% reduction), and 2.005

times as many as May 6" (50.12% decline).


[=aFresh pod yield (kg ha-1) —*—GDD
a

30000 2000
= 1800
cal 25000 @ 1600 a
g
© 20000 rs
2 e P 1200 &
= 15000 Y f 1000
Q A 7 soo &
£ 10000 - g Gh g h so 8
x= .

2 soo mY GIN g N £00 5
& Y ZN Y N 200

>. > VS SV Sv SS DS?
& Sy Ss Ly ce hy os ey Bey & & £8, PS Ss £ Ss SS
¥s Or is oe BF VF Fo” ae? wr Kos Sa

wo on s, bs e &
See Se “s aS SS s s ase eee OS

PLANTING DATE X VARIETY

Figure 49. Fresh pod yield (kg ha’') of five soybean varieties as influenced by different
planting dates and the growing degree days accumulated during its growth period

==Dry pod yield (kg ha-1)  —#=GDD

10000 a 2000
~ 9000 b 1800
= 8000 1600 py
2 7000 d 1400 2
2 6000 e 1200 &
E 5000 i! ef ft 1000 &
A 4000 G Y He 800 &
LZ 3000 Y YA As 600 @

Y hn Y Y N a
= 2000 g Z Y N 400 ©
2 1000 iy Z| | Y YN 200

0 Z AN 0

Na

‘a Vv VV PDP D> >
DIOL LSS LOLI LAOS SSP S
ESS S ee cr ESaNS ¥.3 » Ses oe oe S a

“J a >
Res aes ES Hs hs Bs Ks

PLANTING DATE X VARIETY

ws
a

Figure 50. Dry pod yield (kg ha‘') of five soybean varieties as influenced by different
planting dates and the growing degree days accumulated during its growth period


c. Fresh and Dry Seed Yield (kg ha')

The fresh and dry seed yield were significantly affected by the existing interaction
between planting date and variety at p < 0.01 (Appendix H). Comparing all the
experimental units, Tudela grown under the second planting obtained the top fresh and dry
seed yield which amounted to 17549 and 6928 kg ha’!, respectively while Ryokko planted
in PD4 generated the lowest fresh and dry seed yield (3781 and 1293 kg ha", respectively).

Significant reductions were observed in the third and fourth planting as well as
those sown in the first planting date in terms of the fresh and dry seed yield compared to
those soybean plants grown under the second planting garnering the same trend of result
for all the test varieties. In addition, the first sowing generated significantly higher fresh
and dry seed yield than the last two batches of sowing which produced statistically similar
amounts of yield for Tudela and Tiwala 12. However, the first, third, and fourth planting
produced similar fresh and dry seed yield for Ryokko, Manchuria, and Tiwala 8.

With respect to the corresponding fresh seed yield reduction of Tudela, March 25"
produced a fresh seed yield that was 1.37 times higher than March 5'* (26.89% decline),
1.56 times greater than April 15" (35.85% decline), and 1.52 times as many as May 6"
(34.33% decline). Based on the records of Tiwala 8, March 25" produced a fresh seed yield
that was 1.44 times higher than March 5" (30.78% reduction), 1.68 times greater than April
15" (40.32% reduction), and 1.67 times as many as May 6" (40.11% reduction). When it
comes to Manchuria, March 25" produced a fresh seed yield that was 135.93% higher than

March 5% (26.43% reduction), 149.58% greater than April 15 (33.15% decline), and


164.66% as many as May 6" (39.27% decline). Regarding the performance of Tiwala 12,
March 25" produced a fresh seed yield that was 125.90% higher than March 5% (20.57%
decline), 227.88% greater than April 15" (56.12%decline), and 255.64% as many as May
6" (59.11% decrease). When referring to Ryokko, March 25" produced a fresh seed yield
that was 1.65 times higher than March 5" (39.35% decline), 1.98 times greater than April
15" (49.44% decline), and 2.10 times higher than May 6" (52.44% decline).

In terms of the dry seed yield, sowing dates were compared and gauged the
succeeding yield reductions. For Tudela, March 25" produced a dry seed yield that was
1.34 times higher than March 5" (25.27% reduction), 1.53 times greater than April 15
(34.58% reduction), and 1.499 times as many as May 6" (33.28% reduction). In terms of
Tiwala 8, March 25" achieved a dry seed yield that was 1.41 times higher than March 5
(29.1% reduction), 1.62 times greater than April 15" (38.1% decline), and 1.61 times as
many as May 6" (37.85% decline). For Manchuria, March 25" recorded a dry seed yield
that was 134.87% higher than March 5" (25.85% decline), 147.8% greater than April 15"
(31.88% decline), and 162.55% as many as May 6" (38.1% decline). Regarding the
production of Tiwala 12, March 25" tallied a dry seed yield that was 124.4% higher than
March 5" (19.62% decline), 182.24% greater than April 15" (45.13% reduction), and
201.53% as many as May 6" (50.38% reduction). Lastly for Ryokko, March 25" generated
a dry seed yield that was 1.498 times higher than March 5" (33.25% reduction), 1.95 times
greater than April 15'" (48.69% reduction), and 1.97 times higher than May 6" (49.25%
reduction).

These yield reductions can be supported by the findings of Kumagai (2019) which


accounted that the decline in final yield was an outcome of limitations in the production of
nodes plant'', biomass production, dry matter accumulation, and shortened interception of
solar irradiance and lower accumulated growing degree units due to the shortened
phenological parameters and retarded canopy development from vegetative growth until
the onset of flowering. Kantolic and Slafer (2001) and Calvino et al. (2003) emphasized
that the delayed plating-driven reduction in final yield of edamame is due to: (1) a shorter
cropping period that causes overall growth decline; (2) shorter duration of exposure to
radiation and low solar radiation low accumulated growing degree units and low
temperature leading to retarded growth and lower number of pods plant”, and (3) shorter

days to flowering and full-seed stage as key phenological stages crucial in determining

growth and yield.
[=Fresh seed yield (kg ha-l) + —*=GDD
20000 2000
7%} 18000 1800
po 16000 1600
2 Q
& 14000 c 1400 =
a
= 12000 d 1200 A
= 10000 e é 1000 &
a 8000 y 800 &
a” 6000 f Y 600 Q
FA 4000 Y 400 9
= 2000 J 200


Y
ey en eS x = ss
ws ax

PLANTING DATE X VARIETY

Figure 51. Fresh seed yield (kg ha‘') of five soybean varieties as influenced by different
planting dates and the growing degree days accumulated during its growth period


Dry seed yield (kg ha-1)  ====GDD
8000 2000
= 7000 1800
"= 6000 ae e|
<° 1400 2
Q 5000 be i500
a S
= 4000 d de aed 1000 a
© 3000 Y Z 800 <
a p
B moo £4 gs BBB wm 2
Y fanny fg 400 ©
% 1000 Y Z N Z N
a 200
AG PANEREA\NE8 :
Ss
& S= ro & = KS Se es Qe Ss. S& Ss Sy S & S cS Ss
vss S ay ‘res = Cory oS Frog » eS ws ‘Ss. ey oe
SF S es F LPs FF Pes
Sas Lae S Fass we Ss

PLANTING DATE X VARIETY

Figure 52. Dry seed yield (kg ha’') of five soybean varieties as influenced by different
planting dates and the growing degree days accumulated during its growth period

The second planting generally obtained the best phenological traits and morpho-
physiological attributes which caused favorable yield response while 3" and 4" planting
date exhibited the lower pod yield. Delay in planting in this study resulted to shorter period
of flowering, shorter time from emergence to flowering, shorter duration from flowering
to full-seed stage, shorter soybean plants at R1 and R6 stage, lower number of nodes plant"
' at RI and R6 stage, shorter internode length at R1 and R6 stage, lower biomass in terms
of plant and straw weight, shorter lowest pod height, lower pod length, width, and
thickness, lower number of pods and marketable pods plant', lower percentage of
marketable pods plant", lower pod weight and 100-pod weight, lower percentage of 4-,3-,
and 2-seeded pods but higher percentage of 1-seeded pods, lower seed length and width,

lower seed weight plant’, lower 100-seed weight, and lower seed ratio. Conley (2008)


reported that the appropriate timing of planting can be determined by agrometeorological
inputs coinciding with the soybean growing season, understanding of the phenology, soil
properties, and moisture availability at the time of planting.

The findings of this study agreed with the results reported by Salem (2000)
highlighting that early and timely planting date controls soybean productivity. Faisal
(1986), Mohamed (1988) and Ali (1993) found out that significantly higher yields obtained
by the soybean plant relied on the resulting pod weight plant."' The use of different varieties
ina study will definitely generate varying responses in growth and development traits since
there is an existing genetic variability associated with plant size (height), number of nodes,
number of pods plant", seed weight plant and pod yield as supported by the accounts of
Malik et al. (2006).

Agrometeorological inputs are believed to influence crop establishment, flowering,
pod formation and development, seed formation and development coinciding pod-filling
until full-seed stage. Hundal et al. (2003) reported that timely planting, in their agro-
climatic conditions favor mid-May and early June, is implemented in order to escape the
detrimental effects of late planting that alters the growth and yield performance of different
genotypes across planting dates.

Kane et al. (1997) revealed that there is a significant correlation between total
accumulated rainfall and final soybean yield in the southern regions of United States. It
was that this association between precipitation and final yield was more pronounced in
soybean planted grown under earlier planting and recorded a significant decline when sown

later. The impact of rainfall was characterized also by Kane et al. (1997) based on the most


affected growth stage. During early and late June plantings, rainfall was more pronounced
in vegetative growth stage. For mid-May planting, rainfall was more critical during the pod
development. For late April planting, on the other hand, precipitation was highly critical
during the seed-filling phase which involves the period from seed development until full-
seed stage wherein the seeds occupied the pod cavity fully. With respect to the impact of
rainfall in soybean growth and development, Foroud et al. (1993) reported that R5 to R6
stages of soybean development are considered as the most susceptible to drought stress.
This period coincides with the seed-filling phase as drought stress conditions tend to reduce
the number of pods plant! and final yield. Thus, making precipitation during pod
development until it occupies the pod cavity fully as the main determinant for final fresh
pod and seed yield of all maturity groups as claimed by Chen and Wiatrak (2010). In
another perspective, the prevailing air temperature also influences soybean final yield.
Zhang et al. (2009) and Mishra and Cherkauer (2010) found out that a rise in temperature
from the start of seed developement (R5 stage) until full-seed point (R6 stage) eventually
decreased final seed yield, thus, making, air temperature a crucial climatic input more
pronouncedly during seed filling phase.

In the research conducted recently by Ogles, et. al. (2016), they found out that there
was pronounced reduction in yield between years and documented that this might be
associated to fluctuations in environmental conditions, more specifically atmospheric
temperature during early soybean reproductive growth. Yes, relatively higher temperatures
may positively affect soybean growth but extremely higher temperatures particularly more

than 30 °C can detrimentally affect pollen viability during the reproductive stages due to


altered pollination as reported by Hatfield et al. (2011) and Siebers et. al. (2015).

Referring to the accounts of Pedersen and Lauer (2004), it was noted that weather
is a key management factor that dictates soybean growth development and resulting pod
yield in Sennar State climatic conditions. Significant findings in this study included the
different responses of soybean plant in terms of morpho-physiological and reproductive
parameters in five different planting dates in a span of two years. Agro-meteorological data
from Sennar Research Station portrayed that the best timing for soybean production
throughout the year is between March to July. Smith (2000) highlighted that the favorable
minimum, maximum, and mean temperature for soybean growth was 10°C, 40°C, and
25°C, respectively.

Pedersen and Lauer (2004) also reported that the decline in yield is a consequence
of drought stress which is influenced by the sequential timing of the water stress and the
corresponding degree of compensation of several yield traits. Highlighted in their study is
the tendency of pod yield to be more significantly influenced by physiological changes and
disturbances from flowering to harvesting stage than the changes from germination to the
onset of flowering.

Findings of Shegro et al., (2010) revealed that there were significant differences
among different varieties sown across different planting dates, as well as their interaction
in terms of growth and yield parameters. Due to delay in planting dates, the consequences
were delayed flowering and hastened maturity, but these events depended on varieties of
soybean. Another effect of delayed planting date was reduced leaf are per plant and leaf

area index. The results indicated that different varieties and the corresponding sowing dates


brings influence on soybean growth and yield. The effect of planting dates may vary from
year to year depending on the variation in terms of environmental conditions such as
rainfall amount, intensity, and distribution.

Certain studies on soybean growth and yield response to sowing dates which
covered a span of 35 years were compiled (Pendleton and Hartwig, 1973; Johnson, 1987;
Heatherly and Elmore, 2004). It can be summarized that planting dates in May provided
maximum yield, but yield eventually declined when practicing delayed planting after early
June of the year. The steady decline in yield after the critical planting date could be a
response to changes in the plant and in its environment. Delayed planting resulted in shorter
vegetative and flowering/pod set periods, but the seedfill duration was not consistently
shorter (Cartter and Hartwig, 1963; Egli et al., 1987; Wilcox and Frankenberger, 1987;
Egli and Bruening, 2000; Bastidas et al., 2008). Even though delayed planting probably
causes a decline in yield, shorter plants with fewer nodes (Beaver and Johnson, 1981; Egli
20 and Bruening, 2000; Bastidas et al., 2008) may not necessarily limit yield if the crop
produces enough leaf area to maximize solar radiation interception (Egli, 1993).

Grain yields were evidently higher from earlier planted soybean due to longer
duration of vegetative and reproductive stages (Chen and Wiatrak, 2010). In addition, grain
yield in soybean can also be associated with the length of flowering, pod set, and seed
filling as reported by Egli and Bruening (2000). Carter (1974) observed that as planting
date was delayed, the tendency is for the plant to develop fewer nodes as well as recorded
fewer pods per plant, especially at the upper nodes, fewer seeds per pod and smaller seed

size. Plant height was also decreased with delayed planting dates. It agrees with Leffel


(1961), Smith et al. (1961), and Kruse et al. (1976) which reported that yield is reduced as
planting date is delayed. This yield reduction is believed to be a consequence of the
shortening of the period of reproductive stage of soybean, especially the seed filling stage.

Boote et al. (1998) revealed that lower temperatures influenced the overall yield of
soybean due to a corresponding decline in photosynthetic events, most pronouncedly when
temperature drops to 20 °C and added that cold stress could slow down plant development,
lengthening the growth cycle, thus, extending its maturity period.

Late planting dates, as accounted by Egli and Bruening (2000), were studied to be
causing decline in reproductive nodes and lesser pods. Yet, the length of seed filling stage
was not affected or reduced, thus, fewer seeds with a relatively larger size were produced
given sufficient leaf area for light interception. Additionally, Li (2014) found out that
delayed sowing tends to reduce fresh pod yield in all cultivars across different years and
cen be correlated to the reduction in the number and percentage of 2-seeded pods plant’.
Thus, genotypes which have higher capacity to generate higher 2-seeded pods as well as
3-seeded pods will manifest higher yield.

Zhang and Kyei-Boahen (2007) revealed that sowing of soybean approximately one
month earlier than the optimum timing further resulted in 8,400 Ib/acre higher green fresh
pod yield as compared to delayed planting dates. Li et al. (2014) is in agreement with this
former claim as they reported that when planting exceeded one month of delay, there was
significant decline in edamame fresh pod yields by an amount of 4,000-6,000 kg/ha
difference, yet the degree of yield reduction still depended on the variety.

Takahashi and Ohyama (2011) reported that edamame yielded a range 2 to 5 tons


hectare” in terms of fresh seeds, while in terms of fresh pods it amounted with a range of
7 to 12 tons hectare"! which was monitored with 72% moisture content. The yield obtained
in this study were found to be relatively higher than what is recorded by Takahashi and
Ohyama (2011).

Arathoon (2015) characterized plant height, planting density, number of pods plant”
| number and percentage of marketable pods plant”', seed ratio, fresh biomass production,
seed weight plant’, and percentage of 3- and 2-seeded pods as important components of
yield for edamame. Jiang et al. (2018) conducted a study in Virginia which involved an
evaluation of 86 soybean breeding lines for morpho-physiological and yield traits and it
portrayed that there were highly significant differences among breeding lines in terms of
plant height, fresh biomass production, and number of pods and seeds traits as well as
significant positive correlation between fresh biomass production, pod and seed characters
and seed yield. These traits could serve as an effective tool in soybean breeding programs
which conforms high yielding responses of edamame.

In terms of seed yield, this study revealed greater amount than the results of Fae et
al. (2020) in their research on soybean yield in relation to environmental and soil properties
which studied 22 site-years over the 2016 and 2017 growing seasons in two regions. Yield
accounted 3.4 Mg ha" in 2016 (1.4 to 5 Mg ha’) and 5.5 Mg ha’ in 2017 (3.5 to 7.4 Mg
ha’'). The crucial determinants of soybean yield in this study were maximized acquisition
of solar radiation and water availability which are both dictated by sowing dates. Grichar
(2014) reported that the highest yield was recorded in the mid-February and mid-March

planting dates as compared to April and May planting dates. Timing the sowing of soybean


between February to mid-March was beneficial for soybean producers in the Calhoun
County (28.5°N latitude) who reside in the upper Texas Gulf Coast. When planting date
was delayed until late April, significantly lower soybean yields were achieved. This agrees
with the yield response of different varieties when grown under different plantings which
features March 25" planting with the best performing soybean plants as compared to those
sown under April 15" and May 6".

In this study, March 25" and May 6" recorded the rate of daily yield loss in terms
of fresh pod yield with 0.823% day”! in Tudela, 0.912% day" in Tiwala 8, 0.88% day" in
Manchuria, 1.26% day’! in Tiwala 12, and 1.262% day”! in Ryokko. In terms of fresh seed
yield March 25" and May 6" recorded a rate of daily yield loss of 0.817% day” in Tudela,
0.955% day”! in Tiwala 8, 0.935% day”! in Manchuria, 1.41% day" in Tiwala 12, and 1.25%
day”! in Ryokko. When dealing with dry pod yield, March 25" and May 6" recorded a rate
of daily yield loss of 0.809% day”! in Tudela, 0.912% day” in Tiwala 8, 0.979% day"! in
Manchuria, 1.216% day"! in Tiwala 12, and 1.16% day”! in Ryokko. With regards to dry
seed yield, March 25" and May 6" recorded a rate of daily yield loss of 0.792% day" in
Tudela, 0.895% day"! in Tiwala 8, 0.907% day” in Manchuria, 1.20% day”! in Tiwala 12,
and 1.173% day" in Ryokko. Most yield records as influenced by planting dates in the U.S.
have 0.09 and 1.7% variation in each day of delayed sowing as reported by Beuerlein
(1988) and Egli and Cornelius (2009). Carter and Hartwig (1963) highlighted that although
planting date serves as the main determinant of soybean yield, final pod and seed yield still

varies significantly depending on the sowing date and location.


Daily Production Rate (kg ha!)

Daily production rate was obtained by dividing the fresh pod yield by the number
of days to harvesting (R6 stage). A significant interaction was detected on the daily
production rate between the planting date and variety as shown in Figure 53. It was
significantly lower in the first, third, and fourth planting date (statistically similar response)
compared to those sown during the second planting for all the varieties. Overall,
significantly lower daily production rate were recorded in the second planting and Tudela
generated significantly higher production in a daily basis than the other varieties, whereas,
planting on May 6" generally obtained the lowest rate.

With respect to the performance of Tudela, March 25 (PD2) rendered a daily
production rate that was 1.27 times higher than March 5" (PD1), 1.39 times greater than
April 15" (PD3), and 1.38 times as many as May 6" (PD4). In terms of Tiwala 8, March
25t* (PD2) achieved 1.35 times higher rate of production than March 5" (PD1), 1.49 times
greater than April 15" (PD3), and 1.488 times as many as May 6" (PD4). For Manchuria,
March 25" (PD2) recorded a daily production rate that was 124.33% higher than March 5
(PD1), 126.18% greater than April 15" (PD3), and 139.20% as many as May 6" (PD4).
For Tiwala 12, March 25 (PD2) tallied 132.59% higher DPR than March 5“ (PD1),
175.67% greater than April 15" (PD3), and 186.7% as many as May 6" (PD4). Lastly for
Ryokko, March 25‘ (PD2) exhibited a daily production rate that was 1.59 times higher
than March 5" (PD1), 1.77 times greater than April 15" (PD3), and 1.86 times higher than

May 6" (PD4).


Daily production rate (kg ha-1) —=GDD
§ 380 aa 2000
> Fa
3 250 cE b 1400 S|
el
Zz, 200 £ cd a
fe) g = 1000
E 150 BI
5 Y F g i 800 <
2 100 f y ~ f Y - 600 8
a 5 N AN 200
yo AN ANSE ,
z
oe mm am hk oh
a SEEEESEES S
x eS)
es FP PX FF MOK
Fk ST SSS

PLANTING DATE X VARIETY

Figure 53. Daily production rate (kg ha‘') of five soybean varieties as influenced by
different planting dates and the growing degree days accumulated during its growth period

Harvest Index

Harvest index refers to the relationship between seed yield and biological yield
(Gardner et al., 1985). In this study, harvest index was expressed as the ratio of pod and
seed yield to the total aboveground biomass. It measured the efficiency of soybean plants
to generate seeds as the economic portion of the produce (pods and/or seeds in the case of

soybean depending on the utilization and consumer preference).


a. Harvest Index in terms of Fresh Pods (%)

The analysis of variance showed that the interaction between planting date and
variety significantly exerted an effect on the harvest index of soybean plants in terms of
the harvested fresh green pods at p < 0.01 (Appendix I). The highest harvest efficiency was
exhibited by Tiwala 8 and Ryokko sown in the second planting date, whereas the lowest
ratio of the harvested fresh pod yield to the total aboveground biomass was measured in
Manchuria and Tudela grown under the first and third planting including the fourth planting
of Manchuria, Tiwala 12, and Tudela. Significant reduction in the harvest index based on
fresh pods obtained was evident among the first, third, and fourth sowing compared to the
first sowing for all the varieties tested except for Tiwala 12 wherein similar harvest

efficiency was assessed in the first and second planting.

[== Harvest index in terms of fresh pods (%)  #=GDD
_. 100 2000
@
Zo 1800
2 80 1600 8

70 1400 <
A be BR
60 © = c e 1200 %
£508, Z| i” 1000 &
~ 40 Y Y Y soo &
a 30 Y Y Y 600 a
Z 2 g g Y 400 8
& 10 Y Y Y 200
8, BA 0
>
& N SVS SV SV SM SP > Dp
<q ££ ro Ss QLD SL LS Ss. SESEEESS
Zo RS 2 ee wv 3" yO” 2” WV” 90

4 oe » RS FF he oe RS FES ye re Ra Ss SS eS

ass PL OS «ss ais eras cS) ‘ys ess

PLANTING DATE X VARIETY

Figure 54. Harvest index in terms of fresh pods (%) of five soybean varieties as affected
by planting dates and the growing degree days accumulated during its growth period


b. Harvest Index in terms of Fresh Seeds (%)

Significant interaction between the sowing date and variety significantly influenced
the harvest index of soybean plants based on the fresh seed yield at p < 0.01 (Appendix I).
Figure 55 showed that the highest harvest efficiency was achieved by Ryokko sown in the
second planting date followed by Ryokko sown in the first and third planting and Tiwala
12 grown under the first planting. On the other hand, the lowest ratio of the fresh seed yield
to the total aboveground biomass was observed in Manchuria grown under the fourth
planting. Additionally, significant decline in the harvest index based on harvested fresh
seeds was exhibited by the first, third, and fourth planting compared to the first planting
for all the test varieties except for Tiwala 12 which exerted a significantly higher harvest

efficiency during the first planting than the rest of the sowing dates.

Harvest index in terms of fresh seeds (%)  #==GDD
_ 100 2000
a 9 3 1800
DQ go - - 1600
Q e}
4 70 1400 <
B 60 1200 2
= 50 a 7 1000 =
& @ &
ieee cd 4 = cd a A pycd 8 <
30 aN ~ 600 a
B 20 g N G N 400 &
10 N 200
3 SY SY SV SV SV SV SSDP SP p
2 Ss Ss 2. ‘® ELD MPI LP IAD SH £. LL oS
zg Por wwe Ore PVH re? VP WV
SNE OE NE Ol Se Oe Ss Ss »
PPP SHE SK LK PLA SLT SOK S

PLANTING DATE X VARIETY

Figure 55. Harvest index in terms of fresh seeds (%) of five soybean varieties as influenced
by different planting dates and the growing degree days accumulated during its growth
period


ce. Harvest Index in terms of Dry Pods (%)

The interaction between the sowing date and variety were found to be highly
significant at p < 0.01 in terms of the harvest index based on the dry pod yield (Appendix
I). Figure 56 indicated that the highest harvest index was performed by Ryokko and Tiwala
grown under the first and second planting while the lowest ratio of the dry pod yield to the
dry plant weight was exhibited by Tiwala 8 and Tudela sown in the first planting including
Manchuria grown under the third and fourth planting. Moreover, significant increase in the
harvest index based on the yield produced from dry pods was exhibited by the second,
third, and fourth planting compared to the first planting for Tiwala 8 and Tudela. On the
other hand, Ryokko, Tiwala 12, and Manchuria showed statistically similar harvest index
in terms of dry pods in the first and second planting and depicted a significant decline in

the third and fourth sowing which also garnered statistically similar response.

[Harvest index in terms of dry pods (%)  —*—GDD

100 2000
a 9 1800
S 80 1600 8
> 70 b 1400
KX 60 b 1200 2
8 A Z

50 = g 1000 =
is) Z Z &
&) 40 y g soo &
8 YA
z30 BY Y 600 a
Ee 20 Z Y 400 8
a Y YJ 5
B 10 g Y 200

0 0
&
= SDDS NVM SV MIM. SSDP >
EF PPA PH ELIS FSS IEEE

OP YS” a yO” AP” VD 9h yO” PW” VD” 3” AO” CaS

Sorry YF SF FF wr MLM FS wo HY

FX PPP PF PPPS FP FF FPF
FP LF OB Pa OS FP OS eS

ws 8 ~ cS

PLANTING DATE X VARIETY

Figure 56. Harvest index in terms of dry pods (%) of five soybean varieties as influenced
by different planting dates and the growing degree days accumulated during its growth
period


d. Harvest Index in terms of Dry Seeds (%)

The planting date by variety interaction significantly influenced the harvest index
in terms of the dry seed yield at p < 0.01 (Appendix I). Figure 57 showed that the highest
harvest efficiency was achieved by Ryokko subjected to the first and second planting
whereas the lowest ratio of the dry seed yield to the shoot biomass was exhibited by Tiwala
8 in the first, third, and fourth planting as well as Manchuria and Tiwala 12 grown under
the fourth planting. In addition, significant reduction in the harvest index based on the dry
seed yield was garnered by the first, third, and fourth planting compared to the first planting
consistently for all the varieties except for Tiwala 12 which recorded statistically similar
harvest index in terms of dry seeds between the first and second planting and between the

third and fourth sowing which depicted a significant decline compared to PD1 and PD2.

(Harvest index in terms of dry seeds (%) —=—GDD

WEN 600
Z \ 400
Z N 200

YP? PPP PI IPI DP DS
VY POLMLN O'S o So
PS AP” DV” DY a9 ai a” VOY ay

SP WY x0? e? WP WY o>
FF wo” SH VY FS SS
e Fe ss Pas

‘s

fi 2000

g 1800

fF 1600 &

a

a 1400 2

1200 @

a ¢ 1000 &

is edcded — so &
Qa

a a

Ee o

a

S

A

<

rs}

PLANTING DATE X VARIETY

Figure 57. Harvest index in terms of dry seeds (%) of five soybean varieties as influenced
by different planting dates and the growing degree days accumulated during its growth
period


Zandonadi (2010) reported that soybean plants with lower plant height
measurements exhibited higher harvest index as compared to taller plants which is in
agreement with the result of this study. On the basis of fresh pods, Ryokko, Tiwala 12 and
Tiwala 8 obtained the best harvest index in terms of fresh pods (58.725, 61.025, and 64.2%,
respectively) which were significantly more efficient than Manchuria (49.175%) and
Tudela (50.15%) under PD1. In the 2" planting date (March 25"), it was Ryokko and
Tiwala 8 which obtained the highest harvest index in terms of fresh pods (75.975 and
77.65%, respectively) followed by Tiwala 12 and Tudela with a harvest efficiency of
63.975 and 59.775 %, respectively. During PD3, Ryokko (57.525%) and Tiwala 12 (51.85)
were significantly higher than Manchuria and Tudela which gamered a harvest efficiency
(fresh pod basis) of 49.05 and 48.775, respectively and almost the same reponse was
observed in PD4. Based on the fresh seeds’ computation of harvest index, March 5th
planting allowed Ryokko and Tiwala 12 to obtain the best harvest index (51.275 and
48.65%, respectively) followed by Tiwala 8 with a harvest efficiency of 36.68% while
Manchuria and Tudela recorded the lowest HI with 27.075 and 28.85%, respectively. In
PD2, Ryokko outperformed the other varieties with 63.175 % HI succeeded by Tiwala 12
(43.125%). The 3 planting date, on the other hand, also recorded the highest HI in terms
of fresh seeds in Ryokko (48.325%) followed by Tiwala 8 (36.8%), and lastly with the
lowest response was Tudela. For May 6" planting, Ryokko was succeeded by Tiwala 8,
Tudela, and Tiwala 12 which were significantly higher than Manchuria (23.8%). Generally,
among all the five varieties, it was Ryokko which provided the highest harvest index in

terms of fresh seeds across all planting dates recording 51.275% in PD1, 63.175% in PD2,

48.325% in PD3, and 44.35% in PD4. By referring to the highest index in dry seed basis,
Ryokko recorded the highest for March 5" (60.65%), March 25" (65.175%), April 15%
(50.825%), and May 6" (49%). Under PDI, Ryokko was followed by Tiwala 12
(43.375%), Tudela and Manchuria (36.525 and 36.075%, respectively), which was
significantly higher than Tiwala 8 (28.2%). March 25", on the other hand, featured similar
results with Manchuria, Tiwala 12, and Tudela then the lowest harvest efficiency was
exhibited by Tiwala 8 (36.975%). In PD3, Ryokko gained higher harvest efficiency
compared to the other four varieties with statistically similar response. Lastly for PD4,
Ryokko was followed by Tudela (38.475%) followed by Manchuria, Tiwala 12, and Tiwala
8 which obtained the same harvest index. Generally, the shorter varieties namely Ryokko
and Tiwala 12 were significantly higher in harvest efficiency than taller varieties like
Tudela and Tiwala 8.

Heydari Zadeh and Khajepour (2007) and Pedersen and Lauer (2004) revealed that
harvest index is highly responsive to the effects of different sowing dates highlighting early
planting dates which generated higher harvest index as compared to delayed planting. In
addition, Akter (2016) studied the effects of sowing dates on yield components of soybean
and it was observed that the highest harvest index (44.61%) was exhibited by the February
1* planting while the lowest HI (43.86%) was observed under December 18" planting.

Tacarindua et al. (2013) revealed that the aboveground biomass of soybean plants
declined due to increased air temperature in the environment that exceeds 30°C within a 2-
year period. Their finding highlighted that the synchronous increase of vapor pressure

deficit with increased temperature amplified the temperature effects on dry matter


production. Aside from the effects of air temperature, reduced ambient carbon dioxide and
low light intensity were also attributed to the negative influence of extremely high
temperatures to aboveground dry matter. This dry matter decline was detected to take place
between the onset of flowering and early development of seeds inside the pod cavity which
follows the pod development stage. Reduction in dry matter was associated to the
decreasing response of leaf photosynthetic rate and stomatal conductance. Crafts-Brandner
and Salvucci (2002) noted that photosynthesis is one of the most important physiological
processes that a plant undergoes, however, it sensitive to extreme heat stress which is more
pronounced in C3 plants (one of which is soybean) than C4 plants. (Yang et al., 2006).
When the aboveground biomass production is negatively affected, it leads to the reduction
of harvesting index due to the significant limitations in pod number and seed weight per

plant.


Vegetable Soybean Suitability

The World Vegetable Center, formerly known as the Asian Vegetable Research and
Development Center (AVRDC) features genebanks which accommodate 15,316 Glycine
accessions and those categorized as vegetable soybean account for 13% of the Glycine max
collection (Nair and Easdown, 2013). These vegetable soybean genotypes are developed
through the selections from local landraces and corresponding transfer of desirable
characteristics from agronomic or grain soybean accessions. There is little information
available for vegetable soybeans specifically on its response to varying sowing dates
particularly in the Philippine agrometeorological settings. Despite this large gap that poses
a need to further explore in vegetable soybean, local small-scale growers in some areas of
Batangas, Laguna, and Cabanatuan City as reported by Ocampo (2020), edamame has been
growing and harvesting small-seeded grain soybean varieties, locally known as utaw, for
their fresh green pods in similar way true vegetable soybean genotypes are harvested.
These fresh green pods undergo threshing and then are boiled which are sold in the wet
market and ambulant vendors. Unfortunately, traditional soybean food chain has been
diminishing in which a lot of consumers even in these localities are currently not highly
familiar with utaw (Enicola, 2020). Hence, this study aimed to provide sensible information
to determine the morpho-physiological attributes, phenological traits, and yield
components of different 4 grain soybean varieties (Manchuria, Tiwala 12, Tiwala 8, and
Tudela) and a true vegetable soybean (Ryokko) in response to different planting dates.

Additionally, there is a need to assess the suitability of these grain soybean varieties for


vegetable soybean consumption by comparing their phenological, morpho-physiological,
and yield traits to the true vegetable soybean variety, Ryokko (Kaneko Seed Co., Ltd.,
Japan), tested in this study and to the market standards and consumer preference for
Edamame collected from several literatures.

According to Shanmugasundaram et al. (1991), the following traits are considered
to be the ideal plant type for vegetable soybeans in the tropics: 1.) Delayed flowering > 40
days; 2.) Ten to fourteen nodes on the mainstem; 3.) Longer period to R6 stage; 5.) 15-20
pods/plant; 6.) Pod width of > 1.4 cm; 7.) Pod length of > 5.0 cm; 8.) Predominantly (>
75%) 2- or more seeded pods; 9.) Bright green pod and seed coat color; 10.) Grey
pubescence; 11.) Grey or light brown hilum; 12.) Easy to strip pods; 13.) Height of the
lowest pod must be at least 10 cm; 14.) Weight of 100 seeds must be > 30 g; 15.) Pods
must be free from undesirable pigmentation and spots. In addition, Konovsky et. al. (1994)
reported that although 100 seeds must weigh more than 30g to be classified as a vegetable
soybean, the University of Arkansas currently has advanced edamame germplasm consist
of seeds which ranged from 20-28 g/ 100 seed, yet accessions mostly exceed 30 grams/100
seed. Grade A edamame must require 90% of the pods harvested to be containing two or
three seeds per pod and the number of pods with only one seed inside should strictly be
below 10% of the amount of pods yielded. Shanmugasundaram and Yan (2010) reported
that edamame can be harvested as: 1.) fresh pods that are still attached to the stem, 2.) fresh
pods detached from the stem, 3.) fresh shelled green beans, 4.) frozen green pods, and 5.)
frozen green beans. These criteria were used to identify which among the grain soybean

varieties used in this study can be potentially utilized for vegetable soybean consumption.


Days to Flowering/R1 Stage (> 40 days)

An ideal vegetable soybean plant must flower after 40 days or more. Among the
varieties, Tiwala 8 (40.5 days at March 5" and 42.25 days under March 25" planting) and
Tudela (47.5 days at March 25" planting) were the only genotypes which flowered after
more than or equal to 40 days after sowing. For March Sth planting, Tiwala 8 exhibited the
longest time spent to reach R1 stage (40.5 days) although Tudela almost reached 40 days
by 1.75 days difference while Ryokko flowered most rapidly by 29.75 days. March 25th
planting showed significant differences between each variety and instead of Tiwala 8 based
on the observation from PD1, it was Tudela which flowered the longest time by 47.5 days
in PD2. April 15th planting showed that Tiwala 8 had the most extended time to flower
(38.5 days) with 1.5 days difference to reach at least 40 days to be considered as delayed
days to reach the onset of flowering. May 6th planting recorded Tiwala 8 (36.25 days) and
Tudela (38.25 days) which spent the longest time to flower compared to the rest of the
varieties with 3.75 and 1.75 days difference to reach the ideal 40 days to flower. On the
other hand, Table 4 revealed that it was during the March 25" planting that Tudela and
Tiwala 8 recorded the highest days to first flowering among all observations (42.45 and

47.5 days, respectively) and satisfied the standard set by Shanmugasundaram et al. (1991).


Number of Nodes on the Mainstem (10-14 nodes)

Shanmugasundaram et al. (1991) emphasized that there must be at least 10-14
nodes on the mainstem This criterion was successfully satisfied by Manchuria, Tiwala 12,
Tiwala 8, and Tudela and unfortunately, it was Ryokko which was unable to meet the
standards based on the number of nodes on the mainstem. Tudela acquired the highest
number of nodes plant! at R6 stage which ranged from 14.075 to 18.525 followed by
Tiwala 8 with 12.6 to 15.575. Contrarily, Ryokko produced the lowest number of nodes
plant! with a minimum number of 6.25 and a maximum record of 8.8. Table 15 showed
that March 25th (PD2) was the most favorable planting date to allow production of the
highest number of nodes plant" among the five varieties. Sowing time essentially plays a
role in the formation of nodes as reported by Bastidas et al. (2008) wherein they observed

that earlier planting promotes higher number of nodes primarily on the mainstem.

Days to Harvesting/Full-Seed Stage (Extended)

Among all observations, Tudela grown under March 25" recorded the longest
duration to reach the full-seed stage while Ryokko sown in PD4 exhibited the shortest
period until harvesting with 95 and 58 days, respectively. Figure 16 showed that varieties
grown under March 25th obtained the longest number of days to reach the full-seed stage
(85.75, 68.5, 80.5, 88, and 95 days, respectively), while among all genotypes, those sown

on May 6th (PD4) registered the shortest period. Across the planting dates, it was March


25th (PD2) that took the lengthiest days to flower (85.75, 68.5, 80.5, 88, and 95 days,
respectively) followed by March Sth (PD1) while May 6th (PD4) exhibited the shortest
harvesting periods (73.5, 58, 71.5, 78.25, and 83 days, respectively). The rationale behind
this criterion is that the delayed duration that it takes for a soybean plant to reach R6 stage
is beneficial when it comes to the production of pods, increment in number and size of
seeds, higher accumulation of climatic inputs such as solar radiation, temperature, and
growing degree units and the resulting amount of final yield. This criteria can be supported
by the findings of Anderson et al. (1985), Kumagai (2020) and Wilcox et al. (1987) stating
that when the duration to reach harvesting was shortened, it results to a significant decline
in cumulative radiation, amount of precipitation, and GDD acquired by the soybean plant
which negatively influences the pod development and seed-filling phase due to altered dry

matter accumulation, hence, leading to yield reduction.

Number of Pods Plant' (10-15 pods plant!)

Vegetable soybeans must produce at least 10-15 pods per plant. Across different
sowing dates, the highest number of pods per plant were generated by varieties grown
under March 25" planting (PD2), followed by March 5" (PD1), while May 6" (PD4)
generally produced the lowet number of pods per plant as shown in Figure 3. Tudela
produced the highest number of pods plant”! which ranged from 152 to 196.75 which was
significantly higher than the statistically similar responses of Tiwala 8 and Manchuria

which generated 82 to 119 and 76.5 to 103.25 pods, respectively. Ryokko acquired the


lowest number of pods plant-1 ranging from 16.5 to 30.75. Nevertheless, Ryokko produced
more than 10-15 pods plant’! and satisfied the minimum required number of nodes on the
mainstem. It is worth to highlight that the varieties other than Ryokko produced a way
larger number of pods plant! as compared with the true vegetable soybean. Together with
the number of seeds pod"! and pod weight plant”! the number of pods plant’! is considered
as the most highly determining factor in that affects the final pod and seed yield and serves
as an effective selection tool for vegetable soybean yield as reinforced by the findings of
Ouattara and Weaver (1995), Malik et al. (2006), Oz et al. (2002), Mukhekar et al. (2004),

Mondal et al. (2011), and Al-Hadi (2017).

Pod Width > 14mm

Shanmugasundaram et al. (1991) included in the criteria of an ideal vegetable
soybean plant that the pod width must measure equal or more than 14mm. Figure 31
showed that across all different planting dates, Ryokko obtained the highest pod width.
From all experimental plots, Ryokko planted on March 25th (PD2) exhibited the highest
pod width measuring 15 mm followed by those planted in March 5" (PD1) with 14.37 mm
while Tudela sowed during the May 6th planting obtained the lowest measurement (8.85
mm). Table 32 portrayed the significant differences between the five varieties displaying
Ryokko as the genotype with the best pod width measurement (13.125 to 15 mm). It was
during Apri 15° and Mayé6th planting that Ryokko were unable to reach a pod width

measurement of 14 mm. The variety with the closest measurement to the standard pod


width (14 mm) was Tiwala 12 (10.35 to 10.95 mm) with a mean difference of 3.08 mm

with Ryokko.

Pod Length > 50 mm

Pod must be at least 50 mm long in order to achieve the standard or marketable pod
characteristics. Ryokko exhibited the longest pods (ranging from 56.01 to 68.1 mm),
followed by Tiwala 12 which ranged from 51.1 to 53.35 mm), Tiwala 8 measuring 45.25
to 50.225 mm, Manchria (ranging from 45.5 to 47.975 mm), and lastly was Tudela which
recorded the shortest pod with a minimum pod width of 40.18 to 42.1 mm). It was shown
in Table 31 that March 25th (PD2) obtained the best pod length measurement for all all
varieties. On the other hand, the lowest pod length was recorded during the May 6th
planting for all the varieties Considering all of the experimental plots, Ryokko grown under
March 25" planting performed the best in terms of pod length (68.1 mm), while the shortest
pod was acquired in Tudela grown under May 6" (40.175 mm). Based on the results, only
Ryokko subjected to all four planting dates, Tiwala 12 grown under March 5" (51.1 mm),
March 25" (55.25 mm) and April 15" (51.1 mm), and Tiwala 8 sown during PD2 (50.225

mm) successfully satistisfed the pod length standard (> 50 mm).


Predominantly > 75% 2- or more Seeded Pods

Table 56 presented the percentage of 4-, 3-, and 2-seeded pods and it was found out
that Manchuria (93.5 and 94%), Ryokko (94 and 93.5%), Tiwala 12 (96.25%), and Tiwala
8 (94.5 and 95.25%) recorded statistically similar percentage of combined 4-, 3-, and 2-
seeded pods which were significantly higher than Tudela (90.25 and 90.5%) when grown
under March Sth (PD1) and March 25th (PD2). Ryokko (93.5 and 93%) and Tiwala 12
(94%), on the other hand, obtained the highest percentage in April 15th and May 6th while
Tudela appeared to be the lowest in terms of the percentage of more than 2-seeded pods.
March Sth and March 25th were able to generate the highest percentage of 4-, 3-, and 2-
seeded pods for all varieties. Among all records, Tiwala 12 grown under PD1 and PD2
obtained the most favorable percentage of 4-, 3-, and 2-seeded pods (96.25%) while Tudela
grown under PD3 and PD4 got the lowest response with 87 and 86.25%, respectively.
Based on the data, all of the experimental units rendered a percentage of 2- or more seeded
pods that was greater than 75%.

However, Konovsky et. al. (1994) set a stricter standard for Grade A edamame
percentage of 2- or more seeded pods which requires 90% as well as setting the number of
pods with only one seed strictly to less than 10%. Using this stricter criterion, it can be
implied from the observations that Manchuria (88%) and Tudela (87%) under April 15%
planting and May 6" -grown Manchuria (87.75%), Tiwala 8 (89.75%) and Tudela
(86.25%) exhibited less than 90% 2- or more seeded pods. Moreoever, Manchuria (12 and

12.25%, respectively), Tiwala 8 (10.25%), and Tudela (13 and 13.75%, respectively)


planted during PD3 and PD4 produced more than 10% pods with only one seed inside the
pod cavity. The rest of the experimental plots produced more than 10% one-seeded pods.
Higher percentage of 1-seeded pods is undesirable for vegetable soybean production in
terms of the resultant yield since it can minimize the pod length, 100-pod weight, pod

weight plant”, and harvest index.

Bright Green Pod, Seed Coat Color, Grey Pubescence and Grey or Light Brown Hilum

According to (Wibowo et al., 2020), better vegetable soybean quality is represented
by larger pod size as well as bright and uniform green pod color. The appearance of fresh
green pods and seeds distinctly differ from matured soybeans with pods which turns yellow
and seeds from matured pods vary in color from yellow to brown or black. The color of
dry seed coat of matured seeds actually ranges from yellow to light brown or brown and
black as reported by Kitamura (2001). In this study, Ryokko, Tiwala 12, Manchuria, Tiwala
8, and Tudela produced intense and uniformly green pods at R6 Stage. On the other hand,
Ryokko, Manchuria, Tiwala 12, and Tiwala 8 were characterized with glossy green seeds
with seed coat color ranging from white to light yellow while Tudela seeds ranged from
green to purplish to black. Vegetable soybean is also characterized in terms of pubescence
wherein the highly marketable color is grey due to the good green pod appearance when
cooked or blanched. Yet, grain soybeans on their usual utilization in the industry has no
preferred appearance and color of pubescence. Among the varieties, Ryokko, Tiwala 12,

and Manchuria exhibited grey pubescence while Tiwala 8 and Tudela showed light to


bright reddish pubescence. All varieties exhibited grey to light brown hilum except Tudela
which ranged from brown to black hilum in the fresh green beans stage. Additionally, pods

must be free from undesirable pigmentation and spots.

Easy to Strip Pods

Based on the experience of the researcher in the harvesting process, all the varieties
produced pods that were stripped easily from the plant. However, if these varieties are to
be compared, Ryokko and Tiwala 12 pods can be harvested handily with ease due to a
better grip on its larger pods as compared to Manchuria, Tiwala 8, and especially Tudela
with relatively smaller pods. Also, varieties with smaller pods had their pods clustered in
the stem which took a longer time to finish manual harvesting per plant, whereas pods
seemed easier to locate and pluck out of the plant in large pod-producing genotypes.
Kokobun (1991) highlighted that delayed harvesting causes the deterioration of soybean
seed quality characterized by an increase in hardness and a sudden change in color. Hence,
if harvesting is delayed, the attachment of the pods to the mother plant might also harden
and reduce the ease of stripping which might decrease the harvesting efficiency per unit
time except when the soybean plant reached physiological maturity (R8 stage) wherein
pods are relatively easier to strip since the strength of pod attachment seems lower due to
the moisture content decline. In vegetable soybean production, the time spent in harvesting
covers most of the working hours which occupies approximately 61% for early maturity

production and 87% for normal season of the total working time. Thus, varieties with pods


which are easier to harvest combined with the proper timing of harvesting to prevent
hardening of the pods and its attachment to the stem as well as to maintain the desirable
bright green color of the pods are crucial consideration in vegetable soybean production to

increase the harvesting efficiency without risking the quality of beans.

Pod Clearance From Soil/Height of the Lowest Pod >10 cm

Tiwala 8 and Tudela obtained the highest height of lowest pod among the varieties
which ranged from 14.825 to 16.475 cm during PD1, PD3, and PD4 while Tiwala 8 sown
in PD2 (17.25 cm) was significantly higher than March 25th planting of Tudela (15.6 cm).
Manchura followed Tudela with the lowest pod height which measured from 8.625 to 12.5
em. Table 29 showed that March 25th (PD2) accounted the highest first pod height in
Manchuria (12.5 cm) while April 15th (PD3) had the highest measurement in Tudela with
16.15 cm. Tiwala 8, on the other hand, exhibited 17.25 cm in PD2 and 16.475 cm in PD3
but seemed to be higher than PD4 (15.225 cm). In general, the standard for first pod height
of at least 10 cm was found in Tiwala 8 and Tudela when grown under all four planting
dates and in Manchuria subjected to March 5" and March 25". Manchuria grown under
April 15" and May 6" were close to 10 cm with a difference of 0.375 and 1.375 cm,
respectively. Whereas Ryokko and Tiwala 12 were measured with first pod heights that
were almost half the required 10cm.

Taller soybean genotypes tend to produce higher first node from the ground with

an attached pod as reported by Ogles et al. (2016). The first pod height is an important trait


since plants with higher first pod are easier to manage when it comes to mechanical
harvesting in a large population density and a large area as highlighted by Zandonadi et al.
(2010). Plant height and lowest pod height increases the harvesting efficiency and
minimizes the losses and mechanical damages inflicted in the fresh green beans, thus,
setting this morphological trait a relevant criterion in the selection of soybean genotypes

for commercial production.

100-Seed Weight > 30g

Table 66 revealed that Ryokko obtained the highest 100-seed weight under all
planting dates with measurements ranging from 66.9 (PD3) to 85.625 g(PD2) followed by
Tiwala 12 ranging from 35.725 (PD4) to 45.575 g (PD2), Tiwala 8 which was measured
between 27.8 (PD1) to 36.225 g (PD2), then Manchuria weighing between 22.7 (PD4) to
29.1 (PD2), and lastly was Ryokko which weighed between 66.9 (PD3) to 85.625 g (PD2).
On the other hand, when dealing with the effects of planting dates as shown in Table 67,
the highest response was found in March 25th planting among all varieties. Lastly, May 6"
planting recorded the lowest 100-seed weight in Tudela with 18.675 g and Manchuria with
2.7 g. Among the experimental plots, it was only Tiwala 8 grown under March 25" planting
(36.225 g), Tiwala 12 subjected to all planting dates (35.725 to 45.575 g), and Ryokko
sown in all sowing dates which ranged from 66.9 to 85.625 g that satisfied the requirement

set by Shanmugasundaram et al. (1991).


Despite the measurements that failed to meet the standards of fresh green beans
according to Shanmugasundaram et al. (1991), Konovsky et. al. (1994) reported that the
University of Arkansas has advanced edamame germplasm nowadays which features seeds
of some vegetables soybean genotypes which ranged from 20-28 g / 100 seed. Given this
range of measurement, several varieties used in this study can be accepted including
Manchuria across all planting dates which produced 22.7 to 29.1 g, Tiwala 8 sown under
PDI (27.8 g), PD3 (27.975 g), and PD4 (28.35 g), and Tudela grown under PD1 (20.325
g) and PD2 (23.825 g).

There is a need for the development of a value chain that needs the following
technology interventions: (a) better grain soybean varieties manifesting phenological,
morpho-physiological, and yield traits that will meet that standards of edamame, and (b)
appropriate timing of harvesting by comparing the common practice with the
recommended protocols for edamame production since the local practice involves
harvesting the pods at almost physiological maturity.

Summarized in Table 3 is the suitability of the test soybean varieties for vegetable
soybean consumption based on the number of days flowering, number of nodes on the
mainstem, number of days to full-seed stage, number of pods plant’, pod length and width,
percentage of two- or more seeded pods, presence of bright green pod and seed coat color,
appearance of grey pubescence and grey or light brown hilum, ease of stripping or
harvesting the pods, height of the lowest pod, weight of 100 seeds and being free from

undesirable pigmentation and spots of the pods.


Table 3. Vegetable soybean suitability of five Glycine max (L.) Merrill varieties

VARIETY
Criteria of
Vio t bt Ryokko Manchuria _| _Tiwala 12 Tiwala 8 Tudela
Plant Type rdeat_| 889K | teat | RAK | tdeat_| RAK | tdeat | RAK | taear_| Rank
Days to Flowering
40 days) XiEs{*}]3}*)atvi2tvii
Number of Nodes on
the Mainstem
(10-14 nodes) x15}, [atv i4ty | an ||
Days to
Harvesting(Extended) zs 5 v 3 v 4 v 2 v 1
Number of Pods Plant’
(10-15 podsplant") | V | 5 | v | 3 “4 4}vi2iv 1
Pod Width © 14 mm)
vi[i{[*}a}]*}2}*}3/* 15
Pod Length (> 50 mm) x x
v 1 a 4 v 2 v 3 3
Predominantly (> 75%)
2- or more Seeded
Pods v 3 v 4 v 1 vo 2 v 5

Bright Green Pod

Green Seed Coat Color

Grey Pubescence

Light Brown Hilum

Easy to Strip Pods

Height of the Lowest
Pod (210 cm)
xX 5 Vv 3 xX 4 Vv 1 Vv 2
100-Seed Weight 1 x 4 2 3 x 5
(230g) v v v

High Fresh Pod Yield | v_ | 5 | v | 3 | v | 4 |v | 2 | v |!
Multi-Criteria
Over-all Rank 4 5 3 1 2



Correlation Analysis

Pearson correlation analysis between phenological and morpho-physiological traits
was performed. The correlation coefficients among these soybean plant characteristics
revealed that all of the 36 coefficients (r) were found to be highly significant at p < 0.01,
27 of which were positively correlated, and 9 were detected with negative association as
shown in Table 4.

The plant height, number of nodes at flowering and full-seed stage, fresh and dry
plant weight, fresh and dry straw weight and first pod height depicted strongly positive
correlation with the phenological traits namely the number of days to flowering, full-seed
stage, and between R1 and R6 stage except with the moderately positive relationship
between fresh and dry straw weight with days to flowering and the correlation of the height
of lowest pod to the days between R1 to R6 stage.

Contrarily, days to first flowering exhibited moderately negative association with
pod length, width, and thickness, whereas, the days to harvesting and between R1 to R6
stage were found to be strongly negatively correlated to these pod dimensions.

The strongest positive correlation was detected between the number of days to R6
stage and the number of nodes at R6 stage (0.97**) and with the plant height at R6 stage
(0.95**). The strong correlation of the days to R6 stage with plant height at R6 stage
indicates that the duration of soybean until it reaches peak of productivity remarkably relies
on the establlished aboveground biomass represented by the plant height at R6 which will

subsequently support the inherent pod-bearing capacity of soybean.


The best associations of days to flowering were present with biomass production
which indicates that days to flowering reflects the start up growth of soybean plants before
entering the reproductive growth and aids in establishing the ability to cater high amounts

of reproductive outputs which favors the final yield.

Table 4. Pearson correlation analysis between phenological and morpho-physiological
traits of five soybean varieties grown under four planting dates

Days to Days to Days between
RI Stage R6 Stage R1 to R6 Stage

Morpho-Physiological
Traits

Height at R1 stage

Height at R6 stage

Nodes at R1 stage
Nodes at R6 stage
Fresh plant weight
Dry plant weight
Fresh straw weight
Dry straw weight
Height of lowest pod
Pod length
Pod width
Pod thickness

Legend: Correlation: +/- 1.00 (Perfect Positive/Negative Relationship); +/-0.91 to +/-0.99 (Very Strong
Positive/Negative Relationship); +/-0.71 to +/-0.90 (Strong Positive/Negative Relationship); +/-0.41 to
+/-0.70 (Moderate Positive/Negative Relationship); +/-0.31 to +/-0.40 (Low Positive/Negative
Relationship); +/-0.01 to +/-0.30 (Very Low Positive/Negative Relationship); 0.00 (No/negligible

Relationship) P-value: **p-value < 0.01 (Highly significant); *p-value < 0.05 (Significant); ns p-value >
0.05 (Not significant). Highlighted in green and yellow are positively and negatively significant correlation,
respectively.


The correlation between phenological and yield components was also tested using
the Pearson product moment as shown in Table 5. The correlation coefficients among these
soybean plant traits revealed that 21 out of 27 coefficients (r) were found to be highly
significant at p < 0.01 while three our of 27 coefficients (r) were significant at p < 0.05.
Sixteen were positively correlated, and eight were negatively associated.

The fresh and dry pod yield, fresh and dry seed yield, and daily production rate
exhibited strongly positive correlation with the number of days to flowering, full-seed
stage, and between R1 and R6 stage.

Contrarily, the harvest index based on fresh and dry seeds as well as in terms of dry
pods showed low to moderately negative correlation with the phenological traits. The
strongest positive correlation was observed between the number of days to R1 stage and
fresh pod yield (0.96**) and with the daily production rate (0.95**) and additionally
between days to full-seed stage and dry pod yield (0.95**).

For fresh pod and seed yield, the number of days to first flowering showed stronger
association compared to the number of days to harvesting, whereas the number of days to
harvesting showed stronger association with the dry pod and seed yield than the number of
days to flowering. It is worth noting that all yield measures based on pods and seeds
obtained significantly high correlations as compared to other traits which connotes that
final yield was highly affected by the duration of growth until the seeds occupy fully the
pod cavity and becomes readily available for fresh green pod consumption. The daily
production rate also recorded high correlation (0.93**) which is a very important point

since it was quantified by dividing the final yield by the number of days to R6 stage.


Varieties which exhibited the longest days until harvesting also recorded the best yield and

high daily production rate in kg ha’! basis.

Table 5. Pearson correlation analysis between phenological traits and yield traits of five
soybean varieties grown under four planting dates
Yield Days to R1 Stage Days to R6Stage Days between
Traits R1 to R6
Fresh pod yield
Fresh seed yield

Dry pod yield
Dry seed yield
Daily production rate
Harvest index fresh pods.
Harvest index fresh seeds.
Harvest index dry pods.

Harvest index dry seeds.
Legend: Correlation: +/- 1.00 (Perfect Positive/Negative Relationship); +/-0.91 to +/-0.99 (Very Strong
Positive/Negative Relationship); +/-0.71 to +/-0.90 (Strong Positive/Negative Relationship); +/-0.41 to
+/-0.70 (Moderate Positive/Negative Relationship); +/-0.31 to +/-0.40 (Low Positive/Negative
Relationship); +/-0.01 to +/-0.30 (Very Low Positive/Negative Relationship); 0.00 (No/negligible

Relationship). P-value: **p-value < 0.01 (Highly significant); *p-value < 0.05 (Significant); ns p-value >
0.05 (Not significant). Highlighted in green and yellow are positively and negatively significant correlation,
respectively.

The correlation between morpho-physiological traits was analyzed as shown in
Table 6. The correlation coefficients among these soybean plant traits revealed that 71 out
of 78 coefficients (r) were found to be highly significant at p < 0.01 while one out of 78
coefficients (r) was significant at p < 0.05. There were 42 positive correlations and 30
negative associaations.

The plant height at R1 and R6 stage, number of nodes at R1 and R6 stage and

biomass production in terms of whole plant and straw weight exhibited significant strongly


positive correlations with each other.

In contrast, the pod length, width, and thickness measurements showed moderately
to strongly negative correlations with the plant height at R1 and R6 stage, number of nodes
at R1 and R6 stage and fresh and dry plant and straw weight.

The strongest positive correlation was observed between the dry plant weight and
plant height at R6 stage (0.97**) and between the number of nodes and plant height at R6
stage (0.95**) indicating that taller plants tend to develop higher number of nodes on the
mainstem.

On the other hand, the strongest negative correlation was observed in the pod length
(-0.79** to -0.82**), pod width (-0.77** to -0.79**), and pod thickness (-0.83** to -
0.88**) with respect to the fresh plant and straw weight, respectively.

Taller genotypes and higher biomass in terms of whole plant and straw weight
(Tudela, Tiwala 8, and Manchuria) tend to produce smaller pods and seeds compared to
shorter varieties like Ryokko and Tiwala 12 with relativedly lower whole plant and straw
weight. Significant negative correlations were also exhibited from harvest index which was
in accordance with the findings of Zandonadi (2010) which reported that soybean plants
with lower plant height measurements exhibited higher harvest index as compared plants

with higher biomass.


Table 6. Pearson correlation analysis between morpho-physiological traits of five soybean
varieties grown under four planting dates

PE HRI HR6 NRI NR6 FPtw DPtw FStw DStw HLP PL PW

PT

PE
HRI
HR6
NRI
NRO

FPtW
ppPew
Fstw
Dstw

0.19ns

0.07ns
0.13ns
0.16ns
0.16ns
-0.05ns

Positive/Negative Relationship); +/-0.71 to +/-0.90 (Strong Positive/Negative Relationship); +/-0.41 to
+/-0.70 (Moderate Positive/Negative Relationship); +/-0.31 to +/-0.40 (Low Positive/Negative
Relationship); +/-0.01 to +/-0.30 (Very Low Positive/Negative Relationship); 0.00 (No/negligible
Relationship) P-value: **p-value < 0.01 (Highly significant); *p-value < 0.05 (Significant); ns p-value >
0.05 (Not significant). Highlighted in green and yellow are positively and negatively significant correlation,
respectively. PE-Percentage emergence, HR1-Height at R1 stage, HR6-Height at R6 stage, NR1-Number of

nodes at R1 stage, NR6-Number of nodes at R6 stage, FPtW-Fresh plant weight, DPtW-Dry plant weight,
FStW-Fresh straw weight, DStW-Dry straw weight, HLP-Height of lowest pod, PL-Pod length, PW-Pod
width, PT-Pod thickness, SL-Seed length, SW-Seed width

When it comes to morpho-physiological characters, it deals with an array of
parameters and correlation analysis seemed beneficial in explaining the relationships of the
growth variables with the resulting yield of soybean. According to Table 7, the plant height
at R1 and R6 stage, number of nodes at R1 and R6 stage and fresh and dry plant and straw
weight exhibited moderately to strongly positive correlations with the daily production rate
and final pod and seed yield. Faisal et al. (2011) observed that plant height was strongly
and positively correlated with seed yield as well as phenological characters such as days to
R6. The correlation between yield and plant height (0.60**) indicated that selecting tall

soybean genotypes can help in increasing the final pod and seed yield (Berger-Doyle,


2014). In contrast, the plant height at R1 and R6 stage, number of nodes at R1 and R6 stage
and fresh and dry plant and straw weight showed moderately negative correlations with the
harvest index.

Furthermore, the pod length, width, and thickness exhibited moderately to strongly
positive correlations with the daily production rate and final pod and seed yield. On the
other hand, the pod length, width, and thickness showed moderately to strongly positive
correlations with the harvest index.

The strongest positive correlation was observed between the dry plant weight and
dry pod yield (0.97**) and between the number of nodes at R6 stage dry pod yield (0.95**)
indicating that taller plants with higher biomass and greater number of nodes on the
mainstem tend to produce better pod yield.

On the other hand, the strongest negative correlation was observed in the pod width
(-0.82**) and pod thickness (-0.86**) with respect to the dry pod yield. Among the
correlations involving the harvest index, fresh straw weight recorded the strongest negative
correlation (-0.73**) since biomass and harvest index are inversely proportional with each
other.

Zandonadi (2010) reported that soybean plants with lower plant height
measurements and lower amount of biomass exhibited higher harvest index as compared
to larger soybean plants with higher biomass which is in agreement with the result of this
study. Even though delayed planting can cause yield reduction, shorter plants with fewer
nodes may not necessarily limit the final yield if the crop produces enough leaf area to

maximize solar radiation interception (Egli, 1993).


Table 7. Pearson correlation analysis between morpho-physiological traits and yield
components of five soybean varieties grown under four planting dates
FPY FSY DPY DSY DPR HIFP HIFS HIDP HIDS

PE -0.11ns_—_0.09ns -0.03ns -0.01ns
HRI 8
HR6
NRI
NR6
FPtW 0.07ns
DPtW 0.13ns
0.16ns
0.16ns

Legend: Correlation: +/- 1.00 (Perfect Positive/Negative Relationship); +/-0.91 to +/-0.99 (Very Strong
Posit ionship); +/-0.71 to +/-0.90 (Strong Positive/Negative Relationship); +/-0.41 to
+/-0.70 (Moderate Positive/Negative Relationship); +/-0.31 to +/-0.40 (Low Positive/Negative
Relationship); +/-0.01 to +/-0.30 (Very Low Positive/Negative Relationship); 0.00 (No/negligible
Relationship) P-value: **p-value < 0.01 (Highly significant); *p-value < 0.05 (Significant); ns p-value >
0.05 (Not significant). Highlighted in green and yellow are positively and negatively significant correlation,
respectively. PG-Percentage emergence, HR1-Height at R1 stage, HR6-Height at R6 stage, NRI-Number
of nodes at R1 stage, NR6-Number of nodes at R6 stage, FPtW-Fresh plant weight, DPtW-Dry plant weight,
FStW-Fresh straw weight, DStW-Dry straw weight, PL-Pod length, PW-Pod width, PT-Pod thickness,
DPR-Daily production rate, FPY-Fresh pod yield, FSY-Fresh seed yield, DPY-Dry pod yield, DSY-Dry
seed yield, HIFP-Harvest index in terms of fresh pods, HIFS-Harvest index in terms of fresh seeds, HIDP-
Harvest index in terms of dry pods, HIDS-Harvest index dry seeds.

It is also worth highlighting the association of yield components since the focal
point of soybean production deals with the productivity, hence, determining the relevant
characters that administer linkage with yield is a useful tool in establishing an effective
soybean improvement program through selection and breeding based on desirable traits.

The correlation between pod and seed yield and yield components was analyzed as
shown in Table 8. The correlation coefficients among these soybean plant traits revealed

that 62 out of 88 coefficients (r) were found to be highly significant at p < 0.01 while six


out of 88 coefficients (r) were significant at p < 0.05. There were 34 positive correlations
and 39 negative associations.

The number of pods plant”, number of marketable pods plant’', and fresh and dry
pod weight" exhibited strongly positive significant correlations with final pod and seed
yield. The strongest correlation in this aspect was exhibited between fresh pod yield and
fresh pod weight plant’! (0.99**) and dry pod yield and dry pod weight plant’! since pod
weight plant’! is a function of the final pod yield.

One hundred-pod yield measurements were found to be moderately negatively
correlated to the final pod and seed yield. Among the percentage of the number of seeds
per pod, it was only the three-seeded pods that showed a positive correlation with the final
pod and seed yield ranging from 0.38** to 0.57**.

Additionally, the seed length and width were found to be moderately negatively
correlated to the pod and seed yield. Fresh pod and seed weight plant"! as well as the daily
production rate exhibited strongly positive association with the final seed yield. Contrarily,
the 100-seed weight and harvest index in terms of fresh and dry seeds resulted to a low to
moderately negative relationship with the yield.

Given these results, it can be implied that fresh pod weight is a central soybean trait
that is needed to be emphasized as it influences the resulting pod and seed yield of all the
five genotypes employed in this study. Pod weight was affected by the established plant
structure and biomass, number of nodes which logically would increase pod production
since it serves as the point of growth of the pod-bearing shoot structures, and duration of

growth from emergence to flowering to pod development to seed development and until


the full-seed stage. Higher production of pods at the R6 stage is a manifestation of higher
daily production of dry matter in a daily basis, yet, this parameter would still vary
depending on the length of R6 stage that the soybean plant ensues. These results can be
supported by the findings of Machikowa et al (2005) which reported that among the yield
characters, pod weight exhibited the highest and strongest positive correlation (0.98**)
with final seed yield.

Given these results, it can be implied that fresh seed weight plant"! is a crucial
soybean trait that is needed to be improved as it directly affects the final pod and seed yield
of all the five genotypes studied. Seed weight per plant was affected by the accumulated
plant biomass, number of nodes which rationally would improve seed production since it
serves as the point of development of the pods which encapsulates the seeds, and the period
of growth from emergence to until full-seed phase arrives.

One hundred seed weight recorded the strongest positive correlation with pod
length, width, thickness, seed length and width as well as seed ratio. Since 100-seed weight
is just the measurement of the seed length and width measurements, it cannot sufficiently
determine linearly the corresponding seed weight which can be produced by a single plant.
Taller soybean genotypes such as Tudela, Tiwala 8, and Manchuria tend to produce smaller
seeds as compared to Ryokko and Tiwala 12 which, according to Table 45 and 46, obtained
bigger seeds. Al-Hadi (2017) revealed that the dry weight of reproductive structures
exhibited strongly negative association with phenological periods which implied that plants
grown under longer duration generated lower dry matter of reproductive strucutres. The

prevailing results in this parameters is in agreement with the accounts of Mukhekar et al.


(2004) which highlighted that 100-seed weight was negatively correlated with seed yield
(-0.27*) implying that larger seed-producing genotypes tend to achieve lower seed yield
while thos varieties with smaller seeds can potentially generate favorable yield. This
condition is due to the physiological property of varieties having higher 100-seed weight

to obtain a relatively lower number of pods plant”.

Table 8. Pearson correlation analysis between yield and yield components of five soybean
varieties grown under four planting dates
Fresh pod Fresh seed Dry pod
Yield Components ield ield _—__yield
Number of pods plant! ay
Number of marketable pods plant”!
Fresh pod weight plant”!

Dry pod weight plant!
100-fresh pod weight i
100-dry pod weight -0.68** h EOS One -0.65**
Percentage of 4-,3-, and 2-seeded pods -0.28* 5 -0.16ns -0.28*

Percentage of 4-seeded pods
Percentage of 3-seeded pods
Percentage 2-seeded pods
Percentage of 1-seeded pods 1.28 0.20ns 0.16ns 0.18
Seed length
Seed width
Fresh seed weight plant’!
Dry seed weight plant!
100-fresh seed weight
100-dry seed weight
Daily production rate

Harvest index fresh pods. 0.19* ( 0.22ns
Harvest index fresh seeds. -0.31** -0.28*
Harvest index dry pods. -0.18 -0.12ns -0.15ns -0.20ns

Harvest index dry seeds. Ashe -0.21ns Osis -0.27*
Legend: Correlation: +/- 1.00 (Perfect Positive/Negative Relationship); +/-0.91 to +/-0.99 (Very Strong
Positive/Negative Relationship); +/-0.71 to +/-0.90 (Strong Positive/Negative Relationship); +/-0.41 to
+/-0.70 (Moderate Positive/Negative Relationship); +/-0.31 to +/-0.40 (Low Positive/Negative
Relationship); +/-0.01 to +/-0.30 (Very Low Positive/Negative Relationship); 0.00 (No/negligible
Relationship) P-value: **p-value < 0.01 (Highly significant); *p-value < 0.05 (Significant); ns p-value >
0.05 (Not significant). Highlighted in green and yellow are positively and negatively significant correlation,
respectively.



CHAPTER V

SUMMARY, CONCLUSION, AND RECOMMENDATION

Summary and Conclusion

The effect of four different planting dates (PD! = March 5", PD2 = March 25",
PD3 = April 15", and PD4 = May 6") on the phenological, morpho-physiological and yield
characteristics of five soybean varieties namely: a.) Tiwala 8 (IPB variety), b.) Tudela
(farmer’s variety in Trento, Agusan del Sur), c.) Tiwala 12 (IPB variety), d.) Manchuria
(farmer’s variety in Surigao and Davao), and e.) commercial true vegetable soybean
variety, Ryokko (Kaneko Seed Co., Ltd., Japan) were studied under field conditions in
Santa Maria, Laguna from March to July, 2021. The field experiment was arranged in a
Randomized Complete Block Design (RCBD) which was replicated four times. The
phenological, morpho-physiological, and yield data were gathered from the five varieties
across the four different planting dates were combined and analyzed using Analysis of
Variance (ANOVA) to test the significance, whereas treatment means detected with a
significant difference were differentiated using Tukey's Honest Significant Difference
(HSD) Test for multiple comparisons at 95% confidence interval (p < 0.05). Pearson
correlation analysis were performed to determine the relationships between the
aforementioned soybean plant traits accounted in this study.

The planting dates, varieties, and undermining interaction between planting dates

and varieties significantly affected the days to flowering (R1 stage), days to harvesting or


full-seed stage (R6 stage), and days between the onset of flowering and R6 stage of
soybean. Prevailing weather conditions recorded during the growth duration of soybean
can potentially influence the period spent by the plant in order to achieve flowering and
full-seed stage which is ready for harvesting the fresh green pods for vegetable soybean
consumption.

Among the morpho-physiological traits, the number of nodes at R1 stage and R6
stage, fresh and dry plant weight, fresh and dry straw weight, pod length, pod width, and
height of lowest pod were significantly affected by the interaction between the planting
dates and varieties. Contrarily, pod thickness and plant height during flowering and full-
seed stage were not significantly infuenced by the interaction between planting dates and
varieties but exhibited highly significant response brought by the lone effects of planting

dates and varieties.

In the case of yield and yield components, the interaction between planting dates
and variety significantly influenced the number of pods plant’', number of marketable pods
plant’, percentage of marketable pods plant’, fresh and dry pod weight plant", 100-fresh
pod weight, 100-dry pod weight, percentage of 4-seeded pods, percentage of 2-seeded
pods, percentage of 1-seeded pods, percentage of 4-,3-, and 2-seeded pods, seed length,
seed width, fresh and dry seed weight plant", 100-fresh seed weight, 100-dry seed weight,
daily production rate, fresh pod yield, fresh seed yield, dry pod yield, and dry seed yield
on a kilogram per hectare basis, harvest index on fresh pod basis, harvest index on fresh
seed basis, harvest index on dry pod basis, and harvest index on dry seed basis and were

also detected with significant results through the lone effects of planting dates and varieties.


However, the results of the percentage of 3-seeded pods were statistically insignificant in
terms of the interaction of planting dates and varieties.

In summary, planting dates, varieties, and their interaction revealed a significant
effect on the phenological, morpho-physiological, and yield performance of soybean.
Temperature, rainfall, and growing degree units are important agrometeorological inputs
during the growth, development, and productivity of soybean that affected the performance
of varieties. Adequate amount of rainfall during the vegetative and flowering stage will
promote the crop’s performance through the full-seed stage which is ready for harvesting
the fresh green pods without issues on the quality of final yield. All of the five varieties
performed with the best yield when grown from March 25" (PD2) where rainfall is not too
abundant and the temperature is optimum for uncompromised vegetative and reproductive
growth. Final pod and seed yield declined as the temperature extremely increased, and
rainfall started to increase at the end of June and start of July with lower intercepted solar
radiation due to denser cloud cover to which the plants sown in April 15" (PD3) and May
6" (PD4) were exposed. Water stress mainly causes the abortion of reproductive structures
in grain legumes as reported by Siddique and Sedgley (1986) as well as high cloud cover
which consequently limits the incident solar radiation that the soybean planted needed to
promote biomass production (Webber, 1968, Hay and Walker, 1989).

Mean temperature is the factor which can greatly affect soybean growth and
increment in biomass since it is highly correlated with the accumulated GDD. However,
extremely high temperatures can cause delay in flowering, declined biomass accumulation

and undesirable seed-filling potential which will eventually lead to yield reduction.


Planting date is a crucial part of the soybean cultural management most especially during
the seed-filling phase which is considered as the most important stage of soybean growth
since it dictates the potential final pod and seed yield. When planted earlier or when
subjected to the appropriate timing with respect to the prevailing agrometeorological
inputs, seed-filling which commences earlier and takes longer time before reaching the
full-seed stage which is ready for harvesting the fresh green pods tend to acquire higher
amounts of accumulated solar radiation, higher photoperiod, rainfall, growing degree units,
thus, favoring the resulting growth and yield performance.

Among the planting dates employed, it is recommended that March 25" is the
planting date suitable for all varieties because it is generally the timing when morpho-
physiological traits were favored and all the five varieties generated the highest final pod
and seed yield during this timing of sowing.

From the five varieties used in this study, Tudela obtained the highest plant height
at R1 and R6 stage, days to flowering, days to full-seed stage, days between R1 and R6
stage, number of nodes plant’! at R1 and R6 stage, fresh and dry plant weight, fresh and
dry straw weight, height of lowest pod, number of pods plant”, number of marketable pods
plant’, fresh and dry pod weight plant", fresh and dry seed weight plant’, fresh and dry
pod yield, fresh and dry seed yield, and fresh and dry daily production rate. Tiwala 12 and
Manchuria recorded the highest percentage of emergence. Ryokko, on the other hand,
obtained the highest pod length, width, and thickness, 100-fresh and dry pod weight, seed
length and width, and 100-fresh and dry seed weight among the varieties evidently since it

is a large-podded and large-seeded variety as compared to Tiwala 12, Manchuria, Tiwala


8, and Tudela which produce relatively smaller pods and seeds. Tiwala 12 recorded the
highest percentage of marketable pods plant! while Tudela recorded the lowest.

The major determinants of yield were pod and seed weight plant’! (r = 0.96 to 0.99),
days to R6 stage (r = 0.90 to 0.95), and number of pods plant”! (r = 0.86 to 0.93), whereas
harvest index were strongly associated with pod and seed size.

With the results acquired, it is worth considering that soybean management
protocols such as the appropriate timing of planting should be designed to achieve
favorably higher assimilate production especially at the period of pod development and
consequently seed setting and optimize the measures that can effectively limit the recurrent
environmental stresses during these periods to extend the seed-filling duration. This will
promote the improvement of yield components such as pod number, percentage of 2- or
more seeded pods and seed weight per plant which would highly influence the resulting
final pod and seed yield. However, soybean production should be keenly studied by
employing different genotypes, cropping systems, and varying environmental settings to
achieve deeper understanding on planting date interventions. Given the results of this
study, it can be concluded that our locally developed grain soybean varieties can be
potentially repurposed to be consumed in the same manner as edamame as these varieties
are known to adapt and withstand the existing climatic conditions in our locality, thus,
creating a gap for the development of locally bred grain soybeans for vegetable soybean
consumption in our country. The result of this study will contribute to the careful selection
of our locally available grain soybean varieties applied to a soybean improvement program

aimed at development of superior quality vegetable soybean cultivars with improved


phenological, morpho-physiological, and yield characteristics and reliable adaptation to the

Philippine climatic conditions.

Recommendation

Among the planting dates employed in this study, March 25 (PD2) is
recommended as the most suitable for all varieties since it generally favored the morpho-
physiological traits and all the five varieties generated the highest final pod and seed yield
during this timing of sowing. In addition, Tudela outperformed the other varieties based on
the yield parameters. However, Tiwala 8 was evaluated as the overall most suitable
genotype based on several criteria for vegetable soybean close-to-ideal plant type and
surpassed the true vegetable soybean variety, Ryokko. Appropriate timing of planting
should be discerned to effectively limit the concurring environmental stresses, hence,
achieving favorably higher yield.

The field experiment was executed from March to July of 2021 covering four
planting dates which are set three weeks apart. To achieve a deeper understanding on the
effects of sowing dates on soybean growth and yield performance, it is recommended to
administer further set of experiments which involves addition of planting dates and/or
carrying out different time of the year. It is also appealing to conduct multi-locational trials
in order to account for the potential variations in soybean response in terms of different
soil properties and prevailing agrometeorological parameters. Since this study covered

March to July, another set of trial can be done from August to December and may also


include the first months of the year. Additionally, it is worth to consider the employment
of different set of soybean accessions to assess any significant response to climatic cues
and cultural management. This will promote a more comprehensive investigation on the
performance of soybean to environmental and weather conditions. Choosing the most
appropriate planting date favors the producers to achieve optimum pod and seed yield since
one of the considerations of sowing date decisions include the advantage of early sowing
to minimize drought or water stress on soybean most especially during the seed-filling
phase. However, the rainfall input brought by the discerned plating date is not always
adequate due to varying agrometeorological inputs from year to year, thus, posing a serious
emphasis on implementing a reliable irrigation scheme on the field during the soybean
growing season in case the precipitation acquired by the plant is insufficient. This is
suggested to prevent adverse water stress which oftentimes occur simultaneously with
extremely high temperatures as two of the major causes of significant soybean yield
reduction most importantly in highly humid regions. Lal et al. (2001) suggested to provide
irrigation at 10 - 15 days intervals until the pod development period and most importantly
at flowering and pod-filling phase to maximize the resulting size of pods and seeds.
Another aspect of vegetable soybean marketability that should be addressed in the further
studies is the determination of the chemical composition of the seeds concerning the seed
quality and consumer acceptability by performing proximate analysis of dried soybean
seeds and conducting organoleptic or sensory evaluation of the prepared or cooked fresh

green beans.


LITERATURE CITED

AHMED, M. S., ALAM, M. M. AND HASANUZZAMAN, M. 2010. Growth of
different (Glycine max.L. Merril) varieties as affected by sowing dates.
Middle East Journal of Scientific Research 5 (5): 388 - 391.

AKTER, N., A.K.M.R. AMIN, S.M. MASUM AND M.N. HAQUE. 2016. Effect of
sowing dates and weed control methods on yield components of soybean (Glycine
max L. Merrill). Pak. J. Weed Sci. Res. 22(4): 527-541.

ALI, K. A. M. 1993. Response of some new early maturing, soybean genotypes to
planting dates and plant population densities. PhD. Thesis submitted to Faculty
of Agriculture, Assuit University Egypt

ANDALES, A.A., W.D. BATCHELOR, AND C.E. ANDERSON. 2000. Modification of
a soybean model to improve soil temperature and emergence date prediction. Trans.
ASAE 43:121-129.

ARTHOON. 2015. Agronomic studies on edamame (vegetable soybean) in Kwazulu-
Natal. Pietermaritzburg, South Africa. Nov. 2015.

ASHLEY, D.A., AND W.J. ETHRIDGE. 1973. Irrigation effects on vegetative and
reproductive development of three soybean varieties. Agron. J. 70:467-471.

BAKAL, H., L. GULLUOGLU, B. ONAT AND H. ARIOGLU. 2017. The Effect of
Growing Seasons on Some Agronomic and Quality Characteristics of Soybean
Varieties in Mediterranean Region in Turkey. Turk J Field Crops 22(2): 187-196.

BARREIRO, A. S. (2008). Soybean Yield and Yield Components as Affected by
Planting Date and Maturity Group in Oklahoma.

BASTIDAS, A.M., T.D. SETTYONO, A. DOBERMANN, K.G. CASSMAN, R.W.
ELMORE, G.L. GRAEF, AND J.E. SPECHT. 2008. Soybean sowing date:
vegetative, reproductive, and agronomic impacts. Crop Sci. 48:727—740.
doi:10.2135/cropsci2006.05.0292

BEAVER, J.S., and R.R. JOHNSON. 1981. Response of determinate and indeterminate
soybeans to varying cultural practices in the Northern USA. Agron. J. 73:833-838.


BERGER-DOYLE J, ZHANG B, SMITH SF, CHEN P (2014) Planting Date, Irrigation,
and Row Spacing Effects on Agronomic Traits of Food-grade Soybean.

BOARD, J.E., AND W. HALL. 1984. Premature flowering in soybean yield reductions at
nonoptimal planting dates as influenced by temperature and photoperiod. Agron. J.
76:700—-704. doi:10.2134/agron j1984.00021962007600040043x

BOARD, J. E., & SETTIMI, J. R. 1986. Photoperiod Effect before and after Flowering on
Branch Development in Determinate Soybean. Agronomy Journal 78:995-1002.

https://doi.org/10.2134/agronj1986.00021962007800060013

BOLLA, K.N. 2015. Soybean Consumption And Health Benefits. International Journal
of Scientific and Technology Research 4(7): 50-53.

BRAR, G.S., & T.E. CARTER. 1993. Soybean Glycine max (L.) Merrill. Jn: Kalloo G.
and B.O. Bergh (eds.) Genetic improvement of vegetable crops. Pergamon, Oxford,
UK, pp. 427-63.

CALVINO, P. A., V.O. SADRAS & F.H. ANDRADE. 2003. Quantification of
environmental and management effects on the yield of late-sown soybean. Field
Crops Research 83:67—77. hitps://doi.org/10.1016/S0378-4290(03)00062-5

CARTER, J., and E.E. HARTWIG. 1963. The management of soybeans. p. 161-226. In
A.G. Norman (ed.) The soybean: Genetics, breeding, physiology, nutrition,
management. Academic Press, New York.

CARSON LC, FREEMAN JH, ZHOU K, WELBAUM G, REITER M (2011). Cultivar
evaluation and lipid and protein contents of Virginia-grown edamame.
HortTechnology 21:131-135.

CASTEEL, S. 2011. Soybean physiology: How well do you know soybeans? Soybean
Station, Purdue University.

CHEN, G.H., AND P. WIATRAK. 2010. Soybean development and yield are influenced
By planting date and environmental conditions in the southeastern coastal plain,
United States. Agron. J. 102:1731-1737.

CHIBA, Y. 1991. Postharvest processing, marketing and quality degradation of vegetable
soybean in Japan. Jn: Shanmugasundaram S. (ed.) Vegetable soybean, research
needs for production and quality improvement. Proceeding of Workshop, Kenting,
Taiwan, Asian Vegetable Research and Development Center. pp.108-112.


CHRISTMAS, E. P. 2008. Plant populations and seeding rates for soybeans.
Agronomy Guide, Purdue University, Cooperative Extension Service, West
Lafayette, Indiana.

CLARKE R, HILAKIVI-CLARKE L, CHO E, JAMES MR, LEONESSA F (1996)
Estrogens, phytoestrogens, and breast cancer. Adv Exp Med Biol Dietary
Phytochem Cancer Prev Treat 401: 63-65

COBER, E. R., TANNER, J. W. AND VOLDENG, H. D. 1997. Genetic control of
photoperiod responce in early-maturing near-isogenic soybean lines. Crop Sci. 36:
601-605.

CONLEY, S.P., L. ABENDROTH, R. ELMORE, E.P. CHRISTMAS, AND M.
ZARNSTORFF. 2008. Soybean Seed Yield and Composition Response to Stand
Reduction at Vegetative and Reproductive Stages. Agron. J. 100:1666-1669.

CRAWFORD, L. E., & M.M. WILLIAMS. 2019. Planting depth and seed size affect

edamame emergence individually. HortScience 54:92-94.
https://doi.org/10.21273/HORTSCI13631-18

DRZEWIECKI, J., DELGADO, L. E., HARUENKIT R, PAWELZIK E, MARTIN B. O.,
PARK Y. S, JUNG S.T, TRAKHTENBERG S. AND GORISTEIN S. 2003.
Identification and differences of total proteins an their soluble fractions in some
pseudocereals based on electrophoretic patterns. Journal of Agricultural Food
Chemistry 51: 7798-7804

DUPPONG, L. M., & H. HATTERMAN-VALENTI. 2005. Yield and quality of vegetable
soybean cultivars for production in North Dakota. HortTechnology 15:896—900.
https://doi.org/10.21273/horttech. 15.4.0896

EGLI, D.B., W.P. BRUENING. 2000. Potential of early-maturing soybean cultivars in late
plantings. Agron J. 92:932-537.

EGLI, D. B., & P.L. CORNELIUS. 2009. A regional analysis of the response of soybean

yield to planting date. Agronomy Journal, 101:330-335.
https://doi.org/10.2134/agronj2008.0148

FAISAL, M., A. MALIK, M. ASHRAF, A.S. QURESHI, M.R. KHAN (2011):
Investigation and Comparison of Some Morphological Traits of the Soybean
Populations Using Cluster Analysis. Pak J Bot., 43: 1249-1255.


FEHR,W. R., CAVINESS, C. E., BURMOOD, D. T.,&PENNINGTON, J. S. (1971). Stage
of development descriptions for soybeans, Glycine max (L.) Merrill. Crop Science,
11, 929. https://doi.org/10.2135/cropscil1971.0011183X001 10006005 1x

FOROUD, N., MIINDEL, H., SAINDON, G. AND ENTZ, T. 1993. Irrigation science
effect of level and timing of moisture stress on soybean plant development and
yield components. Irrigation Science 13:149-155.

FRANK, S. AND W. R. FEHR.1981. Associations among pod dimensions and seed
weight in soybeans. Crop Science 21 :547-550.

GARDNER, F.P., PEARCE, RB. AND MITCHELL, RL. (1985). PhYSiology of Crop
Plants. Iowa State University Press, Ames.

GOMEZ KA, GOMEZ AA. 1984. Statistical Procedures for Agricultural Research (2nd
Edition). John Wiley and Sons Inc., New York (USA).

GUO, J., A. RAHMAN, M.J. MULVANEY, M.M. HOSSAIN, K. BASSO, R. FETHIERE
& M.A. BABAR. 2002. Evaluation of edamame genotypes suitable for growing in
Florida. Agronomy Journal 1 12:693-707. https://doi.org/10.1002/agj2.20136

GUPTA, V. P. AND I. I. GARG. 1980. Nature and magnitude of genotype x environment
interaction for seed quality traits and their association with seed yield in soybean.
Seed Tech. News. 10:13.

HAMID, A., A. HUSNA, M.M. HAQUE, M.R. ISLAM (2011): Genetic variability in
pigeonpea (Cajanus cajan L. Millspaugh). Electronic Journal of Plant Breeding, 2:
117- 123.

HASHEMI, J.M. (2001). Sowing date on the developmental stages and some agronomic
and physiological characteristics of five soybean cultivars grown in the second
planting. Crop Sci. J., 3(4): 49-59.

HATFIELD, J. L., & PRUEGER, J. H. (2015). Temperature extremes: Effect on plant
growth and development. Weather and Climate Extremes 10:4-10.

HEATHERLY (1996). “Yield and germinability of seed from irrigated and nonirrigated
early- and late-planted MG IV and V soybean,” Crop Science, vol. 36, no. 4, pp.
1000-1006.

HEYDARI ZADEH, P AND M.R. KHAJEPOUR, 2007. The reaction of Safflower
genotypes on planting date. Agricultural and natural resource science and
technology Magazine. 11th year, 42(a): 69-79


HAYATI, R., EGLI, D.B. AND CRAFTS-BRANDNER, S.J. 1995. Carbon and nitrogen
supply during seed filling and leaf senescence in soybean. Crop science 35: 1063-
1069.

HU, M., & P. WIATRAK. 2012. Effect of planting date on soybean growth, yield, and
grain quality: Review. Agronomy Journal 104:785-790.
https://doi.org/10.2134/agronj2011.0382

HUNDAL, S. S., SINGH, H., KAUR, P. AND DHALIWAL, L. K. 2003. Agro
climatic models for growth and yield of soybean (Glycine max). Indian
Journal of Agricultural Sciences 73: 668-670.

HUNSBERGER, L., J. SIMON, W.J. SCIARAPPA, D. SHEN, Q.L. WU & B. HULME.
2012. Evaluation of Edamame Cultivars in New Jersey and Maryland. SSRN
Electronic Journal, 223-227. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssmm.2032208

HURBURGH, CHARLES R. Jr., "Quality of the 2001 Soybean Crop in the United
States" (2001). Agricultural and Biosystems Engineering Technical Reports and
White Papers. 18. https://lib.dr.iastate.edu/abe_eng_reports/18

JIANG, B., NAN, H., GAO, Y., TANG, L., YUE, Y., LU, S., MA, L., CAO, D., SUN, S.,
WANG, J., WU, C., YUAN, X., HOU, W., KONG, F., HAN, T., AND LIU, B.
2014. Allelic combinations of soybean maturity loci El, E2, E3 and E4 result in
diversity of maturity and adaptation to different latitudes. PLoS ONE 9(8): 1-11

JOHNSON, D. S. WANG & A. SUZUKI. 1999. Edamame: A vegetable soybean for
Colorado. Jn: J. Janick (ed.) Perspectives on new crops and new uses. ASHS Press,
Alexandria, VA, USA. pp. 385-387.

JOHNSON, R.R. AND L.M. WAX. 1979. Soybean stand establishment and yield as
affected by herbicides and cultural practices. Agron. J. 71:880- 884

JUWATTANASOMRAN R, SOMTA P, KAGA A, CHANKAEW S, SHIMIZU T,
SORAJJAPINUN W, SRINIVES P (2010) Identification of a new fragrance allele
in soybean and development of its functional marker. Mol Breed 29:13-21

KANE, M.V., C.C. STEELE, L.J. GRABAU, C.T. MACKOWN & D.F. HILDEBRAND.
1997. Early-maturing soybean cropping system. III: Protein and oil contents and
oil composition. Agronomy Journal 89:464—-469.

KANTOLIC, A.G., AND G.A. SLAFER. 2001. Photoperiod sensitivity after flowering and
seed number determination in indeterminate soybean cultivars. Field Crops Res.
72:109-118. doi:10.1016/ S0378-4290(01)00168-X


KAPOOR, M., GUPTA, A. K, & DEODHAR, A. D. (1977). Sensory evaluation of
vegetable cutlets prepared from soybean (vegetable and grain type) and potatoes.
Curr. Agrie., i, 49-52.

KAUR, H., SINGH, G., GILL, K. K. AND SHARMA, P. (2015). Growth and yield of
soybean (Glycine max) varieties as influenced by sowing time. /ndian. J. of Eco.
42(2): 412:416.

KELLEY, K.M. & SANCHEZ, E.S. 2005 Accessing and understanding consumer
awareness of and potential demand for Edamame HortScience 40 1347 1353

KILEN, T. C. 1980 . Parental influence of F1 seed size in soybeans. Crop Sci. 20: 261-
262.

KIM, J.A., S.B. HONG, W.S. JUNG, C.Y. YU, K.H. MA, J.G. GWAG & ILM. CHUNG
IM. 2007. Comparison of isoflavones composition in seed, embryo, cotyledon and
seed coat of cooked-with-rice and vegetable soybean (Glycine max L.) varieties.
Food Chemistry 102:738-744.

KIM, E.H., S.H. KIM, J.I. CHUNG, H.Y. CHI, J.A. KIM, AND I.M. CHUNG. 2006.
Analysis of phenolic compounds and isoflavones in soybean seeds (Glycine max
(L.) Merrill) and sprouts grown under different conditions. Eur. Food Res. Technol.
222:201 https://doi.org/10.1007/s00217- 005-0153-4.

KOES, R., W. VERWEJJ & F. QUATTROCCHIO. 2005. Flavonoids: a colorful model
for the regulation and evolution of biochemical pathways. Trends Plant Science
10:236-242.

KORATKAR R, SUNG M-K, TORZSAS TL, RAO AV (1996) Effect of soybean
saponins on aberrant crypt formation in mice. Adv Exp Med Biol Dietary
Phytochem Cancer Prev Treat 401: 303.

KUCUK, O. 2004. Soy isoflavones in the treatment of prostate cancer. Jn: Moscardi, F.,
Hoffmann-Campo, C.B., Saraiva, O.F., Galerani, P.R., Krzyzanowski, F.C. and
Carrao-Panizzi, M.C. (eds) Proceedings VII World Soybean Research Conference
and VI International Soybean Processing and Utilization Conference. Foz do
Iguassu, Brazil, pp. 695-700.

KUMAGAI E, TAKAHASHI T. (2020) Soybean (Glycine max (L.) Merr.) Yield
Reduction due to Late Sowing as a Function of Radiation Interception and Use in
a Cool Region of Northern Japan. Agronomy. 2020; 10(1):66.
https://doi.org/10.3390/agronomy 10010066


KUMAR, V., A. RANI, L. GOYAL, D. PRATAP, S.D. BILLORE & G.S. CHAUHAN.
2011. Evaluation of vegetable-type soybean for sucrose, taste-related amino acids,
and isoflavones contents. International Journal of Food Properties 14:1142-1151.
https://doi.org/10.1080/1094291 1003592761

KUMAR, V., A. RANI, S. SOLANKI & S.M. HUSSAIN. 2006. Influence of growing
environment on the biochemical composition and physical characteristics of
soybean seed. Journal of Food Composition and Analysis 19:188-195.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfca.2005.06.005

LAL, G.S., H. LAI & S. SHANMUGASUNDARAM. 2001. Maps of India. Available
from: http://www.mapsofindia.com/indiaagriculture/oil-seeds/soybean-growing-
states. html.

LEE, C.Y. 1989. Green peas. Jn: Eskin M.A.M. (ed.) Quality control in preservation of
vegetables. CRS Press Inc., Boca Raton, FL, USA. pp. 159-183.

LEE, S.J., J.K. AHN, S.H. KIM, J.T. KIM, S.J. HAN & M.Y. JUNG. 2003. Variation in
isoflavone of soybean cultivars with location and storage duration. Journal of
Agriculture and Food Chemistry 51:3382-3389.

LEROY, A.R., W.R. Fehr, and S.R. Cianzio. 1991. Introgression of genes for small seed
size from Glycine soja into G. max. Crop Sci. 31: 693-697.

LI, G., Y. JIANG, X.J. FAN & Y.H. LIU. 2012. Molecular cloning and characterization of
a novel B-glucosidase with high hydrolyzing ability for soybean isoflavone
glycosides and glucose-tolerance from soil metagenomic library. Bioresource
Technology 123: 15-22. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2012.07.083

LI, Y. S., M. DU, H. QI, Q.Y. ZHANG, G. WANG, G. HUA, X.B. LIU, X. & M.
HASHEMI. 2012. Greater differences exist in seed protein, oil, total soluble sugar
and sucrose content of vegetable soybean genotypes [Glycine max (L.) Merrill] in
Northeast China. Australian Journal of Crop Science 6:1681—1686.

LI, Y., J. STREET, Q. ZHANG, G. WANG, J. JIN & S. HERBERT. 2014. Planting date
influences fresh pod yield and seed chemical compositions of vegetable soybean.
HortScience 49:1376—1380.

LIU XH, UPADHYAYA P, EL-BAYOUMY K, ROSE DP (1996) The effect of dietary
soy on human breast cancer metastasis in nude mice. Adv Exp Med Biol Dietary
Phytochem Cancer Prev Treat 401: 283-284.


LUMPKIN, T.A. & J. KONOVSKY. 1991. A critical analysis of vegetable soybean
production, demand and research in Japan. Jn: Shanmugasundaram, S. (ed.)
Proceedings of Vegetable Soybean — Research Needs for Production and Quality
Improvement Workshop. Asian Vegetable Research and Development Center,
Shanhua, Tainan, Taiwan, pp. 120-140.

MADANZI, T., CHIDUZA, C. & RICHARDSON-KAGELER, S.J. 2010 Effects of
planting method and seed size on stand establishment of soybean [Glycine max
(L.) Merrill cv. Solitaire] Soil Tillage Res. 106 171 176

MALEK, M.A., L. RAHMAN, MY. RAFI, M.A. SALAM (2013): Selection of a high
yielding soybean variety, Binasoybean-2 from collected germplasm. Journal of
Food, Agriculture & Environment., 11: 545-547.

MANNAN, M.A., M.A. KARIM, Q.A. KHALIQ, M.M. HAQUE, M.A.K. MIAN, J.U.
AHMED (2010): Assessment of Genetic Divergence in Salt Tolerance of Soybean
(Glycine max L.) Genotypes. J Crop Sci Biotech., 13: 33-38.

MANSUR LM, ORF LH, CHASE K, JARVIK T, CREGAN PB, et al. (1996) Genetic
mapping of agronomic traits using recombinant inbred lines of soybean. Crop
Sci 36: 1327-1336.

MAPILES, J. (2020, Februrary 26). Farmers urged to plant soybean to meet high demand.
Philippine News Agency. Retrieved from
https://www.pna.gov.ph/articles/1094882.

MASUDA, R. & K. HARADA. 2001. Enhancement of sweet components in vegetable
soybean seeds: Starch degradation during cooking enhances flavour of immature
seeds. In: Proceedings of Second International Vegetable Soybean Conference.
Washington State University, Tacoma, WA, USA, pp. 105-108.

MASUDA, R. 1991. Quality requirement and improvement of vegetable soybean. Jn:
Shanmugasundaram, S. (ed.) Proceedings of Vegetable Soybean — Research Needs
for Production and Quality Improvement Workshop. Asian Vegetable Research and
Development Center, Shanhua, Tainan, Taiwan, pp. 92-102.

MEBRAHTHU, T. & C. MULLINS. 2007. Efficiency of mechanical harvest for immature
vegetable soybean pods. Virginia Journal of Science 58:165-174.

MEBRAHTU, T., & A. MOHAMED. 2006. Genetic variation for green pod yield and
quality among vegetable soybean genotypes. Journal of Crop Improvement
16:113— 130. https://doi.org/10.1300/J411v16n01_08



MEBRAHTU, T., A. MOHAMED & W. MERSIE. 1991. Green pod yield and architectural
traits of selected vegetable soybean genotypes. Journal of Production Agriculture
4:395-399. https://doi.org/10.2134/jpa1991.03:

MENTREDDY, S. R., MOHAMED, A.L., JOSHEE, N. AND YADAV, A.K. 2002.
Edamame/ : A nutritious vegetable Crop. In: Janick, J. and Whipkey, A. (Eds.).
Trends in wew crops and new uses. Alexaandra, VA: ASHS Press. 438pp

MESSINA, M. 2004. The science behind soyfoods. Jn: Moscardi, F., Hoffmann-Campo,
C.B., Saraiva, O.F., Galerani, P-.R., Krzyzanowski, F.C. and Carrao-Panizzi, M.C.
(eds) Proceedings of VII World Soybean Research Conference and VI International
Soybean Processing and Utilization Conference. Foz do Iguassu, Brazil, pp. 73-82.

MILES, C.A., T.A. LUMPKIN, L. ZENZ. 2000. Edamame. Farming west of the cascades.
Washington State University, Washington, DC, USA.

MISHRA, V., , CHERKAUER K. A.,, AND SHUKLA S. , 2010: Assessment of
drought due to historic climate variability and projected future climate change in
the Midwestern United States. J. Hydrometeor., 11, 4668,
doi: 10.1175/2009JHM 1156.1.

MOHAMED, M. S. A. 1988. Implication of genotype ° planting date and row
spacing interaction in soybean cultivar development, M.Sc. Thesis submitted to
faculty of Agriculture, Cairo University, Egypt

MONDAL, M. A. HAKIM, A. S. JURAIMI, AND M. A. K. AZAD (2011).
“Contribution of morpho-physiological attributes in determining yield of
mungbean,” African Journal of Biotechnology, vol. 10, no. 60, pp. 12897-12904

MONTRI, D. N., KELLEY, K. M., AND SANCHEZ, E. S. (2006). Consumer interest in
fresh, in-shell edamame and acceptance of edamame-based
patties. HortScience 41, 1616-1622. doi: 10.21273/HORTSCI.41.7.1616

MORSE, W. T. (1950). Chemical composition of soybean seed. In Soybean Products, ed.
I. K. S. Markely. John Wiley and Sons, New York.

MUHAMMAD, A., S.K. KHALIL, K.B. MARWAT, A.Z. KHAN, LH. KHALIL, J.
AMANULLAH & S.ARIFULLAH. 2009 Nutritional quality and production of
soybean land races and improved varieties as affected by planting dates. Pakistan
Journal of Botany 41:683- 689.

MUKHEKAR, G.D., N.D. BANGAR AND D.B. LAD. 2004. Character association and
path coefficient analysis in soybean (Glycine max (L.) Merill). J. Maharashtra
Agric. Univ., 29(3): 256-258.


NGALAMU, T., M. ASHRAF, AND S. MESEKA. 2013. Soybean (Glycine max L)
genotype and environment interaction effect on yield and other related traits.
American J. Exp. Agric., 3(4): 977-987.

NIZAMUTDINOVA, LT., Y.M. KIM, J.I. CHUNG, S.C. SHIN, Y.K. JEONG, H.G. SEO,
et al. 2009. Anthocyanins from black soybean seed coats stimulate wound healing
in fibroblasts and keratinocytes and prevent inflammation in endothelial cells. Food
Chem. Toxicology 47:2806-2812.

OCAMPO, R. (2020, February 27). PH farmers harvest 1st export-grade batch of edamame
For Japan. Philippine Daily Inquirer. Retrieved from
https://newsinfo.inquirer.net/1233971/ph-farmers-harvest-1st-export-grade-batch-

damame-for-japan

OGLES, C. Z., E.A. GUERTAL & D.B. WEAVER. 2016. Edamame cultivar evaluation
in central Alabama. Agronomy Journal 108:2371-2378.

https://doi.org/10.2134/agronj2016.04.0218

PARKER, A, K. FRY AND K. REESE. 2016. Planting date effect on soybean reproductive
duration. Agronomy Sciences Research Update, DuPont Pioneer, Johnston, IA.

PEDERSEN, P. AND J.G. LAUER. 2004. Response of soybean yield components to
management system and planting date. Agron. J. 96: 1372-1381.

PENDLETON, J.W. AND HARTWIG, E.E., 1973. Management. In: B.E. Caldwell
(Editor), Soybeans: Improvement, Production, and Uses, Ist edn. Agronomy,
16:211-237.

PFEIFFER, T.W. AND EGLI, D.B., 1988. Heritability of seed filling period estimates in
soybean. Crop Sci., 28: 921-925.

PIPOLO, A. E. 2002. Influéncia da temperatura sobre as concentragées de proteina e dleo
em sementes de soja Glycine max (L.) Merrill). Piracicaba, Sao Paulo - Brasil.
Universidade de Sao Paulo, Dsc Thesis

PURCELL, L.C., M. SALMERON, AND L. ASHLOCK. 2014. Soybean growth and
development, pp. 1-8. Jn Arkansas Soybean Handbook, MP 197. Ark. Coop. Ext.
Ser., Little Rock, AR.

RACKIS, J.J. 1978. Biochemical changes in soybeans: maturation, post-harvest storage
and processing, and germination. pp. 34-76. Jn: H.O. Hultin and M. Milner (eds),
Post-harvest Biology and Technology. Food and Nutrition, Westport.


RAO, M. S. S., AS BHAGSARI & A.I. MOHAMED. 2002. Fresh green seed yield and
seed nutritional traits of vegetable soybean genotypes. Crop Science 42:1950—

ROACH, D.A. AND WULFF, R.D. (1987) Maternal effects in plants. Annual Review of
Ecology and Systematics 18, 209-235

SAITOH, K., ISOBE, S. AND KURODA, T. 1999. Intraraceme variation in the numbers
of flowers and pod set in field-grown soybean. Jpn. J. Crop Sci. 68 : 396-400*

SALDIVAR, X., Y.J. WANG, P. CHEN & A. HOU. 2011. Changes in chemical
composition during soybean seed development. Food Chemistry 124:1369-1375.

httr loi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2010.07.091

SALMERON, M., GBUR, E. E., BOURLAND, F. M., BUEHRING, N. W., EARNEST,
L., FRITSCHI, F. B., GOLDEN, B. R., HATHCOAT, D., LOFTON, J., MILLER,
T. D., NEELY, C., SHANNON, G., UDEIGWE, T. K., VERBREE, D. A.,
VORIES, E. D. WIEBOLD, W. J. AND PURCELL, L. C. 1. 2014. Soybean
maturity group choices for early and late plantings in the midsouth. Agronomy
Journal 106(5):1893-1901.

SAMMIS, T.W., C.L. MAPEL, D.G. LIGG, R.R. LANSFORD, AND J.T. MCGUCKIN
1985. Evapotranspiration crop coefficients predicted using growing degree days.
Transactions of the ASAE 28(3):773-778.

SANCHEZ, E., K. KELLEY & L. BUTLER. 2005. Edamame production as influenced by
seedling emergence and plant population. HortTechnology 15:672-676.

https://doi.org/10.21273/horttech.15.3.0672

SANTACHIARA, G., BORRAS, L. AND ROTUNDO, J.L. 2017. Physiological processes
leading to similar yield in contrasting soybean maturity groups. Agronomy Journal
109(1):158~ 167.

SARUTAYOPHAT T. 2012. Correlation and path coefficient analysis for yield and its
components in vegetable soybean. Songklanakarin J. Sci. Technol .34: 273-277.

SHANMUGASUNDARAM, S. & M.R. YAN. 2001. Mechanization of vegetable soybean
production in Taiwan. Jn: Proceedings of Second International Vegetable Soybean
Conference. Washington State University, Tacoma, WA, USA, pp. 167-172.

SHANMUGASUNDARAM,, S. & M.R. YAN. 2010. Vegetable Soybean. Jn: Singh, G.
(ed.) The Soybean: Botany, Production and Uses. CAB Intemational. Wallingford,
Oxfordshire, UK pp. 427-461.


SHANMUGASUNDARAM, S. 2001. Global extension and diversification of fresh and
frozen vegetable soybean. In: Lumpkin T.A. and Shanmugasundaram S. (eds.) 2nd
Int. Vegetable Soybean Conf., Washington State University, Pullman, PA, USA. pp.
161-165.

SHANMUGASUNDARAM, S., S.T. CHENG, M.T. HUANG & M.R. YAN. 1991.
Varietal improvement of vegetable soybean in Taiwan. Jn: Shanmugasundaram, S.
(ed.) Proceedings of Vegetable Soybean — Research Needs for Production and
Quality Improvement Workshop. Asian Vegetable Research and Development
Center, Shanhua, Tainan, Taiwan, pp. 30-42,

SHANMUGASUNDARAM . S. 1996. The evolving global vegetable soybean industry. In:
Duchanan A. (ed.) Proc. 2nd Int. Soybean Processing and Utilization Conf.
Bangkok, Thailand. pp. 472-8.

SHARMA, K. P. (2013). Varietal yield stability and appropriate management for quality
organic edamame production (pp. 10-24). The Sharing Farm Society.

http rtifiedorganic.bc.ca/programs/osdp/I-166_Edamame2_Final_Report.pdf

SHEGRO, A., ATILAW, A., PAL, U. & GELETA, N. Influence of Varieties and Planting
Dates on Growth and Development of Soybean (G/ycine max L. Merr) in Metekel
Zone, North Western Ethiopia. Journal of Agronomy 9 (3): 146-156, 2010.

SHURTLEFF, W. & A. AOYAGI. 1994. Green Vegetable Soybeans (Edamame) and
Vegetable Type Soybeans. Bibliography and Source Book, 3rd century AD to 1994.
Soyfoods Center, Lafayette, CA, USA.

SIEBERS M.H., C.R. YENDREK, D. DRAG, A.M. LOCKE, L.R. ACOSTA, A.D.B.
LEAKEY, E.A. AINSWORTH, C.J. BERNACCHI, AND D.R. ORT. 2015. Heat
waves imposed during early pod development in soybean (Glycine max) cause
significant yield loss despite a rapid recovery from oxidative stress. Global Change
Biol. 21:3114-3125.

SIRISOMBOON, P. 2007. Physical properties of green soybean : criteria for sorting.
79:18-22. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfoodeng.2006.01.022

SIRTORI CR, EVEN R, LOVATI MR (1993) Soybean protein diet and plasma
cholesterol: From therapy to molecular mechanism. Ann NY Acad Sci 676: 188—
201.

SMITH, J.R. AND NELSON, R.L., 1986. Relationship between seed filling period and
yield among soybean breeding lines. Crop Sci., 26: 469-472.


STAR, version 2.0.1, 2014. Biometrics and Breeding Informatics, PBGB Division,
International Rice Research Institute, Los Bafios, Laguna.

TAKAHASHI Y AND OHYAMA T. 2011. Production and consumption of green
vegetable soybeans —Edamamel, In: Soybeans: Cultivation, Uses and Nutrition,
Maxwell J E (Ed), pp. 427-44.

TAKAHATA, Y., M. OHNISHI-KAMEYAMA, S. FURUTA, M. TAKAHASHI, AND
A. SUDA. 2001. Highly polymerized procyanidins in brown soybean seed coat
with a high radical-scavenging activity. J. Agric. Food Chem. 49:5843-5847.

TREMBLAY, G.J., JM. BEAUSOLEIL, P. FILION & M. SAULNIER. 2006. Response
of three soybean cultivars to seeding date. Canadian Journal of Plant Science
86:1071-1078.

TACARINDUA, C. R., T. SHIRAIWA, K. HOMMA, E. KUMAGAI, AND R.
SAMESHIMA. 2013. The effects of increased temperature on crop growth and
yielof soybean grown in a temperature gradient chamber. Field Crops Research 154

TSAY, L.M., AND S.C. SHEU. 1991. Studies on the effects of cold storage and precooling
on the quality of vegetable soybeans. In: S. Shanmugasundaram (Ed), Vegetable
soybean: research needs for production and quality improvement. Asian Vegetable
Research and Development Center. pp. 113-119.

TSOU, S.C\S., & T.L. HONG. 1991. Research on vegetable soybean quality in Taiwan. In:
Shanmugasundaram S. (ed.) Vegetable soybean research needs for production and
quality improvement. Proceedings of a workshop held at Kenting, Taiwan 29 April
2 May 1991, pp. 103-107.

VAN ROEKEL, R.J., L.C. PURCELL AND M. SALMERON. 2015. Physiological and
management factors contributing to soybean potential yield. Field Crops Res.
182:86-97.

WEBBER, C.R. (1968). Physiological concepts for high season yields. Field Crops
Abstracts 21,313-317.

WILCOX, J. R., AND CAVINS, J. F. (1995). Backcrossing high seed protein to a soybean
cultivar. Crop Sci. 35, 1036-1041. doi:
10.2135/cropscil1995.001 1183X003500040019x

WILLIAMS, M., T. HERMAN & R. NELSON. 2012. Edamame Cultivar Report-2011.
Midwestern Vegetable Variety Trial Report for 2011. Purdue University, West
Lafayette, IN, USA.


WHIGHAM, D.K. AND MINOR, H.C. 1978. Agronomic characteristics
andenvironmental stress. In Soybean Physiology, Agronomy, and Utilization,
A.G. Norman, (Ed.). pp. 77-117. Academic Press, New York.

WU, T.L., N. TANG & Z.S. ZHAO. 2000. Selection standards of seed and pod
characteristics for vegetable soybean. Soybean Science 19:184-187.

XU, Y.X., J. BARBARO, F. REESE, A. LANGAIGNE, L. RUTTO & M. KERING. 2015.
Physicochemical, functional and microstructural characteristics of vegetable
soybean (Glycine max) as affected by variety and cooking process. Journal of Food
Measurement and Characterization 9:471-478

ZANDONADI, R., T. COOLONG, AND T. PFEIFFER. 2010. Mechanical harvesting of
edamame. Univ. of Kentucky. htips://www.uky.edu/Ag/.../edamameharvest.pdf,

ZARGAR, M., S. MAFAKHERI AND M.J. SHAKOURI. 2011. Response of Soybean
Varieties to Different Planting Dates. Middel-East J. of Scientific Research,
8(1):161-164

ZHANG, J., Q. SONG, P.B. CREGAN, R.L. NELSON, X. WANG, J. WU & G.L. JIANG.
2015. Genome-wide association study for flowering time, maturity dates and plant
height in early maturing soybean (Glycine max) germplasm. BMC Genomics 16:1—
11. bttps://doi.org/10.1186/s12864-015-1441-4

ZHANG, L., & S. KYEI-BOAHEN. 2007. Growth and yield of vegetable soybean
(edamame) in Mississippi.HortTechnology 17:26-31.

https://doi.org/10.21273/horttech.17.1.26

ZHANG, Q. Y., Q.L. GAO, S.J. HERBERT, Y.S. LI & A.M. HASHEMI. 2010. Influence
of sowing date on phenological stages, seed growth and marketable yield of four
vegetable soybean cultivars in North-Eastern USA. African Journal of Agricultural
Research 5:2556-2562.

ZHANG, Q., Y. LI, K.L. CHIN & Y. QI. 2017. Vegetable soybean: seed composition and
production research. Italian Journal of Agronomy  12:276-282.
https://doi.org/10.408 1 /ija.2017.872

ZHANG, Y.M., J.M. ZHAO, M.J. WANG, H. XING and J.Y. GAI. 2006. Genetic variance
of nutritional quality of vegetable soybean germplasm in southern China. Soybean
Science 3:239-243.
