Safety and Quality Improvement of Locally Produced Fresh Sausage and Dry-Cured Ham in Sabangan, Mountain Province

MALAYA LARANJO ALABADO

UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES LOS BAÑOS

Master of Science in Food Science

JUNE 2017

ABSTRACT

Food producers in Barangay Camatagan, Sabangan, Mountain Province are one of
the many (farmers) that have been deprived of the knowledge and resources to achieve
food safety and quality of their produced goods — etag and native longganisa. This
study was successful in identifying the gaps and limitations in the production of the dry-
cured ham — efag, and the fresh sausage native longganisa. Different standards including GMP, FAO, WHO, and FDA requirements were
used as basis to assess the existing practices of the local producers in Brgy. Camatagan,
Sabangan, Mountain Province, and then developed appropriate actions to improve their
process and finished products. Implementation of GMP and standardization of slaughter
procedure was remarkable in improvement of microbial quality. Addition of phosphate was done to improve aesthetic quality of longganisa.
Results showed that there was a significant difference in terms of color. For efag, residual
brine draining after 24 hours of salting was done and this showed were significantly effect on texture of the meat. All the results and topics discussed in this study were shared to the other members
of the community who did not participate in the production. A seminar-workshop was successfully conducted.

INTRODUCTION

Achieving food safety and quality has remained to be the biggest challenge of the meat
and livestock industry in the 21% century. It is clear that the consumer's definition of food
quality in relation to meat is now wide and has been conditioned by changing attitudes in society
in general, often implied by the media (Wood et al., 1998). Due to increased consumer
awareness, quality is not limited to flavor, texture and other sensory characteristics anymore, but
also includes views and perceptions about the condition of animal production in relation to
animal welfare, the impact of animal production in the environment and, of course, food safety
(Wood et al., 1998). Consequently, various initiatives has been done to meet the increasing
demand for high quality meat and meat products which includes all factors that affect meat
quality in general, whether extrogenous or endogenous (Toldra, 2010). More importantly, studies
have been done to face the most serious meat safety issues resulting in immediate consumer
health problems and recalls from the marketplace of potentially contaminated products that are

associated with microbial, and especially bacterial pathogens (Sofos, 2007).

In the industrialized countries, incidents of food contamination have been solely
concerned on meat, dairy products, salads and canned goods. Consumers have also been affected
by food scares. However, in developing countries, food-bome illnesses are recognized despite
the lack of data. More often, these are associated with low-levels of generic economic
development and, more specifically, limited capacity to control safety of the food supply
(Henson, 2003). Hence, this indicates that those who have difficult access to information and

technology are the ones put at risk in terms of safety and quality.

In the Philippines, national policy on food safety has not been clearly stated and there are
still gaps and overlaps at large in the implementation of programs (Lizada, 2007). As of April
2017, there have been 19 cases of food-safety related illnesses recorded since January 2016
(newsinfo.inquirer.net). Based on the record of Philippines Statistics Authority (PSA), there were
only 4 cases and 2 cases of food poisoning in 2013 and 2014 respectively. This is significantly
lower than the reported cases stated in the current events. This therefore shows insufficient data
in the monitoring of food safety related issues in the country. Today, there has been no report or
update yet on the incidents. The absence of monitoring and scientific data to assess the
emergence of food-borne illnesses and the risks involve, clearly manifests the need to increase
genuine awareness of food safety and quality not only for the benefit of the consumers, but more

especially to the small to medium size food manufacturers.

Swine production has been one of the major sources of income of the farmers in
Barangay Camatagan, Sabangan, Mountain Province, aside from backyard farming which
involves planting of rice and vegetables. They are one of the many food producers that have been
deprived of the knowledge and resources to achieve food safety and quality of their produced
goods ~ etag and native longganisa. Based on literature, the production of efag is quite similar to
dry-cured ham (Toldrd, 2010) or cured-raw meats (Heinz and Hautzinger, 2007). These types of
cured meats are not subjected to heat treatment. Instead, they undergo processing which can
either be fermentation, curing and ripening in controlled climatized conditions (Heinz and
Hautzinger, 2007). Longganisa,on the other hand, is a term of Spanish origin that has been
classified as a fresh sausage(Heinz and Hautzinger, 2007). As of today, the people living in the
area see great opportunity in meat processing. The terms efag and longganisa will be used

throughout this paper to emphasize the native origin of the products.

The meat processing in Sabangan, Mountain Province, has received feedback from
consumers about inconsistency of taste and flavor of the produced goods. There was already an
incident allegedly associated to food poisoning. The producers could not justify the safety of the
product due to lack of study and analysis to assess its compliance to the set standards. The
concept of meat processing was only introduced to the locals to utilize the surplus of swine
production. There has been a decline in their profit from selling the live animal (pig) due to low
buying price, brought about by market competition, especially the presence of imported meat and
meat products. The producers saw meat processing as a better opportunity to a stable income
than selling of live animal. Since most of them are dependent to this, there is a need to establish
production standards to achieve consistency and safe products, such that products can be deemed

suitable for registration and market expansion.

Alongside the importance of manufacturing practices, process parameters, and standards,
water is also another vital contributor to product safety. The water used for sanitation and
production maybe a source, if there is, a foreign contaminant in the product, or a high microbial
count. It is therefore crucial to determine the quality of water being used; hence, failure to see
this error would defeat the purpose of product analysis. The location of the processing area was
identified to have poor water resource system, consequently containing some dissolved salts and

other impurities (BARROW, 1987).

In line with the identified challenges relating to the maintenance and implementation of
food quality and safety, this research will attempt to understand the gaps and limitations of the
existing food production practice of efag and native longganisa in Sabangan, Mountain Province.
Details including: (1) the parameters used to determine quality; (2) the microbial quality of the

finished products; (3) quality of the water used for cleaning, sanitation and production; and (4)

physico-chemical and microbiological analysis of finished products and process evaluation to be

used for improvement of the current production of efag and native longganisa.

This study focused primarily on the evaluation of food safety and quality of etag and
native longganisa through production audit, physico-chemical, microbiological and sensory
evaluation. Water analysis was also included to determine its affects in the microbiological
quality of the finished products. Furthermore, the study determined the opportunities for

improvement in the whole process.

Objectives of the Study

The main objective of the study is to assess quality and safety of etag and native

longganisa produced in Brgy. Camatagan, Sabangan, Mountain Province.

Specifically, the study aims to:

1, Determine the current practices in efag and native Jongganisa production;
2. Analyze the microbiological, physico-chemical and sensory quality; and
3. Describe the effectiveness of educational training on quality and safety of etag and

longganisa based on the results.

REVIEW OF RELATED LITERATURE

National Food Control Systems

An improved understanding of the risk based approach and growing awareness about the
impact of food safety on public health and national economies, has led many countries, to make
significant changes to their food control systems, in recent years (FAO, 2003). Although this
study does not aim to establish a national food control system, this will provide a broader range
of understanding on the necessity of food safety in all levels, be it consumer group or small
farmers.

Back in 2002, during the FAO/WHO Global Forum of Food Safety Regulators, issues
about food safety were discussed. These include: (1) regulatory issues including new inspection
approaches and techniques and food safety emergencies; (2) risk management, (3) capacity
building, and (4) communication and participation were discussed in relevance to food safety.
Along the discussion, several realizations have been highlighted. Among these are (1)
application of effective control measures; (2) a single, uniform and simpler system of food safety
laws takes time; (3) risk management is most effective when it is based on sound scientific
information; (4) food safety strategies should be risk-based and cover the entire food chain
(Buchanan and Suhre, 2005); (5) in-house control systems based on the HACCP approach are
needed; (6) capacity building should be integrated and coordinated; (7) National Action Plan
should be developed based on a needs assessment and national food control systems should be

strengthen; and (8) communication has an all-important role in many aspects of food safety

including informing and educating consumers and public at large and getting feedback from
consumers and other stakeholders (FAO/WHO, 2002).

Nowadays, consumers expect protection from hazards occurring along the entire food
chain, from primary producer through consumer (often described as the farm-to-table
continuum) (FAO, 2003). As no mandatory activity of this nature can achieve its objectives fully
without the cooperation and active participation of all stakeholders e.g. farmers, industry, and
consumers, the term Food Control System is described by FAO (2003) as the integration of a
mandatory regulatory approach with preventive and educational strategies that protect the whole
food chain.

Two of the established food control systems around the world are in Canada and Ireland.
The legislation of food safety regulations in both countries was developed through risk
assessment and participated by different agencies of the government, spearheaded by food safety
agencies namely Health Canada and Canadian Food Inspection Agency (CFIA) and Food Safety
Authority of Ireland. Despite these efforts, experts still disagree about whether food is safer
today than in the past, but they agree that ensuring safe food has become more complex than at
any other point in history (Redman, 2000).

According to FAO (2003), the distinction between food safety and quality has
implications for public policy and influences the nature and content of the food control system
most suited to meet predetermined national objectives. This connotes that in order to strengthen
national food control system, that we should not only produce safe foods, but also, good-quality
food, considering all nutritional values of food and adequacy of diets to nutrient
recommendations (Prosperi et al., 2014) and all other attributes that influence a product’s value

to the consumer (FAO, 2003).

In the Philippines, national policy on food safety has not been clearly stated and there are
still gaps and overlaps at large in the implementation of programs (Lizada, 2007). As of April
2017, there have been 19 cases of food-safety related illnesses recorded since January 2016
(newsinfo.inquirer.net). Today, there has been no report or update yet on the incidents. The
absence of monitoring and scientific data to assess the emergence of food-borne illnesses and the
risks involve, clearly, manifests the need for a national food control program to ensure food
safety. Given this fact, it is necessary for food producers to be aware about food safety and
quality, especially for industrial production, to protect their brand, and to provide the market
with high-quality and safe foods. This means that the purchase of raw materials to packaging and
distribution of finished goods will be the responsibility of the producer/manufacturer. Quality
and safety is only measured through licensing and registration by the governing bodies. The
FDA (2014) released A.O. 2014-0029 as guidelines for food producers to ensure food safety
through imposition of food quality standards in the country. Hence, it is understood that products
licensed and registered under FDA are thoroughly assessed and approved for safety and quality.
Food safety and quality standards have been widely applied by industry leaders, however,
there is still resistance or difficulty of implementation experienced from small business (FAO
and WHO, 2002). The major contributing factor for this is cost. The literature on costs of food
safety improvement, primarily US studies of HACCP for meat and poultry, shows that there are
rising marginal costs associated with higher levels of safety (Unnevehr and Huirne, 2003).
Concomitantly, local producers in the Philippines of convenience foods are not necessarily
equipped to assure food safety (Lizada, 2007) to produce high quality products, one of which is
the beneficiary of this research, HPFMC meat processing plant in Brgy. Camatagan. In order for

them to adapt to the current trade scenario, increasing their knowledge level on food safety and

quality, and assessing the quality and safety level of their product will lead to product and
processing improvement, hence, rendering the product safe and suitable for large market

consumption.

Agriculture and Livestock Production

In relation to the national food control system, farm-to-market approach allows
identification of the most effective points for intervention of factors that affects food safety
(FAO, 2002; Unnevehr and Huime, 2003). Since many food safety hazards can enter the food
production chain at multiple points and can multiply or cross-contaminate other products once
present (Unnevehr and Huime, 2003), background on agriculture and livestock production
should be understood, to grasp the realities and needs for producing safe and high-quality meat.

The issue of the global concentration of agribusiness is crucial to the future of the food
systems of developing (and poor, nondeveloping) countries (Magdoff and Tokar, 2010). This is
because value-added food supply chains are changing in complex ways. It is driven by economic
development, urbanization and social change and facilitated in many cases by policy reforms
(FAO, 2013), aiming for a basic commodity production. In this case, “value-added” comes in the
form of quality, timeliness, food safety and labor standards in production (Timmer, 2013).

The linkage of agriculture to other sectors of the society, e.g. economy, poverty (FAO,
2005), food security, (FAO, 2013) etc. is more complex than one can imagine. Thousands of
years ago, human population derived its food and raw materials from wild animals and plants
(Serpell, 1986). This was known as the hunting and gathering period, where men mostly do the
hunting and women tended to the children, and performed gathering and foraging of available

food items like nuts, tubers, etc. This concept of survival was appropriate during those times


when community was only composed of small families, migrating from one land to another to
look for available food. After the last global ice age, a socioeconomic revolution took place
which overthrew the existing order and replaced it with something entirely new and
unprecedented (Serpell, 1986). This was the start of the domestication of plants and animals.
Historians were clear that the agricultural revolution took place in tandem with the industrial
revolution in the century after about 1750, characterized by technological changes — new crops,
new rotations, new breeds of livestock, and new implements and machines (Overton, 1996).
Today, three main areas of agriculture related to food production (FAO, 2013) involves: (1)
making food more available and accessible; (2) making food more diverse and production more
sustainable; and (3) making food itself more nutritious.

Humans are generally omnivorous, such that they consume food from plant and animal
origin. In the perspective of diet and nutrition, a person needs to intake carbohydrates, fats,
proteins (Burrows et al., 1991) and vitamins and minerals to properly supply nutrients for all
bodily functions. Carbohydrates are generally sourced from starches and grains, vitamins and
minerals are present in fruits and vegetables, whereas fats and proteins, although found in plant
sources like soy, nuts, legumes, etc., are primarily obtained from fish and animal produce —
mainly as meat and dairy (from milk-producing animals). Unfortunately, only a percentage of the
world’s population has access to the recommended healthy diet. Food security and food access
temains a global undertaking even until today (Prosperi et al., 2014; Lé et al., 2015), given the
fact that nearly one billion people in the world is undernourished (FAO, 2009).

The livestock sector is central to food security, not only for rural small holders who rely
directly on livestock for food, incomes and services, but also for urban consumers, who benefit

from affordable high quality animal-based food (FAO, 2009). Literatures have suggested that


meat consumption is likely to continually increase over the years. The Organization for
Economic Co-operation and Development — Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations (OECD-FAO) projects 87 percent growth increase meat production from 2009 to 2018.

The table below shows the existing and projected consumption of meat (FAO, 2009).

Table 1. Meat Consumption by region, 2000 and 2050 (projected).

PER CAPITA CONSUMPTION OF MEAT

2000 2050
(ke/person/year)
Central and West Asia and North Africa 20 33
East and South Asia and the Pacific 28 51
Latin America and the Caribbean 58 1
North America and Europe 83 89
Sub-Saharan Africa in 2

Source: Rosegrant and Thornton, 2008; FAO, 2009

Pork is one of the most favored meats all across the world. Based on the data, it has the
highest increase in demand from 1995 to 2007, from 80, 123, 000 tons to 115, 454, 000 tons,
East and Southeast Asia being the leading producers, in terms of average annual growth in
number of animals and in output per animal (FAO, 2009). In the Philippines, pork production has

the highest number in livestock production (see Table 2).


There can be no doubt that the demand for good quality (pig) meat will increase (and this
is especially in those regions where pork is preferred as meat, as in South-East Asia and South
America), arising from the growing purchasing power and increasing size of the urban
populations (Devendra and Fuller, 1979). Today, the livestock sector supports almost one billion
of the world’s poorest people and is likely to do so for decades to come (FAO, 2009). Because of
the rising demands for healthy and food safety standards, the challenge now for smallholders is

to remain competitive with the larger, more-intensive production systems (FAO, 2009).

Table 2. Production of Main Categories of Meat, 1995-2007.
PIG POULTRY CATTLE SHEEP

Thousand tons Thousand tons Thousand tons Thousand tons

1995 2007 1995, 2007 1995 2007 1995 2007

Philippines 805 1501 419 649 97 170 31 35

Source: FAO, 2009

Evidently, livestock production contributes not only to human diet, but also to food
security, livelihood, especially to people belonging in the rural poor, and in overall economic
development. Pork, in particular serves 2 purposes: (1) it can feed the producer and his family or
(2) it can be sold (or bartered) as a source of income or other goods. To support the local
communities in facing the aforementioned challenges in meat and livestock production,
cultivating knowledge about the background and the necessary tools and technology concerning

the process is of great importance. Hence, the assurance of the quality and safety of the


processed meat is one step in overcoming the competition from existing widely distributed meat

and meat products.

Meat and Meat Processing

Meat (alongside poultry and fish) is generally recognized as an essential part in the
sensory properties of the human diet and plays an important role in contributing to the healthy
properties of the diet (Southgate, 1997). As time progressed, consumer demands have increased
and changed dramatically, such that they have understood the concepts of healthfulness, taste
and value for money, negative concerns about food additives, ethical concerns about animal
welfare and ecological concerns about pollution and land use (Southgate, 1997). In addition, it
has been projected that global production of meat will continue to increase due to the changing
diet of consumers, most especially the urban dwellers, leaning in to the preference of
incorporating more animal protein, meat in particular in the daily diet, to achieve lower calorie
intake. This has called the attention of the meat industry to maximize meat resources, given the
limited expansion capability for production systems due to feed availability and environmental
reasons, and provide consumers leaner meats and products with lower salt content, while
maintaining high standards in quality and safety.

FAO (Heinz and Hautzinger, 2007) considered meat processing as an essential part of
their livestock programs, not just because of the possibility of fabricating nutrient-rich products
for human food but also to maximize the utility of carcass parts and for supplying shelf-stable
meat products without the necessity of cold storage and transportation. Meat processing is a
complex system. Toldra (2010) described meat processing in three parts, to quote verbatim: (1)

technologies e.g. decontamination, aging, freezing, curing, emulsification, thermal processing,


fermentation, starter cultures and drying; (2) manufacture and different characteristics of
worldwide meat products e.g. hams and sausages, bacon, canned products and paté, dry-cured
ham, mold-ripened sausages, semi-dry and dry fermented sausages, restructured meats, and
functional meat products; and (3) efficient strategies to control the sensory and safety quality of
meat and meat products including:(1) physical sensors;(2) sensory evaluation;(3) chemical and
microbial hazards;(4) detection of GMO’s; (5) HACCP; and (6) quality assurance.

This study is primarily concerned on the processing of efag, a cured, sun-dried pork meat,
and native longganisa, a type of sausage common in the Philippines, specifically on the
establishment of sensory quality and safety parameters. Thus, this chapter will lay the facts

needed in the production of efag and native longganisa.

Etag

Based on literature, the production of efag is similar to dry-cured ham (Toldrd, 2010) or
cured-raw meats (Heinz and Hautzinger, 2007). The terms will be used interchangeably as being
referred to efag in this chapter. These types of cured meats are not subjected to heat treatment.
Instead, they undergo processing which can either be fermentation, curing and ripening in
controlled climatized conditions (Heinz and Hautzinger, 2007). The curing, fermentation and
ripening plays a crucial part in the development of flavor as well as in the depletion of moisture
that supports its shelf stability. The procedure followed by HPFMC is basically the selection of
the meat part, curing by the use of spices and salt for 24-48 hours and sun-drying without
definite amount of time, rather depending only on the depletion of moisture by 25% of its initial

weight.


The important requirements in the production of cured-raw meats include selection and
acquisition of fresh meat of good hygienic quality. DFD (dark, firm, dry) and PSE (pale, soft,
exudative) meat should be discriminated. The former contributes to early development of
microorganism while the latter creates some difficulties to processors because of an excessive
water loss due to their lower water-binding capacity and negative effect on taste due to possible
excessive salt intake during curing (Toldré, 2010). Ideally, meat should have a pH lower than 5.6
for pork (Heinz and Hautzinger, 2007), and must have a reddish color, higher content of
intramuscular fat and better marbling. Detection of oxidation and development of rancid off-
flavor and odor is also crucial (Toldra, 2010).

An ideal cured-raw meat should undergo eight to nine stages or processing to achieve
high-quality finished products. A process flow diagram is indicated below for processing of dry-
cured ham.

Reception is the stage where the ham or raw meat is refrigerated for 1-2 days and thawed
to achieve 2-4°C (Toldra, 2010). However, for small to medium scale producers, raw, fresh meat
is used for the processing. No refrigeration is required.

The pre-salting stage is for the addition of nitrite and nitrate as preservatives, mainly to
combat botulism (Toldra, 2010). The level of nitrite and nitrate added should be based on
recognized standards, e.g. European Union, FAO, and FDA.

Addition of marine salt is done in the salting stage. Salt is responsible for reduction of
water activity, thereby inhibiting microbial growth and the desirable, salty taste of the finished
product. Meat cuts are kept at a low temperature preferably 0-4°C during curing or salting. This
is carried out for weeks to ensure equal penetration of salt in the meat cuts (Heinz and

Hautzinger, 2007).


The drying or ripening stage is also the fermentation stage in the process. In industrial
meat production systems, drying is done in a controlled chamber, where moisture is allowed to
disperse from the meat muscles and evaporate to the chamber. Enzymes that are responsible for
biochemical changes are allowed to take place for better flavor and taste. Drying temperatures
varies from 16° to 25°C depending on drying time (relationship of the time and temperature is
inversely proportional) (Heinz and Hautzinger, 2007), with relative humidity of 65% to 85%
(Toldré, 2010). The target objective during this stage is to achieve 32% weight loss (primarily
due to moisture loss) (Toldré, 2010). Constant monitoring is therefore critical, as excessive

drying will only result to dry, hard texture and dark color of meat.

Figure 1. Adopted process flow diagram of dry-cured ham
Source: Toldré, 2010; Heinz and Hautzinger, 2007


Smoking is done in regions with wet/cold climate. Risk of mold growth is high in these
areas and smoking can prevent this. Furthermore, this process will give the meat a distinct
smoke-flavor. The source of wood is important because this might give undesirable taste to the
finished product.

In some parts of the world, extended ripening is done to make time for further chemical
and enzymatic reactions, producing amino acids that contribute more to the meat’s exquisite and
intense flavor (Toldra, 2010). This is the common practice for producing Iberian hams where
meat is submitted to ripening cellars and kept for 24 months at controlled temperature and
relative humidity.

Once the desired flavor and texture is already achieved, the finished product is now ready
for packaging and distribution. Dry-cured hams are sometimes sold as bone pieces or can be

chopped and sliced at retails shops (Toldré, 2010).

Native Longganisa

Native longganisa or longganisa, in HPFMC is made from ground pork muscle and fat,
added with textured vegetable protein (TVP), curing mix and seasonings. The whole mixture is
cased and packed. There is no heat treatment applied. These types of meat product are classified
as fresh sausages which exist in different names, depending on which region of the world. The
word “longganisa”, probably came from “longaniza” (also “chorizo criollo’) as it is called in
countries influenced by Spanish tradition (Heinz and Hautzinger, 2007). The Philippines has
been under the Spanish regime for more than three hundred years, which probably explains why

this product exists.


The process for this product is less complicated than the cured raw meat. Ingredients are
mixed together, stuffed in casings, packed and frozen. Figure 2 illustrates the process of making
longganisa.

The curing mix in the formulation is composed of salt, nitrate/nitrite, phosphate and
water. This combination is responsible for the solubilization of salt-soluble myofibrillar protein.
The remaining myofibrillar system swells by binding with water present in the formulation. Once
cooked, these ingredients coagulate (dissolved proteins) or aggregate (proteins in the remaining
myofibrils) to form a gel (Tomberg2005; Toldra, 2010). Furthermore, salt is added not as an
additive but an ingredient (Toldra, 2010). It contributes to water/fat binding, gel formation, taste,
and keepability (Toldré, 2010). Nitrite has antimicrobial properties (Smith and Hong-Shum,

2003) as well as contributes to color development (Toldra, 2010).


FOrMUIBUIO OF

Ingredi

*Curing Mix

lending

Bley

| *Addition of Fat

Figure 2. Adapted Process flow diagram of fresh sausage from pork chops
Source: Inglett and Inglett, 1982; Toldré, 2010; Heinz and Hautzinger, 2007

Eating Quality of Meat

Quality of the meat products constitutes of taste and flavor, structure, color, nutritional
value and microbial quality (Toldr4, 2010). Given the fact that there are two products produced
by HPFMC, the descriptive sensory quality of the two would differ.

The color of dry-cured ham is commonly red, depending on which part of the muscle is
used for processing. Presence of myoglobin with oxidative patterns contributes to this

characteristic. The texture is preferably firm, which is indicated by slow breakdown of


myofibrillar proteins. The extent of drying, degradation of connective tissue, and intramuscular
fat content has great effects on the appearance and texture of the product (Toldré, 2010). The
flavor of the ham varies greatly according to the presence of free amino acids and volatile
compounds present after processing.

The sausage “longganisa” commonly has a savory taste of cured meat and spices. The
addition of nitrite can strongly affect flavor and color intensity, commonly red. The structure or
texture of the sausage can either be soft or firm depending on the desired characteristics or
preference. The overall sensory characteristic can vary depending on formulation of ingredients;
e.g. addition of TVP will dilute flavor and nutritional density or reduced lean meat can be done

by higher phosphate content to increase water binding with fat.

The parameters for sensory and safety quality of etag and native longganisa has not yet
been established. This paper will try to determine these details through descriptive sensory

evaluation and microbial analysis.


Hygiene and Sanitation in Meat Processing Plants

Hygiene and sanitation, and standardized production process are important to eliminate
andor reduce microbial load during and after processing. Microbial stability and safety of meat
is the utmost consideration in every production (and slaughterhouse) plant. These signify two
important aspects: (1) pathogenic microorganisms that lead to food-poisoning; and (2) spoilage
microorganisms that jeopardize shelf-life of the product.

For red meat, the potential pathogenic microorganisms that can be found are Salmonella
spp. in general and Clostridium botulinum type A and B as well as Listeria monocytogenes and
verotoxin-producing Escherichia coli (VTEC) (Leistner, 1997). The presence of yeast and molds
producing mycotoxins is also an interest.

The spoilage microorganisms are not necessarily injurious to human health (Leistner,
1997), however, these cause changes to the original properties of the product that render the food
unpleasant and undesirable for consumption. The microorganisms that are commonly present in
meat or muscle that cause fermentation (mainly production of lactic acid) which leads to
soumess or rancidity are Lactobacillus, Enterococcus, and Pediococcus. Pseudomonas and
Enterobacteriaceae as well as yeast and molds contribute to the putrefaction of meat (Leistner,
1997).

It is therefore necessary to ensure that proper sanitation and hygiene be implemented to
achieve a cleaner production. According to UNEP (2000), a cleaner production is defined as the
continuous application of an integrated, preventive, environmental strategy applied to processes,
Products, and services to increase overall efficiency and reduce risks to human and the
environment. In a more detailed scenario, a cleaner production do not only cover the in-process

cleaning to achieve microbial stability and food safety, but it also considers the effects of


production to the environment. It includes water consumption, effluent discharge, energy
consumption, and assessment. Alll of these aspects are as important; but the scope of this research
however, is limited only to the hygiene and sanitation directly affecting the food quality and
safety of the finished goods.

Cleaner production in meat processing applies from livestock reception to packaging of
finished goods. It is necessary to identify the steps of these processes to identify the details of

how and where cleaning or washing may apply.

Slaughter

The UNEP (2000) provided a diagram (see Figure 3) for slaughtering of pigs.
Slaughtering process composes of 6 stages: (1) pre-handling of pigs; (2) stunning and bleeding;
(3) dehairing and finishing; (4) evisceration and splitting; (5) by-product processing; and (6)
rendering.

Pigs for butchering are normally fasted for 2 days to reduce intestinal contents. Prior to
being slaughtered, livestock are washed with water to minimize the amount of dirt and manure

introduced to the plant (UNEP, 2000).

Stunning is done through electric shock and the pig is bled using hollow, sterilized knife,
directing the blood to a collection trough. Time required for effective bleeding is less than 7

minutes.

Hide treatment is necessary to remove dirt and hair from pig to carcasses (UNEP, 2000).
The hair of the pig is removed by a scalding hot water, at least 60°C, followed by scraping

through manual shaving, deharing machines, or singeing with a gas-fired hand-held torch to


remove remaining hair. Once the hide is removed, the surface is first cleaned by showering and

brushing.

After removal of hair, the pig is then brought to evisceration area where stomach is
opened and the viscera are removed. Prior to that, the head, hoofs, feet and tail are removed. This
can be done manually for small-scale operations. Before the processing of hides at a tannery, the

flesh must be removed and the hides washed and immersed in brine (UNEP, 2000).

The edible offal components and casings (intestinal tract) are separated from the viscera
and sent on for cleaning and further processing (UNEP, 200). The carcasses are then split into
two using sterilized saws and knives and then trimmed and graded (UNEP, 2000), The trimmed
carcasses will then be washed either manually using hoses or automated carcass washing units
(UNEP, 2000). Inedible parts such as bone, fat, heads and condemned offal are sent to a
rendering plant either on site or off site for rendering into feed materials and tallow (UNEP,

2000).

At the end of the dressing process, carcass -chilling takes place in cold (- 5 to 4°C) air
chambers with or without intermittent spraying(or misting) carcasses with cold water for variable
durations within 12 - 24 hours, while the total chilling process lasts 24 — 48 hours (Dickson and
Anderson 1991; Hippe et al.1991; Strydom and Buys 1995; Gill and Bryant 1997; Gill and Jones

1997b; Greerand Jones 1997; Stopforth and Sofos 2005;Simpson et al. 2006; Toldra, 2010).

ig

Livestock reception and

al Manure
truck washing

J

Stunning and bleeding |» Blood —»| Blood Processing

J


Dehairing and hide
finishing
u I—» Edible offal —® | Offal processing
Evisceration j—> Casings —>| Casings processing
H +> Inedible offal
Chilling }—>| Rendering
Cutting and boning |» Bones and fat —

i

Meat for consumption

Figure 3. Flow diagram for slaughtering of pigs
Source: UNEP, 2000


Plant cleaning

Plant cleaning and sanitation, especially for perishable food products like meat, also
requires conditions to ensure efficiency and safety. This is crucial so that the microbial load of
such products must be low to guarantee adequate shelf life and to avoid spoilage during
distribution (Heinz and Hautzinger, 2007). This is also done to prevent contamination. In cases
where there are areas classified as “dirty” or “unsanitized”, it should be kept separate from
“clean” and “sanitized” ones, whereas personnel should not be allowed to move between them
(Warriss, 2000).

Carcasses, meat, plant surfaces and equipment needed to be cleaned, For carcasses,
cleaning should be done by using water sprays operated by high pressure; hot water is better but,
there is a danger of cooking the surface tissues if temperatures above about75°C are used
(Warriss, 2000). In plant surfaces, removal of dirt and organic substances can be done using
antimicrobial treatments through hot water or steam (Heinz and Hautzinger, 2007; Warriss,
2000), or disinfectants like chlorine, hydrogen peroxide, organic acids such as lactic and acetic
acids, and trisodium phosphates.

Cleaning-in-process (CIP) system is a requirement for cleaning equipment and materials
(FSSAI, 2010). However, the danger in CIP) is the formation of aerosols (Heinz and Hautzinger,
2007). Aerosols are stirred up dirt produced during physical cleaning using pressurized water or
contaminated water droplets (Heinz and Hautzinger, 2007; Warriss, 2000). It is therefore
necessary to remove all products or meat during the cleaning process. To ensure the effectivity of
the cleaning and sanitation procedure, necessary steps are recommended by FAO (Heinz and

Hautzinger, 2007). These steps should compose of: (1) dry cleaning; (2) application of high-


pressure water; (3) equipment cleaning using pressurized steam/water-mix; (4) application of
chemical cleaning solutions; and (5) disinfection.

Dry-cleaning or manual cleaning is initially done to remove scrap e.g. coarse solid
particles, in walls and floors. Water is not used for initial cleaning, because is wasteful and
would cause possible clogging in the drainage system (Heinz and Hautzinger, 2007).

After dry-cleaning, removal of the remaining solid parts, blood and dirt on the floor,
walls and processing sections can be achieved through the use of high-pressure water. Otherwise,
a hot water can be used, and is considered much effective. The equipment should then be cleaned
using pressurized steam /water mix which ideal temperature is 100°C. The disadvantage of this
method is again the formation of aerosol and/or excessive condensation, which can cause
possible product-to-surface contamination. The processor can decide which is better to use
between pressurized water and water-mix, depending on the type of facility.

Chemical cleaning solutions are required for the removal of sticky and encrusted layers
of fat and protein. The abovementioned chemical cleaning substances can be used for this, be it
alkaline, acid or neutral. For further details on the solutions and/or preparation of cleaning
agents, check Principles of Meat Processing Technology (Heinz and Hautzinger, 2007). Lastly,
disinfection is done to eliminate microorganism that are potential sources of surface
contamination. Disinfection is done using hot water, steam or chemical disinfectants such as
chlorine, aldehydes, quatermary ammonium compounds (QUATS) among others.

The cleaning and sanitation of meat processing plants, be it small, medium or industrial
size, should fall under good housekeeping (NMIC, 1977). Good housekeeping involves constant
inspection, scheduled cleaning and maintenance. The benefits of these are: (1) maintenance of

product quality; (2) time-efficiency, e.g. elimination of unnecessary clean-ups; (3) labor-


efficiency brought by proper designation of work; (4) conservation of materials and equipment
by proper care and maintenance; (5) Maximization of working space by removal of littered and
dirty areas; (6) facilitation of maintenance and machine repair; (7) risks are reduced; and (8)
morale is boost and integrity of the plant is achieved, knowing that hygiene and sanitation is

strictly implemented.

Functional Ingredients

Salt

Salt has long been an essential part of the human diet (Shereve and Brink, 1977). Sodium
chloride or common salt is used in households as a basic ingredient, mainly for its contribution to
salty taste and flavor (FAO, 2007). In the industry, sodium chloride is the basic raw material of a
great many chemical compounds, such as sodium hydroxide, sodium carbonate, sodium sulfate,
hydrochloric acid, sodium phosphates and sodium chlorate and chlorite (Shereve and Brink,
1977). It is practically one of the most basic ingredients in the manufacture of chlorine by
electrolysis (Shereve and Brink, 1977).

In the food industry, salt is important for taste and shelf-life (FAO, 2007). In the meat
industry, its added function is on meat solubilization. The process of adding rock salt, sea salt, or
mined salt to an unheated piece or small cuts of meat in order to lower water activity, prevent
microbial growth and chemical spoilage, tenderize the meat, and add flavor to the product
(Toldra, 2010) is called curing.

In this study, one of the main ingredients for both products is salt. Salting is one of the

most important stages of the traditional process of cured ham manufacturing (Barat et al., 2006).


More than the attainment of sensory properties, salt is essential for the preservation of meat for
whole drying process (Arboix, 2014). The function of salt in sausages is not just for preservation,
but it also contributes to basic taste characteristics of the final product and in combination with
water, it assists in opening up the structure of proteins, thereby giving form, structure and

firmness to the finished product (Heinz and Hautzinger, 2007).

Phosphates

In the meat industry, phosphates have many functions including protection against
oxidation, water binding, stabilizing, emulsifying and improvement of the meat flavor
(Hrynczyszyn et al., 2010).Polyphosphates are used in meat products in association with sodium
chloride to improve the binding properties and solubilization of myofibrils (Desmond, 2006;
Xiong, Lou, Wang, Moody, & Harmon, 2010; Villamonte, et al., 2012). It has been shown that
using polyphosphates may induce a reduction in the salt content of meat products by enhancing
the saltiness and improving the water binding capacity (Weiss, Gibis, Schuh,&Salminen, 2010;
Villamonte, et al., 2012). Furthermore, polyphosphates are used extensively in meat and meat
products due to their functional properties. They reduce cook losses, improve textural properties
especially by increasing water holding capacity, retard oxidative rancidity, develop color and
supply protection against microbial growth, etc. (Lee, Hendricks, & Comforth,1998; Martin,
Cofrades, Carballo, &Jime’nez-Colmenero,2002; Puolanne, Ruusunen, &Vainionpaa,2001;
Sheared, Ute, Richardson, Perry, & Taylor,1999; Unal et al., 2005).

In this study, the level of phosphate was altered and its effects were evaluated through

sensory evaluation. The new formulated sausage was compared to the original formulation


Nitrates and Nitrites

Curing is a conservation technique widely used since antiquity to prolong the shelf-life of
food products (Marco et al., 2006). According to Bedale et al. (2016), consumers have an
illogical relationship with nitrite (and its precursor, nitrate) in food. Despite a long history of use,
nitrite was nearly banned from use in foods in the 1970s due to health concerns related to the
potential for carcinogenic nitrosamine formation (Bedale et al., 2016). Despite the many health
concerns pertaining to the use of nitrate and nitrite, there is no developed alternative yet to serve
its function (Hospital et al., 2014).

In the manufacture of dry fermented sausages, the addition of curing agents (salt and
nitrate/nitrite), as well as the low pH and water activity(aw) achieved during ripening, act as
hurdles for food-poisoning and spoilage bacteria, ensuring the stability and safety of the final
product(Hospital, et al., 2014; Vignolo, Fontana, & Fadda, 2010).Nitrate and nitrite are added to
meat products due to their important role on color and flavor development and their antioxidant
activity (Honikel, 2008; Hospital, et al., 2014).Furthermore, nitrite exerts a significant
antimicrobial effect related to the inhibition of the growth of several pathogens, such as Listeria
spp. and Clostridium botulinum (Hospital, Hierro, & Fernandez, 2012; Sebranek & Bacus, 2007),
whereas its effect on the inhibition of Salmonella spp. is controversial (Tompkin, 2005).

Because of its importance in food manufacturing, the use of nitrate and nitrite are still
allowed, but only in small amounts (Heinz and Hautzinger, 2007). FAO (2007) sets standard of
0.01-0.02% determined by its toxicity level. Philippines FDA (2006) allows up to 0.0416% for

cured meats.


Location of the Study

Brgy.Camatagan belongs to the municipality of Sabangan, Mountain Province. It is a part
of the Cordillera Administrative Region (CAR), located in the Northern Philippines. The

barangay is 120 km away from Baguio City with coordinates 16°57’N and 120°55’E.

The total land area of the barangay is 7.4 km’, with a total population of 1,031,
composing of 571 is male and 470 female. The barangay has 6 sitios namely: (1) Dapdapilan;

(2) Polipog; (3) Tampugo; (4) Proper Camatagan; (5) Tupac; and (6) Legleg.

Tourist Attraction

Barangay Camatagan, like any other upland communities in CAR, is surrounded by
lavish, green mountains with a scenic view of the winding Chico River, which is sighted
perfectly from Tiging viewpoint, making it one of the favorite tourist destinations. Located in
sitioLegleg is the Amigoc Spring and Cave, in which no one has dared to reach yet. The
barangay observes four festivals: (1)Begnas — done before and after rice harvest, happening
twice a year; (2) Pakde — done before and after planting and harvest; (3) Barangay Day —
celebrated every 31° of December; and (4) Barangay Fiesta — celebrated every last Sunday of

February.


Existing Market and Production

Currently, the producers of efag and native longganisa put up a Barangay Food Terminal,
selling food varieties located in National Highway, Brgy. Camatagan, Sabangan Mountain
Province. The meat processing area is also within the same building. The cooperative’s original
target before was to produce twice a month, This has stopped when their original rented
processing facility was taken by the Barangay office, reason why they continued production in
the Barangay Terminal, but only on a scheduled basis. The target market of the cooperative is the
local people in the barangay, but they are now slowly expanding to the whole of Sabangan

municipality.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Gathering of Data

The study was conducted in Brgy. Camatagan, Sabangan, Mountain Province.Actual
observation was conducted, starting from slaughter to packaging. This was done to identify the
part of the whole process where safety and quality can be compromised. Evaluation/audit form
based on standards set by governing bodies was used as guide and reference for assessment of
the results. The procedure used in the production of efag and native Jongganisa was described. A
knowledge assessment through situational analysis, microbiological, physico-chemical and
sensory analyses was also conducted for validation. Results of the evaluation were used to

recommend appropriate actions for further improvement.

After the initial evaluation, another 2 series of tests was conducted to validate and prove
efficiency and effectivity of the changes that was implemented. The results of this validation
were incorporated in the EDCOMM system that was presented to the farmers/producers so they

can grasp and understand why safety and quality of their products needs to be improved.

Situational Analysis

An interview of the plant personnel or processors, supplemented with focused group
discussion (FGD) and actual observation of the process was done to understand the existing

condition of the processing standards of the local producers. The situational analysis covered the


following sub-topics: (1) stakeholder analysis; (2) Knowledge, Skills, Attitude, Practice (KSAP)
analysis; (3) SWOT analysis; (4) leaming style analysis and (5) communication resources
analysis.

Actual observation was performed during the production process, highlighting on the
safety and quality practices. The findings during the actual observation were used as basis for

safety practices improvements, e.g. personal hygiene, cleaning procedures, etc.

Analysis

Product Sampling

A specific time and date for production and sampling was set due to the challenges in
production e.g. established processing guidelines, processing area limitations and price and
availability issue of non-meat raw material, etc. The schedule sampling and production happened

since September 26 to October 7, 2016.

Three live animals were slaughtered and processed for native longganisa and etag.
Twenty (20) Kg of meat was processed each for both efag and longganisa. There were two
formulations for each process; therefore sampling was done as shown in Appendix 1. The

slaughter, method of processing for both etag and longganisa was observed.


Treatment

There were 2 parts on intervention in this process. The first intervention was the
implementation of GMP in the process and this was evaluated based on meat safety standards.

This was applied on both Jongganisa and etag. Standards can be found in Appendix 10.

The second treatment was based on the results of sensory evaluation of the process. It
was found out that the texture or mouthfeel of /ongganisa should be improved. Based on this
data, the factors that can be altered for improvement are: (1) standardize the slaughter procedure
to ensure good quality of fresh meat based on UNEP (2000) process and (2) alter formulation by
adding phosphate to increase water binding capacity. The phosphate was added during the
formulation of curing mix. The original quantity is only 40g (0.4% w/w) phosphate per 10,000g
of meat. It was added with 1.2g (0.12% w/w) to check if there will be an improvement on the

texture of the product. Tables 3 and 4 below enumerate how the treatments were employed.

For etag, the jal evaluation showed that the desirable characteristics of the existing
were achieved in the process. However, since the slaughter procedure was also improved, the
etag samples will also be evaluated in this term. The members of the cooperative also introduced
brine draining after 24 h of salting for better taste of the ham. This idea was applied in the

Process to check if there is a significant difference between brine-drained ham and brine-soaked

ham. Table 3 summarizes how the treatment was applied.


Table 3.Treatment of longganisa.

PRODUCT NOTREATMENT TREATMENT 1 ‘TREATMENT 2

TREATMENT ‘Original Process Standardized Slaughter ‘STaughter Procedure
Procedure basedon UNEP —_Standardization and addition

of 0.12% more phosphate

Table 4. Treatment of efag.
PRODUCT NO TREATMENT TREATMENT 1 TREATMENT 2
TREATMENT Original Process ‘Standardized Slaughter ‘Standard Slaughter
Procedure based on UNEP _—_—Procedure and brine

draining after 24-h salting

Water Analysis

To determine the potability and safety of water used in meat processing, heterotrophic
plate count and multiple-tube fermentation technique for the member of the coliform group. The

procedures conducted were based on Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and

Waste-water (APHA, 2012).


Heterotrophic Plate Count

Using separate sterile pipets, Iml of undiluted sample was poured to a petri dish (10°);
0.1m pipetted to a petri dish (10°); Iml undiluted sample was pipetted to a 99m buffered water
(10?) and 0.1 ml from the same solution was pipetted to petri dish (10°). All samples were
prepared in triplicate. Dilution bottles were shaken 25 times in 30 cm arc within 7 s if it stands
more than 3 min before it is pipetted into petri dish. Plate count agar (12-15 ml; cooled to 45 +
1°C) was poured to each plate within 15 min of original dilution. Plates were rotated, tilted,
allowed to solidify and inverted. Plates were incubated for 4842 hrs at 35°C. Colonies were
counted and recorded according to BAM (2003) guidelines. Calculation and reporting was done
using below formula:

rc
[@ xn, )+@1xn)x@

N
Where:

N=Number of colonies per ml or g of product
¥ C= Sum of all colonies on all plates counted
nl = Number of plates in first dilution counted

n2 = Number of plates in second dilution counted

d= Dilution from which the first counts were obtained.

Determination of Total Coliform Bacteria, Fecal Coliform, and E. coli

Presumptive phase. Three replicates of 10ml of undiluted samples were dispensed to

10ml LST broth multiple tube MPN analysis. The LST tubes were incubated at 35°C+ 0.5°C.


Tubes were examined and reactions were recorded at 48 + 3 h for gas, i.e., displacement of

medium in fermentation vial or effervescence when tubes are gently agitated.

MPN - Confirmed test for coliforms. From each gassing LST or lactose broth tube,
loopful of suspension was transferred to a tube of BGLB broth; avoiding pellicle if present (a
sterile wooden applicator stick may also be used for these transfers). BGLB tubes were incubated
at 35°C 0.5°C and examined for gas production at 48 + 3 h. Most probable number (MPN) of
coliforms was calculated based on proportion of confirmed gassing LST tubes for 3 consecutive

dilutions.

MPN - Confirmed test for fecal coliforms and E. coli. From each gassing LST broth
tube from the Presumptive test, a loopful of each suspension was transferred to a tube of EC
broth. EC tubes were incubated 48 + 2 h at 45.5 °C and examined for gas production. Results of

this test were used to calculate fecal coliform MPN.

MPN - Completed test for E. coli. Completed test for E. coli was performed. Each
gassing EC tube was agitated, a loopful of broth was removed and streaked for isolation on a L-
EMB agar plate and EMB plate and incubated for 18-24 h at 35°C+ 0.5°C . Plates were
examined for suspicious E. coli colonies, i.e., dark centered and flat, with or without metallic

sheen. Transfer

MPN Calculation. The calculation for MPN was based on BAM Appendix 2: Most

Probable Number from Serial Dilutions. October 2010.


Microbiological Analysis

All the analysis used was based on USFDA (2001). All the equipment and materials,
reagents and media were prepared accordingly. The workspace was also disinfected prior every
analysis. Aseptic technique was strictly observed. The analysis employed were: (1) aerobic plate
count; (2) yeast and mold count (efag only); (3) enumeration of Escherichia coli and coliform

bacteria; (4) Staphylococcus aureus and Salmonella species.

Preparation of Sample Homogenate

Two (2) packs of each longganisa sample weighing 250g were gathered as sample units.
Only one sample unit was obtained from efag, hence following the procedure of obtaining at
least 250g analytical unit. A total of 25g was taken from the sample units for each analysis. This

was properly homogenized using a stomacher blender and appropriate dilutions were prepared.

Aerobic Plate Count

Using separate sterile pipets, decimal dilutions of 10-2, 10-3, 10-4, were prepared of food
homogenate by transferring 10 ml of previous dilution to 90 ml of diluent. 1 ml of each dilution
was pipetted into separate, appropriately marked petri dishes (triplicate for each dilution)
Dilution bottles were shaken 25 times in 30 cm arc within 7 s if it stands more than 3 min before
it is pipetted into petri dish. 12-15 ml plate count agar (cooled to 45 + 1°C) was poured to each

plate within 15 min of original dilution.Plates (inverted) were incubated for 48+2 hrs at 35°C.


Colonies were counted and recorded according to BAM (2003) guidelines. Calculation and

reporting was done using below formula:

ee
[@ xm, )+ Oi xn) x @)

Where:

N= Number of colonies per ml or g of product
C= Sum ofall colonies on all plates counted
nl = Number of plates in first dilution counted
n2 = Number of plates in second dilution counted

d= Dilution from which the first counts were obtained.

MPN - Presumptive Test for Coliforms, Fecal Coliforms and E. coli.

From the previously prepared dilutions, 3 consecutive dilutions (10-2, 10-3 and 10-4)
were used and 1 mL aliquots was inoculated from each dilution into 3 LST tubes for a 3 tube
MPN analysis. The LST tubes were incubated at 35°C+ 0.5°C. Tubes were examined and
reactions were recorded at 48 + 3 h for gas, i.e., displacement of medium in fermentation vial or

effervescence when tubes are gently agitated.

MPN - Confirmed test for coliforms. From each gassing LST or lactose broth tube,
loopful of suspension was transferred to a tube of BGLB broth; avoiding pellicle if present (a
sterile wooden applicator stick may also be used for these transfers). BGLB tubes were incubated
at 35°C+ 0.5°C and examined for gas production at 48 + 3 h. Most probable number (MPN) of
coliforms was calculated based on proportion of confirmed gassing LST tubes for 3 consecutive

dilutions.


MPN - Confirmed test for fecal coliforms and “E. coli”. From each gassing LST broth
tube from the Presumptive test, a loopful of each suspension was transferred to a tube of EC
broth (a sterile wooden applicator stick may also be used for these transfers). EC tubes were
incubated 48 + 2 h at 45.5 °C and examined for gas production. Results of this test were used to

calculate fecal coliform MPN.

MPN - Completed test for “E. coli”. Completed test for E. coli was performed. Each
gassing EC tube was agitated, a loopful of broth was removed and streaked for isolation on a L-
EMB agar plate and EMB plate and incubated for 18-24 h at 35°C 0.5°C . Plates were
examined for suspicious E. coli colonies, i.e., dark centered and flat, with or without metallic

sheen. Transfer

MPN Calculation. The calculation for MPN was based on USFDA (2010) Appendix 2:

Most Probable Number from Serial Dilutions. October 2010.

Staphylococcus aureus — Direct Plate Count Method

For each dilution to be plated, 1 ml sample suspension was aseptically transferred to 3
plates of Baird-Parker agar, distributing 1 ml of inoculum equitably to 3 plates (e.g., 0.4 ml, 0.3
ml, and 0.3 ml). Inoculum was spread over surface of agar plate, using sterile bent glass
streaking rod. Plates were retained in upright position until inoculum is absorbed by agar (about
10 min on properly dried plates). Plates were inverted and incubated for 45-48 h at 35-37°C.
Plates containing 20-200 colonies were selected. Colonies of S. aureus are circular, smooth,

convex, moist, 2-3 mm in diameter on uncrowded plates, gray to jet-black, frequently with light-


colored (off-white) margin, surrounded by opaque zone and frequently with an outer clear zone;
colonies have buttery to gummy consistency when touched with inoculating needle. Colonies
were counted and recorded. Number of colonies was added on triplicate plates represented by
colonies giving positive coagulase test and multiplied by the sample dilution factor. This number

was reported as number of S. aureus/g of food tested.

Coagulase test. Suspected S. aureus colonies were transferred into small tubes containing
0.2-0.3 ml BHI broth and emulsify thoroughly. BHI culture suspension was incubated for 18-24
hat 35-37°C. 0.5 ml reconstituted coagulase plasma with EDTA was added to the BHI culture
and mixed thoroughly. This was incubated at 35-37°C and examined periodically over 6 h-period
for clot formation. Only firm and complete clot that stays in place when tube is tilted or inverted

is considered positive for S. aureus.

Detection of Salmonella

Twenty five (25) gram food was weighed with a sterile wood spatula, put it into an
Erlenmeyer flask and added with 225 ml buffered peptone water to obtain 1 part sample + 9 part
buffer. Mixed and incubated at 37°C overnight (16-20 hours). One (1) ml of the pre-enrichment
was transferred with a pipette to 10 ml Tetrathionate broth (Miiller-Kaufmann) and 0.1 ml of the
pre-enrichment was transferred with a pipette to 10 ml Rappaport-Vassiliadis soy peptone (RVS)
broth. The former was incubated at 37.0°C + 0.5°C while the latter was incubated at 41.5°C +
0.5°C overnight (18-24 hours). A 10 plloopful was spread from the inoculated and incubated
Tetrathionate broth (1) and RVS broth (II) on XLD and on BGA agar plates and incubated at

37°C overnight (18-24 hours). Results were read both in XLD and BGA plates. In XLD plates, a


typical Salmonella colony has a slightly transparent zone of reddish color and a black center; a
pink-red zone may be seen in the media surrounding the colonies. Typical Salmonella colonies
ona BGA agar plate cause the color of the medium to be red/pink (phenol red is the indicator).

The colonies are grey-reddish/pink and slightly convex.

Physico-Chemical Analysis

For initial evaluation, proximate analysis was conducted to test the samples. The assays
conducted were based on Official Methods of Analysis of AOAC International (2000). Moisture,
protein and fat content of products are determined primarily to establish the nutritive and
economic value of the products. Moisture content primarily determines the shelf-stability of the
product; the data will imply microbial susceptibility of the product as water is one of the basic
requirements for microbial growth. Protein is analyzed for the purpose of nutrition labeling,
functional property investigation and biological activity determination (Nielsen, 2003). Fat
content is a determinant of quality and also an indicator for risk of rancidity. Ash indicated the

mineral content possibly present in the product.

Sample Preparation

Fresh sausage or “longganisa”.Remove from casings and homogenized using meat

grinder, mixing thoroughly after each grinding; and begin all determinations promptly.


Dry-cured ham or “etag”. Meat was separated as completely as possible from any bone and
chopped to small dice with a knife. Homogenize using meat grinder, mixing thoroughly after

each grinding; and begin all determinations promptly.

Moisture Content Determination

Crucibles were placed in the oven and dried to constant weight (overnight at 105°C or at
least 2 h at 135°C). Crucibles were removed from the oven using tongs to avoid contact and
placed immediately in desiccator. They were allowed to cool for 20-30 min (at least 2
mincooling time for each crucible). Cooled crucibles were weighed. One (1.0) gram sample was
added while crucibles were weighed in the balance. Weighed sampleswere placed in the oven at
105°C ovemight or at least 2 hat 135°C. Dried sample was allowed to cool in a desiccator for 30
minutes and weighed. Moisture content was calculated as follows:

wt. before drying after drying
sample weight *

% moisture = 100

% dry matter = 100 — % moisture

Crude Protein

Digestion. Three replicates of 0.30g samples were weighed and wrapped in a small piece
filter paper. Weighed sample was placed in a 300ml Kjeldal flask (sample + filter paper) and

added with approximately 0.5g salt mixture and Sml concentrated H2SO4. Samples were


digested for about 45-60 minutes or until the solution clears to a bluish or colorless solution and

cooled.

Distillation. The end of the condenser (glass tubing) was immersed in a receiver (125ml
Erlenmeyer flask) containing 10ml 2% boric acid and 2 drops indicator. Approximately 125ml —
150ml distilled water was added to Kjeldal flask. Flask was swirled gently to dissolve digested
sample and 30ml 45% NaOH (do not shake) was added and immediately connected flask to
spray trap (Kjeldal bulb). The flask was gently swirled to mix the solution thoroughly. Enough
distillate was collected distillate (75ml). A blank was run, using filter paper and the same amount

of reagents to a correct for any nitrogen present,

Titration, The distillate was titrated with standard 0.1N HCl until the end-point is

reached. The color of the distillate changes from blue to light yellow or light brown.
Calculation. %Crude Protein was calculated as follows:

__ ample titration ~ Blank titration)x meq. N x 0.1N HCL x
= Sample weight (g)

YN 100

Where:

%CP =N x 6.25


Crude Fat or Ether Extract

Three replicates of 3.5g samples were prepared and wrapped individually in a small piece
of filter paper. Samples were then dried to constant weight in the oven (105°C overnight). Hot
samples were weighed. Samples were placed in the Soxhlet extractor and place in watch glass to
evaporate solvent. Samples were then dried to constant weight at 105°C overnight. Samples were
again weighed while hot.

wt. before extraction — wt. after extraction
sample weight

EE = x 100

Water Activity

Water activity was measured through water activity meter. Previously prepared sample
was filled into the sample cup, just enough not to over the lip. The sample was placed in a
measurement chamber and the second sample placed in pre-conditioning chamber. The chambers
were then closed to develop equilibrium. Start button is pressed to initiate the analysis. It finishes
with a “peep” sound until values are shown on display. The analysis was based on Aqualab

Water activity Manual (Decagon, 2012).

Salt Content Determination

The sodium chloride content is determined by titration based on Volhard method of
AOAC (1990) 15" edition:935.47, 941.18. Finely comminuted sample was thoroughly mixed

into a 300mL flask. A reagent blanks and previously analyzed sample was run as recovery with


each sample. A 25.0 mL of 0.1000 + 0.0005 N AgNOs solution was added into the flask and
swirled until sample and solution were in intimate contact, and then added with 15 mL of conc.
HNO. This was added with sufficient boiling chips and boil until meat digested and thenadded
with a small amount of lactose to the reagent blank. KMnO, solution was added in small portions
while boiling to tum solution dark brown. Boiling was continued until color disappears. Small
portions of KMnO,were continuously added until solution retains dark color for several minutes
before clearing. The side flask was washed with water. Approximately 25 mL of water was
added and boiled for approximately 5 min. It was cooled to room temperature in the fume hood,
rinsed the neck of the flask and diluted to approximately 150 mL with water. Approximately 5
mL of diethyl ether was added and approximately 2 mL of the ferric alum indicator. It was
swirled to coagulate the precipitated AgCl. The excess AgNO; was titrated with KSCN solution

to a permanent, salmon colored, end point.

Calculations
25.0 mL — (mL KSCN)(R’ ;
enact = 220mL = (m )(R)I(N AgNO3)(5.85)
Sample Weight
‘Where:
L AgNO.
R = ratio of ~A9N03

mL KSCN


Nitrite in Cured Meat

The test procedure was based on AOAC (2012). Approximately 5g of finely comminuted
sample was weighed and thoroughly mixed to test sample into S0mL beaker. A 40mL H:0
heated to 80°C was added. It was mixed thoroughly with glass rod, taking care to break up all
lumps, and transferred to 500mL volumetric flask. Beaker and rod was thoroughly washed with
successive portions of hot HzO, adding all washings to flask. Hot H,O was added to bring
volume ca 300mL. Flask was transferred to steam bath, and allowed to stand for 2h, shaking
occasionally. It was cooled to room temperature, diluted to volume with HO, remixed and
filtered, A 2.5mL sulfanilamide reagent was added to aliquot containing 5-50 yg NaNO> in
5OmL volumetric flask, and mixed. After 5 min, it was added with 2.5mL NED reagent, mixed,
diluted to volume, mixed, and let color developed for 15 min. A portion of solution was
transferred to photometer cell and determined at 540nm against blank of 45mL H20, 2.5mL
sulfanilamide reagent and 2.5mL NED reagent. Nitrite present was determined by comparison
with standard curves prepared as follows: Add 10, 20, 30, and 40mL nitrite working standard
solution to 50mL volumetric flask, add 2.5 sulfanilamide reagent, mix, and proceed as above,

beginning “After 5 min...”. Standard curve is straight line to pg/mL NaNO in final solution.

Phosphate Determination

The determination of phosphate in meat was based on AOAC (1990). Approximately 1g
of dried sample was ignited to 550°C for at least about 4 hours. Residue was cooled down and

added with 20ml HCI and 5 drops of HNOs. The residue was boiled until dissolved completely


and cooled. The cooled solution was filtered and transferred to a 100ml volumetric flask and
added with distilled HO. A volume of Sml was taken from initial solution and diluted to S0ml.
A Iml aliquot from the sample solution was pipetted in a test tube and added with 1 ml each of
NH,-molybdate, hydroquinone and NazSOs, The solution was then diluted to 10ml. Different
concentrations were prepared to standard KH2PQx. All the solutions were allowed to stand for 30

minutes and % transmittance readings were taken at 60mu.

Calculation
_ uge in aliquot x dilution factor
%Phosphorous Content = Ay * 100
Phosphate Content = (Phosphorus content)(F)
Where:

F(K2HPOg) = 5.62


‘ing Quality

Quantitative descriptive analysis has been used as an aid in product development and
matching, in the maintenance or improvement of an established product, as a diagnostic tool
when a product is losing its accustomed share of the market, and as a quality control measure
(Van Oirschot and Tomlins, 2002). Factors affecting texture, taste, flavor, color are the part of
meat used, maturity, rigor mortis; ingredients formulation; mixing of ingredients; freshness, etc.
This method was used to evaluate the sensory attributes of efag and longganisa to develop a
unique set of descriptions to sensory characteristics and investigate subtle differences between

the existing and new formulation of efag and longganisa.

Using ANOVA (Kruskal-Wallis Multiple Comparisons) test, the significant value (a) is
0.05. Anything equal and higher than the value is insignificantly different and lower value is
otherwise. There were 3 sets of analysis conducted: (1) efag, raw; (2) efag, in broth; and (3)
longganisa, cooked. Dunn’s test was then applied to check which treatments were different. The
sensory evaluation form is attached in Appendix 10a to 10c. The samples were subjected to a
descriptive sensory evaluation tests with a total of 30 panelists.

For longganisa, the two formulations were compared. The samples were evaluates according
to their mouthfeel, color, flavor and saltiness. As mentioned in the previous sections, the samples that

were evaluates was before and after slaughter procedure was standardized, and added with 30%

phosphate.

Etag, which has been used as a flavoring agent for the pork broth in the area, was
evaluated for its color, texture and aroma in its original dry-cured meat form as well as the

flavor, aroma and saltiness of the broth, where the eag was added.


Cooking of the broth

Five hundred grams (500g) of pork with 125g of etagwas boiled for 1h in a 1000ml
potable water to soften. Two hundred (200) g of diced potato and 300g grams of was added and

allowed to cook for 10-15 minutes. The broth was served warm.

Cooking of Native Longganisa

Around 100ml of potable water was poured into pan and allowed to simmer. Two
hundred fifty grams (250g) of longganisa was placed, and rotated regularly until browning

became even.

Three statistical methods were used to analyze the data acquired. For microbiological
analysis, the data were statistically analyzed using t-test Procedure. For physico-chemical test, F-
test was used to determine if there was a significant difference; followed by Scheffe’s testto

identify which pairs were different.

Si

Seminar-Workshop

Based on the results of the experiments, interviews and FGD, a seminar-workshop was
conducted to fill-in knowledge gaps among member assigned as new processors. The data on the
improvement imposed in the production system shared to new attendees. The results of the
experiment were presented to educate and help them understand why safety and quality of their
products needs to be improved. A pre-test and a post-test consisting of ten (10) items were
employed to verify knowledge gain and an evaluation of the seminar was conducted to gauge its

over-all impact.

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Quality and Safety Assessment

Establishment Inspection

Based on the FSSAI (2010), ANZFA (2001), FAO (2007), and FDA (2006) standards for
GMP (FSSAI, 2010; DOH, 2004; and ASQ, 2002), the grounds and building structure did not
comply due to cost limitations (Tables 5 and 6). However, improvement can be done in order to
prevent hazards from happening, e.g. seepage, harboring of pests and animals. Tables 6 and 7

showed the summary assessment of the facility’s location, surroundings, design and construction.

The facility was situated in a forested area and although it was evident that it is not
polluted, the place is a rented apartment and located in a residential area. There is a need to
provide entrance and exit closure around the premises to prevent entry of animals and pests. To
ensure that rodents are prevented, frequent inspection, cleaning and fumigation should be done.
Itis also noted that since there is no proper compartmentalization of the processing area from the

other parts of the house, it was recommended that during production, the processing area

(kitchen) will not be used for other activities. Only production personnel should be allowed

during this time.

Table 5. Assessment of location and surroundings.

PREMISES 'STANDARD™

EXISTING CONDITION

“ASSESSMENT
Acceptable/Needs
ImprovemenUNot Acceptable

‘2 Constructed and
‘maintained to protect.
against weather,
flood, ground
seepage,

Constructed and
maintained to protect
access and
harbouring of vermin,
rodents, birds, insects
or other animals

© Away from polluted

Grounds

4 Away fom industrial
activities

€ Used for residential
purpose or has access
to

Rented space, grounds not under
the

‘operator's control; prone to
pollution - along the highway,
prone to landslide -on a hill

residential area; not totally
protected from insects, birds,
fodents and other animals

along the road; water access is
difficult

forested area/community, away
fom industrial area but can be
prone to pests, animals, etc

‘There are two floors. The first
‘one includes the
kitchen/processing area,
receiving area, toilet and the
retail store.

Not acceptable, Maintenance is
necessary to limit possibility of
environmental risks, relocation is
still preferred.

Not acceptable. Maintenance is
necessary to limit possible risks of
environmental risks; Relocation is
stil preferred

‘Needs improvement. Protection from
seepage should be there;
‘maintenance is necessary to limit
possible risks of pollution, ete.

‘Needs improvement air is stil free
but needs to improve on protection
from entry of animals

[Needs improvement. The rented
space is a house, segregation of the
processing area should be in place to
avoid cross-contamination

DOH AO No, 1535. 2004 REVISED GUIDELINES ON CURRENT GOOD MANUFACTURING
PRACTICE IN MANUFACTURING, PACKING, REPACKING, ORHOLDING FOOD


Table 6. Assessment of plant construction and design.

PREMISES ‘STANDARD*

EXISTING CONDITION


"ASSESSMENT

Acceptable/Needs Improvement/Not
Acceptable

‘2 Comparimentalized working

Material movement in one
direction

© Area occupied by
‘machinery is less than 50%

Floor a Floor is made of non-
absorbent, impervious,
‘washable and non-toxic
materials

b Floor surface are dry

¢ Floor connected to adequate
drainage

Wall a Wallis made of non-
absorbent, impervious,
‘washable and non-toxic
materials

b Wall's height appropriate for
‘leaning and operations

Ceilings 2 Ceilings are easy to clean
and are clean

Windows a Sufficient number of
windows for exhaust;
screened

Simall working area, no actual
compartmentalization

Materials movement comes
in and comes out in one place

There is only one machine,
meat grinder also used for
casing

Made of cement

Floor was not kept dry at all
times, regular sweeping
cleaning was not done

No drainage connection;
kitchen (house) set-up

‘Mmade of cement

Wall's height is appropriate
for cleaning

Easy to clean but not kept
clean

‘There are 3 small windows
without screen

‘Needs improvement, standardization of
areas where each processing will take
place. Given the limitation of space, the
timing and sequencing of each activity
should be implemented,

Not acceptable; there are two openings
Boing to the kitchen (processing area). The
process flow, fom raw materials to exit of
finished product should be established.

‘Acceptable. The machine is well-cleaned
‘and kept at its proper place

‘Acceptable as long as this is Kept clean
and dry.

[Not acceptable; SOP for cleaning should
be established,

Needs improvement; to keep the floor dry,
‘mopping using absorbent material is done,
all liquid waste should be thrown properly
is the drainage outside

‘Acceptable as long as this is kept clean,
and dry.

Acceptable, SOP for cleaning should be
established to identify the frequency and
method of cleaning.

Not acceptable; SOP for cleaning should
be established.

Needs improvement. The windows should
be kept closed during production;
otherwise putting up of screens should be
done.

“DOH AONo. 153 S. 2004 REVISED GUIDELINES ON CURRENT GOOD MANUFACTURING
PRACTICE IN MANUFACTURING, PACKING, REPACKING, ORHOLDING FOOD


Table 6. Continued...

PREMISES ‘STANDARD* EXISTING CONDITION "ASSESSMENT

Acceptable/Needs Improvement/Not Acceptable

Doors ‘@Doors are made of smooth The door is made of wood, Needs improvement. The door should also be kept
‘and non-absorbent surfaces; also not screened. clean, must be kept closed during production and
sereened ‘minimize coming in and out; if possible, screen

should be made available,

Equipment a Equipment are non- Equipment are non- ‘Needs improvement. SOP for cleaning should be
corrosive, regularly cleaned corrosive but are not _established to identify the frequency and method of

regularly cleaned cleaning,

Adaptation of Cleaning In No CIP standard available Needs improvement. SOP for cleaning should be

Process (CIP) established to identify the frequency and method of

cleaning,

Proper storage Proper storage are available Needs improvement. Adaptation of 5S can be applied,
‘but are not arranged and Proper labeling of storage areas should also be done
organized accordingly

Availabilty of containers Waste containers, ash Needs improvement. Proper waste disposal and

for food waste bins are made available but segregation should be observed. Waste container
only outside should be made available in necessary locations

‘within the plant premises.

‘Accessfor Easy access for hand Lavatory is available within Needs improvement, Potable water should be used for
hhand washing washing the processing area; hand washing and be made available all the time,
however, there is difficulty, especially during processing
in water access
ing Changing facility should be Changing facility is not Not acceptable. Allocate an area where personnel can
available for personnel, as available be allowed to change and place their belonging prior
well as lockers and storage entering or starting the production. The store or the
place adjacent receiving area can be made, provided all
things are organized
Toilets Toilets are available and Toilet is available but with Needs improvement. The toilet should always be
regularly cleaned limited access to water, and washed and cleaned, Ensure that water containers are
not regularly cleaned filled all the time.

DOH AO No. 153 S.2004 REVISED GUIDELINES ON CURRENT GOOD MANUFACTURING
PRACTICE IN MANUFACTURING, PACKING, REPACKING, ORHOLDING FOOD.



Table 7. Summary assessment of establishment construction, design, location and surroundings.

PREMISES

ASSESSMENT

Acceptable/Needs Improvement/Not Acceptable

Location and surroundings

Layout

Building structure and design (loor
to ceiling)

‘Access for hand washing.

Individual working areas (changing
facility, process area, etc.)

Needs improvement. Although the area is away from pollution, there is a greater risk for
environmental seepage, harbouring of vermin, rodents, birds, insects and other animals,
They build walls to protect the area from these risks,

‘Not acceptable. Compartmentalization of working areas should be considered, The
‘movement or direction of materials should be established.

‘Needs improvement. Frequent cleaning should be done. SOP should be established,

[Needs improvement. Area is accessible but treated and potable water should be used,

All areas should be kept clean and organized.

It was observed that the ceilings, windows and doors did not comply with the standard for

material according to the GMP. Also, it was observed that they were not regularly cleaned. There were

dust everywhere, and some stains on the wall. The floor was wet and dirty. Therefore the personnel were

advised to regularly clean from cei

to floor. The personnel were advised to establish SOP for general

cleaning and during processing. Hand washing reminders were also posted around the area to make sure

that worker would always pay attention.

The toilet was allocated at the back side of the area. The workers were advised to ensure water is

available at all times. The area outside the kitchen was advised to be used as changing facility and storage

for the personnel.


The storage cabinets were properly assigned for each utensil, equipment and raw materials used
for the processing. Labels were provided to prevent cross contamination and keep the production place
organized. Containers of food materials were also labeled and arrange depending on its usage and form.

Waste containers were also cleaned and ensured to be present inside and outside the production

area, Waste segregation was also suggested.

Figure 5. Chlorination of water to be used for the whole process; a — addition of chlorine; b
dipping of chlorine test strips and comparing it to standard; and ¢ — test strips color
change until standard of 0.1-0.3ppm was achieved.

Table 8. Assessment of hygiene practices.

‘STANDARI

EXISTING
CONDITION

“ASSESSMEN'

sble/Needs Improvement/Not
Acceptable

Wearing a Head covering

protective haimet
clothing.
b Face mask
© Gloves ‘Not available forall
4 Footwear Not available forall
€ Apron/Uniform
Hygiene a Nocutsorwounds Personnel
Practices Participate in production

when they have wounds
b Regularly wash hands Not all the time

Trimmed nails

4 Good behavior during Some are talking and
food handling activities using cellular phones

© Eating and drinking The processing area is
not allowed during also used for cooking and

production eating,

‘Some personnel do not

‘Not available for all

Not available forall

Not all personne!
observing this

Not accepiable. Everyone should wear
protective clothing during production.

Not acceptable. Everyone should wear
protective clothing during production.

Not acceptable. Everyone should wear
protective clothing during production.

Not acceptable. Everyone should wear
protective clothing during production

Not acceptable, Everyone should wear
protective clothing during production

‘Acceptable. Personnel who are sick and have
cuts or wounds should not participate in the
production

Not acceptable. All personnel are required to
wash their hands regularly, before and after
every activity

Not acceptable. Personnel participating in the
production process should have trimmed nails

Not acceptable. Talking, unless essential to
production and use of mobile phone is not
allowed during processing,

Not acceptable, No food and drinks are
allowed during the production. Lunch break
takes place when the product is allowed to
marinate for 2 hours, such that it is set aside
and all equipment and apparatus are already
leaned and put back to their proper storage
All materials needed for production is
separated from utensils used in the kitchen

SOH AO No, 153 S, 2004 REVISED GUIDELINES ON CURRENT GOOD MANUFACTURING

PRACTICE IN MANUFACTURING, PACKING, REPACKING, ORHOLDING FOOD

Sanitation and Hygiene

5B

Poor hygiene and sanitation was observed during the inspection. Standards were not

applied in the procedures. They also

<d in water analysis and microbiological analysis for the

products specifically in coliforms and total plate count. This topic will be discussed further later.


The recommendation was proper implementation of hygiene and sanitation, and water
chlorination. To view the details of inspection, see Appendix 2 in this paper. Chlorination of

water is in Appendix 3.

During the initial inspection, it was observed that protective clothing was not strictly
worn by personnel. Some workers do not wear haimet, gloves, face masks. Also, it was observed
that the workers do not use footwear inside the production premises. All these observations were
corrected during the succeeding production schedules. Despite these limitations, it was observed

that all personnel were provided with their production uniforms.

During production, some workers did not trim their nails. They were all advised to follow
this hygiene guideline religiously. Personnel were well aware that they should be physically fit
for work. Practices during production like eating, drinking, talking and use of mobile phone are

strictly prohibited. However, some personnel were still doing these. They were all advised to

avoid these practices, as they promote risk for the product.

Table 9. Summary assessment of hygiene practices

‘ASSESSMENT

Wearing of protective clothing Not acceptable. Everyone is required to wear
protective clothing during production.

Sanitation and hygiene practices during production Not acceptable. All personnel should maintain a
good behavior during production and ensure
cleanliness is observed at all times.


Table 10. Assessment of slaughter practice.

PROCESS
STAGE

‘STANDARD*

EXISTING CONDITION


‘ASSESSMENT

Acceptable/Needs ImprovementNot
Acceptable

Livestock
reception and
‘ruck washing

‘Stunning and
Bleeding

Dehairing and
hide finishing

Evisceration

igs for butchering are Tasted
for 2 days to reduce intestinal
‘contents; livestock are
washed with water 10
‘minimize the amount of dirt
and manure introduced to the
plant

Electric shock is used for
stunning; the pi is bled using
hollow," sterilized knife,
directing the blood to a
collection tough; time
required for effective
bleeding is less than 7
sminutes

Hair of the pig is removed by
a scalding hot water, at least
60°C, followed by scraping
‘through manual shaving,
deharing machines, or
singeing with a gascfired
hand-held torch to remove
remaining hair, the surface is
first cleaned by showering
and brushing after dehairing.

The pig is then brought to
evisceration area where,
stomachs are opened and the
viscera are removed. Prior to
that, the head, hoofs, feet and
tail are removed. This can be
done manually for small-scale
operations. Before the
processing of hides at a
tannery, the flesh must be
removed and the hides
washed and immersed in
brine

Pig pens are muddy, pig was
wrestled and tied 10 its feet,
weighed in a hanging scale (94
kg) live weight). Hanged on its
feet in a bamboo stalk, walked
for 500m down the slope,
transported in a tricycle to the
processing area

No stunning; throat is cut while
the pig was held down until
blood is drained. Unclean
bleeding area, no catcher for the
blood and there was a dog
‘around the perimeter, licking the
blood spilled on the pavement,
Blood was collected ina pot,
knife used was not sterilized

Dehairing was done using
flames (butane); the hide gets
bumed

Unsterilized knife as used for
cutting. The carcass was just
placed on the ground with a
banana leaf

Not acceptable. The pig should be rested
prior butchering for at least 24 hours,
Which means collection of animal from
farm should be done a day prior the
schedule. The pig pen in the slaughtering
area should be washed and cleaned,

Not acceptable. The animal should not be
subjected to stress during this process
which contributes a lot to the texture
quality of the product. The knives used
should always be sanitized and disinfected.

Not acceptable, The bumed skin of the
animal gives a brown color to the skin,
This will hinder the hide inspection of the
animal. The carcass should also be washed
with chlorinated water.

Not acceptable. Placing the carcass on the
‘round exposes it to high-risk of microbial
Contamination. There should be an area or
fabricated platform that is easy to clean
and sanitize.

FUNEP, 2000.

Table 10 continued...

PROCESS
STAGE

‘STANDARD™


EXISTING CONDITION

‘ASSESSMENT

Acceptable/Needs Improvement/Not
Acceptable

Edible Offal

Casings

Inedible Offal

Curing and
boning

Processing

Chilling

SUNEP, 2000

The head, hoofs, feet and
tail are removed first;
stomachs are opened and
the viscera are removed;
ean be done manually for
small-scale operations.

The edible offal
components and casings
(nvestinal tract) are
separated from the
viscera and sent on for
cleaning and further
processing.

sent to a rendering plant
either on site or off site
for rendering into feed
‘materials and tallow .

sent to a rendering plant
either on site or offsite
for rendering into feed
‘materials and tallow

‘The trimmed carcasses
will then be washed
either manually using
hoses or automated
carcass washing units

chilling takes place in
cold (~ 5 104°C) air
chambers with or
without intermittent

variable durations within

12 = 24 hours, while
the total chilling process
lasts 24 ~ 48 hours.

Washing at 1030am and
containers; sold for Php130/Kg
{intestines)

Cleaned but not processed for
casings of longganisa.

Weight of head was 6.6Kg; 2 feet
were a total of 2.1KG and were
sold immediately to customers
after the butchering

Placed in basins, unwashed.
Remaining meat are weighed per
kilo and sold at Php190/kg, liver
Php190/kg, heart and other organs
at Php130/kg,

Meat were segregated in pails and
basin for processing; uncovered;
fies are seen on the meat and
container itself

All the eut meats were placed into
the freezer after cutting and
deboning.

Two dogs present during
slaughter, meat was abandoned
‘outside, although with cover

Not acceptable, Containers and_other
materials used for evisceration should be
washed and disinfected,

Not acceptable. The water used for
cleaning the casings is not treated. This is
a high-risk of microbial contamination.
Containers used should also be cleaned
and sanitized,

Acceptable, The inedible offal are
disposed of properly.

Not acceptable. The basins, pails and
knives used should be cleaned and
disinfected. The weighing scale should
also be cleaned and sanitized.

Not acceptable, The meat that will be used
for processing should be washed and
cleaned and placed in a sanitized or
disinfected containers with proper cover to
eliminate microbial contamination from
flies, air, te

[Not acceptable. All the meat that will be
stored in the frcezer for commercial
purposes should be washed thoroughly
prior storage.

Not acceptable. The parameter should
always be protected from animals, pest,
rodents and other possible cause of
‘contamination that may be a risk to the
safety of the product.



Slaughter

In the community's old practice, pig to be slaughtered is kept in muddy pens and taken
the same day of processing. In the new practice, the animal should be collected 24 h prior
processing to allow rest. Before, the pig was wrestled and cut in its throat to bleed and kill. Now,
mechanical pistol are already used to stun the animal. The collection of blood was still the same
except that the knife, basin and area of collection were cleaned and sanitized. Before, dehairing
was done through seinging. In the improved process, the pig is applied with hot water for

scalding. Seinging is only done to eliminate remaining small hair.

The removal of parts followed, They use clean and washed apparatus and containers.
Frequent washing was also done. Dogs and other stray animals were prevented to come into the

area. For the complete details of this observation, see Appendix 3.

a b c d

Figure 6. Slaughter: Collection to Evisceration: (a) — collection and washing of pig; (b) —
stunning and bleeding; (c) — dehairing and hide finishing; and (4) — evisceration.


Table 11.Summary assessment of slaughter practice.

ST ‘ASSESSMI

Pre-slaughter ‘Not acceptable. The live animal was exposed to preslaughter stress. This contributes
highly on the quality of meat.

Slaughter Not acceptable. Utensils and area used for slaughter was not cleaned and disinfected,

The meat will be exposed on both physical and microt

contamination.

Post-slaughter Not acceptable, was not washed and cleaned prior storage. This increases the risk of
both spoilage and pathogenic microbial contamination.

Longganisa and Etag Production

Before improvements were implemented in the production of longganisa and etag, the

personnel were not wearing proper uniform, mask, haimet, etc. They were also not particular

about trimming nails, good behavior during processing. Most of them were using cellphone,
talking and walking around the premises. Hand washing was not practiced. After the assessment,
the workers became very keen on following proper wearing of protective clothing. They reduced
the number of workers in the area in proportion to the production volume. The work was for
done in lesser time than before (7h vs 6 h). Cleanliness was observed in the area. Hand sanitizer,

alcohol, paper towels, hand soap and chlorinated and/or boiled water was made available all the

time.

Before, the ingredients were prepared using measuring cups and estimates. As of their
improved procedures, they were already using weighing scales, and cylinder for measuring liquid

and solid ingredients. They also learned to set standard input and output per production, e.g


20Kg will be processed for the day. The details of the processing standards and process

observations for longganisa and efag are available in tables 12 and 13 respectively. Summary for

both assessments is shown in tables 14 and 15.

Figure 7. Longganisa Processing: (a) — cutting of meat; (b) — testing the apparatus for
homogenizing; (c) — blending of meat, spices and curing mix; and (d) — stuffing and
packaging.

Figure 8. Etag Processing: (a) — meat was tied with a straw string to be used for hanging; (b) —
tied meat was covered prior salting; (c) - manual salting; (d) - sun-drying of etag.

Table 12.Assessment of longganisa production.


PROCESS ‘STANDARD* EXISTING CONDITION “ASSESSMENT
STEP
Acceptable/Needs —_Improvemen/Not
‘Acceptable

Formulation of Weighed mbture ofall, Utensil/equipmenv{ables were not Needs improvement, measuring cups Were

curing Mix nitrate/nitrite, phosphate disinfected just washed and rinsed used for determining quantity of
and water using clean with tap water (not treated). Used ingredients; suggest that weighing scale be
and disinfected utensils measuring cups instead of weighing used for beter accuracy, using weated and
and weighing scale scale. clean water is prescribed as well as

thorough cleaning and disinfection of
utensils and other materials.

Curing Lean meat should be Connective tissue and tendons were Needs improvement; uniform cutting of
fice of removed fom lean meat using lean meat was observed; bu use of cleaned
tendons or hard Jenife and chopping board; not and disinfected materials is necessary:
connective tissue and wearing gloves, face mask, haimet. chlorinated water must be used; hygiene is
only solid fats (beef ‘Knife and container used were not also important throughout the process
body ft, pork disinfected. Taking and conversing
back ft) should be used in the entre process. Not washing

‘of hands from time to time. Parts
used were sirloin and round.

Homogenizing  Mincing of meat Homogenizer was washed but not Needs improvement; the homogenizer
and fat(3 mm grinder disinfected same with containers, should be cleaned and disinfected prior
disc) utensils not disinfected, no gloves usage; workers that are manually puting in

and face masks, no washing of meat into the mincer should sanitized their
hands durin interval hhands at all times and use appropriate
gloves.

Pre-Blending Mixing of salt and Weighing of homogenized meat Needs improvement, weighing scale
spices, with ft garlic; should be used in measuring ingredients.
Casing Washing of casing using
preparation (soaking and untreated water
rinsing natural pig
casings)

Blending Grinding of Washing of homogenizer prior to Needs improvement; the homogenizer
mixture: meat, fat, blending using tap water. should be cleaned and disinfected prior
spices and curing mix Containers used were not _usage; workers that are manually mixing

disinfected. Presence of flies. No all the ingredients should sanitize their
gloves during blending, Issue on hands and use appropriate gloves (at all
«alulation of curing mix. times).

Stuffing Sausage stuffing sausages do not have uniform sizes; Needs improvement; uniform size of the

(manval stuffer),

the mixture is usually
stuffed into thin or
‘medium size

calibre natural casings of
the “edible” type;
linking and twisting the
‘cases to uniform sizes

oo many handlers, working table
was not disinfected; no gloves, no
face mask

sausage should be ensured; workers that
are manually stuffing, linking and twisting
the filled cases should sanitized their hands
at all times and use appropriate gloves.

“inglett and Inglet, 1982; Toldrd, 2010; Heinz and Hauizinger, 2007

Table 12 continued...


PROCESS
‘STEP

‘STANDARD*

EXISTING CONDITION

‘ASSESSMENT

Acceptable/Needs
Acceptable

ImprovementINot

Packaging Storagein
vacuum bags can prevent
the fast onset of
rancidity
Deep-ffozen at -18°C,
the
storage life can be
extended up to three
months.
‘The product packaging
should contain
mandatory label
information including
product name, use of
brand name, complete
list of ingredients, net
contents and drained
weight, name and
address of manufacturer,
lot identification, storage
condition, expiry or
expiration date, food
allergen information, and
‘nutrition facts in
accordance 10 AO 2014-
0030.

Freezing

Labeling

Packaging material, ordinary plastic
bags, no design and no seal. Frozen
storage right after packaging,

‘Stored in freezer, temperature is not
‘monitored

‘No label indicated on the packaging
materials

Needs improvement, look for a belter
packaging material that wouldn't brittle
‘when stored below °C; sealed packaging
material is preferred.

‘Needs improvement; the fieezer should be
regularly cleaned and the temperature
should be verified

[Not acceptable. The producers should now
‘consider making and designing the label
‘and packaging material to have the product
‘accepted and approved by the FDA.

“Inglett and Inglen, 1982, Toldrd, 2010, Heinz and Hautzinger, 2007, ‘Department of Health AO 2014-0030,

Table 13.Assessment of etag production,

OCESS ‘STANDARD*
STEP

EXISTING
CONDITION

“ASSESSMENT

Acceptable/Needs _ Improvement/Not
Acceptable

Fresh meal) Frozenfihawed hams must be
Refrigerated carefully controlled
Ham when received at the factory and
‘Thawed Ham — musibe thawed before processing.

Reception Hams are stored for 1 ~2 days at 2~
4° C to reach a uniform temperature
(acclimatized condition with
decontamination treatments on both
the carcass and chambers)

Pre-Salting This stage isthe incorporation of
nitrate on the surface ofthe ham

Salting Salt is applied on the
‘extemal surface of the hams, spread
evenly or hand - rubbed, and left for
2-3 weeks, Typical amounts may
bbe 20-30 g medium -
grain salt per kg on the lean surface
and 10 ~ 20 g of wet salt per kg on
the skin

Drying Dry the hams in controlled drying
chamber till they reach about 32%
‘of weight loss, and to provide
‘enoughripening time for enzymes to
react and contributeto flavor

Smoking _ Smoking over a wood fir, a feast
(Optional) for 2-3 days,

Cu to 1 ke per
piece; cut outside;
weighed using
‘manual seale

Left outside in a
basin with no cover,
parts included are
shor loin, rib, lank

Meat was tied with a
saw sting 10 be
used for hanging

Ratio 1.8KG:10Kg
(salt to meat); actual
was 4KG salt to
28KG erag, curing
takes 3 days

Sun drying minimum
of 3 days depend on
the sun with the
objective of 25%
moisture reduction.
Rely only on weight
loss

Not done, if smoked,
Etog is cured for 6
days and smoked
using, wood from
anus” and/or guava
tree

Needs improvement, hams is freshly
prepared from butchering; although
needs to be washed and cleaned.
Preferably, meat cuts should be
uniform.

[Not acceptable; the existing practice do
not require temperature equilibrium of -
2.10 -I°C, the temperature of the meat is
maintained in 16°C (ambient
temperature) which poses high~
‘microbial risk. The producers should
provide for chambers or storage
containers that are accessible for
decontamination and would ensure
reduction of microbial population and
pathogen prevalence.

‘Acceptable. The traditional practice
does not require addition of nitrate.
‘This thus indicates to understand the
‘microflora in the product at is proceed
to ripening,

Acceptable. However, the effect of the
amount of salt added in the meat might
have effect on aesthetic characteristics
as well as in microbial inhibition

Needs Improvement. The effect of
drying is highly relevant to the final
quality of the product. Ths is to ensure
that the water activity is enough not to
slow down enzymatic hydrolysis
reactions, likeproteolysis, while
ensuring that the product would not be
susceptible for microbial growth
(product water activity is 074-75, see
Table 15),

Acceptable, not "smoke" flavor, not
intended to be eaten on its own. But is
used as flavoring agent when cooking
broth,

“Lawrie and Ledward, 2006; Toldrd, 2010, "Department of Health AO 2014-0030,
**Xanthophyllum rectum is a ee in the family Polygalaceae. The specific epithet rectum is from the Latin meaning "upright",

referring tothe inflorescences.


Table 13 continued.

PROCESS ‘STANDARD* EXISTING ‘ASSESSMENT
STEP CONDITION
Acceptable/Needs — Improvement/Not
Acceptable
Extended Ripening cellars at mild Not particularly Acceptable, Ripening affects aesthetic
ripening temperatures for long periods of done. However, after characteristics of ham. There is a great
time, up to24 months at temperatures drying, the meat is opportunity to explore the different
10 - 20 ° C and relative stored’ in closed biochemical changes that occur during,
humidity of 65% to 82%. containers and kept this process.
in a cool dry
place(16°C-25°C).
Boning/ Boned hams can be sliced Bones are not_ Needs improvement; product should be
Slicing/ at the retailer shop or directly by removed; the meat is properly packed to ensure that quality is
Packaging consumersat home. The commercial stored in closed not compromised after prolonged
distribution, whichis growing very containers and kept storage.
rapidly in’ the market, consists in a cool dry
Of slices packaged under vacuum or place(16°C-25°C),
‘modified atmosphere. ‘When the product is
sold, itis wrapped in
papers
Labeling "The product packaging should No label indicated Not acceptable. The producers should

contain mandatory label information
including product name, use of brand
name, complete list of ingredients,
niet contents and drained weight,
name and address of manufacturer,
Tot identification, storage condition,
expiry or expiration date, food
allergen information, and nutrition
facts in accordance’ to AO 2014-
0030.

fon the packaging
materials

‘now consider making and designing the
label and packaging material to have
the product accepted and approved by
the FDA.

“Lawrie and Ledward, 2006, Toldra, 2010, Department of Health AO 2014-0030,


Table 14.Summary assessment of longganisa production.

‘STEPS ‘ASSESSMENT

Pre-operation ‘Needs improvement; measuring cups were used for determining quantity of
ingredients; suggest that weighing scale be used for better accuracy; using treated
and clean water is prescribed as well as thorough cleaning and disinfection of
utensils and other materials.

Operation Needs improvement. The machine used was not disinfected. Workers do not wash
their hands all the time when moving in and out of production. Uniform size of the
sausage should be ensured; workers that are manually stuffing, linking and twisting
the filled cases should sanitized their hands at all times and use appropriate gloves.

Post-operation ‘Needs improvement. No proper and/or official acceptable packaging material that
has been approved by FDA. The storage/freezer used should be thoroughly cleaned,

Table 15.Summary assessment of etag production.

‘STEPS ‘ASSESSMENT

Pre-operation ‘Needs improvement; the meat that will be used for the processing was not
thoroughly washed and cleaned, chambers used are not temperature and humidity
controlled chamber to have the meat reach a uniform temperature.

Operation Needs improvement. Salting stage is acceptable but the drying stage however
requires a not temperature and humidity controlled chamber as this is highly relevant
to the final quality ofthe product. This isto ensure thatthe water activity is enough not to
slow down enzymatic hydrolysis reactions, likeproteolysis, while ensuring thatthe product
‘would not be susceptible for microbial growth

Post-operation ‘Needs improvement. No proper and/or official acceptable packaging material that
has been approved by FDA and the product should be properly packed to ensure that

quality is not compromised after prolonged storage.



Water Treatment and Analysis

Water analysis was conducted to identify if this was a possible cause of contamination
since initially, the water being used was not treated. The results of these analyses were used in
the recommendation of standards.

In the initial evaluation, the water sample failed in the total coliform count. Coliform
count at 1,600 is higher than the allowable standard of 500, therefore it is neither safe for
drinking nor for washing equipment and materials used in meat processing. For E. coli and
heterotrophic plate count, although both the values for before and after treatment passed the
standard, it was evident that microbial counts were reduced after chlorine treatment. Count for E.
coli was reduced from 23 to <1.8 and 159 to 160 for HPC.

The result of this analysis was used to verify the results of microbiological analysis of
etag and longganisa. Initially, the results for longganisa showed that it had high aerobic plate
count, coliform count and E. coli. Etag, being salted and dried, passed the microbiological

standards set by FDA (2013).

Chlorination is one of the most effective ways of eliminating coliform present in
naturally-sourced water. Chlorine-containing compounds are effective against a wide range of
bacteria and penetrate cell walls (Heinz and Hautzinger, 2007). The change in the microbial
quality of water will also affect the product. It should follow that the product using the treated

water should have lower microbial count than otherwise.

n

Table 16.Heterotrophic plate count, total coliform count and £. coli determination of water used
in processing before and after chlorine treatment.

ANALYSIS STANDARD* _ BEFORE TREATMI AFTER TREATMENT
Heterotrophic Plate** <3500 160 T

Count (HPC) (CFU/ml)

Total Coliform <i 1,600 <18
(MPN/100m!)

Fecal <i 23 <18

coliform(MPN/100ml)

“*Philippine National Standards of Drinking Water (PNSDW, 2007)

Analysis of Longganisa

robiological Analysis of Longganisa

To improve the microbiological quality of native longganisa, GMP was applied. Results
showed that E. coli count before treatment was significantly different than after treatment
(11,000reduced tol.8). APC and Staphylococcus aureus counts are not significantly different.
All of which complied with the required standard. The samples resulted to negative detection of
Salmonella, before and after treatment.This implies that aside from improvement of hygiene and
sanitation, the most probable cause of contamination of E. colicould be the water used during
production. E. coliis a Gram ~ negative, facultative anaerobic, non - spore - forming rod that
occurs widely in nature as well as in the intestines of humans and animals (Toldra, 2010;
USFDA, 2001). Because of chlorine treatment, the sample is now in compliance with the FDA

regulations.


‘On the other hand, it can be observed that the aerobic plate count after treatment although
not statistically significant, was higher than before treatment. This can be attributed to the other
factors including the lack of proper packaging material, prolong period in sanitized storage areas
and limitations of this study. The packaging material of the product breaks at frozen conditions.
It was also observed that the freezer used in storing the product was not regularly cleaned. The
product after treatment was stored in the freezer for a couple of days to finish the analysis, unlike
the sample before treatment which was analysed immediately. The storage period allowed an

ample of time for microbial growth.

Table 17.Aerobic plate count, £. coli, Staphylococcus aureus, and presumptive presence of
Salmonella in native longganisa before and after GMP implementation.

ANALYSIS ‘STANDARD* BEFORE GMP ‘AFTER GMP.
IMPLEMENTATION IMPLEMENTATION

Aerobic Plate Count

(APC) (CFU/g) 100,000 12,600 33,650
E.Coli (MPN/g) <18 11,000 “18
Staphylococcus aureus

(CFU/g - coagulase 100 4 4

positive)

Salmonella Detection
(4) at 25g

“Revised Guidelines for the Assessment of Microbiological Quality of Processed Foods FDA Circular No, 2013-010,
‘Values withthe same leter in each row are insignificantly different at P<O.05

3B

Physico-chemical Evaluation of Longganisa

Proximate analysis (moisture, protein, fat and ash) is carried out to establish the nutritive
and economic value of the products (FAO, 2003). Water activity was identified to determine the
shelf-stability of the product; the data will imply microbial susceptibility of the product as water
is one of the basic requirements for microbial growth. Protein was analyzed for the purpose of
nutrition labeling, functional property investigation and biological activity determination
(Nielsen, 2003), Fat content was a determinant of quality and also an indicator for risk of
rancidity. Analysis of salt and nitrite/nitrate gave indication on microbial susceptibility, such that
the two compounds have good anti-microbial activity. Phosphate is a part of the curing mix for
Iongganisa for good binding capacity for texture. Codex, FAO/WHO and other governing bodies
has a certain content limitation for this additive, so its determination will ensure that the
processors are in compliance with this standard. Below is the summary of the analyses conducted

for longganisa.

The standard moisture content of fresh cooked sausage and chorizo according to USDA
(2016) is 44.55% and 31% respectively. The moisture content of the Jongganisa sample was
around 58-62%, the values were precised having SD of +0.002-0.008. The moisturecontent of all

samples is the same.

The standard protein content of fresh cooked sausage and chorizo is 13.80% and
24,10&% (USDA, 2016). The protein content of the sample was close to the value of fresh
cooked sausage, ranging from 13-15% with a standard deviation of +0.0009-0.008. The protein

content of all samples was not significantly different.


The fat content of the sample ranged from 6-12%. This is significantly far-off from the
standard value of chorizo and fresh cooked sausage 38.70% and 36.25%. The amount of fat
added in the formulation is only 30% (w/w), but this is contrary to the analytical results. This
shows that the samples can be claimed as low-fat. Also, the fat content of the samples are not

statistically different.

The effects of nitrite in cured products have been studied for many years and can be
summarized as: formation of the characteristic red color; growth inhibition of spoilage and
pathogenic bacteria such as Clostridium botulinum; contribution to the development of typical
cured meat flavor; and delaying oxidative rancidity (Flores &Toldr4, 1993). Allowed nitrite level
in meat products according to FAO (2007) is 0.01-0.02%. Philippines FDA (2006) allows up to
0.0416% for cured meats. The sample was added with 0.05% w/w, however, the analytical
results showed the amount of nitrite is not detectable using spectrophotometric method. The
amount can still be increased, if the producers would want to change profile of the product and

shelf-life. However, they wanted to claim “no preservative added” so the amount is reasonable.

According to FAO (2007), the allowable amount of phosphate added in cured meat is at
0.05-0.5%, The analytical results of phosphorous as potassium phosphate were 0.5% to 0.7%.
All samples passed the standards except for sample added with 0.12% phosphate, as expected. It
was also noted that the mean values are significantly different from each other. In the original
process, phosphate was measured through measuring cups. After slaughter standardization, the
amount of phosphate was significantly higher. Another possible reason for this is the use of

weighing scales in ingredient preparation, unlike before when measuring cups were used.


Table 18.Physico-chemical properties of longganisa before and after slaughter procedure
standardization (UNEP, 2000), and addition of 0.12% more phosphate.

‘SLAUGHTER
SLAUGHTER PROCEDURE
PROCEDURE STANDARDIZATION
ASSAY ORIGINAL PROCESS — STANDARDIZATION —_ AND ADDITION OF
(UNEP, 2000) 0.12% MORE
PHOSPHATE,
‘Moisture 5817 589 a2
‘Crude Protein 1416 13.18" Ist
%Crude Fat 193 aan 62"
Nitrite (ug/e) na not detectable not detectable
‘WPhosphate ost ost om
Water Activity na 0975" ost"

‘Means with the same leer in each row are insignificantly different at P<O.05

The water activity is also high at around 0.98 for all samples. This is the requirement for
microorganisms to thrive and continue to grow (Heinz and Hautzinger, 2007). This means that
this product is highly susceptible for microbial growth. Water activity was the same for all

samples.

Sensory Evaluation of Longganisa

Based on table 19, the samples were insignificantly different in terms of mouthfeel. Mean
scores of all three samples showed that they were either very tender or tender. For color, there is

a significant difference between sample from original process and after slaughter procedure


standardization and added with 0.12% phosphate. The former was closer to dark brown while the
latter is lesser than dark brown. For flavor, there was no significant difference according to their
mean scores; all of them have similar meaty garlic profile. In terms of saltiness, all the products

have the same level of saltiness.

These results implied that the standardization of slaughter procedure did not impact the
product in terms of mouthfeel, texture, flavor and saltiness. This means that improvement of
their existing slaughter practice could not have affected the quality of their processed and

comminuted meat.

The addition of 0.12% phosphate, however, brought a significant difference in terms of
color. This supports the ability of phosphate in developing color in meat products (Lee,
Hendricks, & Comforth, 1998; Martin, Cofrades, Carballo, & Jime’nez-Colmenero, 2002;
Puolanne, Ruusunen, & Vainionpad, 2001; Sheared, Ute, Richardson, Perry, & Taylor, 1999;
Unal et al., 2005). Authors have mentioned the ability of phosphates to slow discoloration of
meat (Dusek et al., 2003; Kilik, et al., 2016; Villamonte, et al., 2012) and occurrence of color
change if there is interaction between sodium chloride and phosphates in thermal transitions
(Villamonte, et al., 2012). Phosphate have very strong antioxidant effects against oxidation of
lipids in cooked meat products during storageby binding metal ions that act as catalysts for
oxidation (Cheng, Wang, & Ockerman, 2007; Villamonte et al., 2012). Another important reason
for using phosphates is their ability to increase meat pH and to slow discoloration by stabilizing
vitamin C (Dusek et al., 2003), However, the ability to inhibit lipid oxidation by added
phosphates in cooked meat products is reduced by phosphatases. Phosphatase activity is greatly
reduced by cooking; most of the added phosphates are lost by the time meat is cooked due to

phosphatase activity in the meat (Davis & Townsend, 1994; Li, Bowers, Craig, & Perng, 1993.


Asa result of a reduced level of added phosphates by phosphatase activity, a desired antioxidant
effect is not achieved in cooked meat products during storage (Kilic et al., 2016). It can be
derived from this data that the amount of phosphate had an effect on the retardation of
discoloration of cooked meat due to lipid oxidation, given that the amount was increased and it

has the shortest storage period among the samples.

It is well-known that the reduction of the solubility of the sarcoplasmic and myofibrillar
proteins changes the structure and surface properties of meat, thereby changing its color
(Goutefongea, Rampon, Nicolas, & Dumont, 1995; Villamonte et al., 2012). In a study
conducted by Villamonte et al. (2012), it was observed that discoloration of meat (low levels of
lightness) subjected to high pressure in correlation to its thermal properties, was attributed to the
increased WHC (Baublits, Pohlman, Brown, Yancey,& Johnson, 2006) and myoglobin
denaturation (Trout, 1989). The effect therefore of the increase in WHC and the process of

cooking the meat could have affected the color change.

t i %.(@ Fe

a b c d e

Figure 9.Longgansia — Finished product: (a) — original process; (b) and (c) — sample after
slaughter process standardization; (d) and € — samples after slaughter standardization
and addition of 0.12% phosphate.


Table 19. Mean sensory scores of /ongganisa before and after slaughter procedure
standardization, and addition of 0.12% phosphate.

SLAUGHTER
SLAUGHTER PROCEDURE
PROCEDURE STANDARDIZATION
ORIGINAL EROCESS) STANDARDIZATION AND ADDITION OF
(UNEP, 2000) 0.12% MORE
PHOSPHATE
1.73" 1.30 1.55"
Mouthfeel
131° 1.49 ume
Color
1.73" 126° 159°
Flavor
. 159° 154 143°
Saltiness

‘Means with the same leer in each row are insignificantly different at P<0.05; N=30

Range of scores:

Mouthfeel (very tende

1, disintegrates = 5)
Color (dark brown = 1, light brown= 5)
Flavor (meaty garlic = I, off-flavor = 5)

Saltiness (salty = 1, not salty = 5).


Analysis of Etag

Microbiological Analysis of Etag

In Table 20, it was evident that efag, having undergone drying and salting have low
microbiological count. Unlike /ongganisa, which coliforms were able to survive, efag has passed
microbiological standards, both before and after treatment.

Salt is known to have its essential function in meat products in terms of shelf-life
(Quintavalla, 2002; Desmond, 2006), by preventing microbial growth (Toldré, 2010). Drying,
which is probably the most ancient way of preservation (Toldré, 2010), is known for its aesthetic
effect on food when it needs to be stored in long periods of time and its effective inhibitory effect
‘on microorganism by decreasing water activity (Aw) through elimination of moisture. These
processing technology employed deemed effective in the etag sample, despite limitations of
equipment and proper drying rooms. These will be further validated in physico-chemical analysis

where salt content and water activity was analyzed.

Arguably, the APC after treatment was higher than the count before the treatment. The
drying time of this batch was about 5 weeks, due to bad weather condition. The usual sun-drying
time for etag should only be 3-6days, enough to achieve 25% moisture loss. But due to lack of
dehydration chambers, contamination which led to increase of microbial count, probably took
place during the liquid exchange throughout the drying period (Toldra, 2007). Nitrate was not
added to the product, which means all product characteristics are solely brought about by salt and
ripening.In addition, the finished products do not have a packaging material. After drying, the

dry-cured ham was only kept in a plastic, covered container. It is only wrapped with used papers


when sold and transported. This limitation exposes the finished product to high risk of
contamination, However, in Table 21, the water activity of etag is 0.75, which means, it is no
susceptible to bacteria, which explains the low coliform count, but can allow possible mold

growth,

In addition, fermentation and ripening processes take place simultaneously with the

drying and make the products palatable (Heinz and Hautzinger, 2007), Also, Hinrichsen and

Pedersen (1995), as mentioned by Toldra (2007), concluded in their study on Parma hams,
representing six different stages in the manufacturing process, that microorganisms are important
for the development of flavor in Parma ham because all of the correlating volatile compounds
they found can be generated by secondary metabolism of microorganisms, especially amino acid
catabolism. So the possible explanation why there was an increase of aerobic plate count in the
last sample is the possibility of the onset of fermentation. This can be validated if

microbiological characteri:

tion of this product is done to identify the type of microorganisms

present, which affects the palatability of this product.

Table 20. Aerobic plate count, E. coli, Staphylococcus aureus, and presumptive presence of
Salmonella in etag before and after GMP implementation

"ANALYSIS 'STANDARD* BEFORE GMP ‘AFTER GMP.
IMPLEMENTATION IMPLEMENTATION

Aerobic Plate Count

(APC) (CFU/g) 100,000 39,000 95,000
E. Coli (MPN/g) <1 18 “18
Staphylococcus

aureus (CFU/g - 100 1 1
coagulase positive)

Salmonella Detection
(4) at 25g

“Revised Guidelines for the Assessment of Mi
Values with the same letter in each row are insignificanly differr

‘of Processed Foods FDA Cireular No, 2013-010
at P<0.05,

Physico-chemical Evalu:

ion of Etag

The standard moisture content for dry-cured ham is 11% (USDA, 2016). The samples
still have significantly high moisture content ranging from 20-34%. This might implicate
insufficient drying, but if the desired aesthetic characteristics are achieved, this could be
reasonable. Protein content requirement is set at 5.05% (USDA, 2016), and the sample had a
high value of 15-29%. This product is a good source of protein. Fat content requirement of dry-
cured ham is 80%. In nutritive value, this is a good indication since the samples only have 40-
40% fat. This also means that the flavor profile of efag would be different from commercial dry-
cured ham, since fat is known to be a contributor to flavor, taste and even texture profile of meat

(Toldré, 2010; Heinz and Hautzinger, 2007; and Lawrie and Ledward, 2006).


Grau et al. (2011) mentioned that salt is a bacteriostatic agent (LeOn-Crespo et al., 1997),
which imparts a typical salty taste and influences the development of a proteolysis phenomenon
‘Amau et al., 1997) affecting texture and flavor (Andrés et al., 2005; Toldra et al., 1997; Toldré
and Flores, 1998). The amount of salt in the original formulation was 14%. The salt content of
samples after slaughter standardization was 14% and 17%. After brine draining, the result was
12% and 17%, Though not significantly different, the piling of meat and rubbing of salt during

salting stage must have an effect on the distribution of salt, since this is done manually.

Table 21.Physico-chemical properties of etag before and after slaughter procedure
standardization, and residual brine draining after 24-h salting.

SLAUGHTER
SLAUGHTER PROCEDURE
PROCEDURE STANDARDIZATION

ASSAY ORIGINAL PROCESS — STANDARDIZATION —_AND RESIDUAL
(UNEP, 2000) BRINE DRAINING

AFTER 24-H SALTING

% Moisture 2043" saat? 2156

Crude Protein 1561" aa a.01r

WCrude Fat soagt 19.6r sar"

NaCl 14.00" loa" 14.59"

Water Activity na 0.74 07s"

‘Mans with the same leter in each row are insignificantly different at P-O.0S.

The water activity (ay) is low at 0.74-0.75. The typical ay for dried meat is at 0.70 (Heinz

and Hautzinger, 2007). This implies that the product is not very susceptible to bacteria whose aw


minimum requirement to survive is at least 0.90 (Heinz and Hautzinger, 2007), but can be
conducive of yeast and mold growth since these types of microorganisms require only 0.71 ay. It
is however notable that the efag sample taken after brine draining had a high aerobic plate count,
it is important to check bacterial species that could contribute to this and how it may affect the

product profile.

Sensory Evaluation of Etag

Based on Table 22, the samples after slaughter standardization and brine draining have
lesser firm texture than the samples from the original process and samples before draining the
brine solution. It has been known how salt place a major role in enhancing water holding
capacity. Salt exerts important functions in the ham, such as an initial reduction of aw and
inhibition of the growth of spoilage microorganisms; it facilitates the partial solubilization of
myofibrillar proteins and gives a characteristic salty taste to hams (Toldra, 2007). During curing,
the initial outward flow of water and soluble proteins from the muscle to the brine, by virtue of
the higher osmotic pressure of the latter, is eventually reversed (Lawrie and Ledward, 2006).
This is because the salt, which diffuses inwards, forms a complex with the proteins of the meat
which has a higher osmotic pressure than the brine (Lawrie and Ledward, 2006). The
incorporation of the salts of strong acids, such as sodium chloride, in the comminuted meat mix
is important in enhancing water-holding capacity (Gerrard, 1935). The more strongly ions are
bound by the protein the stronger will be the hydrating effect (Hamm, 1957). It is therefore
arguable that, brine draining promoted more exudation of fluid known as ‘weep’ in uncooked

meat as described by Lawrie and Ledward (2006), thereby giving the meat a “soft” texture. This


is similar to pale, soft and exudative (PSE) meat resulting to loss of water holding capacity.
However, it is notable that texture of meat is also affected by the extent of drying, the

degradation of the connective tissue, and the content in intramuscular fat, which also exerts a

positive influence on some texture and appearance traits (Toldré, 2007). The ham that was
subjected to brine draining had a longer drying period due to bad weather conditions. This could

also have a significant effect on the texture of the product.

The color of the meat after improvement and standardization of slaughter procedure was
significantly different from the original process. The treated sample was prominently brown
compared to the sample from the original process. It is well-known that subjecting the animal to
preslaughter stress was found to cause a rapid pH decline (Toldré, 2001). A rapid pH decline can
result in denaturation of myofibrillar proteins such that WHC is ultimately quite low, even if
ultimate pH (24 h) is within normal ranges. Rapid postmortem glycolysis is associated with the
high drip loss, poor WHC, and pale color of pale, soft exudative (PSE) pork (Bendall and
Wismer - Pedersen 1962; Toldré, 2007). After standardizing the slaughter procedure, the meat

therefore was neither discolored nor tured pale.

G&Stse

Figure 10. Etag Finished Products (@) sample from original process (b) and (e)~ samples
after slaughter procedure standardization; (d) and (e) — samples after slaughter
procedure standardization and brine draining after 24-hour salting



Table 22.Mean sensory scores of efag before and after slaughter procedure standardization, and
residual brine draining after 24-h salting

SLAUGHTER
SLAUGHTER PROCEDURE
PROCEDURE ‘STANDARDIZATION
ORIGINAL PROCESS — STANDARDIZATION —_AND RESIDUAL
(UNEP, 2000) BRINE DRAINING
AFTER 24-H SALTING
Texture 1.20° 1.50” 1.78"
Color 2.12" 1,09" 1.45
Aroma L7e 129° Lsa*

‘Means with the same leer in each row are insignificantly diferent at P<0.05,, N=30,

Range of scores:
Texture (firm = 1, soft= 5)
Color (brown = 1, yellow= 5)

Aroma (meaty = I, off-flavor = 5)

The brine exuded from the meat still contains NaCl and in cases where salting takes place
in salting drums, and the hams are in contact with the exuded brine. The main purpose of brine
draining is to prevent excessively prolong the resting period in containers as the exuded water
can be reabsorbed and encourage the growth of undesirable microorganisms in areas that are not
covered in brine (Arboix, 2014). Presence of undesirable microorganisms would cause
unpleasant aroma (Arboix, 2014). The standardization of slaughter procedure and draining of
brine after 24-h salting did not have significant effect on the aroma of all products. Means scores

showed that the products attained their meaty aroma.


Sensory Evaluation of Etag Broth

The etag samples were used as a flavoring agent in broth. The broth samples were then
assessed based on flavor, saltiness and aroma. Results showed that the broth added with treated
etag do not have significant difference with each other. The flavor of the 3 sets of broth was

meaty.The same goes with aroma. All samples have meaty profile.

In terms of saltiness, the broth added with etag after slaughter procedure standardization
and brine draining after 24 hours was significantly different from both samples using efag after
slaughter procedure standardization (only) and with efag from the original process. The least
salty was the broth added with efag from the original procedure. The most salty was the broth
added with etag after slaughter procedure standardization. The penetration of salt is the most
probable cause of this difference. The absorption surface and penetration is of salt (Arboix,
2014) are the factors that influence the difference in salt content, since the salting is done
manually. Both slaughter procedure improvement and brine draining have effect on the saltiness

of the sample.


Table 23.Sensory scores of broth using efag before and after slaughter procedure standardization,
and residual brine draining after 24-h salting

SLAUGHTER
SLAUGHTER PROCEDURE
PROCEDURE STANDARDIZATION
ORIGINAL EROCESS) STANDARDIZATION AND RESIDUAL,
(UNEP, 2000) BRINE DRAINING
AFTER 24-H SALTING
Flavor 155° 135° 139°
Saltiness 2.33" 0.83" 1.76
Aroma 1.49% 1.42" 163°

Means with the same Teter in each column are insigaifcanly different P-O.05, N=30,
Range of scores:

Flavor (meaty = 1, off-flavor = 5)

Saltiness (salty = 1, not salty= 5)

Aroma (meaty = 1, off-flavor = 5)

Seminar-Workshop

A seminar workshop was conducted to share the results of the analyses for product
improvement. Since the formulation and processing information is exclusive for the cooperative
members, the chosen participants of the seminar-workshop are those who are not directly trained

for the processing.

Design, Development and Implementation

After safety assessment, product improvement and process validation, the results were
presented to the member of the cooperative. Along with it were the explanation and discussion of

the importance of science in their meat production. The topics discussed in the seminar-


workshop were (1) CGMP and present an example of the practice; (2) the standard sequence of
slaughter procedure and its effect on the carcass; (3) the role of ingredients in producing efag and

longganisa; and (4) the basic aesthetic quality of etag and longganisa.

The seminar-workshop conducted was participative. The learners were asked to group

themselves and there were activities conducted that would encourage them to use their learning
and apply in the current situation of their meat processing. Multi-media materials were also used,
since the learners suggested that they prefer looking at videos and graphics so they can visualize

and understand the topics discussed clearly.

Analysis

During the focused group discussion, it was found out that the learners, were already
familiar with the word GMP, but they still need guidance in the actual implementation. They
wanted their products to be marketed in larger scale so they wanted to be trained about quality
and regulations compliance. The group was also aware that thorough GMP implementation will
be costly. So, it was decided that the intervention in this thesis would focus on hygiene and
sanitation, standardization of procedures, microbial safety and physico-chemical qualities of the

finished product.

Evaluation of Knowledge Gain

The group was given a pretest and a posttest to evaluate their learning curve. Table 24

shows the results of the pretest and a posttest. Complete enumeration was done for the pretest


and a posttest, setting of 80% as the passing score. Based on the mean scores, the class failed
from the passing rate on the pre-test (before training) and passed the post-test (after training). In
terms of variability, the deviation in between scores is only approximately 1. The seminar is

therefore effective in imparting knowledge to the attendees.

Seminar Evaluation

An evaluation of the seminar was also included to check for areas of improvement.
Participants were given evaluation form to assess the overall effectivity of the seminar-
workshop. The questions were designed to check the areas that are well appreciated and should
be brought forward for future seminars to be conducted and as well as the weak spots for
improvements. This was also conducted to identify other information, materials and specific
input that should be added on the seminar for better knowledge boost. Complete enumeration is
also used for the evaluation of the seminar, out of 15 participant, 11 said that the seminar was
very good; 9 people said that the speaker has excellent knowledge on the topic; excellent
presentation style; excellent usability of the printed materials; 7 said that the audio quality was
good; and 10 people said that the seminar was rated “excellent” in meeting their expectations.
The seminar itself was also evaluated which the participants gave a very good overall rating, but
they said they would be more comfortable if the speaker could speak their native language. Table

25 illustrates the results of the seminar evaluation.

Table 24, Mean scores of participants in both pre-test and post-test.


MEAN SD
Pre-test 16 5.00 1.09
Post-test 16 8.81 1.17

Table 25. Ratings of participants of the whole seminar.

PARAMETERS

Over-all rating of the seminar
Rating per aspect of the seminar
Speaker’s knowledge of the subject
Speaker’s presentation style
Usefulness of print materials
Quality of the audio sound

Extent of seminar met your expectation

Tegend:

ood

fery Good 3 = Excellent


SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION

Food safety and quality even in small producers can be achieved, as long as the products
and processes are thoroughly evaluated based on standards so as to identify the different
opportunities for improvement, hence implementing corrective actions to eliminate possible risks

that might jeopardized the over-all quality of the product.

This study was successful in identifying the gaps and limitations in the production of the
dry-cured ham — etag, and the fresh sausage native longganisa. Different standards including
GMP, FAO, WHO, and FDA requirements were used as basis to assess the existing practices of
the local producers in Brgy. Camatagan, Sabangan, Mountain Province, and then developed

appropriate actions to improve their process and finished products.

The facility was inspected including surroundings, building premises as well as hygiene
and sanitation practices. The initial production audit showed how poor the hygiene and sanitation
was. The storage areas, ceilings, floors and all other areas of the production premise, including
materials and equipment were not regularly cleaned. Because of this observation, the personnel
were advised to establish standard cleaning procedures that they should follow religiously. This
showed a big improvement on the quality of the finished product. Water quality was also
improved through water treatment. Significant decrease in microbial load was achieved after
chlorine treatment. There was also a significant improvement on the microbial quality of the

product after implementing GMP.

Physico-chemical analysis was also conducted to establish the nutritive and economic

value of the products. Based on the standard requirements set by USDA for both dry-cured hams


and sausages, both efag and native longganisa have good nutritive quality. Therefore, it is
important that the products be strictly hygienically processed, stored and transported to avoid

contamination.

Furthermore, native longganisa was subjected to two different treatments: standardization
of slaughter procedure and phosphate addition. The addition of phosphate exceeded the
maximum limit of allowed quantity in regulations. It also contributed to a change in color of the

cooked longganisa.

There were two interventions done to improve the quality of etag. First was the
standardization of slaughter process and the second, was the draining of residual brine, 24 hours
of salting. The two treatments applied in efag production did not have significant effect on its
physic-chemical properties. Etag has a low water activity which implies that the product is not
very susceptible to bacteria but can be conducive of yeast and mold growth. The samples after
residual brine draining were significantly less firm and softer compared to the other samples. The
draining of brine has manifested effect on the product although biochemical changes were not

observed here.

The etag samples were also added to broth for sensory evaluation, to demonstrate its
application. Results showed that the broth added with treated etag do not have significant
difference with each other, except for saltiness. The flavor of the 3 sets of broth was meaty. The

same goes with aroma. All samples have meaty profile.

All the results and topics discussed in this study were shared to the other members of the
community who did not participate in the production. A seminar-workshop was successfully

conducted. Multi-media and interactive method of education/instruction was used basing on the


learning style of the parti

ants. The knowledge gain of the members was evaluated after the

seminar and all the attendees passed the post-test evaluation. The seminar itself was also
evaluated and the overall rating of the seminar was very good. However, they said that
communication would be easier if they would use their native tongue as the medium of

instruction.

RECOMMENDATION

The challenge of this research is that it has a broad perspective but the time was limited,
therefore the parameters were only basic. However, this study has opened numerous
opportunities for future research. Specific areas can further be explored so that the native

products etag and longganisa, can be improved.

Facility Improvement

It is highly recommended that the manufacturers should find a new facility by renting or
building a new one. Otherwise, the building should be improved by building barriers to exclude
harboring vermin, rodents, insects and other animals from entering the production facility. The
location can be prone to environmental seepage like landslide, flooding, etc. Assessment by an

expert can be done to apply appropriate measures and ensure safety

Hygiene Improvement

The personnel should always be reminded of the importance of hygiene and sanitation in
food production. This is not only for compliance purposes, but also to ensure that the product is
safe for the consumers. Hand washing, use of clean water and standardized cleaning procedure

should not be overlooked and should always be followed.


The Importance of Communication

Discoveries and research about science and technology are invaluable in today’s world.
This research elaborates how important it is to disseminate information about science and
technology to the community. The general information about GMP, HACCP, food quality and
safety should be specifically applied according to explicit needs of any production facility,
especially those who do not have the access to such information. It is recommended that future
researches would be initiated based on the needs of the community, not only in continuation of

this paper but also, to all researchers.

Further Study

Using the data gathered from microbiological analysis, microbial characterization of etag
and even longganisa can be identified, to check on how this affects its natural quality. Etag
primarily, undergoes ripening stage. The changes that occur during the whole period can be
observed, and this will provide a clear answer as to why etag has its distinct characteristics. The
packaging of longganisa can also be improved and check if it could have any effect on the

extension of the product shelf-life.

Before any intervention on the existing production process, it is recommended that the
products be studied well, one aspect at a time. The type of meat used for longganisa will have an
effect on the finished products. The parts of meat used in making Jongganisaare not consistently

the same for every production. This can be looked into for future research.


This can also be done for efag. Most dry-cured ham uses the leg part. There could be a
different result if other parts of meat are used. The method of salting and amount of salt will
have effect on the biochemical processes of the dry-cured ham. These are areas that can studied

further so our native products be introduced in the science community and be improved.

LITERATURE CITED

ADB. 1991. Sector Paper on Livestock. Staff Paper No. 4, Agriculture Department, Asia
Development Bank.

AGAOGLU, S. E. M. A., DOSTIL, N., and ALEMDAR, S. 2007. Antimicrobial activity of some
spices used in the meat industry. Bull. Vet. Inst, Pulawy, 51, 53-57.

ALLEN, M. J., EDBERG, S. C., and REASONER, D. J. 2002. Heterotrophic Plate Count - What
is their Significance in Drinking Water? International Journal of Food Microbiology, 92
(2004) 265-274.

American Public Health Association (APHA). 2012. Standard method for examination of water
and wastewater, 22nd edn. APHA, AWWA, WPCF, Washington.

ANZFA. 2001. Food Safety Standards - Definitions. A Guide to Food Safety
Standards.Australia New Zealand Food Standards Code. Australia.

AOAC. 1990. Official Methods of Analysis, 15th ed., Association of Official Analytical
Chemists, Arlington.

AOAC.2000. Official Methods of Analysis, 17" ed., Association of Official Analytical
Chemists, Maryland, USA.

AOAC. 2012. Official Methods of Analysis of AOAC INTERNATIONAL, 19th ed. AOAC
INTERNATIONAL, Gaithersburg, MD, USA.

ARBOIX, J. A. 2014. Dry Cured Ham. Encyclopedia of Meat Science, Vol 2. pp. 86-91. Institut
de RecercaiTecnologiaA groalimentaries (IRTA), Girona, Spain.

ASQ. 2002. The Certified Quality Auditor's HACCP Handbook. American Society of Quality,
Food, Drug and Cosmetic Division, Milwaukee, Wisconsin, USA.

BAKARAT, SM M. 2012. GAPs AND GMPs for Ensuring our Food Safety Supply.OMICS.
International. www.omicsgroup.org

BARAT, J. M., VIDAL-BROTONS, D., LOPEZ-PASCUAL, E., and GRAS, M. L.
2006.Quantification and Kinetics of the Residual Brine Generation during Ham and
Shoulder Pile Salting. Meat Science 73, pp. 576-580. Institute of Food Engineering for

Development, Department of Food Technology, Universidad Polite’cnica de Valencia,
Camino de Vera s/n. 14, 46022 Valencia, Spain.

BARROW, C. 1987. Water Resources and Agricultural Development in the Tropics.Longman
Scientific and Technical. Essex, England.


BEDALE, W., SINDELAR J. J., MILKOWSKI, A. L. 2016. Dietary Nitrate and Nitrite:
Benefits, Risks and Evolving Perceptions. Meat Science 120, pp. 85-92. Food Research
Institute, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, USA.

BONTOGON, M. L. 1993. Selected Characteristics of Ham Cured Using Different Processing
Methods. Animal Science, UPLB.

BUCHANAN R. and SUHRE, B. 2005. New Developments in Chemical and Microbial Risk
Assessment, pp 161-179. Towards Safer Food: Perspective on Risk and Priority Setting.
Resources of the Future. Washington, DC USA.

BURROWS, B. C., MAYNE, A. J., and NEWBURY, P., PhD. 1991. Into the 21st Century: A.
Handbook for a Sustainable Future. Admantine Press Limited. Twickenham, England.

CAPUCCINO, J. G. and SHERMAN, N. 2002. Microbiology: A Laboratory Manual, 6th edition.
Pearson Education, Inc. CA, USA.

CONDEX STAN 234-1999. 2007. Recommended Methods of Analysis and Sampling. Codex
Alementarius Commission.

DA. 2013. Philippine Agribusiness Investment Opportunities. Agribusiness and Marketing
Service, Department of Agriculture, Quezon City, Philippines.

DE BOECK, E., JACXSENS, L., BOLLAERTS, M., and VLERICK, P. 2015. Food Safety
Climate in Food Processing Organizations: Development and Validation of a Self-
assessment Tool. Trends in Food Science and Technology, Volume 46, Issue 2, Part A,
pages 242-251. Ghent, Belgium.

DECAGON. 2012. Aqualab: Fundamentals of water activity. Decagon Devices, Inc., Pullman,
Washington 99163 USA.

DESMOND, E. 2006.Reducing Salt: A Challenge for the Meat Industry. Meat Science, 74(1),
188-196.

DEVENDRA, C. and FULLER, M. F. 1979. Pig Production in the Topics. Oxford University
Press. Oxford, UK.

DOH. 2004. Revised Guidelines on Current Good Manufacturing Practice in Manufacturing,
Packaging, Repacking, or Holding Food. Department of Health, Sta. Cruz, Manila,
Philippines.

DOH. 2014. Rules and Regulations on the Licensing of Food Establishments and Registration of
Processed Foods, and Other Food Products, and for Other Purposes, A. O. 2014-0029.
Department of Health, Philippines.

DUSEK, M., KVANISCKA, F., LUKASKOVA, L., and KRATKA, J., 2003.[sotachophoretic
determination of added phosphate in meat products. Meat Science, Vol. 65, pp. 765-769.
Department of Food Preservation and Meat Technology, Institute of Chemical Technology,
Czech Republic.


ESCOBAR, A. 1995.Encountering Development: The Making and Unmaking of the Third
World.Princeton University Press. NJ, USA.

ETIENNE, G., AUBERT, C. and MAURER J. L. 1998.Feeding the Asia in the Next Century.
Macmillan India Limited. New Delhi, India.

FAO and WHO. 2002. Global Forum of Food Safety Regulators: Improving efficiency and
transparency in food safety systems — sharing experiences. Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations and World Health Organization. Rome, Italy.

FAO and WHO. 2003. Assuring Food Quality and Safety: Guidelines for Strengthening National
Food Control System. Joint FAO/WHO Publication. Rome, Italy.

FAO. 2000. The State of Food and Agriculture. The Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations. Rome, Italy.

FAO. 2005. The State of Food and Agriculture: Agricultural Trade and Poverty - Can Trade
Work for the Poor? Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. Rome, Italy.

FAO. 2005. The State of Food Insecurity: Eradicating World Hunger ~ Key to Achieving the
Millennium Development Goals. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations. Rome, Italy.

FAO. 2010. Meat Processing Technology for Small- to Medium-Scale Producers. The Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific,
Bangkok.

FAO. 2010. Meat Products with High Levels of Extenders and Fillers, pp. 195- 22. Meat
Processing Technology for Small- to Medium-Scale Producers.The Food and Agriculture
‘Organization of the United Nations.Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific, Bangkok.

FAO. 2010. The State of Food and Agriculture: Women in Agriculture, Closing the Gender Gap
for Development. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. Rome, Italy.

FAO. 2013. The State of Food and Agriculture: Food Systems for Better Nutrition. Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. Rome, Italy.

FDA. 2005. Food CGMP Modemization — A Focus on Food Safety. Food CGMP Modemization
Working Group, Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition, US Food and Drug
Administration. MD, USA.

FDA. 2006. Updated List of Food Additives, Bureau Circular 2006-016. Bureau of Food and
Drugs, DOH, Muntinlupa City, Philippines.

FDA. 2013. Revised Guidelines for the Assessment of Microbiological Quality of Processed
Foods. Department of Health, Food and Drug Administration.Alabang, Muntinlupa City,



Flores, J., &Toldra’, F. (1993).Curing. In: R. Macrae, R. K. Robinson, & M. J. Sadler (Eds.),
Encyclopedia of food science, food technology and nutrition (pp. 1277-1282). New York:
Academic Press Inc.

FREDERIC, G. 2005. Feeding the World: An Economic History of Agriculture, 1800-
2000.Princeton University Press. New Jersey, USA.

FSSAI. 2010. Training Manual for Food Safety Regulators, Vol. 3, Food Regulatory
Enforcement and Compliance through Inspection. Food Safety and Standards Authority of
India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare.FDA Bhavan, Kotla Road, New Delhi 110
002, India.

GALINDO-CUSPINERA, V., WESTHOFF, D. C., and RANKIN, S. A. 2003. Antimicrobial
Properties of Commercial Annatto Extracts against Selected Pathogenic, Lactic Acid, and
Spoilage Microorganisms. Journal of Food Protection, Number 6, June 2003, pp. 911-
1099, pp. 1074-1078(5).

GENGLER, I. 2009. When People are the Instrument: Sensory Evaluation Methods. ASQ
Statistics Division Newsletter, 27, (4), 8-12.

GILLESPIE, A. 2001. The Illusion of Progress: Unsustainable Development in International
Law and Policy. Earthscan Publication Ltd. London, UK.

GILLSON I. and FOUAD, A. 2015. Trade Policy and Food Security: Improving Access to Food
in Developing Countries in the Wake of High World Prices. The World Bank. Washington
DC, USA.

GONZALEZ, B., and DIEZ, V. 2002. The Effect of Nitrite and Starter culture on
Microbiological Quality of "Chorizo" - a Spanish dry cured Sausage. Meat Science, 60(1),
295-298.

GRAU, R., ALBARRACIN, W., PEREZ, M. T., ENTEQUERA, T., and BARAT, J. M.
2011.Use of Simultaneous Brine Thawing/Salting in Dry-cured Iberian Ham Production.
Journal of Food Engineering, Vol. 104. pp. 316-321.

HEALEY, J. F. 2010. Statistics: A Tool for Social Research, 9th ed. Cengage Learning,
Wadsworth, CA, USA.

HEINZ, G. and HAUTZINGER P. 2007.Meat Processing Technology for Small- to Medium-
Scale Producers.The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.Regional
Office for Asia and the Pacific, Bangkok.

HENSON, S. 2003. The Economics of Food Safety in Developing Countries.Agricultural and
Development Economics Division.The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations. Rome, Italy.

HONIKEL, K. 0. 2008. The Use and Control of Nitrate and Nitrite for the Processing of Meat
Products. Meat Science, 78(1), 68-76.


HORWITS, W., Dr. 2000.Official Methods of Analysis of AOAC International. Maryland, USA.

HOSPITAL, X. F., HIERRO, E., and FERNANDEZ, M. 2014. Effect of Reducing Nitrate and
Nitrite Added to Dry Fermented Sausages on the Survival of Salmonella Typhimurium.
Food Research International 62, pp.410-415. Universidad Complutense, 28040 Madrid,
Spain.

HRYNCZYSZYN, P., JASTRZEBSKA, A., and SZLYK, E. 2010. Determination of phosphate
compounds in meat products by 31-Phosphorous Nuclear Magnetic Resonance
spectroscopy with methylenediphosphonic acid after alakaline extraction.
AnalyticaChimicaActa 673, pp. 73-78.

INGLETT, M. J. and INGLETT, G. E. 1982. Food Products Formulary Vol. 4: Fabricated Foods.
The Avi Publishing Company, Inc. Westport, Connecticut.

JORDAN, E., EGAN, J., DULLEA, C., WARD, J., MCGILLICUDDY, K., MURRAY, G., &
MCDOWELL, S. 2006. Salmonella Surveillance in raw and cooked meat and meat
products in the Republic of Ireland from 2002-2004. International Journal of Food
Microbiology, 112(1), 66-70.

KAREL, M. 2000. Tasks of Food Technology in the 21st Century. Food Technology, 54 (6).

KILIK, B., SIMSEK, A., CLAUS J. R., AND ATILGAN E. 2016. Melting release point of
encapsulated phosphates and heating rate effects on control of lipid oxidation in cooked
ground meat. Lwt - Food Science and Technology Vol. 66., pp 398-405.

LAWRIE, R. A. and LEDWARD, D. A. 2006. Lawrie’s Meat Science, 7th edition. Woodhead
Publishing Limited. Cambridge, England.

LE, Q, AUCKLAND, S., NGUYEN, H. B., MURRAY, S., LONG, G., and TERRY, D. R.
2015. The Socio-Economic and Physical Contributors to Food Insecurity in a Rural
Community. SAGE Open. Available from: sgo.sagepub.com.

LESITNER L. 1997. Microbial Stability and Safety of Healthy Meat, Poultry and Fish Products
pp. 347-360. Production and Processing of Healthy Meat, Poultry and Fish Products,
Advances in Meat Research — Vol. 11.Blackie Academic and Professional. London, UK.

LIM, CJ. 2014. Food City.Routledge. NY, USA.

LIZADA, M. C. C., PhD. 2007. Food Safety in the Philippines: Problems, Issues and
Opportunities for the Small Farmers and Producers. Ateneo de Manila University,
Philippines.

MACASAET, R. M. 1973. Effect of Fasting on some Chemical and Storage Properties of Cured-
Smoked Ham. Animal Science, BS Agriculture, UPLB

MAGDOFF, F. and TOKAR, B. 2010.Agriculture and Food in Crisis. Monthly Review Press.
NY, USA.


MARCO, A., NAVARRO J. L., and FLORES, M. 2006. The Influence of Nitrite and Nitrate on
Microbial, Chemical and Sensory Parameters of Slow Dry Fermented Sausage. Meat
Science 73, pp. 660-673. Instituto de Agroqur’mica y Tecnologr’a de Alimentos (CSIC),
Apartado 73, 46100 Burjassot (Valencia), Spain.

MARRIOTT, N. G. and SCHILLING, M. W. 2006.Utilization of Pale, Soft and Exudative Pork.
Reviewer, Iowa State University, IA, USA

MOLLA, B., ALEMAYEHU, D., SALAH, W. 2003. Sources and Distribution of Salmonellas
serotypes from Food Animals, Slaughterhouse Personnel and Retail Meat Products in
Ethiopia: 1997-2002. Ethiopian Journal of Health Development, 17(1), 63-70.

NIELSEN, S. 2010. Food Analysis: Laboratory Manual, 2nd edition. Springer Science. NY,
USA.

NIELSEN, S.S. 2003. Food Analysis, 3rd edition. Indiana, USA.

NMIC. 1977. Guidelines on Meat Hygiene, Inspection and Preservation. National Meat
Inspection Commission, Philippines.

MIS. 2005. The Meat Inspection Code of the Philippines. Department of Agriculture, Quezon
City, Philippines.
OVERTON, M. 1996. Land and Labor Productivity in English Agriculture, 1650-1850, pp. 17-

39. The Nature of Industrialization, Volume 4: Agriculture and Industrialization from the
Eighteenth Century to the Present Day. Blackwell Publishers, Ltd. Oxford, UK.

PINSTRUP-ANDERSEN P., and WATSON, D. D., Il. 2011. Food Policy for Developing
‘Countri¢ ‘he Role of Government in Global, National and Local Food Systems. Comell
University. New York, USA.

PLAVSIC, D., OKANOVIC, D., GUBIC, J. and NJEZIC, Z. 2015. Microbiological and
Chemical Evaluation of Dried Smoked Meat Product.Procedia Food Science, 5 (2015) 239-
24.

POND, W. G. and LEI X. G. 2001.Of Pigs and People, pp. 3-15.Swine Nutrition, 2nd edition.
CRC Press LLC. Florida, USA.

PRETTY, J. 2008 Sustainable Agriculture and Food, Volumes III and IV.Earthscan. London,
UK.

PROSPERI, P., AALLEN, T., PADILLA, M., PERI, L., and COGILL, B. 2014. Sustainability
and Food & Nutrition Security: A Vulnerability Assessment Framework for the
Mediterranean Region. Montpellier, France.

QUINTAVALLA, S., and VICINI, L. 2002.Antimicrobial Food Packaging in Meat Industry.
Meat Science, 62(3), 373-380.



REDMAN, N. E. 2000. Food Safety: A Reference Handbook. ABC-CLIO, Inc. Santa Barbara,
California.

ROXAS, N. P.1976.Chemical Properties of Meat from Hogs Slaughtered at different weights.
UPLB, Philippines.

RUIZ, J. A., GUERRERO, L., ARNAU, J., GUARDIA M. D., ESTEVE-GARCIA, E. 2001.
Descriptive Sensory Analysis of Meat from Broilers Fed Diets Containing Vitamin E or B-

Carotene as Antioxidants and Different Supplemental Fats. Poultry Science Vol 80, 976-
982.

SANZ, Y., VILA R., TOLDRA, F., NIETO, P., and FLORES, J. 1997.The Effect of Nitrate and
Nitrite Curing Salts on Microbial Changes and Sensory Quality of Rapid Ripened
Sausages. International Journal of Food Microbiology, 37(2), 225-229.

SERPELL, J. A. 1986. In the Company of Animals: A Study of Human-Animal Relationships.
Basil, Blackwell Ltd. Oxford, UK.

SHELEF, L. A. 1984. Antimicrobial effects of Spices 1. Journal of Food Safety, 6(1), 29-44.

SHREVE, R.N. and BRINK, J. A., Jr. 1977. Chemical Process Industries, 4th edition. McGraw-
Hill Book Company, New York, N. Y. 10020, USA.

SMITH, G. and KELLY, A. M. 2008. Food Security in a Global Economy: Veterinary Medicine
and Public Health. University of Pennsylvania Press. Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

SMITH, J. and HONG-SUM, L. 2003.Food Additives Data Book, Blackwell Publishing
Company. Oxford, UK.

SOEDPADMO, E., SAW, L. G., CHUNG, R. C. K., and KIEW, R. 2007. Tree Flora of Sabah
and Sarawak, Vol. 6.Forest Research Institute Malaysia.

SOFOS, J. N. 2007. Challenges to Meat Safety in the 21st Century. Department of Animal
Sciences, Center for Red Meat Safety, Colorado State University. CO, USA.

SOUTHGATE, D. A. T. 1997. Demand for a Healthful Meat, Poultry and Fish Products, pp. 1-
29. Production and Processing of Healthy Meat, Poultry and Fish Products, Advances in
Meat Research ~ Vol. 11.Blackie Academic and Professional. London, UK.

TIMMER, C. P. 2013. Reflections on the Role of Agriculture in the Structural Transformation,
pp. 311-326. Agricultural Transformation in a Global History Perspective.Routledge
Taylor and Francis Group.Oxon, OX14 4RN, London.

TOLDRA, F. 2007. Handbook of Fermented Meat and Poultry.Laboratory of Meat Science,
Instituto de Agroquimica y Tecnologia de Alimentos (CSIC), Valencia, Spain. Blackwell
Publishing, USA.

TOLDRA, F. 2010. Handbook of Meat Processing. Blackwell Publishing. lowa, USA.


TOMASEVIC, I., KUZMANOVIC, J., ANDELKOVIC, A., SARACEVIC, M., STOJANOVIC,
M. M. and DJEKIC I. 2015. The Effects of Mandatory HACCP Implementation on
Microbiological indicators of Hygiene in Meat Processing and Retail Establishments in
Serbia. Meat Science, 114 (2016), 57-57.

TOROPILOVA, J. and BYSTRICKY, P. 2015. Why HACCP Might Sometimes Become Weak
or Even Fail. Procedia Food Science, 5 (2015) 296-299.

TYAGI, D. S. and VYAS, V. S. 1990.Increasing Access to Food: The Asian Experience.Sage
Publications. New Delhi, India.

UNAL, S. B., ERDOGDU, F., and EKIZ, H. I. 2005.Effect of Temperature on Phosphate
Diffusion in Meats.Journal of Food Engineering 76, pp. 119-127. University of Mersin,
Turkey.

UNEP. 2000. Cleaner Production Assessment in Meat Processing. United Nations Environment
Programme, Division of Technology, Industry and Economics and Danish Protection
Agency. AS, Denmark.

UNNEVEHR L. J. and HUIRNE, R. B. M. 2003. New Approaches to Food-safety Economics:
and New Research Directions, pp. 1-8. New Approaches to Food-safety
Economics.Kluwer Academic Publishers. Netherlands.

UNNEVERR, L., HADDAD, L. and DELGADO, C. 2003. Food Safety in Food Security and
Food Trade: Food Safety Policy Issues for Developing Countries. Intemational Food
Policy Research Institute. Washington, D.C USA.

USDA. 2016. National Nutrient Database for Standard Reference. US Department of
Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service. MD, USA.

USFDA. 2001. Bacteriological Analytical Manual. US Food and Drug Administration, Center
for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition. USA.

USFDA. 2003. Bacteriological Analytical Manual. US Food and Drug Administration, Center
for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition. USA.

USFDA. 2010, Bacteriological Analytical Manual. US Food and Drug Ad
for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition. USA.

stration, Center

USFDA. 2012. Microbial Risk Assessment Guideline. U. S. Department of Agriculture/Food
Safety and Inspection Service.

Van Oirschot, Q.E.A., and K.l. Tomlins. 2002. Applying analytical sensory evaluation
techniques, which translate qualitative perceptions to numerical data to research on
development issues. Paper presented at the Conference on Combining Qualitative and
Quantitative Methods in Development Research, Centre for Development Studies,
University of Wales, Swansea, 1-2 July 2002.


VILLAMONTE, G., SIMONIN, H., DURANTON, F., CHERET, R., and DE LAMBALLERIE,
M. 2012. Functionality of Pork Meat Proteins: Impact of Sodium Chloride and Phosphates
under High Pressure Processing. Innovative Food Science and Emerging Technologies 18,
pp. 15-23.

WARRISS, P. D. 2000. Meat Science: An Introductory Text. CABI Publishing. Oxford, UK.

WHO and FAO. 2013. INFOSAN Activity Report, 2011-2012. Available online.Cited on
January 7, 2016. Available from: http://www.fao.org.

WHO. 2003. Heterotrophic Plate Counts and Drinking-water Safety: the Significance of HPC's
for Water Quality and Human Health. World Health Organization, IW Publishing, London,
UK.

WOOD, J.D., HOLDER, J. S. and MAIN, D. C. J. 1998.Quality Assurance Scheme. Meat
Science, Vo. 49, No. Suppl. 1, $191-S203. Elsevier Science Ltd. Great Britain.

ZARRINGHALAMI, S. SAHARI, M. A., and HAMIDI-ESFEHANI, Z. 2008.Partial

replacement of nitrite by annatto as a color additive in sausage. Meat Science 81(1), 281-
284.
