The Nutritional Content, Health Value and Acceptability of Rice-Like Grains from Sago [Metroxylon sagu Rottb.] and Corn [Zea mays L.] Flours

JOSIE L. PLATON, RND

UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES LOS BAÑOS

Master of Science in Applied Nutrition

DECEMBER 2014

ABSTRACT

Rice-like grains were prepared from 11 combinations of sago and IPB variety 6 corn
flours and were subjected to sensory evaluation and acceptability tests. Generally, rice-like
grains from 30:70 (sago:corn) combination showed the highest scores in terms of aroma, flavor,
tenderness and general acceptability based on the 7-point Hedonic rating scale. The nutritional
content and health value of the different combinations were then determined on the 30:70
(sago:con) combination . There was a significant reduction (p< 0.05) in the amount of moisture
content, crude fat, crude fiber, lysine and tryptophan content as well as the antinutrient content when the 30:70 (sago:corn) combination rice-like grains were cooked. The 30:70 (sago:corn) combination rice-like grains were classified into intermediate
glycemic index (Gl) food of 67.60 % using an in vitro enzymatic starch digestion method as
compared to rice with a relatively high Gl of > 70 %. Based on their nutrient contribution to the
recommended energy and nutrient intake for Filipinos (% RENI), the 30:70 (sago:corn)
combination is a good source of energy, protein, zinc and iron based on the CODEX
classification. The study showed that the 30:70 (sago:corn) combination can be utilized as a
staple food owing to its nutritional, health and sensory qualities and thus, can foster a food secured Filipino families.

INTRODUCTION

Because of the probable global food shortage in the years to come, underutilized
plant resources are now being extensively tapped by scientist throughout the world. In
this regard, sago palm is gaining much importance as a crop par excellence and a starch
crop of the 21% century (Jong 1995), due to its being an economically acceptable,
environmentally friendly, and contribution in the promotion of a socially stable
agroforestry system (Flach 1997). Before rice came into existence, sago was the main
source of carbohydrates and of sustenance for the inhabitants for the Malay Archipelago.
In Indonesia it is called the “staff life” much like our coconut because of its numerous
uses (Flores 2009). The word ‘sago’ is originally Javanese, meaning starch-containing
palm pith. The common industrial starches are typically derived from cereals (corn,
wheat, rice, and sorghum), tubers (potato, sweet potato), roots (cassava), and legumes
(mungbean, green pea). Sago starch is perhaps the only example of commercial starch
derived from another source, the stem of palm (sago palm). Ishizaki (1998) stated that in
comparison to other grains in the world, sago palm has the highest productivity per land
area of about 25 ton/ha/y. Ishizaki (1998) reiterated the potential of sago as a foodstuff to.
counter a possible food crisis caused by the rapid growth of global populations (Karim et
al. 2008).

Maize, on the other hand, is the American Indian word for corn, means literally

“that which sustains lit it is, after wheat and rice, the most important cereal grain in the

world, providing nutrients for humans and animals and serving as a basic raw material for


the production of starch, oil and protein, alcoholic beverages, food sweeteners and, more
recently, fuel (FAO 1992). World-wide with its high content of carbohydrate, fats,
proteins, some of the important vitamins and minerals, maize has acquired a well
deserved reputation as a poor man’s nutricereal (Prasanna 2001).

In Asia, rice has been the staple food for most populations and for most Filipinos,
no meal is complete without rice (Dawe et al. 2006). The Philippines is the world’s
biggest rice importer, purchasing between 1 to 2 million metric tons each year, mainly
from Thailand and Vietnam. This volume is equivalent to 10 % of the Philippines’ total
rice consumption. Thus, one solution to the rice shortage is to have an alternative
foodstuff other than rice on each meal, and consuming less amount of rice (Tibao 2009).

The recent awareness of the people, towards healthy food has spurred the search
of non-conventional flours in relation to dietary fiber content and potent antioxidants.
Hence, the quest for sources like sago, and corn had generated attention, especially when
the cost of rice and wheat flour is unstable and rising. In terms of color acceptability, the
dominant off-white sago flour obtained by a natural process should not be judged as
undesirable considering its polyphenol content {(i.e. catechins) (Ozawa et al. 1991))
which is now being considered as antioxidant in foods (Shahidi et al. 2007).

It is recognized that foods not only provide basic nutrition, but can also prevent
diseases and ensure good health and longetivity (Rodriguez et al. 2006). _ Investigating
possible nutritional and health benefits of rice-like grains from sago flour and IPB variety
6 com flour may give the necessary push to promote the consumption and production of
these two crops. Incorporation of IPB variety 6 com with sago as a complement will be

of great significance. Thus, this study was conducted to determine how we can fully


utilize sago flour and IPB variety 6 corn flour, their beneficial qualities to help mitigate

food shortage.

Objectives of the Study

The general objective of this study was to develop an acceptable rice-like grain
made from sago and IPB variety 6 corn (QPM) flours. The study specifically aimed to:

1. evaluate the sensory attributes and determine the acceptability of different rice-like
grains from sago-com combination;

2. measure the nutritional content such as proximate composition (% moisture, % crude
protein, % crude fat, % crude fiber, % total ash, % nitrogen-free-extract), mineral
content (zinc, iron and calcium), lysine and tryptophan of rice-like grains from sago-
corn combination;

3. measure the antioxidant activity and phytochemical components namely phenols,
tannins, flavonoids, saponins and alkaloids and antinutrient content such as phytate
and oxalate of rice-like grains from sago-corn combination;

4. measure the dietary fiber and glycemic index of rice-like grains from sago-com
combination;

5. determine the carbohydrate profile namely starch, amylose and amylopectin content
present in rice-like grains from sago-com combination; and

6. correlate the carbohydrate profile of rice-like grains from sago-comn combination

with their dietaty fiber and glycemic index.

Date and Place of the Study

The study was conducted from September 2013 to April 2014 at the Bio-Assay
Laboratory, Institute of Human Nutrition and Food (IHNF) at the University of the

Philippines Los Bafios (UPLB), Laguna.

Scope and Limitation of the Study

Only the sago-corn combination that form rice-like grains upon cooking were
subjected to sensory evaluation and only most acceptable rice-like grains ie., 30:70 sago-
corn combination were subjected to different analysis to determine the nutritional content
and health value. Only zine, iron and calcium among the minerals were analyzed. The in
vitro starch digestibility procedure was used as an alternative experimental procedure for
in vivo method in estimating glycemic response of samples. Rice-like grains were

produced at laboratory scale only.

REVIEW OF LITERATURE

Sago Palm (Metroxylon sagu Rottb.)

Taxonomy and Botany

The sago palm (Metroxylon sagu Rottb.) is a species of the genus Metroxylon
belonging to the Palmae family. It is 6-14 m tall (Abd-Aziz 2000), with a circumference
of 1.2 m (Flach 1977). The word ‘sago” is originally Javanese, meaning starch-
containing palm pith. The scientific name is derived from ‘metra’, meaning pith or
parenchyma and ‘xylon’ meaning wood (Jong 1995). The sago palm is hexapantic, that
is, it flowers once and dies shortly thereafter. The plant reaches commercial maturity at 9-
12 years of age, when the fruit starts to develop, and starch accumulation in the trunk
reaches a maximum. It has a pinnate leaves about 6-9 m long, and very thick stems
similar to those of buri palm [(Corypha elata.) (Figure 1)]. It is easily distinguished by
the robust size of the inflorescence branches, which are massive compared with other
species (Singhal et al. 2007). After the formation of fruits, the trunk decays, and one or
more of the suckers from the cluster takes over. Unlike other important palms such as
coconut, the sago palm grows in clump and suckers profusely like banana (Flach 1997).

Although underutilized and somewhat unappreciated the large starch

accumulations from the trunks of sago palm give its best worth (Flores 2009). Figure 2


shows a schematic diagram of the life cycle of a palm, with a relatively short seed-to seed

life of 11 years.

Fig. 2. The life cycle ofa sago palm; approx. 11 years (Schuiling and Flach 1985)

Location of Sago in the World and in the Philippines

The probable center of diversity of sago palm is in New Guinea and Melanasian
Islands. It grows in hot humid tropics in Oceana (Papua New Guinea and Oceanian
Islands) and Southeast Asia (Indonesia, Thailand, Vietnam and Philippines) as shown in
Figure 3. Sago is primarily grown in areas of the developing world, and has been cited as
a poor man’s crop (Flach 1997). Majority of the sago stands in the Philippines are located
in fresh-water swamps at low altitudes in Mindanao (Agusan, Surigao, Misamis,
‘Zamboanga, Cotabato, Sulu and Basilan). Sago growing areas in the country can also be
found in Leyte, Cebu, Bohol, Siquijor and Panay Island (consisting of Aklan, Iloilo,
Antique, and Capiz provinces) (Dela Cruz 2012). If wild sago strands can be found in
Luzon, the people perhaps are unaware of its uses, thus there are no reports or account of
sightings (Flores 2009).

Fig. 3. Location of Sago Palm (Karim et al. 2008).

8g

The State of Sarawak, located outside the Malaysia Peninsula, has the largest-
sago growing area and is the world’s biggest exporter of sago with approximately
exporting 25, 000 to 40, 000 tons of sago products per year to Singapore, Taiwan and

Japan (Singhal et al. 2008).

Comparison of Sago to Other Crops

Nutritive Value

Generally, sago contains 83 % starch and 13 % water (Dignan et al. 1994). It has
a very low protein content, almost no fat, and contains traces of minerals and vitamins.
Virtually, sago is an energy food and should be added with other food to ensure a
balanced and adequate meal (Malolo et al. 1999).

Sago starch was found to have a good effect on the human body when being
added in the diet was found to be is useful to keep the in vivo oxidative status at a low

level. In a study on the effect of sago starch content in the diet on the antioxidant enzyme

activities and the status of lipid peroxidation in rats by Kazuka and Kiharu (2003), it was
concluded that diets containing a high ratio of sago starch could decrease the amount of
plasma thiobarbituric acid reactive substance and increase the liver superoxide dismutase

and catalase activities and concentration of serum and liver a-tocopherol having a good

effect in the body.


Common staple crops in the Philippines are yam, taro, sweet potatoes, coconut,

cassava, banana, potatoes, and rice. The following are observed based on the comparison

of these crops (Malolo et al. 2009):

1.

‘Sago has the highest carbohydrate content among the staple crops. Being which,
it has the highest energy content.

Coconut has the highest fiber content and sago has the lowest.

Sago has very little fat content and this is similar to other crops except for
coconut which has high fat.

Lowest protein content was observed in sago in contrast to coconut having the
highest protein. However, sago’s protein content is comparable to cassava and
banana.

Taro (red) has the highest calcium content among the crops. Banana has the
lowest value, followed by yam and sago.

Sago has comparable iron content to yam.

In the Philippines, sago is usually known only to the Jumads, thus its stigma as the

poor man’s staple (Flores 2009). Sago is full of starch or carbohydrates and is great for a

quick boost of energy, and hence often served in India for breaking fasts during religious

festivals.

UP scientist Dr. Dulce M. Flores, the primary advocate of sago product, reported

that apart from being a cheaper alternative, sago flour is free from gluten, a form of

protein found in wheat products. It has been reported that about 1 % of wheat-eating

populations suffer from sensitivity to gluten and that the United States (US) is the number


‘one consumer of gluten-free bread, a hint at the product's export potential (Johnpel

2012).

Yield

This plant has been reported in literatures to have high starch yield, at an average
of 20-25 tons/hectare (Flach 1997), and is unique for its ability to adapt to peat soils of
low nutrient status. According to Prof. Alan B. Loreto of the Philippine Root Crop
Research and Training Center (PhilRootcrops), in his lecture on the potentials of sago
during the 17" National Research Symposium held at BAR in 2005 among the starch
crops in the Philippines (i.e. rice, com, wheat, and potato) the productivity of sago per
land area is the highest (Dela Cruz 2012). It is also known for its tolerance to tropical
acidic marshy grounds which cannot be utilized as farmlands. Further, because of its
hardy perennial nature, it yields continuously without any replant (Flores 2009). The
sago palm is far more productive than rice, corn or wheat, producing 4 times more starch
(100-200 kg per palm), which is enough to feed a family of 4-5 for a month (Dela Cruz

2012); and even 17 times greater than of cassava (Karim et al. 2008).

Sago as Staple Food

All over the Visayas and Mindanao, the commodity may be referred to as unaw,

saksak, lumbia, unod, landing, ot kinugay. The natives in the hintermost lands and

tropical rain forests, who do not cultivate lands for rice or corn, eat this as their staple, as

ify

is common throughout tropical Asia, Melanesia, Polynesia and many Southeast Asian
islands, Sago must have been introduced to the different islands through travel, either by
trade, conquest, or migration (Flores 2009).

The National Historical Museum of Butuan City has documented the use of sago
as staple food by the people in Mindanao during the early recorded history. The native
Butuanons of Bansa, Butuan City still serve the snack item called palagsing, which is
just suman na sago, a favourite delicacy festive occasions in this city. The villages in
Cebu, Jolo, Basilan, Davao Oriental and most villages in Mindanao have the same way of
preparing the crude sago delicacies. The pearlized ingredient known to the urban
“mallers” in Manila and other big cities as “sago” is at present made from tapioca, for
lack of supply of the real sago flour (Flores 2009).

Singhal et al. (2007) reported that in Sarawak, Malaysia, sago starch is widely
used to produce ‘tabaloi’, which is a kind of local biscuit delicacy as well as baking it
into another traditional food called /empengs. On the other hand, sago starch was also
used in production of keropok, a Malaysian fish-starch snack food (Mohamed et al.

2008).

Rice Substitute from Sago Palm

Mohammad Hasroel Thayieb, a professor of agriculture at the University of
Indonesia, is promoting artificial rice made from sago as an alternative staple in response
to worries that climate change will cut paddy rice production and endanger food supplies

(Indah 2012). Indonesia is the Southeast Asia’s biggest rice-eating nation consuming


about 140 kg of rice per person per year. However, earlier attempts by the government to
offer cassava as a rice substitute have not been successful. He believes that the new
alternative to rice will reduce the country’s dependency on rice imports and the people
will accept the substitute as it is still rice, just not from paddy. But it would take a lot
more effort to get people to give up rice and start eating sago, which looks like glue.
They say sago rice is not just sticky it is poor in taste or almost tasteless. They have
injected wheat gluten to reduce the stickiness and added fructose to make it sweetener.
These additions do not make sago rice more expensive; sago rice is currently priced at
about a fourth of the cheapest rice (Indah 2012).

Based on the abundance of this natural resource, some food and environmental
experts argue that sago rice offers a way of shoring up Indonesia’s food security,
particularly as the planet warms and agriculture comes under increasing pressure from
changing weather patterns. A move toward sago rice also could help resolve the
government’s dilemma of whether to try to keep what remains of the world’s third largest
rainforest standing, or allow large swatches to be cut down for agriculture, including rice
farming. Researchers say that if Indonesians switched to sago from rice, only one third
of Java’s land surface would be needed to produce the annual requirement of 32 million

tonnes of sago powder (Indah 2012).

Uses of Sago

In the Southeast Asia and the Pacific, rice, cassava and sago are the main starch

crops. Of these, sago shows the best prospects of providing inexpensive raw materials in

the production of high value industrial products (Flach 1997).

Sago starch has been modified chemically to be used as: 1) absorbent starch gels
that are used in such products as namely: ice packs; fragrance gels; absorbent paper
towels and paper tissues in baby comforters; pesticides gels; absorbent for removal of
excess water in athletic fields; construction sites; basement; golf courses; fire fighting
gels (keeps water on the surface); and 2) sago starch as raw materials for conversion to
several products such as: glucose, high fructose glucose syrup, monosodium glutamate
for the food and beverage industry; maltodextrins, cyclodextrins which is widely used as
carrier for spices, flavours and seasonings, and as dispersants for instant dry mixes; and
as a source of glucose, this is a raw material feed for the ethanol industry and other
glucose based fermented products like lactic acid (Flores 2009).

Other parts of the plant are used as roofing and construction material- e.g. for
roofing thatching, trunks as posts, rachis and fencing and strips of rachis woven into
panels (sawali or kalakat) for walls. The bark is used as slabs for flooring, walls and also
as fuel. The ‘hampas’, or waste fiber from the trunk after starch processing, can be used
as an animal feed extender or as a planting medium and fertilizer (similar to coconut coir)
in making compost, or as culture medium for mushrooms. The trunk is used y local
people as a substrate for the production of sago larvae, which is a popular food. Sago
starch is used as an extender for adhesives in making plywood (Flores 2009). In
comparison, rice has only one secondary product - the leftovers after threshing that could

provide animal feed but the quantities are too small to be very useful (Persoon 1992).

Sago Flour Processing

‘As a process industry, sago flour and starch is normally made thru a wet
extraction process, in order to obtain a white hued product preferable to consumers
(Karim et al. 2008, Kamal et al. 2007).

Conventional and commercial procedures for sago flour and starch extraction
differ mainly on degree of operation. The common way of acquiring sago palm is
selecting (age-restricted) and cutting it down. It may then be floated in water ways or the
bark-like layer then be stripped from the trunk and delivered to a processing facility.
There, the pith is pulverized to loosen starch particles within the fiber. The starch is
removed from the fibers by kneading with hands or trampling by feet or by a spray of
water. Starch-laden water runs into a settling container, where the starch is precipitated
while the water overflows (Karim et al. 2008). The starch is then removed and dried.
Native starch extracted from debarked pith yields only 25-30 % of total starch content
(Kamal et al. 2007). Manual filtration and squeezing in the first technique however
affected the yield in that losses due to inefficiency were inevitable. By hand, not all
starch liquid was successfully squeezed from the pith. It was also far from hygienic. In
the modem technique, grated sago pith was squeezed mechanically by the machine and
the ‘hampas’ was separated simultaneously. This resulted in clean or absolute
performance in squeezing. The resulting ‘hampas’ contained very minimal moisture,
which meant that most of the starch liquid had been successfully squeezed out. In

addition to efficiency, mechanized squeezing was also more hygienic (Kamal et al.

1S

2007). Figure 4 shows the comparison of native and commercial sago flour/starch

processing.

Traditional
(isaya people, Sabah)

Fell palms
Cut into sections and
clean up
Haul to river
Make raft in river
Float to processing site
Dismantle raft and
remove logs

from
+———"skinning”

Reduce to battens

Spread rasped pith into

‘trampling platforms

Moisten pith

Trampling

Sedimentation

Waste removal

‘Skins

(a) water,

(b) fiber
Remove flour and
spread on

drying floor

Dried Flour (Food)-<— Sun drying

Commercial Starch— Bagging and weighing
Transport to “farm gate”
Collecting by buyer
(domestic)

Modern Factory Refining

(Sarawak Chemical Industries, Siba)

1" stage Boat docks with wet sage
(Washing Pump into factory
and Waste Dumping/stirring tank
sieving) Sieve for coarse refuse
Filter
Rotary filter
Fine material
2" stage Waste — Filter for finest material
{washing} Silo,
3”*stage Waste +—Filter
(washing)
Sedimentation tank
Centrifugal dryer
Flour +— Furnace dryer
Final <+— Bazging
Product Warehouse

Shipping (export)

Fig. 4. Conventional and commercial sago flour processing (lifted from Kamal et al. 2007).

Corn (Zea mays L.)

Taxonomy and Botany

Com is a tall annual plant belongs to the grass family (Gramineae) that is an
important economic crop worldwide. It is originated in North America, where it became
one of the most important food sources for early civilizations. Its root system is fibrous
with stalks that are erect, a single leaf at each node and leaves in two opposite rank. Corn
is considered to be a cross-pollinated species and is monoecious. The male (tassel) and
female (ear) flowers are separate on the same plant. Commercial cultivars of com in
some cases do develop branches (tillers or suckers), but they normally develop only one

or two ears per plant (FAO 1992).

The Corn Kernel

The com kemel, like that of other cereal grains, includes pericarp (6 %),
endosperm (82 %) and germ (12 %) (Figure 5). The main structural component of the
endosperm is starch, a complex carbohydrate that constitutes on an average 71 % of the
grain and is a source of concentrated energy. Bulk of the proteins in a mature corn kernel
is in the endosperm and germ; but, the germ protein is superior in both quantity and
quality (Prassana et al. 2001).

Both the embryo and endosperm contain proteins but the germ proteins are

superior in quality as well as quantity. According to Sofi et al. (2009), zeins are class of


alcohol soluble proteins that are specific to endosperm of corn and are not detected in
any other plant part. The zein is consist of albumins, globulins, glutelins and prolamins
and constitute about 50-60 % of maize proteins. The zein fraction in normal maize
normally contains higher proportion of leucine (18.7 %), phenylalanine (5.2 %),
isoleucine (3.8 %), valine (3.6 %) and tyrosine (3.5 %), but smaller amounts of other
essential amino acids such as threonine (3 %), histidine and cysteine (1 %), methionine
(0.9 %), lysine (0.1 %) and is essentially devoid of tryptophan as it is absent from the

prolamin fraction (a-zeins) of maize kernel (Sofi et al. 2009).

Endosperm Pericarp
(starch section) oF
Hult
Hard starch Solt starch
(Storch and
Gluten)
Pedice! Gem
oF Mhower stot

Fig. 5. Structure of com kernel (Source: www.fao.org)

Utilization of Corn and Corn by-products

Com as a crop has multiple uses and can be used as food at its various stages of
development and it is not necessary to wait for the crop to reach maturity. Com is used
as food, as feed for livestock and as raw material for industry. Besides this, it is also used
as industrial starches and in pharmaceuticals as dextrose, maltose, ethanol and corn oil.
(Johnson et al. 2012).

In the Philippines, about 20 % Filipinos particularly in the Visayas and Mindanao
region consume white com as staple food. This food commodity was introduced in the
Philippines by the Spaniards 400 years ago. Since then it has been grown throughout the
archipelago, making it as a secondary staple to rice in the Philippines. According to the
National Nutrition Survey conducted by FNRI-DOST last 2003, com-eating regions in
the country usually consume this cereal in the form of grits which are produced by

milling white com similar to rice (Panlasigui et al. 2010).

Quality Protein Maize (QPM)

Corn, along with the cereal grains, is known to have poor nutritional value. Com
endosperm, consisting of approximately 9-12 % protein is however deficient in two
essential amino acids. It contains reduced amount of essential amino acids such as lysine
and tryptophan. This leads to poor net protein utilization and low biological value of
traditional maize varieties. Discovery of maize mutants in the mid-1960s containing the

opaque-2 gene which enhances levels of lysine and tryptophan in the endosperm protein,


‘opened a new era in breeding for improvement of quality in maize. However these
mutants also came with several undesirable traits such as, opaque and chalky grain
texture, low grain yield, higher levels of ear rot, slow dry down and increased incidence
of stored product pests. Through an inter-disciplinary research involving breeders,
biochemists and other disciplinary scientists, International Maize and Wheat
Improvement Center (CIMMYT) researchers developed Quality Protein Maize (QPM).
This special type of maize has exactly the same qualities as normal maize in grain
texture, taste and colour but possess almost double the levels of lysine and tryptophan,
high yield and tolerance to biotic and abiotic stresses. Several QPM hybrids have been
released for cultivation in the developing world. From less than four countries that grew
QPM in 1997, today more than 23 countries have released and are producing QPM in the
developing world. QPM produce yields as much as 10 % higher than the best local
hybrids and are more tolerant to environmental stresses. With its high quality of protein

content, QPM can significantly reduce cases of malnutrition worldwide (DA 1999).

Nutritive Value of Quality Protein Maize (QPM)

The nutritional benefits of QPM for people who depend on maize for energy and
protein intake, and for other nutrients, are indeed quite significant. According to
Prassana et al. (2001), on 1964, Mertz et al., first reported that the lysine content in
opaque-2 was 3.3 to 4.0 g per 100 g of endosperm protein, which was more than twice

that of normal maize endosperm (1.3 g lysine/100 g endosperm protein).


The concentration of two essential amino acids like lysine and tryptophan in grain
was increased in QPM genotypes as compared to normal grain maize genotypes. The
lower content of leucine in QPM further balances the ratio of leucine to isoleucine
content (Table 1). The balanced proportion of all these essential amino acid in QPM

enhanced the biological value of protein.

Table 1. Comparison of essential amino acid content in normal maize and

QPM grain.
‘AMINO ACID AMINO ACID CONTENT (mg per g N)
Normal grai QPM grai
Lysine 177 256
Isoleucine 206 193
Leucine 827 507
Sulfur amino acids 188 188
Aromatic amino acids 50s 502
Threonine 213 199
Tryptophan 35 8
Valine 292 298

Besides protein quality, another important factor is ‘biological value’, which
refers to the amount of absorbed nitrogen needed to provide the necessary amino acids
for different metabolic functions. The biological value of normal maize protein is 45 %,
while that of opaque-2 maize is 80 %, the other nutritional benefits of QPM include
higher niacin availability due to a higher tryptophan and lower leucine content, higher

calcium and carbohydrate, and carotene utilization. Furthermore, high quality protein


maize can be transformed into edible products without deterioration of its quality or
acceptability, and can be used in conventional and new food products (Prasanna et al.
2001).

In the study conducted by Nagares et al. (2011), high amounts of lysine and
tryptophan were observed in rice combination with more com concentration. This
indicates that the higher the com in the rice composites, the higher the amount of lysine

and tryptophan.

Nutritional Content and Health Value of Rice-Like Grains

Nutritional quality of food is one of the important factors determining the
utilization potential of foods. The challenge of processing sago flour and IPB variety 6
com flour for human consumption is to develop acceptable foods of high nutritional
value and make them available among the nutritionally vulnerable groups. Combination
of sago flour and IPB variety 6 com flour for the production of rice-like grains is likely to
have an alternative foodstuff and help to solve the rice shortage of the country. A new
product that will taste like rice, cheaper and comparable to the nutrient content of rice is

needed as a part of the day-to-day meals.

Proximate Analysis of Foods

Proximate analysis of a food is done to determine the amount of each of the

nutrients in a known quantity of food. Determination of proximate analysis can be done


using the official methods specified by the Association of Official Analytical Chemists
(AOAC) (MeWilliams 1997).

This system of analysis divides the food into six fractions: moisture, ash, crude
protein, ether extract, crude fibre and nitrogen-free extractives. The moisture content is
determined as the loss in weight that results from drying a known weight of food to
constant weight at 100°C. This method is satisfactory for most foods, but with a few, such
as silage, significant losses of volatile material may take place. The ash content is
determined by ignition of a known weight of the food at 550°C until all carbon has been
removed. The residue is the ash and is taken to represent the inorganic constituents of the
food. The crude protein (CP) content is calculated from the nitrogen content of the food,
determined by a modification of a technique originally devised by Kjeldahl over 100
years ago. In this method the food is digested with sulphuric acid, which converts to
ammonia all nitrogen present except that in the form of nitrate and nitrite. The
carbohydrate of the food is contained in two fractions, the crude fibre (CF) and the
nitrogen-free extractives (NFE). The former is determined by subjecting the residual food
from ether extraction to successive treatments with boiling acid and alkali of defined
concentration; the organic residue is the crude fibre. When the sum of the amounts of
moisture, ash, crude protein, ether extract and crude fibre (expressed in g/kg) is
subtracted from 100, the difference is designated as carbohydrate (expressed as nitrogen
free extract, NFE) (Deblecz 2011). The difference between crude fiber analysis and
dietary fiber analysis mainly rests on the condition that dietary fiber are those kinds of
fiber, soluble or not, which are consumed as basic human diet (“edible” component of

foods even if some of them are analogous non-digestible polysaccharides) while crude


fiber are for those fiber which may not be consumed and are representative of the basic
fiber present in food units (the residue of plant based food left after extraction with
solvent, dilute acid and dilute alkali) (Dietary Fiber Definition Committee Report 2001).
Karim et al. (2008) reported the proximate composition of sago starch to be:
moisture content (10.6-20.0 %), crude ash (0.06 %-0.43 %), crude fat (0.10 %-0.13 %),

crude fiber (0.26-0.32 %) and crude protein (0.19-0.25 %)..

Mineral Content

Zinc. For more than 20 years it has been known that zine is a dietary essential.
Each adult contains between 1.5 and 2.5 g of zinc, making it the second most abundant
mineral in the body (Guthrie and Picciano 1995). One of its major functions is as a
constituent of enzymes involved in protein and carbohydrate metabolism. Large amounts
of zine are deposited in the bones, eyes, and male reproductive tract. Zinc activates other
enzymes and is involved in RNA and DNA integrity. Zinc is vital for growth and
development. Furthermore, zinc is associated with tissue regeneration and protein
synthesis (Fleck 1981). The body’s need for zinc is greatest during periods of growth
such as infancy, adolescence, and pregnancy, and during lactation (Guthrie and Pacciano
1995). Deficiency is characterized by slow growth, alopecia and disturbances in the
keratinisation process in the skin (Serrano-Claudio et al. 2002).

In the Philippines, the zinc requirement for adults is based on the intake that will

meet the daily absorbed zine requirements of 0.072 and 0.059 mg/kg for adult males and


females, respectively and adjusted for bioavailability of 30 % following the
recommendation of FAO/WHO (RENI 2002).

According to the 7" National Nutrition Survey (NNS) conducted by the Food and
Nutrition Research Institute of Department of Science and Technology (FNRI-DOST) in
2008, infants and preschool children as well as elderly were found at risk to zine
deficiency. The overall zinc deficiency prevalence (< 65 wg/dL) among infants and
preschool children 6 months-5 years old was 21.6 %, registering an overall mean serum
level of 94.52 + 0.92 g/dL. Male and female infants and preschoolers showed equal risk
to zinc deficiency (21.6 %). On the other hand, 28.4% of the elderly 60 years old and
over were noted to be zinc deficient with a mean serum zine level of 91.44 1.13 g/dL.
Both male and female elderly found at increased risk to zinc deficiency (33.6 % and 24.5

%, respectively) (FNRI-DOST Facts and Figures 2008).

Tron, Iron is the fourth most abundant element on earth, comprising 4.7 % of the
Earth’s crust. This great abundance of iron in nature makes it surprising that iron
deficiency is the most common nutritional deficiency, both in the US and worldwide.
The highest percentage of iron is found in the hemoglobin of red blood cells. The chief
function of hemoglobin is to carry oxygen from the lungs to the tissues, where it is
released; there it absorbs carbon dioxide and returns it to the lungs (Fleck 1981).

In the Philippines, the iron requirement is based on the amount of dietary iron
needed to meet absorbed iron requirements. This corresponds to the amount needed to
cover basal losses plus growth for children and menstrual losses for women of

reproductive age, bioavailability and iron absorption rates in the average Filipino diets,


food consumption surveys and in-vitro studies on non-heme iron availability from rice-
based diets (RENI 2002).

WHO considers iron deficiency as the number one nutritional disorder in the
world. As many as 80 % of the world's population may be iron deficient, while 30 %
may have iron deficiency anemia (IDA). The presence of anemia is an indication of an
individual’s iron status. The consequences of IDA are decreased physical development,
long term cognitive impairment, poor growth among infants, and poor growth among
infants; poor school performance among school-age children; decreased work
performance among adults; risk of birthweight for infants, and; increased maternal
mortality among pregnant women (WHO 2007).

In the Philippines, based on the 7" NNS in 2008, anemia prevalence is still
highest among infants 6 to 11 months at 55.7 %, followed by pregnant women at 42.5 %,
and the elderly at 33.0 %. Anemia prevalence among the infants and pregnant women
were considered as severe public health problems because the prevalence rates are greater

than 40.0 % (FNRI-DOST Facts and Figures 2008).

Calcium. Calcium is the fifth most abundant element in the body. There is more
calcium in the body than any other mineral element (Fleck 1981). Almost all (99 %) of
this calcium is found in the hard tissue of the body namely, bones and teeth.

Calcium, in conjunction with phosphorus, is an important constituent in bone
formation during growth and maintenance. The mineral plays a very important role in
the clotting of blood. It is also an important constituent of fluids that function in the

thythmic beating of the heart, in the response of nerve tissue to stimuli, in contraction of


muscles, and in control of the passage of fluids through cell walls. Another important
function of calcium is that it tends to be a kind of coordinator among inorganic elements
(Fleck 1981).

In the Philippines, the calcium requirement was based on the animal protein
intake per capita of Filipinos which is around 20 to 40 grams only compared with the 60
to 80 grams in developed countries (RENI 2002). Rickets in children and osteomalacia
(sometimes called adult rickets) are characterized by a lack of calcium, phosphorus, and
vitamin D (Fleck 1981). Factors depressing calcium absorption are oxalic acid, phytic
acid, steatorrhea, emotional instability, and increased gastrointestinal motility, lack of

exercise, dietary fiber, caffeine and drugs (Guthrie and Picciano 1995).

Antioxidants are defined by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) as
preservatives that specifically retard deterioration, rancidity or discoloration due to
oxidation. Oxidation of food occurs when oxygen is added to unsaturated sites of
molecules. Oxygen, light, heat, heavy metals, pigments, alkaline conditions and degree of
unsaturation are catalysts in this process (Hui 1992). Antioxidants can be grouped in
several ways. Antioxidants can be classified as endogenous antioxidant and dietary
antioxidant based on source. Endogenous antioxidants are those that can be synthesized
by the body, and include enzymes, proteins, and hormones, while exogenous antioxidants
are those that are derived from the diet. Dietary antioxidants are mostly of plant origin

and include plant pigments, secondary metabolites and vitamins (Lampe 1999). Other

grouped antioxidants in terms of solubility are lipophilic and hydrophilic or lipid-soluble
and water soluble. Water-soluble antioxidants include ascorbic acid, flavonoids, uric acid
and thiols while lipid-soluble antioxidants include vitamin E, carotenoids and ubiquinone
(Amao et al. 2001).

The sago tree, also known as “Rumbia” has been thoroughly studied for the
production of sago starch, but the properties of other components, for example, the
antioxidant capacities are less known. The washing form the sago starch extraction
process is rich in antioxidant compounds that give it a golden brownish color. On
exposure to air, the liquid changes to a deep purple color rapidly. Hence, this by product
of the sago industry could be a rich source of antioxidant compounds which are known to
protect the body from free radicals that can damage various systems in the body (Dabbi

2007).

Phytochemical Components

Plant foods contain many bioactive compounds in addition to those which are
traditionally considered as nutrients, such as vitamins and minerals. These
physiologically active compounds, referred to simply as “phytochemicals”, are produced
via secondary metabolism in relatively small amounts (Rodriguez et al. 2006).

Phytochemicals are a large group of plant-derived compounds hypothesized to be
responsible for much of the disease protection conferred from diets high in fruits,
vegetables, beans, cereals, and plant-based beverages such as tea and wine (Heneman et

al. 2008).


Phenols. Phenolic compounds or polyphenols constitute one of the most
numerous and widely distributed groups of substances in the plant kingdom, with more
than 8,000 phenolic structures currently known. Phenols in plants are known for its
capability to scavenge radicals. The total phenolic content has been reported to
contribute directly to the antioxidant action (Ramle et al. 2008). Their main dietary
sources are fruits and plant-derived beverages such as fruit juices, tea, coffee, and red
wine. Vegetables, cereals, chocolate, and dry legumes also contribute to the total
polyphenol intake, Current evidence strongly supports a contribution of polyphenols to
the prevention cardiovascular diseases, cancers, and osteoporosis and suggests a role in
the prevention of neurodegenerative diseases and diabetes mellitus (Scalbert et al. 2005).

Marinova et al. (2005) used Folin-Ciocalteu method to determine phenolic
compounds from Bulfarian fruits and vegetables, and the standard curve was obtained
through the use of gallic acid. Total phenolics were expressed in gallic acid equivalents
(mgGAE-1 extract).

Sago flour total phenols are mainly catechins and epicatechins. They are a class.
of flavonoids, especially the flavan-3-ols, alongside with epicatechin, gallocatechin, and
epigallocatechin (Wollgast 2005). D-catechin and DL-epicatechin were isolated from the
sago pith as the compounds which cause browning of sago starch (Ozawa et al. 1991).

For this study, gallic acid was used as standard for total phenolic content.

Tannins. Tannins are defined as naturally occurring water-soluble polyphenols
of varying molecular weight, which differ from the most other natural phenolic

compounds in their ability to precipitate proteins from solutions (Bhat et al. 1998).


Tannins act as a defense mechanism in plants against pathogens, herbivores and hostile
environmental conditions. Tannins have been traditionally used for protection of
inflamed surfaces of the mouth and treatment of catarrh, wounds, hemorrhoids, and

diarrhea, and as antidote in heavy metal poisoning (Ogunleye and Ibitoye 2003).

Flavonoids. Flavonoids belong to a group of natural substances containing in
their chemical structure a variable number of hydroxyl phenolic groups. They are located
in sources of vegetal origin (fruits, seeds, roots, flowers, tea or wine). It is the most
diverse group of phytochemicals. Research suggests that flavonoids, in particular, may be
an important phytochemical group that contributes to the reduced mortality rates
observed in people consuming high levels of plant-based foods (Gonzalez-Gallego 2007).

According to the study conducted by Okamoto et al. (1986), two water-insoluble
flavans were isolated from the pith of the sago palm and identified to be (2S)-7-hydroxy-
S-methoxyflavan and (2S)-5,7-dimethoxy-40-hydroxyflavan. HPLC of crude
procyanidin, isolated from the pith of the sago palm revealed the presence of epicatechin
(Ozawa et al. 1991) one of the catechins, the most widely recognized properties of which

are their antioxidant activities.

Saponins. Saponins are a class of chemical compounds, one of many secondary
metabolites found in natural sources, which are abundant in various plant species
(Hostettmann and Marsto 1995). Saponins are glycosidic compounds present in many
edible and inedible plants. Structurally they are composed of a lipid-soluble aglycon

consisting of either a sterol or more commonly a triterpenoid and water-soluble sugar


residues differing in type and amount of sugars (Rao and Sung 1995). When ingested by
humans, saponins also seem to help our immune system and to protect against viruses
and bacteria. The non-sugar part of saponins have also a direct antioxidant activity, which
may results in other benefits such as reduced risk of cancer and heart diseases (Cheeke et

al. 2006).

Alkaloids. Alkaloids are a group of naturally occurring chemical compounds
which mostly contain basic nitrogen atoms. This group also includes some related
compounds with neutral and even weakly acidic properties. Also some synthetic
compounds of similar structure are attributed to alkaloids. Beside carbon, hydrogen and
nitrogen, molecules of alkaloids may contain sulfur and rarely chlorine, bromine or
phosphorus. Alkaloids are produced by a large variety of organisms, including bacteria,
fungi, plants, and animals and are part of the group of natural products (also called
secondary metabolites), They often have pharmacological effects and are used as

medications (Manske 1965).

Antinutrients

Antinutritional factors or antinutrients, include phytate and oxalate are
compounds that limit the digestion and absorption of nutrients and result in reduced
bioavailability of nutrients and flatulence production. Antinutrients appear to function
generally in defense against herbivores and pathogens. They often found in plants

because they benefit the plants in some way like, keeping pests from eating the plant

while it grows (Harris 2006). Antinutrients like phytates and oxalates are potentially

harmful and give rise to a genuine concem for human health in that they prevent
digestion and absorption of vitamins, minerals and other nutrients. They may not be
toxic as such, but can reduce the nutritional value of a plant by causing a deficiency in an
essential nutrient or preventing through digestion when consumed by humans or animals
(McEwan 2008). Many traditional methods of +— food __preparation
suchas fermentation, cooking, and malting increase the nutritive quality of plant foods
through reducing certain antinutrients such as phytic acid and oxalic acid (Hotz and

Gibson 2007, Kumar 2010).

Phytates. Phytic acid (known as inositol hexakisphosphate (IP6), or phytate when
in salt form) is the principal storage form of phosphorus in many plant tissues. Phytate is
formed during maturation of the plant seed and in dormant seeds it represents 60-90 % of
the total phosphate (Kumar et al. 2009). Phytate is found in all plants because it stores the
phosphorus needed to support germination and growth. Phytate is highest in bran-based
products. Whole-wheat flour has about half the phytate of bran but doubles the amount in
com, oat, rice or processed white flours, according to the book “Food Phytates" (Reddy
and Sathe (ed) 2001).

The major concern about the presence of phytate in the human diet is its negative
effect on mineral uptake. Minerals of concem in this regard include zinc, iron, calcium,
magnesium, manganese and copper. The formation of insoluble mineral-phytate

complexes at physiological pH values is regarded as the major reason for the poor


mineral bioavailability, because these complexes are essentially nonabsorbable from the

human gastrointestinal tract (Greiner and Korietzny 2006).

Oxatates. Oxalic acid is a strong organic acid which has been found to be widely
distributed in plants. In general, oxalate content is highest in leaves, followed by seeds; it
is lowest in the stems. Oxalic acid concentration tends to be higher in plants than in
meat, which may be considered oxalate-free when planning a low-oxalate diet. High
oxalate levels in tropical plants are of some concern. Calcium combines with oxalate to
form calcium oxalate in the intestinal lumen, making the calcium unavailable for
absorption; calcium oxalates is excreted in the feces (Noonan and Savage 1999). Hui
(1992) stated that intake of 5 grams or more of oxalic acid could be fatal to humans while
Munro and Bassir (1969) estimated the threshold of oxalate toxicity in man to be 2-

5g/100g of the sample.

Dietary Fiber

According to the Dietary Fiber Definition Committee (2001) a comprehensive
report on the meaning of dietary fiber was defined as “the edible parts of plants or
analogous carbohydrates that are resistant to digestion and absorption in the human small
intestine with complete or partial fermentation in the large intestine”. Dietary fiber
includes polysaccharides, oligosaccharides, lignin, and associated plant substances.
Dietary fiber promotes beneficial physiological effects including laxation and/or blood

cholesterol attenuation, and/or blood glucose attenuation”. This definition was arrived


through careful research worldwide for the past 30 years due to its positive health effects
brought about by increased consumption.

The recommended daily intake of fiber is 20 to 35 grams each day. As examples,
a % cup serving of bran flake cereal has 5.5 grams and an unpeeled pear has 4.5 grams of
fiber. As much as possible, this amount should come from foods high in fiber, rather
than supplements (Hwang et al. 1999). There are two divisions of fiber components:
soluble fiber and insoluble fiber. Soluble fibers appears to be digested to a limited extent
to provide calories to the body, while insoluble fibers are excreted undigested, thus
providing stool bulk, but not energy (McWilliams 1997).

The consumption of dietary fiber plays an important role in the prevention of various
diseases including colon cancer, coronary heart disease, obesity, diabetes, and
gastrointestinal disorders. Insoluble fiber, which is often found in cereals, is mainly
related to intestinal regulation, whereas soluble fiber, mainly found in fruits and
vegetables, is involved in lowering blood cholesterol and glucose adsorption (Thebaudin
etal. 1997, Chau and Huang 2004).

Ozawa et al. (1996) reported that sago pit contains 58 % starch, 23 % cellulose,
9.2 % hemicelluloses, 5.8 % pectin and 3.9 % lignin. Thus, sago is not only composed of

starch but also dietary fiber.

Glycemic Index

The glycemic index (GI) concept was introduced by Jenkins et al. in 1981. GI is

defined as a measurement used to classify foods according to their potential for raising

blood glucose level (Whitney and Rolfes 2002), and is generally measured by

determining the increment in blood glucose concentration accompanying the
consumption of a test meal over a set of period of time and comparing it with a reference
food (white bread or glucose) and is expressed as a percentage (Gori et al. 1997).

From a nutrition perspective, it is not particularly important to know the exact GI
value of every food as this will change depending on the various factors listed. What is
important is to be able to identify which foods are absorbed over a longer period of time
(low GI; GI; < 55), which foods elicit a rapid surge of glucose (energy) into the
bloodstream (high GI; GI > 70), and which are in between (intermediate GI; Gl 55-70).
Consequently, foods high in carbohydrates can thus be arranged into these broad
categories to guide dietary choices (Gibson et al. 2010).

A committee brought together in 1997 by the World Health Organization (WHO)
and the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), endorsed the use of the GI method for
classifying carbohydrate rich foods and recommended that GI values along with other
food consumption data be used in the guiding of healthy food choices. The International
Tables of Glycemic Index with 565 entries has been cited as a reference in many
scientific papers and use as tools for the comparisons of the effects of different
carbohydrate on disease risk (Foster-Powell et al. 2002).

High GI diets may have undesirable health effects by promoting hyperglycemia
and hyper-insulinemia. Recent studies report that a high diet GI may increase risk of
cardiovascular disease (CVD) and type-2 diabetes. On the other hand, low GI diets have
been shown to improve blood glucose control in patients with diabetes, and may help in

the reduction of body weight and risk factors for CVD (Robert et al. 2008), Lowering


postprandial blood glucose (by consuming low GI foods) has positive health outcomes

for both healthy subjects and patients with insulin resistance. These effects are

summarized by Lang (2004) Figure 6.

[Treatment of disease
J Secondary prevention of disease

ubjects with
_Ziinsuin resistance | SPeeite functions [cognitive functions (memory)
. Physical performance

Lowering
post-
prandiat Insulin resistance
blood Cardiovascular disease
glucose Prima ntion of disease 4 Diabetes
Obesityoverweight
Healthy subjects panier

Optimizing functions J Cosnitive functions (memory)
° ° Physical performance

Fig. 6. Potential beneficial impact of reduced postprandial blood glucose response on
various body functions (Adapted from Lang 2004).

Panlasigui et al. (2010) conducted a research regarding GI of QPM grits, milled

rice, and the mixture of these two food items. These were determined in ten female

subjects. Using a randomized crossover design, results showed that pure QPM com grits

has a lower glycemic response compared to milled rice and the rice-cor grits mixture,

which may be related in part of to differences in their dietary fiber composition and

physicochemical characteristics. Pure QPM com grits may be a more healthful beneficial

food for diabetic and hyperlipidemic individuals.

Meanwhile, Ahmad et al. (2009) investigate the effect of ingestion of different

physical forms of sago supplementation on plasma glucose and plasma insulin responses,


as compared to the white bread supplementation in man, during resting condition. The
study revealed that sago meals tested have higher glycemic and insulinemic responses
compared to white bread and thus their ingestion may help improve prolonged exercise

performance.

Measuring Glycemic Index In Vitro. Glycemic index evaluation in humans can
be difficult and costly; therefore studies measuring in vitro digestion of starch foods have
been done in order to predict in vivo effects (Gotti et al. 1997). While Englyst and
Hudson (1996) proposed the utilization of rapidly digestible starch expressed in foods as
eaten, Gofii et al. (1997) developed a first order equation from the in vitro kinetics of
starch digestion of foods.

In vitro methods to measure GI can be helpful for the initial screening of grain
varieties or for the industrial development of foods. However, in the accordance with the
definition, the GI must be confirmed in vivo by clinical trials (Gof et al. 1997).

Literature data are available on starch digestibility of rice varieties from
Philippines and China. Frei et al. (2003) reported the glycemic index of six local rice
varieties from Philippine. Hu et al. (2004) documented the predicted glycemic scores of

three leading commercial rice cultivars in China.

Carbohydrate Profile

The most common digestible polysaccharide in plants is starch, Starch is

deposited in certain storage organs of plants such as seeds ad tubers. In some plants, it


can be found in the piths like sago palm tree starch. Rice, corn, wheat, sorghum, barley
and legume starches are obtained from seeds. Cassava, potatoes, sweet potatoes, taro,
yam, and arrowroot starches are examples of crop starches.

Starch can exist in two forms, amylose and amylopectin, both of which are
polymers of D-glucose. The amylose molecule is a linear, unbranched chain in which the
glucose residues are attached solely through a 1-4 glycosidic bonds (Gropper et al. 2009).
Rice is classified based on amylose content. Juliano (1992) suggested the classification of
tice varieties with 0-5 % amylose content are waxy, those with 5-12 % are classified as
very low, 12-20 % amylose content are classified as low-amylose varieties, those with
20-25 % as intermediate-amylose varieties, and those with 25-33 % or greater are
classified as high-amylose varieties,

Amylopectin, on the other hand, is a branched-chain polymer, with branch points
occurring through a 1-6 bonds. Both amylose and amylopectin occur in cereal grains,
potatoes, legumes, and other vegetables. Amylose contributes about 15 % to 20 %, and

amylopectin 80 % to 85 %, of the total starch content (Gropper et al. 2009).

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Raw Materials

Sago flour obtained from the University of the Philippines (UP) Mindanao Flour
Mill and the IPB variety 6 com flour produced from the Institute of Plant Breeding (IPB)
at University of the Philippines, Los Baitos, Laguna (UPLB) were used in the study

(Figure 7).

IPB variety 6 corn (QPM) flour

Fig. 7. Sago flour and IPB variety 6 com (QPM) flour

Selection of Sago:Corn Flour Combination

Preliminary study was conducted to produce rice-like grains made up of sago and

IPB variety 6 corn flours (Appendix A). Two sets of treatment were prepared. In the first


set of treatment egg white was not added while on the second set of treatment, egg white
was added. For each treatment, eleven (111) sago-corn combinations were made into rice-
like grains (Appendix Figure 1) and were cooked to identify samples that will retain the
discreet rice-like grain particles. In the set of treatment were egg white was not added all
samples did not form into rice-like grains after cooking. On the other hand, in the set of
treatment were egg white was added, four sago-com combination were not formed into
rice-like grains (100 % sago flour, 90:10, 80:20, 70:30). Only six sago-corn combinations
namely 60:40, 50:50, 40:60, 30:70, 20:80 and 10:90 and 100 % IPB variety 6 com flour
retained the rice-like grain shape and were the samples subjected for sensory evaluation
in this study (Appendix Figure 2). Egg white served as a binder for the formation of rice-
like grains from sago flour and IPB variety 6 corn flour. Sago flour is free from gluten

(Flores 2009), a form of protein found in wheat products.

Preparation of Rice-Like Grains

Sago and IPB variety 6 corn flours were sifted through 150 mesh screen to obtain
flour in uniform size. Egg white (about 30 g) was added to the composite mixtures of
sago and IPB variety 6 corn flours i.e., 1 egg white per 100 gram composite mixture and
moistened to form dough. Enough water was added such that when touch, the dough
would not adhere to the hand. The dough was extruded using noodle maker. The noodles
were steamed for 3 to 4 minutes and dried at 55°C for 3 to 4 hours in a laboratory dryer.
The noodles were cut into 10.0 to 12.0 mm pieces. Dried samples were polished using a

Satake horizontal abrasive whitener from the laboratory of College of Engineering and


Agricultural Technology (CEAT) (Escobar 1992). Polished rice-like grains were stored

ina sealed polyethylene bags until used for sensory evaluation (Figure 8).

The most acceptable sago-com combination based on sensory evaluation using 7-

point Hedonic Test and was analyzed to measure the nutritive content and health value.

RAW MATERIALS

Sago flour and IPB variety 6 com flour

COMPOSITE MIXTURES

‘Add 1 pe egg white (30 g) for every 100 g
composite mixtures; add enough water such that
when touched the dough will not adhere to the

{hand knead and form a dough

DOUGH

ODLES:

Extrude into noodle maker

Steam for about 3-4 minutes;

dry the noodles at 55°C for 3-4 hours;

cut into 10.0 to 12.0 mm;

polish using Satake horizontal abrasive whitener

y

RICE-LIKE GRAINS

Fig. 8. Schematic diagram of preparation of sago flour, IPB variety 6 corn flour and

rice-like grain products.

a

Sensory Evaluation

Sensory evaluation of cooked rice-like grains samples prepared from different
composite mixtures that include appearance, color, aroma, flavor, texture and general
acceptability was conducted. Barangay II, Tanauan City, Batangas has 288 households
and was used as the basis for determining the total number of respondents. The sampling
design used is Simple Random Sampling (SRS) using a 0.05 margin of error which
means that the true value of the proportion of households who chose a specified sample
as “best sample” is 95 % confident. The margin of error to be used is 0.05 because it is
more manageable and the cost and time constraint were also be considered. Although, the
value has the lesser precision than the other margin of error, this percentage was allowed
because this is not a nationwide survey.

The total computed 7 is 100, panelists are mothers or household heads (in case
mother is not present) because they are the ones responsible in purchasing staple for the
consumption of the family.

A scorecard (Appendix B) was prepared and was used to determine sensory
characteristics of rice-like grains samples and were coded with three (3) digit random
numbers. The samples were set in a serving tray with a cup of water placed in a table for
each of the judges. The sensory acceptability included color, aroma, cohesiveness,
flavor, tenderness and general acceptability of the cooked sample were obtained using the
7-point Hedonic Test. Questions were also asked about the respondents’ reasons in
choosing the best sample and the possibility of purchasing the composites at the local

market.


The most acceptable cooked rice-like grains i.e. 30:70 sago:com combination was

subjected to various chemical analyses to evaluate its nutritional content and health value.

Chemical Analyses

Chemical analyses were done on sago flour, IPB variety 6 com flour, most
acceptable uncooked rice-like grains, and most acceptable cooked rice-like grains from
sago-comn combination. Means were expressed in dry weight basis. Analyses were done
in triplicate following standard methods. The protocol for sample analysis is shown in

Figure 9.

Proximate Analyses

Moisture, crude protein, ash, fiber and fat were analyzed as described in

Association of Official Analytical Chemist methods (AOAC 1990).

Moisture content. Ten (10) grams of the ground samples were placed as evenly
as possible over the bottom of a metal dish with tight fitting cover, weighed and dried
overnight at 45°C. After drying, dish was cooled in a dessicator for 30 minutes before
taking the final weight. Moisture content was computed using the formula:

fresh weight ~ dry weight

% Moisture = - -- x 100

fresh weight

SENSORY EVALUATION

| Most acceptable sago-corn combination

Flour (100 % Sago, 100 % IPB variety 6 com)
Uncooked Rice-Like Grain (most acceptable)
Cooked Rice-Like Grain (most acceptable)

{ * |
NUTRITIONAL HEALTH
CONTENT VALUE
Antinutrient Dietary Glycemic Carbohydrate
. Content Fiber Index Profile
Ley Phytate Starch
Crude protein Oxalate Amylose
orude t ‘Amylopectin
Crude fiber
Total Ash
Mineral
Content
Zine
Iron
Calcium
‘Amino Acid
Lysine
Tryptophan
v v v v v
RESULTS
cz
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
¥

INTERPRETATION OF DATA


Crude protein. Fifty (50) milligrams of dried defatted ground sample was

weighed and placed in a micro Kjedahl digestion flask. About 0.20 g of catalyst mixture
made up of selenium was mixed with the sample. Two (2) mL of concentrated sulfuric
acid was subsequently added and digested in a microdigestor until the solution was clear
and odorless.

Nitroprusside reagent was added for color development. The solution was read
in a digital UV spectrophotometer at 66 nm. A calibrator curve from a freshly heated
ammonium sulfate was prepared and used to calculate nitrogen in the sample. Percent
nitrogen was converted to percent protein using the factor 5.95 (for rice). The formula
used was as follows:

(slope ud) x (absorbance sanpic)

% Nitrogen = ~

weight of sample

where: 1 Nitrogen

slope = —~
unit absorbance

Crude fat, Using a Soxhlet fat extractor, 1 gram sample was weighed, wrapped
in a filter paper and place into the thimble. Petroleum ether was poured into the round
bottom flask, then the samples were reflux for 12-16 hours. After extraction, samples
were placed in an oven for at least an hour at 45°C and equilibrated in a dessicator before

weighing. The formula below was used to calculate the amount of fat:

weight of fats

% Fats = - x 100

weight of sample


where:
wt. of fats = (wt. of thimble + sample before refluxing) — (wt. of thimble +
sample after drying)
wt, of sample = (wt. of sample + thimble) ~ (wt. of thimble)

Crude fiber. One hundred (100) mg dried, defatted sample was weighed and
placed in a Bercillus beaker into where 50 mL of 2.5 % sulfuric acid was added and then
refluxed for 30 minutes. Then the sample was washed with hot distilled water until the
washing was neutral with litmus paper. Fifty (50) mL of 2.5 % sodium hydroxide
solution was added and refluxed again for 30 minutes and washed again with hot distilled
water until the washing become neutral with litmus paper. Sample was dried for 2 hours
at 105°C. It was cooled in a dessicator and the weight was recorded. Then, it was ignited
in a furnace overnight until all the carbonaceous matter was consumed. Residue was
cooled and weighed. Amount of crude fiber was computed using the formula:

weight of fiber

% Crude fiber = -~ - x 100

weight of sample

where: weight of fiber = (weight of crucible + sample after drying) - (weight
crucible + sample afer ignition)

Total ash content. One hundred (100) mg dry, ground sample was placed in a 30
mL porcelain crucible whose tared weight has been taken. Then, the crucible with
sample was placed into a furnace and was ignited overnight at 650°C. Afterwards, it was
cooled and transferred into a dessicator. It was equilibrated at room temperature and the

weight was recorded. Total ash was calculated based on the formula:


weight of ash

% Total ash = -~ x 100

weight of sample

where: weight of ash = (weight crucible + sample after ignition) — (weight of crucible)

Carbohydrate and energy content. Carbohydrate (expressed as nitrogen free
extract, NFE) was computed using the formula:
% NFE = 100 - (% Moisture + % Crude Protein + % Ash + % Fiber + % Fat)
The energy content was calculated by multiplying carbohydrate, protein and fat contents

by 4, 4 and 9 kcal/g, respectively and values obtained were summed.

Mineral Analysis

The calorimetric method published in the official methods analysis of the
Association of Official Analytical Chemist (AOAC 1990) was employed for the analysis
of zinc and iron while calcium content was analyzed followed the EDTA method

described by Guinagossian et al. (1977).

Zinc determination, Sample was accurately weighed in a clean platinum or silica
dish (about 25 g). It was ashed at temperatures not exceeding 500°C. The temperature of
the muffle furnace was raised slowly to avoid ignition. When ash was carbon free, it was
dissolved under watch glass, in minimum volume of HCI (1+1). About 20 mL of water
was added and evaporated to near dryness on a warm hot plate. Twenty (20) mL of 0.1N

HCI was added and continued heating for 5 minutes. Then, it was filtered through a pre-


wash fast filter paper into 100 mL volumetric flask. Dish was washed and filtered with
several 5 to 10 mL portions of 0.1N HCl, and was cooled. Then, it was diluted to volume
with 0.1IN HCL. For the color development, 1.0 mL aliquot of the sample containing 8.0
ppm of Zn’ was placed to aS mL volumetric flask. About 0.5 mL of buffer solution was
added to the sample and mixed well. Zincon solution was added drop by drop until the
red color is 1 drop in excess. It was mixed well again and diluted to 5.0 mL using

distilled water. The absorbance of the solution was measured at 620 nm.

Iron determination. One hundred (100) mg sample was weighed and ignited in
furnace at 550°C overnight. One (1) mL concentrated HC] was added and was mixed
gently using stirring rod. Then, 4 mL distilled water was added and heated on a hot plate
at 100°C until the solution was evaporated to about 2 mL. About 2 L distilled water was
added and heated to about 90°C. Then it was filtered through ashless filter paper of
medium porosity using a volumetric flask as receiver. Crucible, filter paper and funnel
were rinsed with distilled water for several times. Then, it was transferred to a 50 mL
flask and was diluted to volume to 20 mL with distilled water. The aliquot of the
solution was then injected in an atomic absorption spectrophotometer and the absorbance
was read at $20 nm. A standard curve using several concentrations of iron was prepared

to be used in computing the amount of iron in the sample.

Calcium determination. The analysis of calcium content was done following the
EDTA Method. One (1) mL aliquot of ash solution was placed in a test tube containing 3

mL standard (NH,):C2O4. The pH was adjusted to 5-5.5 using diluted HCI and it was


mixed well. After 1 hour, it was centrifuged for 5 minutes at 3000 rpm and 3 mL of 1 %
NH4OH was added to the residue and it was centrifuged again. Afterwards, 0.5 mL HCI
was added to the residue and was mixed well and then it was transferred into a 125 mL
Erlenmeyer flask. Five (5) mL NHsCI-NH,OH solution, 0.25 gram NaCO3 and several
drops of Eriochrome Black T indicator was added to the solution and it was titrated with

EDTA until a true blue color was obtained (Guinagossian et al. 1977).

Limiting Amino Acid Analysis

Lysine determination. One hundred (100) mg dried, defatted powdered sample
was placed into a test tube and 3 mL papain solution was added and mixed well using a
vortex mixer. The solution was placed in an incubator for 16 hours at 65°C. After
incubation, it was cooled to room temperature and centrifuged at 3000 rpm for § minutes.
The hydrolysate was collected and 1 mL aliquot sample was placed in a test tube into
which 0.50 mL carbonate buffer and 0.50 mL cupric phosphate suspension was added.
Mixture was allowed to stand for 5 minutes and centrifuged at 3000 rpm for 5 minutes.
The supernate was collected. In 1 mL of the aliquot, 0.10 mL DNP was added and
allowed to stand for 2 hours with intermittent shaking. Five (5) mL of 1.2 N HCI and 5
mL ethyl acetate were added and mixed well then, it was allowed to settle. The acetate
layer was siphoned off and was washed twice. The absorbance of aqueous solution was
read at 390 nm. Papain treated sample was used as the blank. Standard curve was
plotted against absorbance. Concentration of lysine was calculated from the slope of the

line using the formula:

% lys in sample =

where:


(slope sus) X (DS campie)

- x 100

weight of sample

weight of sample = (100 mg/3) x I mL. = 33.3 mg
% lys in sample

% lys in protein = -
% protein in sample

Tryptophan determination. One hundred (100) mg dried, defatted, powdered

sample was placed in a test tube into which 3 mL papain solution was added and mixed

well using a vortex mixer. The solution was placed in an incubator for 16 hours at 65°C

then, was allowed to cool to room temperatures, and was centrifuged at 3000 rpm for 5

minutes. The hydrolysate was collected and 1 mL aliquot sample was placed in a test

tube where 4 mL of reagents C was added. It was mixed well, incubated at 65°C for 15

minutes and allowed to cool to room temperature. Absorbance was read at 545 nm

(Opienska-Blauth et al. 1963). Blank sample was prepared using papain. A standard

curve was prepared. Concentration of tryptophan against absorbance was plotted and

slope of the line was obtained to calculate the tryptophan present in the sample using the

formula:

(slope su) X (abs

- x 100

% try in protein =

weight of sample

where: weight of sample = (100/3) x I mL = 33.3 mg

% try in sample

% try in protein = -
% protein in sample


Phytochemical Analysis

Total antioxidant activity. For the preparation of extract, 200 mg dry, ground
samples was weighed. Then, 20 mL 50 % methanol was added and extracted by shaking
in vortex mixer for 30 minutes. Mixture was centrifuge for 5 minutes at 3000 rpm and
supernate was decanted. For the determination of antioxidant activity, 1 mL aliquot was
collected from the extract. Four (4) mL distilled water and 1 mL of freshly prepared 1 M
DPPH methanolic solution was added. The resulting solutions were then left to stand for
30 minutes. Absorbance was read at 517 nm (Shimada et al. 1992). Percent Scavenging
Activity (SA) was calculated using the formula shown below:

% DPPH scavenging activity = [1-(test sample absorbance / blank sample absorbance)] x 100.

Total phenolic content. The total phenolic content was determined by the Folin-
Ciocalteu Assay wherein 0.2 mL of the extract was placed on a test tube and 2.8 mL
distilled water was added and mixed thoroughly. One (1) mL of 0.2 M sodium carbonate
(NajCO) and 0.2 mL Folin-Ciocalteus Phenol reagent were added and mixed
thoroughly. Then, it was placed in boiling water bath for 15 minutes and cooled to room
temperature. The absorbance was read at 710 nm (Velioglu et al. 1998).

The total phenolic content was calculated using the standard curve for catechin and
according to the following equation:

amount of catechin

% total phenols =~ -- x 100

weight of sample

where: weight of sample = (50 mg/SmL) x (2.00 mL) = 20 mg
The total phenolic content was expressed in grams catechin equivalent per gram sample.

SI

Tannin. Total tannin analysis was conducted using the modified vanillin method.
An aliquot, 0.50 mL of the methanol extract was placed in a 17x100 mL tube. 0.5 mL of
8 % HCl in methanol was added to the extract followed by 2.0 mL 1 % vanillin solution.
The mixture was then shaken thoroughly and allowed to stand for 10 minutes at room
temperature. The absorbance was read at 500 nm using a Cecil UV-Vis
spectrophotometer. A standard curve was prepared using catechin to compute for the
amount of tannins in the sample and the total tannins content are expressed in vanillin
equivalent per gram sample (Price and Butler 1977). Tannin content was calculated using
the following equation:

weight of tannin

% tannin = x 100

weight of sample

where: weight of tannin = (slope usX abS samptc)
slope as = abs/mg tannin

Flavonoids. The total flavonoid concentration was measured using a colorimetric
assay developed by Zhishen et al. (1999). One (1) mL of diluted sample was added to a
10 mL volumetric flask containing 4 mL of distilled water. At time zero, 0.3 mL of 5 %
NaNOz was added to each volumetric flask; at $ minutes, 0.3 mL of 10 % AICl was
added; at 6 minutes, 2 mL of 1 M NaOH was added. Each reaction flask was
immediately diluted with 2.4 mL. of distilled water and mixed. The absorbance of the
mixtures upon the development of pink color was determined at 510 nm relative to a

prepared blank. The total flavonoid contents of the samples are expressed in milligrams

gallic acid equivalent per gram sample. Tannin content was calculated using the

following equation:


amount of flavonoid
x 100

% total flavonoid = -~

weight of sample

where: weight of sample = (50 mg/SmL) x (2.0 mL) = 20 mg

Saponins. Five hundred (500) mg of ground samples was mixed with 5 mL of 80
% ethanol. The mixture was subjected to 50°C temperature with intermittent shaking for
15 minutes. After cooling the mixture, it was centrifuged at 3000 rpm for 10 minutes. The
extraction was repeated twice and the supernatant was pooled. Then, the total volume
was adjusted to a total of 15 mL with 80 % ethanol. The absorbance was read at 450 nm
and the standard that was used was saponins from Gysophylla (Hostettman and Marsto

1995). Tannin content was calculated using the following equation:

weight of saponins

% saponin = x 100

weight of sample

where: weight of saponins = (slope yy X abS sanpt)
slope us = mg saponins/abs

Alkaloids. One (1) gram dry sample was weighed in 125 mL Erlenmeyer flask.
It was placed on a steam bath for 30 minutes and was filtered using a coarse filter paper.
0.25 mL aliquot of the extract was transferred in test tube and Dragendorff reagent was
added in equal volume. A sample was rated positive for presence of alkaloids if it is

positive in at least 3 of the test reagents used in the assay (Hultin and Torsell 1965).


Antinutrient Analysis

Oxalate content, One (1) gram of the sample flour was extracted thrice by
warming (40-50°C) and stirring with a magnetic stirrer for 1 hour with 20 mL of 0.3N
HCI and the combined extracts was diluted to 100 mL with water. From the combined
extracts, 5 mL was made alkaline by the addition of | mL SN NH;OH. Then, 2-3 drops of
phenolphthalein was added to acidify the solution and 1 mL of 5 % CaCl was added and
the mixture was left to stand for 3 hours. It was centrifuged at 3000 rpm for 15 minutes
and the supernate was discarded. The precipitate was washed thrice with hot water with
thorough mixing and centrifuging each time. Two (2) mL of 3N H2SOx was added to the
precipitate and it was warmed in a water bath (70-80°C) to dissolve the precipitate. The
solution was titrated with freshly prepared 0.01 N potassium permanganate solution at
room temperature (29°C) until a pink color persisted for at least 30 seconds (Munro and
Bassir 1969).

vol KMnO, xn KMnO, x mol wt oxalic acid/1000

% Oxalic acid = -x 100

weight of sample

Phytate content. Five hundred (500) mg sample flour was extracted with 20 mL.
of 2.4 % HCl (0.65N) for 2 hours at room temperature on a vortex mixer. The extract was
centrifuged for 15 minutes and the supernatant was decanted and filtered through
Whatman number | filter paper. Three mL aliquot of the filtrate was diluted to 18 mL.

with distilled water and the diluted sample was passed through a 200-400 mesh AGI-X8

s4

chloride anion exchange resin. Inorganic phosphorus was eluted with 0.07 M NaCl
followed by elution of phytate with 0.7 M NaCl. For the analysis, 0.10 mL aliquot of the
phytate phosphorus solution was added with 3 mL Wade reagent and was left to stand at
room temperature for 15 minutes. The absorbance was read at 500 nm (Latta and Eskin

1980).

Total Dietary Fiber Analysis

Total dietary fiber was analyzed using the published method of AOAC (1990).
Dried powdered samples was gelatinized with heat stable a-amylose in the presence of a
buffer and then digested enzymatically by proteases after pH adjustment, followed by
digestion with amyloglucosidase in an acidic medium to effectively remove the proteins
and starches present in the sample. The soluble dietary fiber was effectively precipitated
using ethanol. The mixture was filtered and washed with acetone and ethanol then was
dried. The dried residue was ignited in a furnace at 550°C and dietary fiber was
calculated from the residue minus protein and ash.

weight residue

% TDF = - x 100

weight of sample

where: Wi. of residue = average of weights (mg) for triplicate sample determination
Wt. sample = average of 2 sample weighs (mg) taken


In Vitro Glycemic Index

Processing Methods. Approximately 50 mg sample material was weighed in 50
mL Erlenmeyer flask. Subsequently, the sample was cooked at a controlled temperature
at 100°C for 30 minutes in 4 mL distilled water. The in vitro starch digestion procedure
was started immediately after cooking in order to avoid any effect of retrogradation. It

was performed in the same flask when cooked to avoid any losses of materials.

In Vitro Rate of Starch Digestion. The procedure and model established by Gon
et al. (1997) was used to measure the in vitro starch digestion (Appendix C). Fifty-
milligram of samples was prepared in 50 mL Erlenmeyer flasks as described in the
processing method. Subsequently, 10 mL of HCI-KCI buffer (pH 1.5) was added and
samples were mixed for 2 minutes using vortex mixer. Then, 0.2 mL of a solution
containing 1 mg of pepsin (from porcine gastric mucosa) in 10 mL HCI-KCI buffer (pH
1.5) was added to each sample, followed by 60 minutes of incubation in a shaking water
bath at 40°C. The volume was raised to 25 mL by adding 15 mL of Tris-Maleate buffer,
the pH being adjusted accurately to 6.9 by addition of 0.4M NaOH. To start starch
hydrolysis, another 5 mL of Tris-Maleate buffer containing 2.6 IU of a-amylase (from
porcine pancreas) was added to each sample. The flasks were placed in a shaking water
bath at 37°C with moderate agitation. Aliquots of 0.1 mL were taken every 30 minutes
from 0 to 180 minutes (3 hours). Alpha amylase was inactivated immediately by placing
the tubes in a boiling water bath for 5 minutes with vigorous sharing every 5 seconds and

refrigerated until the end of incubation time. Then, | mL of 0.4 M sodium-acetate

(NaCH3COO) buffer (pH 4.75) and 30 iL of amyloglucosidase from Aspergillus sp were

added. The samples were incubated at 60°C for 45 minutes to hydrolyze the digested
starch into glucose. After incubation, an aliquot of 0.1 mL were taken from each samples
and 0.9 mL of distilled water was added. Samples were mixed using vortex mixer before
transferring 0.1 mL aliquots of the solution into glass test tubes for glucose measurement.
Finally, the glucose concentration was measured using 3 mL glucose oxidase-peroxidase
(GOPOD) kit. The incubation with the reagent was at 50°C for 20 minutes, and the
absorbance was measured at 510 nm against the reagent blank. Glucose was converted

into starch by applying the factor of 0.9. Each sample was analyzed in triplicate.

Calculation. The rate of starch digestion was expressed as a percentage of total
starch hydrolyzed at different times (0, 30, 60, 90, 120, 150, 180 minutes). The kinetics
of in vitro starch digestion was followed by a nonlinear model established by Goni et al.
(1997). The first order equation is C = Coo (I ~ e ™), where C is the percentage of starch
hydrolyzed at time ¢ (min), Coo is the equilibrium percentage of starch hydrolyzed after
180 minutes, and & is the kinetic constant. The parameters Coo and k, were estimated for
each sample and each treatment based on the data obtained from the in vitro starch

digestion (Appendix D).

Hydrolysis Index and Estimated Glycemic Index. From the digestion curves
obtained during the starch hydrolysis, the area under the hydrolysis curve (AUC) was

calculated for each sample and each treatment using the equation:


AUC = Ca(ty — to) — () {1 - exp[-k(ty ~ to)]], where Coo is the equilibrium

percentage of starch hydrolyzed after 180 minutes, t is the final time (180 min) and to is
the initial time (0 min), and k is the kinetic constant.

A hydrolysis index (HI) for each sample was calculated as the ratio between the

area under the hydrolysis curve of each sample and the corresponding area of white

bread, used as reference, and expressed in percentage, as reported by Gofii et al. (1997):

AUC of each sample

%HI = - x 100

AUC of white bread

Finally, the glycemic index (GI) was predicted with the formula:

GI =39.71 + (0.549 x HI)

Starch, Amylose and Amylopectin Analysis

Starch and amylose content was analyzed using the modified procedures by
Rodriguez and Mendoza (1997). Amylopectin was estimated by subtracting the value of

amylose from that of total starch.

Starch content determination. Starch extract about 0.01 mL in a test tube was
mixed well with 2 mL of 2.5 % sulfuric acid. The solution was placed in an ice bath and
2 mL anthrone reagent was added. Tube was covered with marbles and was placed in
boiling water bath for 10 minutes. Afterwards, the tube was placed in an ice bath to stop
the reactions and cooled down to room temperature. The absorbance reading was set at

630 nm, Standard solution was prepared. Absorbance values were plotted against the


concentration of glucose in the working solution and the slope of the regression line was
calculated for starch. Starch content was calculated using the formula:

(slope a) x (absorbance sonpt)

x 100

% glucose =

weight of sample

where : slope std = mg glucose/unit absorbance
weight of sample = 50 mg/50 ml x ml = 0.10 mg

% starch = % glucose x 0.90

Amylose content determination. Fifty (50) mg ground, defatted sample was
placed ina test tube then 0.5 mL of 95% ethanol and 9.5 mL 1N sodium hydroxide were
added and mixed in a vortex mixer. The solution was placed in boiling water bath for 10
minutes, cooled down to room temperature and 0.5 mL aliquot was pipetted in a test tube
then it was mixed well with 0.20 mL iodine-potassium iodide solution. A 0.10 mL of 30
% hydrochloric acid was added and mixed with distilled water to make 5 mL volume
solution. The solution was allowed to stand for 30 minutes and absorbance was read at
570 nm. Standard was prepared to plot absorbance values against the amount of amylose

in the working solutions; the slope of the line was calculated.

(slope wd) x (absorbance samp)

% amylose =~ x 100

weight of sample

where: slope std = mg amylose/absorbance
weight of sample = 50 mg/10 mL x 0.50 ml = 2.5 mg


Amylopectin content determination. The amylopectin content was obtained by

subtracting the amount of amylose determined in each sample from their starch content.

Computation of Nutritional Value

The nutritional value of sago flour, IPB variety 6 com flour, most acceptable
uncooked rice-like grains and, most acceptable cooked rice-like grains was computed for
its contribution to the recommended energy and nutrient intake for Filipinos (% RENI)
for energy, protein, zinc, iron and calcium to determine if sago flour, IPB variety 6 com
flour and its rice-like grain product are good sources of these nutrients for a particular age
group using the formula:

Nutrient content of food per 100 g

% RENI = a= x 100

RENI for age

The Philippines has adopted the Codex Guidelines on use of Health and Nutrition
Claims since January 2007. The guideline was used in addition to the existing national
laws on labelling and advertisement. The only nutrition claims allowed are those relating
to the energy, protein, carbohydrates, fats and its components, fiber, sodium, vitamins
and minerals with Nutrient Reference Value (NVR) (Del Mundo et al. 2011).

According to the Codex Alimentarius (2007) for a food to be considered a
“source” of protein, it should be > 10 % of Nutrient Reference Values (NRV) per 100
grams while it should be > 20 % of NRV per 100 grams to be considered a “high source”.

On the other hand, for a food to be considered a “source” of minerals and energy, it

should be 2 15 % of Nutrient Reference Values (NRV) per 100 grams while it should be

2 30 % of NRV per 100 grams to be considered a “high source”. The NVR is based on
the local reference nutrient intake called Recommended Energy and Nutrient Intake

(RENI).

Statistical Analysis

All the data that were gathered from the sensory evaluation were analyzed using
Kruskal-Wallis, a non-parametric analysis of variance (ANOVA). Results of the all
analyses were also analyzed using ANOVA. For the mean comparison, Tukey’s HSD
was used. Pearson correlation coefficient was used to measure the strength of association
among different variables. All the statistical tests were performed at 5 % level of

significance. The results were expressed as mean values + standard deviation.

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Sensory Evaluation of Sago-Corn Combination

Hedonic Test

Six (6) sensory attributes of cooked rice-like grains from sago-com combination
were evaluated namely color, aroma, flavor, tenderness, cohesiveness and general
acceptability. From the scale of 7 - which is ‘extremely disliked’ or acceptable to 1 —
which is ‘extremely disliked’ or unacceptable, seven (7) cooked rice-like grains were
evaluated. Sensory characteristics of cooked rice-like grains were generally significantly
different from each other with increasing amount of sago (Table 2). Based on the quality
scores rated for each attributes, the panel of judges rated the cooked pure IPB variety 6
com flour the highest rating in terms of color with the mean value of 6.20 compared to
the rest the sago:com combination. This is mainly for the reason that the judges
perceived that the whiter the rice grains, the better is the quality. But in terms of aroma,
flavor, cohesiveness and tenderness, the 30:70 sago:corm combination was the most
preferred,

In general, all the sago:com combinations were acceptable but 30:70 sago:com
combination was the most acceptable. The flavor (5.51) and aroma (5.35) of 30:70

sago:com combination probably contributed to its overall appeal.


Table 2. Mean sensory quality scores of cooked sago-com combination and IPB variety

6 com flour.*
GENERAL
SAGO-CORN COHESI- TENDER-

COMBINATION COLOR AROMA \enece FLAVOR "Negg ACCEPTA-

BILITY

SF 60:40 CF 4.684 4.954 5.19% 5.02° 5.07" 494°

‘SF 50:50 CF 4.754 498% 5.28% 4.986 5.16" 5.06

SF 40:60 CF 487% 5,05"# 5.15% 5.016 5.03" 5.01%

SF 30:70 CF S21" 5,357 5.497 5.51? 5.33? $.73°

‘SF 20:80 CF 5.16% 5.134 5.15% 5.19% 5.04” 5.184

SF 10:90 CF 547° 5.25% SAILS 5.21% 5.08 5.27"

SF 0:100 CF 620° 5.32 5.39% sal* 5.20% 5.46"

‘Means followed by common letter (s) within a column are not significantly
Where, SF: Sago Flour; CF: Com Flour (IPB variety 6 com flour)
Hedonic Seale: 7~ Extremely like 5 —Slightly like 3 —Dislike slightly 1 - Extremely dislike
6~ Moderately like 4—Neither like 2 — Dislike moderately

nor dislike

ifferent at p = 0.05

Ranking

The panel of judges were requested to rank the cooked rice-like grains samples in
the order of their preference with 1 — being the most preferred and 7 — being the least
preferred. The results of the sensory evaluation revealed that 30:70 sago:corn
combination ranked as the most preferred, followed by the cooked pure corn, and 60:40

sago:corn combination got the least preferred in terms of ranking.


Sensory evaluation revealed that 47 % of the respondents chose flavor as their
main reason in choosing the best sample, 24 % for color, 12 % for tenderness and aroma,

respectively, and 5 % for cohesiveness.

Price/Cost

Ninety-three (93) percent of the evaluators answered positively that they would
purchase their chosen best sample if available in the market while only seven (7) percent
would not buy it.

Suggested prices for a kilo of most acceptable rice-like grains (30:70 sago:com
combination) by the panels ranged from PhP35.00 to 50.00. Forty-seven (47) percent
replied that they will buy the product for a price of PhP35.00-40.00 per kilo, 34 % for

PhP41.00-45.00 and 18 % for PhP46.00-50.00.

Proximate Composition

Table 3 summarizes the proximate composition of sago flour, IPB variety 6 com
flour, most acceptable uncooked rice-like grains and most acceptable uncooked rice-like
grains. Analysis of variance shows that there is significant difference (p < 0.05) in the

proximate composition of the samples.

Table 3. Mean proximate composition of sago flour, IPB variety 6 com flour, most

acceptable uncooked rice-
grains (dry weight basis).*

ike grains and most acceptable cooked rice-like

MOST MOST
ACCEPTABLE ACCEPTABLE
PROXIMATE 7 Fi

IPB VARIETY 6 — UNCOOKED COOKED

aa SAGOFLOUR “CORN FLOUR RICE-LIKE RICE-LIKE

@ GRAINS GRAINS

(SF 30:70 CF) (SF 30:70 CF)

Moisture 14914022" 1062+ 0.23 13.464020 — 8.180.164
Crude Ash 0.44 40.02 1.28 + 0.04* 0.74 £0.05" 0.81 40.03"
Crude Fiber 031 40.024 3.1240.06" 1.62 40.06" 1.44 0.05°
Crude Protein 0.26 + 0.02 10.35 + 0.07* 6.59 +0.23° 7.174 0.06"
Crude Fat 0.13 + 0.02¢ 2.124 0.06* 1,82 £0.05 147+ 0.05
Carbohydrate 83.94 + 0.22* 72.52 + 0.294 15.77 + 0.23° 80.93 40.14"

** Means having the same letter(s) within rows are not significantly different at p (< 0.05).

Moisture Content

The moisture content of sago flour was found to be 4 % higher with 14.91 % than

IPB variety 6 com flour with 10.62 %. The value of moisture content of sago flour in the

present study is within the range to the data reported by Karim et al. (2008) (10.6-20.0

%). The moisture content of the sago flour should be regulated at 10-12 % according to

Karim et al. (2008) and Singhal et al. (2007) to prevent mold growth, bacterial

contamination and insect infestation (beetle). When sago flour and IPB variety 6 com


flour were combined to form rice-like grains, significant differences (p < 0.05) were
observed in the moisture content among samples.

The moisture content of rice like grains decreased significantly when it was
cooked. There was a 5.28 % reduction in moisture content from uncooked rice-like
grains (13.46 %) to most acceptable cooked rice-like grains (8.18 %). The starch of rice-

like grains was hydrolyzed during cooking that leads to the reduction in moisture content.

Crude Ash

The ash content is a measure of the nutritionally important mineral contents
present in the food material. The ash content of a food sample gives an idea of the
mineral elements present in the food samples (Ajala 2009). Results indicated that the IPB
variety 6 cor flour had more ash (1.28 %) than the sago flour (0.44 %) (Table 3). The
result of crude ash of sago flour in the study is comparable to the result conducted by
Karim et al. (2008) with the range of 0.06 %-0.43 %, while the ash content of IPB variety
6 com flour is close to the study done by Nagares et al. (2011). When sago flour was
combined to IPB variety 6 corn flour and made into rice-like grains, a 0.74 % crude ash
was exhibited.

Generally, when the food is cooked and as s heating is continued, some of the
mineral elements may be partly loss as volatile compounds. However, in this study it
was observed that there is no significant difference in the ash content of the most
acceptable uncooked rice-like grains and most acceptable cooked rice-like grains thus,

cooking did not lead to the lost of minerals in the product.

Crude Fiber

Crude fiber is made up primarily of plant structural carbohydrates such as
cellulose, hemicelluloses and lignins, which is a highly indigestible material. These
components have little food value but provide the bulk necessary for proper peristaltic
action in the intestinal tract (Whitney 2005).

IPB variety 6 com flour recorded significantly higher content (3.12 %) as
compared to sago flour (0.31 %) (Table 3). The value of crude fiber of IPB variety 6
com flour in the study is closed to the result reported by Nagares et al. (2011) at 3.85 %.
When the sago and com flour were combined and made into rice-like grains and cooked,
the crude fiber content decrease significantly. Crude fiber content of most acceptable
uncooked rice-like grains decreased from 1.62 % to 1.44 % when it was cooked.
Cooking of rice-like grains involved heat treatment that reduces the crude fiber content
due to increased temperature that leads to breakage of weak bonds between

polysaccharides (Lola 2009).

Crude Protein

Protein, being an essential growth promoting factor and the body building nutrient
was significantly higher in IPB variety 6 com flour Result showed that IPB variety 6
com flour has higher amount of crude protein at 10.35 % as compared to sago flour with
only 0.26 % (Table 3). IPB variety 6 corm flour has higher protein content since it is

enhanced to contain more lysine and tryptophan.


The crude protein content of most acceptable rice-like grains from 6.59 % was
increased to 7.17 % after cooking. In the study of Olajide et al. (2011), cooking lead to a
decrease in protein content of wild cocoyam corm which was attributed to protein
denaturation. This reduction of protein may be the result of the loss of free amino acids
which took place through leaching during cooking (Olajide et al. 2011). On the contrary,

after cooking of rice-like grains crude protein content slightly increased.

Crude Fat

Between the sago flour and the IPB variety 6 com flour, the latter significantly
yielded more crude fat contents (2.12 %) than the former (0.13 %) since maize has more
lipid globules (spherosomes) (Table 3). According to Abd-Aziz (2002), sago contains
virtually no fat. The oil content of the maize kernel comes mainly from the germ. Oil
content is genetically controlled with values form 3 to 18 % (FAO 1992).

Results also showed that crude fat content of rice-like grains was significantly
decrease when it was cooked from 1.82 % to 1.47%. The decrease in fat content may be
due to high temperature during cooking of rice-like grains which may have melted the
fat, thus causing a reduction in the fat content (Ajala 2009). It is important to note that the
higher fat content may pose a problem in shelf life of foods resulting in auto-oxidation

and rancid flavor.

Carbohydrate

Statistical analysis showed that there was a significant different in carbohydrate
content of sago flour and IPB variety 6 com flour (Table 3). Sago flour has higher
carbohydrate content with 83.94 % compared to IPB variety 6 corn flour with mean value
of 72.52 %, Meanwhile, most acceptable cooked rice-like grains acquired higher amount
of carbohydrates with mean value of 80.93 % compared to 75.77 % carbohydrate
content of most acceptable uncooked rice-like grains. The high level of carbohydrate
content observed in most acceptable cooked rice-like grains was due to the dietary energy

provided by carbohydrates which is the main nutrient supplied by sago flour.

Mineral Content

The mineral contents of the samples are shown in Table 4. Sago flour was found
to be a good source of minerals like iron and calcium at 1.98 and 7.89 mg/100 g,
respectively compared to IPB variety 6 corn flour. But in terms of zinc content sago flour
has lower value at 0.26 mg/100 g compared to IPB variety 6 corn flour at 2.04 mg/100 g.

It can be observed that there were no obvious difference in the value of zine, iron
and calcium content between the most acceptable uncooked rice-like grains and most
acceptable cooked rice-like grains. The most acceptable cooked rice-like grains exhibited
high calcium content with mean value of 7.12 mg/100 g, but with small amount of zine
(1,06 mg/100 g) and iron (1.67 mg/100 g). Minerals are generally much more stable in

their molecular structure and thus can withstand much more heat for a much longer


period of time. Since minerals are generally not sensitive to heat during processing and
ash values in the study did not decreased, therefore cooking seemed not affect the mineral

content of rice-like grains (Satpute and Annapure 2012).

Table 4. Mean mineral contents of sago flour, IPB variety 6 com flour, most acceptable
uncooked and most acceptable cooked rice-like grains.*

Sago Flour 0.26 + 0.05 ° 1.98+0.05* 7.894 0.05
IPB variety 6 Com Flour 2.04 + 0.05 * 1.56+0.02° 6.63 +0.05°
Most Acceptable Uncooked 1.11 + 0,08" 1.7440.04° 7.13 40.07"

Rice-Like Grains (SF 30:70 CF)

Most Acceptable Cooked 7 . a
Rice-Like Grains (SF 30:70 CF) 1.06 + 0.02 1.67 + 0.04 7.12 + 0.04

** Means having the same letter(s) within column are not significantly different at p (< 0.05).

Limiting Amino Acid Content

Lysine and Tryptophan Contents

‘Amino acids like lysine and tryptophan are building blocks that help form

muscles and other tissues. Lysine and tryptophan belong to essential amino acids that


must be consumed daily in food, as the human body can neither produce them nor store
them,

Significant difference in lysine and tryptophan content was exhibited between the
two flours and when it is made into rice-like grains. Results showed that there is a
noticeably higher amount of lysine and tryptophan in IPB variety 6 com flour than sago
flour (Table 5). IPB variety 6 com flour was found to have a mean value of 479.94
mg/100 g and 49.32 mg/100 g lysine and tryptophan, respectively. The biological value
of QPM protein is about 90 % of that in milk protein, a common standard of nutritional
excellence (Prasanna 2001). This value is close to the data obtained by Nagares et al.
(2011). On the other hand, sago flour has only a mean value of 11.96 mg/100 g for lysine
and 2.86 mg/100 g for tryptophan.

The study revealed that there was a significant decreased in the amount of lysine
and tryptophan of rice-like grains when cooked. Similar trend was observed in the study
of Purcell and Walter (1982) wherein the amount of amino acid of sweet potato decreased
after cooking. The reduction in lysine and tryptophan content in rice-like grains when
cooked are presumably due to their diffusion into cooking water. Most acceptable
cooked rice-like grains had a mean value of 110.63 mg/100 g for lysine and 7.96 mg/100

g for tryptophan.


Table 5. Mean lysine and tryptophan content of sago flour, IPB variety 6 com flour,
most acceptable uncooked rice-like grains and most acceptable cooked rice-
like grains*.

LYSINE TRYPTOPHAN
SAMPLES (mg/100 gy (mp/l00 g)
a 4

Sago Flour 11.96 + 0.35 2.86 + 0.08
IPB variety 6 Flour 479.942 1.57 49.32 £0.40
Most Acceptable Uncooked 122.674 139° mero
Rice-I Grains
(SF 30:70 CF)
Most Acceptable Cooked : .
Rice-Like Grains 110.63 + 6.69 7.96 & 0.63
(SF 30:70 CF)

* Means having the same letters (s) within column are not significantly different at p (= 0.05).

Antioxidant Content and Phytochemical Components

The antioxidant activity and phytochemical components of sago flour, IPB variety
6 com flour, most acceptable uncooked rice-like grains and most acceptable cooked rice-
like grains are shown in Table 6. The results showed that all mean values for antioxidant

activity, phenols, and flavonoids were significantly different among samples.

Antioxidant Content

Sago flour exhibited a high antioxidant activity value at 30.38 % than IPB variety

6 com flour at 21.10 % expressed as % scavenging activity. The higher the %

nR

scavenging activity, the higher is the antioxidative activity therefore sago flour has a
higher antioxidant activity. Sago had always been branded as the poor man’s staple
(Flach 1997) and being marketed cheaply, the benefits that could be derived from elite
foods such as berries, wines and chocolates, may as well be readily consumed. Cooked
rice-like grains exhibited antioxidant activity mean value of 23.83 %. It can be observed
that the value was decreased may be due to the leaching out of the water soluble
antioxidants. Most losses are due to the leaching of antioxidant compounds from the
food into the cooking water during the prolonged exposure to water and heat (Chipurura
2010). Antioxidant is important due to its distinct role in scavenging or reducing the free
radicals so as to prevent free radical chain reaction from damaging our body systems

(Dabbi 2007).

B

Table 6. Mean antioxidant activity and phytochemicals present in sago flour, IPB variety
6 com flour, most acceptable uncooked rice-like grains and most acceptable

cooked rice-like grains.*

MOST MOST
IPB VARIETY ACCEPTABLE ACCEPTABLE
SAGO UNCOOKED COOKED
COMPONENTS. FLOUR 6 CORN RICE-LIKE RICE-LIKE
FLOUR GRAINS GRAINS
(SF 30:70 CF) (SF 30:70 CF)
Antioxidant 30.3840.82* 21.1041.25° 25.7441.25° 23.83 + 1.42"
Activity (% SA)
Phenols
(mg/100g ‘ a 5 b
expressed as p/ -2-24#0.084 9.48 + 0.32 6.64 + 0.22 7.33 £0.27
gallic acid eq/g )
Tannins
(mg/100g
expased es 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
vanillin eq/g)
Flavonoids
(mg/100g ‘ a © >
expressed as mg 1,88 + 0.07 7.96 + 0.27 5.57£0.19 6.16 + 0.23
quercetin eq/g)
Saponins
(mg/100g 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
saponins)
Alkaloids . . . .
(rating) Negative Negative Negative Negative

‘* Means having the same letter (5) within column are not significantly different at p (= 0.05).
" The higher the % scavenging activity, the higher the antioxidative activity.


Total Phenolic and Flavonoid Content

Total phenol compounds was determined by Folin Ciocalteu method, and reported
as Gallic acid equivalents. The total flavonoid contents are reported as mg quercetin
equivalent/g. Phenols and polyphenolic compounds, such as flavonoids, are widely found
in food products derived from plant sources, and they have been shown to possess
significant antioxidant activities (Nabavi et al.2009).

It was observed that IPB variety 6 corn flour had the highest total phenolic
content at 9.48 mg/100 g while sago flour had the lowest at 2.24 mg/100 g expressed as
gallic acid equivalenv/g. For the flavonoids content, IPB variety 6 corn flour had the
highest at 7.96 mg/100 g while sago flour had the lowest at 1.88 mg/100 g expressed as
mg quercetin equivalen/g.

According to (Liu 2004), phytochemical in freshly harvested plant foods may be
destroyed or removed by processing technique including cooking. Increased surface area
of tissues in contact with cooking water, as well as high cooking temperatures and
lengthy cooking times are all likely to have caused disruption of cell walls and
breakdown of phenolic compounds (Francisco et al. 2010).

In contrast, the phenols and flavonoids content of rice-like grains in the study
shown certain stability when cooked, a quality that is reflected in the preservation of their
antioxidant capacity. This is similar to the study conducted by Sahlin et al. (2004)
wherein cooking gave rise to an increase in phenolics in green beans, pepper and

broccoli. The increased in phenol and flavonoid content after cooking probably due to the


increased level of free flavonols in the product as affected by the heat treatment (Sahlin et

al, 2004).

Tannins, Saponins and Alkaloids

There were no traces of tannin, saponins and alkaloids content detected in all

samples.

Antinutrient Content

Phytate and Oxalate

Sago flour contains 64.87 mg/100 g phytate while no traces found in IPB variety
6 com flour (Table 7). It was observed that there was a reduction in the phytate content
from sago flour into uncooked rice-like grains at 81.47 % and from sago flour into
cooked rice-like grains at 86.22 % (Figure 10). Phytate, being a heat stable component in
plant foodstuffs, is not easily degraded while cooking. However, phytates maybe soluble
under very high temperatures like during boiling (100°C) (Kumar et al. 2010) as evident
by the significant reduction of phytate content in rice-like grains after cooking. Wet-
heating method (boiling) made a difference in reducing phytic acid content from pure
sago flour to cooked rice-like grains. Moreover, in the study conducted by Njoki et al.
(2014) wherein a pronounced reduction in the anti-nutrient content (phytates) of grain

amaranth was observed in the case of wet-heat cooking (boiling) as compared to dry-heat


cooking (roasting and popping). The removal of phytate during cooking results in the
improvement of the bioavailability of essential minerals, such as calcium, iron and zinc,
On the other hand, there were no oxalate content detected in sago flour and IPB variety 6
corn flour, therefore oxalate content is also absent in the most acceptable uncooked rice-

like grains and most acceptable cooked rice-like grains.

Table 7. Mean antinutrient contents of sago flour, IPB variety 6 corn flour, most
acceptable uncooked rice-like grains and most acceptable cooked rice-like

erains.*
PHYTATE CONTENT OXALATE CONTENT
RNde Sd (mg/100 g) (mg/100 g)
Sago Flour 64.87 + 0.58* 0.00
IPB variety 6 Com Flour 0.00 0.00
Most Acceptable Uncooked
Rice-Like Grains 12.02 + 0.68" 0.00
(SF 30:70 CF)
Most Acceptable Cooked
Rice-Like Grains 8.944 0.30° 0.00

(SE 30:70 CF)

* Means having the same letter(s) wit

‘column are not significantly different at p (< 0.05).


°
g

g -20

g = Most acceptable
2 40 uncooked rice-like
$ grains

S 60 ‘Most acceptable
= ‘

5 cooked rice-like
|B 20 ori grains
| eK 86.22

-100

Phytate

Fig. 10. Reduction (%) in the phytate content of most acceptable uncooked rice-
like grains and most acceptable cooked rice-like grains.

Dietary Fiber

It can be observed that IPB variety 6 flour contains high content of dietary fiber
(3.77 %) compared to sago flour with a negligible amount mean value of 0.36 % (Table
8). The cooked rice-like grains from the combination of these two flours exhibited 3.67
% which has no obvious difference in the value of uncooked rice-like grains (3.69 %).
Generally, boiling may reduce the dietary fiber content of food due to the leakage into the
boiling water (FAO 1990). But in the study, results showed that the dietary fiber content

of rice-like grains was not significantly reduced during cooking.


Table 8. Mean dietary fiber contents of sago flour, IPB variety 6 corn flour, most
acceptable uncooked rice-like grains and most acceptable cooked rice-like

grains.*

SAMPLES DIETARY FIBER (%)
Sago Flour 0.36 + 0.02°
IPB variety 6 Com Flour 3.77 £0.05"
Rice ike Grain (SF 30°70 CF) TOOTS
Most Acceptable Cooked 3.67 £0.05"

Rice-Like Grains (SF 30:70 CF)

* Means having the same letter(s) within column are not significantly different at p (= 0.05).

Glycemic Index

In vitro starch hydrolysis rate

The average starch hydrolysis curves of sago flour, IPB variety 6 com flour, most
acceptable uncooked rice-like grains, most acceptable cooked rice-like grains and the
reference (white bread) are displayed in Figure 11. The curves follow a first order
equation: C = Cx (1- ¢ “) where C is the concentration at # time, Coo is the equilibrium
concentration, k is the kinetic constant and r is the chosen time. The curves show a first
part from 0 to 90 minutes where the hydrolysis rate increases and a second 90 to 180

minutes where the rate slowly decreases.


White bread —@- Sago flour

80 | —&~IPB var. 6 flour —*— Uncooked ri

y a
*—Cooked rice-like grains

ers
$s

Total starch hydrolysis (%)
=
&

0 30 60 90 120 150 180

Time (min)

Fig. 11. Total starch hydrolysis rate of different samples at 0 to 180 mins.

It can be clearly seen that sago flour and IPB variety 6 com flour (raw materials)
as well as the most acceptable uncooked rice-like grains and most acceptable cooked
rice-like grains were less digested than the reference (white bread). White bread showed
a hydrolysis rate of about 76.96 % after 180 minutes, which agreed with the value
reported in the original protocol by Goni et al. (1997) with 76.70 %. IPB variety 6 corn
flour generated less percentage of starch hydrolysis at 50.83 %, whereas the hydrolysis
value for sago flour is higher at 55.43 % after 180 minutes. The high amylose content of
IPB variety 6 com flour compared to sago flour has been associated with reduced

susceptibility to enzymatic hydrolysis.


On the other hand, the hydrolysis rate was markedly higher for cooked rice-like
grains as compared to uncooked rice-like grains. After 30 minutes, for example, almost
40.0 % of the starch in the cooked sample had been hydrolyzed, whereas only 32.6 % of
the starch in uncooked rice-like grains was hydrolyzed at this stage. According to the
study conducted by Snow and O’Dea (1981) cooking greatly increased the rate at which
starch can be hydrolyzed by gelatinizing the starch and making it more easily available
for enzymatic attack. Cooked rice-like grains has a greater exposure to heat that affects
the starch in such a way as to make it even more readily available for the hydrolysis.

Generally, natural grain flours contain non-gelatinized starch granules, which are
resistant to enzymatic digestion (Goni et al. 1997), different from white bread which
presents higher availability of gelatinized starch for the action of pancreatic enzymes in
its composition. The rate of hydrolysis increases proportionally with the degree of starch

gelatinization (Chung et al, 2006),

Hydrolysis index (HI) and Estimated Glycemic Index (GI)

The results of the in vitro starch digestion are summarized in Table 9, including
the estimated parameters Coo and k in the starch hydrolysis model, the HI and the
estimated GI, Equilibrium concentration (Coo) which demonstrates the extent of starch
hydrolysis when curve reaches a plateau, exhibited a range between 32.24-41.50 %.
Between the two raw materials, sago flour had relatively higher Coo (41.50 %) than IPB
variety 6 com flour (38.21 %). In terms of rice-like grains, uncooked had the lower Coo

(32.24 %) while higher Coo was observed in cooked (38.66 %).


Table 9. Equilibrium concentration (Coo), kinetic constant (k), area under curve (AUC),
hydrolysis index (HI) and estimated glycemic index (GI) for sago flour, IPB
variety 6 corn flour, most acceptable uncooked rice-like grains and most

acceptable cooked rice-like grains and white bread*.

HI Gi value***
SAMPLES Coot* ke AUC
° (%) %)

White Bread 46.604 0.16" 0.0033 2,063.11 + 7.03 * 100° 94.61*

’ » » .
Sago Flour 41,5040.25" 0.0018 1,089.4746.48" 52.8140.43° 68.70 0.23
IPB variety6 —38.210.11° 0.0017 969.37#26.58° 46.994 1.32° 65.51 £0.72
Com Flour
Most Acceptable
Uncooked Rice- 32.24£0.18* 0.0019 874.18 20.864 42.37 1.02* 62.974 0.564
Like Grains
(SF 30:70 CF)
Most Acceptable
Cooked Rice- 38664034 0.0019 1,049.29 18.57" 50.8140.85" 67.6040.47°
Like Grains

(SF 30:70 CF)

* Values followed by a different letter(s) in each column are significantly different (ps 0.05).
** Cooand k were determined by the equation C= Ceo (1-e™).
‘*** GI was calculated from equation proposed by Gori et al. (1997).

Kinetic constant (k) is another hydrolysis parameter that describes the hydrolytic

process of starch digestion (Table 10).

to 0.0019 among the four samples.

The kinetic constant showed a range of 0.0017

The lowest value (0.0017) was observed in IPB

variety 6 corn flour while most acceptable uncooked and most acceptable cooked rice-

like grains had 0.0019 & value. It indicates that the most acceptable uncooked rice-like

grains and most acceptable cooked rice-like grains are much susceptible to the digestive

enzymes and much rapidly hydrolyzed than the sago flour and IPB variety 6 com flour

(raw materials).


The AUC was calculated as the integral of the kinetic equation, and used to obtain
the HI for each food, which values are reported in Table 10. The HI, another parameter
related to digestibility, was used in the formula by Gofi et al. (1997) to obtain the
estimated GI. This index expresses the digestibility of the starch in foods in relation to the
digestibility of starch in a reference material, namely white bread (Jenkins et al. 1984).
Starch HI of each sample was obtained by using the AUC for the starch hydrolysis rate
from 0 to 180 minutes of the samples divided by AUC of that for white bread (Goi et
al. 1997). The HI of the samples ranged between 42.37 % and 52.81 %.

Gl is calculated from HI and is defined as the incremental postprandial blood
glucose area after injection of the test product, as a percentage of the corresponding area
after injection of an equicarbohydrate portion of the reference product (Jenkins et al.
1984). Sago flour showed a higher HI and GI (52.81 % and 68.70 %, respectively)
compared to IPB variety 6 corn flour. The greater amylose content observed in IPB
variety 6 corn flour, in comparison to sago flour, may be a major contributor to the
greater resistance of the digestive enzyme for IPB variety 6 corn flour. Generally, the
values of HI and GI among samples were significantly different except for the close value
of sago flour and most acceptable cooked rice-like grains. It was observed that the most
acceptable cooked rice-like grains had a GI value of almost 68 % while, most acceptable
uncooked rice-like grains contains almost 63 %. Higher GI value of most acceptable
cooked rice-like grains compared to most acceptable uncooked rice-like grains may be
due to the fact that cooking swells starch molecules and softens foods making it faster to
digest. The GI value of cooked rice-like grains was not that high this may be due to the

addition of egg white in sago-com combination, GI has been used to classify


carbohydrate foods. Egg white is high in protein but low in carbohydrates, in fact egg is
not included in the international tables of glycemic index (Foster-Powell and Brand-
Miller 1995).

According to Jenkins et al. (2002), foods with GI of < 55, 56-69 and > 70 are
classified as low, moderate, and high GI, respectively. The numbers refer to percentages
in comparison to the reference food. In this study, the most acceptable cooked rice-like
grains had GI value of 67.60 % which fall within the moderate or medium glycemic
index food (higher than 55 but less than 70 %). The GI value of most acceptable cooked
rice-like grains are much lower than those mentioned by Goni et al. (1997) for white
bread (100), spaghetti (78), rice (81), biscuits (79), beans (60), peas (74), boiled potatoes
(101), and potato chips (74) (Goni et al. 1997).

In contrast, the intake of rice in comparison to other starchy staples has been
associated to higher glycemic index (> 70 %). A study by Jenkins et al. (1984) revealed
that white rice had a glycemic index of 83. Miller et al. (1992) also classified freshly
cooked rice as a high GI food with values ranging from 64 to 93.

Glycemic index describes the rate of blood glucose absorption after food
consumption (Whitney and Rolfes 2002). High GI diets may have undesirable health
effects by promoting hyperglycemia and hyper-insulinemia (Roberts 2000). Recent
studies report that a high diet GI may increase risk of cardiovascular disease (CVD) and
type-2 diabetes. On the other hand, low GI diets have been shown to improve blood
glucose control in patients with diabetes, and may help in the reduction of body weight

and risk factors for CVD (Robert et al. 2008).

Carbohydrate Profile

Starch content

Significant difference was clearly observed in terms of starch content among the
samples (Table 10). Sago flour had the highest starch content with 84.59 %, while IPB
variety 6 com flour contains only 76.03 %. The most acceptable cooked rice-like grains
exhibited high starch content with 80.04 % when sago flour and IPB variety 6 com flour
were combined thus, it is a good source of energy and must be part of everyday healthy

balanced diet.

Amylose content

IPB variety 6 corn flour has the highest amylose content with 32.32 % as
compared to sago flour with 26.59 %. The amylose contents for sago flour found in this
study agree well with the published values of 22 to 31.7 % (Ahmad et al. 1999); 24 and
34 % (Mohamed et al. 2008). No significant differences were exhibited in the amylose
content between uncooked and cooked rice-like grains with 30.25 % and 30.21 %,
respectively. Amylose content of rice determines the hardness and stickiness of cooked
rice. Amylose is the main criterion of grain quality of rice and is an indicator of
amylose:amylopectin ratio. It is considered as the major determinant of the cooking and

eating qualities of rice (Juliano and Pascual 1980). The most acceptable cooked rice-like


grains with 30.21 % fall within the high amylose range. Amylose content higher than 25

% gives non-sticky or hard cooked rice (Astawan and Widowati 2011).

Table 10. Mean starch, amylose and amylopectin content of sago flour, IPB variety 6
com flour, most acceptable uncooked rice-like grains and most acceptable
cooked rice-like grains.

os

SAMPLES STARCH AMYLOSE’ AMYLOPECTIN
% % %

Sago Flour 84.59 + 0.18" 26.59 + 0.17° 57.99 + 0.03°

IPB variety 6 76.03 +0.31¢ 32.324 0.12* 43.71 £0.42¢

Com Flour

Most Acceptable

Uncooked Rice-Like 78.39 + 0.16° 30.25 +0.10° 48.14 £0.18 °

Grains (SF 30:70 CF)

Most Acceptable
Cooked Rice-Like 80.04 +0.14° 30.21 + 0.07° 49.83 + 0.16"
Grains (SF 30:70 CF)

ing the same letter within column are not sigi ).
** Classification of amylose - Waxy (0-5 %), Very low (5-12 %), Low (12-20 %), Intermediate (20-25 %),
High (25-33 % or greater)

Amylopectin content

Amylopectin is a highly branched molecule that makes the rice sticky during

cooking. About fifty percent (49.83 %) of amylopectin content was obtained by most


acceptable cooked rice-like grains when sago flour (57.99 %) and IPB variety 6 corn

flour (43.71 %) were combined.

Correlation Analysis

Table 11 presented the correlation analysis of carbohydrate profile, dietary fiber
and glycemic index. It was observed that starch had a very strong negatively correlation
to amylose and dietary fiber while had very strong positively correlation to amylopectin
and positively correlation to glycemic index. The two main types of starches are amylose
and amylopectin. Starch content and composition of amylose and amylopectin affect
digestibility of the rice starch in cooked rice. Amylose had a very strong negatively
correlation to amylopectin. The amylose is more slowly digested because it absorbs less
water and has tight clumps of starch. On the other hand, amylopectin is digested faster,
thus the faster glucose finds its way into the bloodstream. Most scientists believe that
amylose is digested more slowly than amylopectin (Miller et al. 1992, Foster-Powell et
al. 2002) because amylose is a polymer of simple sugars with a straight and unbranched
chain. This straight-chain amylose develops a solid bond that is not easily gelatinized.
Therefore, it is more difficult to digest amylose than the amylopectin, which is a
branched and open structured simple sugar polymer. Based on these characteristics,
foods that contain high amylose have higher hypoglycemic activity than those having
high amylopectin (Indrasari 2010). Starch is the major component of carbohydrates and
an important factor that affects the glycemic response. High starch content in foods

consequently leads to high glycemic index value of food.


Amylose had a very strong positively correlation to dietary fiber but very strong
negatively correlation to amylopectin and moderately negatively correlation to glycemic

index. Foods with high amount of amylose and dietary fiber lowers glycemic response.

Table 11. Pearson correlation (r) of carbohydrate profile, dietary fiber and glycemic

index (GI).
COMPONENTS, AMYLO- DIETARY GLYCEMIC
STARCH AMYLOSE ‘ect OETARY INDEX
Starch Pearson Correlation 1 -9814* 997+ -.900** 694%
.000 .000 .000 006
2 2 2 2 2
‘Amylose Pearson Correlation _—-.981** 1 -9934* 919 -577*
Sig. (I-tailed) 000 .000 .000 025
N 12 2 12 12 12
Amylopectin Pearson Correlation 99 7** -9938* 1 -9126* 650°
Sig. (1-tailed) 000 000 000 on
N 2 12 2 2 2
Dietary fiber Pearson Correlation _—-.900** sige -9128* 1 -653¢
Sig. (I-tailed) 000 000 000 oul
N 12 12 12 2 12
Glycemic Pearson Correlation e9ar* -S11* 650" -653* 1
Index Sig. (I-tailed) 006 025 onl oul
N 12 12 12 12 2

7 values-Very strong (0.81), Strong (0.6-0.8), Moderate (0.4-0.6), Weak (0.2-0.4), Very weak (0-02)
* Correlation is signiticant atthe 0.5 level (I-taied) ** Correlation is significant at the 0.1 level (tailed)

There is an inverse relationship between amylose and glycemic index. Amylose
does affect the GI value similar to observation by Frei et al. (2003) and Hu et al. (2004)
which high amylose rice produce lower Gl value. This is due to high amylose slowed

the digestion rate because of the linear structure of amylose. There is a greater hydrogen


bonding between glucose units in amylose molecule (Panlasigui 2010). Consequently,
they do not swell or gelatinize as readily upon cooking and, therefore, are digested more
slowly and result in lower blood glucose and insulin responses than those with low
amylose content. Amylose content had an obvious impact on starch degradation and thus

on the predicted glycemic response. For this reason, the intake of high amylose foods has

been considered more desirable for individuals with impared carbohydrate and lipid
metabolism (Frei 2003). Amylopectin had a very strong negatively correlation to dietary
fiber but with strong positively correlation to glycemic index. Since amylose is inversely
proportional to the value of amylopectin, foods with high amount of amylose tend to have
high dietary fiber content but low in amylopectin. Because, amylopectin is a polymer of
simple sugar with plenty branches and open structure thus, it is easier to gelatinized and
digested. Based on these properties, glycemic responses of high amylose foods differ
from those of high amylopectin foods. High amylopectin foods tend to increase their
glycemic index response (Foster-Powell et al. 2002). Other carbohydrate component that
affects the glycemic response is dietary fiber. Dietary fiber plays a key role in
maintaining human health. Dietary fiber cannot be digested and absorbed by human
digestive tract, but it has a function that is essential for health maintenance, prevention of
various diseases, and as an important component in nutrition therapy (Indrasari 2010).
The result of this study showed that dietary fiber had a strong negatively correlation to
glycemic index. Dietary fiber inclines toward lower glycemic response because it is

slowly digested (Astawan and Widowati 2011).


Nutrient Intake and Contribution to RENI

Nutritional quality of food is one of the important factors determining the
utilization potential of foods. The challenge of processing sago flour for human
consumption is to develop acceptable foods of high nutritional value and make them
available among the nutritionally vulnerable groups. Utilization of sago flour either by
incorporation or substitution of main ingredient in popular traditional foods is likely to
help in enhancing utilization.

The nutritional value of sago flour, IPB variety 6 corn flour, most acceptable
uncooked and most acceptable cooked rice-like grains was computed for its % RENI
(Recommended Energy and Nutrient Intake) contribution (Tables 12 and 13) for energy,
protein, zine, iron and calcium.

According to the Codex Alimentarius (2007) for a food to be considered a
“source” of protein, it should be > 10 % of Nutrient Reference Values (NRV) per 100
grams while it should be > 20 % of NRV per 100 grams to be considered a “high source”.
On the other hand, for a food to be considered a “source” of minerals and energy, it
should be > 15 % of Nutrient Reference Values (NRV) per 100 grams while it should be
> 30 % of NRV per 100 grams to be considered a “high source”. The NVRs are a set of
numerical values that are based on scientific data for purposes of nutrition labelling and
relevant claims. The NVR is based on the local reference nutrient intake called

Recommended Energy and Nutrient Intake (RENI).


As shown in Table 12, sago flour, IPB variety 6 com flour, most acceptable
uncooked rice-like grains and most acceptable cooked rice-like grains are high sources of
energy for 1 to 3 years old children based on RENI and sources of energy for 4 years and
above. This implies that sago flour can be used in preparing complementary foods and
that combination of sago flour and IPB variety 6 com flour can be an alternative snack
for children and adults. Moreover, combination of sago flour and IPB variety 6 corn
flour can be made up as rice-like grains as substitute for an ordinary rice with comparable
carbohydrate content. Meanwhile, the most acceptable cooked rice-like grains from the
30:70 sago flour and IPB variety 6 corn flour combination is considered as high source of
protein for 1 to 9 years old children as well as to 10 years to > 19 years old to both male
and female.

The percent energy contribution of most acceptable cooked rice-like grains is
comparable to ordinary well-milled cooked rice for children 1 to 9 year old and for both
male and female 10 years and above. In terms of percent protein contribution, the most
acceptable cooked rice-like grains (30:70 sago-IPB variety 6 corn flour combination)
was considered high source of protein for all age groups as compared to the protein
content of well-milled cooked rice (Table 12).

Table 13 showed that cooked rice-like grains is considered a source of zinc for 1 to 9
years of age; for male 10 tol2 years of age and 19 years and above; and for female 10 to
12 years of age and 16 tol9 years of age and above. For the iron contribution, most
acceptable cooked rice-like grains is also considered as a source for 1 to 9 years of age.

As for their calcium contribution based on RENI, sago flour, IPB variety 6 com flour,


most acceptable uncooked rice-like grains and most acceptable cooked rice-like grains
are not considered sources of calcium.

The most acceptable cooked rice-like grains exhibited high zinc value and
considered a source of zine in all age groups as compared to well-milled cooked rice.
But in terms of percent iron contribution, both most acceptable cooked rice-like grains
and well-milled cooked rice are good source. On the other hand, ordinary well-milled
boiled rice had higher percent calcium contribution in all age groups as compared to

cooked rice-like grains made from sago-corn combination Table 13.


21008 YN ae

zainos_"
x0 S96b +6581 « S88r 6L'1 sueak 6[=
oe 19'8h + L891 2001 m1 sueak 91 —
oe TSb oLeSl 2 85°51 sol sueak $1 ~
we £585 + 1081 os OFS +978 ik4 suvad Z1 - OL
EMMAEES
oe 18TH os'el 0 OL19 80'r1 sol sel sue9k 61z
a0 COE arzi welcos [vee | ovr | oom | swakar-
+ 6600 x4 oe LEBS ws oF Loz suvak ¢| ~
ae VES wore | evevoe | seo | cor | vorst | seoter—
aw
weave | 0099 | 4 SBt 019 iste | 8796 | elore | we | seriz sHeok 61
s€787 ea LYSE + £67 00 LEO £57 +6 $6801 + 98°bZ wee + LOE sreak 9p
#lTEZ +07 LE coll oe LUGE ee BE101 we ETE ee £7'OS1 96 TE 00'r +e SOLE saved ¢~{
NEUOTIHO,
(%) %) (%) (%) (%) (%) (%) (%) (%)
uisjoig | AB10ug | usjog | ABxoug | uoiorg sBi0ug | ursyoig | AB19Ug ‘B12uq
(49 0L:0€ AS) SNIVUD | (49 0L:0€ JS) SNIVUD gov
agrimetan | SX aax009 | argon qaxoooNn eae | ¥ao1d 0vs
ATGVLddOV LSOW | ATAV1dIIOV LSOW

“(s1seq Axp) sures 99| 40d 9011 poyooo pay]iul-|jam pure surel ay1]-2011 payoos ajqeidaose sour ‘suyes8 ay|-201r
paxyoooun aqedecoe isou ‘Moy Woo 9 AIOUeA gd] ‘INoy OBes jo utaiosd pue £Bsaua Jo ([NIY %) UONNqUIUOS INTY “ZI P1G2L



soos
ev | we [ee] soo | oro | esse] soo | wo | core] o80 | as | wersy] sor | eeu | ws
ore | vox | ws] wo [ors |enrsi| io | wo | soci | oo | ws | nee | wo | eee [ we
ore | soe | os | wo | sox | wer | wo | ae | son | oo | ere | -cose | ooo | eve | ove
or'e ooo | L99 wo 6L8 2 LOL wo 6 +058 990 we ee O0'PE | 600 aol er
Tivnga
ty | esr | szo | soo | ewer | oro | soo | osm | veut | avo weaete | sor [oso | sor | swaKeiz
ove isel | orb wo au “0 x4 ipzt 990 + tt 60 Lika wet | sxx gt -
ore | ose [wv | wo | see | oe wo | os | cea | 990 | on | see | sco | oe | ose | smatsi-
owe wl | 88's wo SeUt + 65'S wo se'el ote Or 990 oot +2 O00E eo | eeest | zee | seXzi-o1
aA
ey [cu [ we | wor | canst | ever | cor | «ewer | .9s0e wren | secce | ert | soos] isp | smeKe-c
309 we | ot | ose | -evor | ort | see | 907 secu | acee | ert | eooz| sy | Smet o-y
ovo | sez | oes | crt | savor | wosec | evr | sci | .usve +0561 | wecsy | ost | escec| acs | swome-t
NRIGTUHD.
CW | to Tw] ww | w |e | wm | cw |wm | wm | @ [wo |e wo |
ume | von | our | wmeyes | won | ourz | ume | won | ourz_| umoyen | won | ourz_| vies | von | ou
(49 ov:0€ 38) (49 0v:0€ 45) ay
oni a3x009 SNIVEO TMIT-IONL SNIVED BXIT-IONL YNOU NOD eres
aaTnw-T1a8 a3¥009 ‘Gax00ONN 9 ALSPIVA Gal
aavLdd0V LSOW aTBVL4300V ISON

.q Aap) sures QQ] s0d 2013 payooo part

Jom pure sures@ 2411-2911 payoos afqeidacce ysow ‘suresd
‘ayI-2011 payoooun aiqeidaoce yous ‘Noy wos 9 AaLseA df ‘INOY oBes Jo wmNtd[e9 pue UOd! ‘OUIZ Jo (NTA %) YOUNqUIUOS INU “EI a192L


Based on their nutrient contribution (% RENI), sago flour is source of energy and
iron while IPB variety 6 com flour is a source of energy, protein, zinc and iron. The
combination of this two flours when formed and cooked into rice-like grains is a good
source of energy, protein, zinc and iron. This implies that the combination of sago flour
and IPB variety 6 com flour can be made into complementary food as they are sources of
energy and minerals like zinc and iron which are important for growth and development.
These two flours can be substitute for wheat flour in making noodles, bread, cookies and
other baked products.

As sago is almost pure starch it is thought to be an inferior food. However, this is
not the decisive factor as it is the total composition of the diet that counts, or the quality
and quantity of complementary foods. Thus, sago is a different dietary component
compared to rice. Rice tastes better and is quicker to prepare so all meals contain a
substantial proportion. Sago meals are served with a greater proportion of additional
foodstuffs as fish, meat or vegetables and time to collect these other items is available.
From an analysis of several hundred meals it became obvious that rice meals generally
lack these complementary dishes, and that sago meals are more nutritious. This is the
only meaning basis of nutritional comparison (Persoon 1992).

Rice-like grains from sago flour and IPB variety 6 com flour can be an
alternative to ordinary rice for children and adult. Moreover, the consumption of rice-
like grains from sago flour and IPB variety 6 corn flour can help to fight malnutrition as
it is a good source energy and protein and can help in the alleviation of zinc and iron

deficiencies as it is a source of zinc and iron.


Table 14 presented the percent adequacy of most acceptable cooked rice-like
grains based on 2,000 kilocalories. One-half ('4) cup (1 serving) of most acceptable rice-
like grains with an actual weight of 87.5 g exhibited 14.75 % adequacy based on 2,000
kilocalories while 29.59 % adequacy was computed for one cup or equivalent to 2

servings of cooked rice-like grains.

Table 14. Percent adequacy of most acceptable cooked rice-like grains (30:70 sago:com
combination) based on 2,000 kilocalories.

SERVING WEIGHT KILOCALORIE

PORTION (@) {keal) % ADEQUACY
% cup (1 serving) 873 295.08 14.75
1 cup (2 servings) 175.1 591.86 29.59

The 30:70 (sago:com) combination rice-like grains is a great source of energy
because it is abundant in carbohydrates with 80.93 %. Carbohydrates act as fuel for the
body and aids in the normal functioning of the brain. Carbohydrates are essential to be
metabolized by the body and turned into functional, usable energy. The mineral content
of 30:70 (sago:corn) combination rice-like grains like zinc and iron can increase the
functioning and metabolic activity of all organ systems, which can further increases

energy levels. Furthermore, eating 30:70 (sago:com) combination rice-like grains can be


beneficial for the health, simply because it does not contain harmful fats and can provide

nutrients without having any negative impacts on health.

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION

In the study, the nutritional content and health value of sago flour, IPB variety 6

com flour and rice-like grains from sago-com combination was determined. The sensory

characteristics and acceptability of sago flour, IPB variety 6 com flour and the most

acceptable uncooked and most acceptable cooked rice-like grains were also evaluated for

their sensory attributes and acceptability. Specifically the study revealed that:

Only six sago-corn combinations namely 60:40, 50:50, 40:60, 30:70, 20:80 and
10:90 and 100 % IPB variety 6 corn flour were formed into rice-like grains and
subjected for sensory evaluation for this study. Rice- like grains from pure com (CF
100) was the most favored in terms of color but 30:70 sago:corm combination was
the most liked in terms of aroma, cohesiveness, flavor, tenderness and general
acceptability.

There was a decreased in the amounts of moisture content, crude fat, crude fiber,
lysine and tryptophan content when rice-like grains was cooked while increased in
crude protein and ash content was observed.

No significant difference was observed in the mineral content (zinc, iron, calcium)
when rice-like grains are cooked.

From the result of the present study it was understood that sago flour is an excellent
source of carbohydrate based dietary energy and essential minerals (iron and

calcium) that are important for normal functioning of the body.


Cooking methods enhanced the availability of nutrients in sago by decreasing the
antinutritional factor like phytate.

IPB variety 6 flour has significantly higher content of dietary fiber than sago flour.
The dietary fiber content of most acceptable uncooked rice-like grains was not
significantly reduced during cooking.

Sago exhibited higher amounts of starch, while IPB variety 6 com has higher amount
of amylose. The amylose content of most acceptable uncooked rice-like grains is not
significantly different to most acceptable cooked rice-like grains.

The most acceptable cooked rice-like grains exhibited higher GI value compared to
most acceptable uncooked rice-like grains. This may be due to the fact that cooking
swells starch molecules and softens foods making it faster to digest. In this study,
the most acceptable cooked rice-like grains is considered as “intermediate or
medium glycemic index products”. It may be considered as a possible health food
alternative for individuals on weight control diets, diabetics, or those searching for
healthier eating habits.

Based on their nutrient contribution (% RENI), the most acceptable cooked into rice-
like grains is a high source of protein for I to 9 years old children as well to 10 to 19
years old for both male and female; high source of energy for 1 to 3 years old

children; and a source of iron and zinc for | to 9 years old children.

RECOMMENDATION

The study has provided information on the nutritional value and health value of
rice like grains from sago-com combination as well as their acceptability. The study
highlighted that 30:70 sago-com combination can serve as staple in lieu of ordinary rice.
It was the most acceptable in terms of sensory characteristic and can provide nutrients
needed by the body. The utilization of sago flour and IPB variety 6 com flour in making
rice-like grains appeared to be favorable from nutritional content and health value as a
staple food.

However, there are still a lot of factors that needs to be studied to be able to
utilize the rice-like grains. There is a need to further investigate the shelf-life, microbial
quality, storage life and packaging of rice-like grains from sago:corn combination to
determine the safeness of the product. Also, administer sensory evaluation on different
regions to gather acceptable proportions of sago-corn combination on every part of the
country and thereby, combination of sago-corn combination can be varied according to
region’s preference. Another aspect would be the use of rice-like grains made from sago-
com combination in feeding programs should be tested to know whether it can help
improve nutritional status, thus preventing malnutrition. Moreover, in vitro methods to
measure GI can be helpful for the initial screening of rice-like grains made from sago-
com combination but direct in vivo measurement of GI must also be conducted. Like
ordinary rice, rice-like grains from sago flour and IPB variety 6 com flour, cannot supply

all the nutrients necessary for adequate nutrition. Fish, animal products and vegetables


are useful additions to the diets as they provide large amounts of essential amino acids
and micronutrients.

Lastly, addition of IPB variety 6 corn flour, a superior grain to sago flour,
underutilized but has a potential indigenous food, can find end uses in food product
development and nutritional interventions. Future line of research can be undertaken in
this regard to develop market potential of such foods for health benefits, nutritional

empowerment and as an alternative traditional staple.

LITERATURE CITED

ABD-AZIZ S. 2002. Sago Starch and Its Utilization. Journal of Bioscience and
Bioengineering. Vol. 94, No. 6, 526-529.

AJALA L. 2009. The effect of boiling on the nutrients and anti-nutrients in two non
conventional vegetables. Pakistan Journal of Nutrition. 8: 1430-1433.

AHMAD H, SINGH R, GHOSH AK. 2009. Glycemic and insulinemic responses in men
at rest following sago meal. Indian J Med Res 130, pp. 160-165.

[AOAC] ASSOCIATION OF OFFICIAL ANALYTICAL CHEMISTS. 1990. Official
Methods of Analysis. 13th ed. Washington, DC. USA. 304 p.

ARNAO MB, CANO A, ALCOLEA JF, ACOSTA M. 2001. Estimation of free radical-
quenching activity of leaf pigment extracts. Phytochemical Analysis.12:138-143.

ARVIDSSON-LENNER R, ASP N-G, AXELSEN M, BRYNGELSSON S, HAAPA E,
HARVI A, KARLSTROM B, RABEN A, SOHLSTROM A, THORSDOTTIR I,
VESSBY B. 2004. Scandinavian Journal of Journal. 48(2):84-94.

ASTAWAN M, WIDOWATI S. 2011. Evaluation of Nutrition and Glycemic Index of
Sweet Potatoes and Its Appropriate Processing to Hypoglycemic Foods.
Indonesian Journal of Agricultural Science 12(1):40-46.

BHAT TK, SINGH B, SHARMA OP. 1998. Microbial degradation of tannins-A current
perspective. Biodegradation 9:343-357.

CHAU CF, HUANG YL. 2004. Characterization of passion fruit seed fibres: a potential
fibre source. Food Chemistry, v. 85, p. 189-194.

CHEEKE P, OLESZEK W, PIACENTE S. 2006. Anti-inflammatory and anti-arthritic
effects of yucca schidigera: A Review. Journal of Inflammation. 3: 6-12.

CHIPURURA B, MUCHUWETI M, MANDITSERAA F. 2010. Effects of thermal
treatment on the phenolic content and antioxidant activity of some vegetables.
Asian Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 2: 93-100.

CHUNG HJ, LIM HS, LIM ST. 2006. Effect of partial gelatinization and retrogradation
on the enzymatic digestion of waxy rice starch. Journal of Cereal Science, v.43,
pp. 353-359.


CODEX ALIMENTARIUS. Food Labelling Complete Texts. 2005. Fourth Edition.Joint
FAO/WHO Food Standard Programme Codex Alimentarius Commission. Rome.
pp. 41-46.

[DA] DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE. 1999. Agrikulturang Makamasa. Com
Program. Retrieved February 20, 2014 from http://www.da.gov.ph.programs/com.

DABBI LP. 2007. Antioxidant Activities of Metroxylon sagu Extract and its
Therapeutic Effect on Cigarette Smoke Exposed Mice. [PhD dissertation].
School of Medicine University of Malaysia Sabah. 115 p.

DAWE DC, MOYA PF, CASIWAN CB. 2006. “Why Does the Philippines Import
Rice”. Retrieved March 20, 2014 from http//:www.irri.org.

DEBLECZ K. 2011. Analysis of Foods. Retrieved May 3, 2013 from
http://www.tankkonystar.hu.

DELA CRUZ RT. 2012. Sago: A wealth leached from the pith. BAR Digest Home.
October-December 2005 Issue (Vol.7 No.4). Retrieved March 25, 2014 from
http://www. bar.gov.ph/digest-home/digest-archives.

DEL MUNDO JA, FORSHAGE PJ, OCAMPO MR. 2011. Philippine Food Standards:
Development and Recent Changes. Retrieved February 12, 2014 from
http://worldfoodscience.com.

DIETARY FIBER DEFINITION COMMITTEE REPORT. 2001. The Definition of
Dietary Fiber, Cereal Food World, 46(3): 112:126.

ESCOBAR MM. 1992. Synthetic Rice Grains from Local Starches and Flours. [PhD
dissertation]. College, Laguna, Philippines. University of the Philippines Los
Bahos. 123 pp. (Unpublished; available at the UPLB Library).

[FAO] FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION OF THE UNITED
NATIONS. 1992. Maize in Human Nutrition. FAO, Rome, Italy. pp 1-2, 13-
18, 21-27.

[FAO] FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS.
1990. Carbohydrates in Human Nutrition. Agriculture and Consumer Protection.
WHO, Rome, Italy.

FLACH M. 1997. Sago Palm. Metroxylon sagu Rottb. Promoting the conservation and
use of underutilized and neglected crops. 13" edition. Institute of Plant Genetics
and Crop Plant Research, Gatersleben/International Plant Genetic Resources
Institute, Rome, Italy. 76 p.


FLECK H. 1981. Introduction to Nutrition. 4" edition. Macmillan Publishing Co., Inc.
‘New York and Collier Macmillan Publishers. London. 588 p.

FLORES DM. 2009. The Green Potential of Sago Palm and Sago Starch. Paper
presented at the National Biotech Week, Scientific Forum at SM Mall of Asia,
Philippines. pp. 1-8.

[FNRI-DOST] FOOD AND NUTRITION RESEARCH INSTITUTE-DEPARTMENT
OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY. Facts and Figures 2008, Bicutan, Taguig
City, Metro Manila, Philippines. 371 p.

FOSTER-POWELL K, HOLT SAH, BRAND-MILLER, CB. 2002. International table
of glycemic index and glycemic load values. American Joumal of Clinical
Nutrition.76, 5-56.

FOSTER-POWELL K, BRAND-MILLER, CB. 1995. International table of glycemic
index. The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition.62:871S-93S.

FRANCISCO M, VELASCO P, MORENO DA, GARCIA-VIGUERA C, CARTEA ME.
2010. Cooking methods of Brassica rapa affect of the preservation of
glucosinolates, phenolics and vitamin C. Food Research International, 43:1455-
1463.

FREI M, SIDDHURAJU P, BECKER K. 2003, Studies on the in vitro starch
digestibility and the glycemic index of six different indigenous rice cultivars from
the Philippines. Food Chemistry. 83: 395-402.

GIBSON N, SCHONFELDT HC, PRETORIUS B. 2010. Development of a rapid
assessment method for glycemic index. Joumal of Food Composition and
Analysis. v. 24: 4: 750-754,

GONI I, GARCIA-ALONSO A, SAURA-CALIXTO F. 1997. A starch hydrolysis
procedure to estimate glycemic index. Nutrition Research, v. 17: 427-437.

GONZALEZ-GALLEGO J, SANCHEZ-CAMPOS S, y TUNON M J. 2007. Anti-
inflammatory properties of dietary flavonoids. Nutr Hosp. 22(3):287-93.

GREINER R, KONIETZNY U. 2006. Phytase for Food Application, Food Technol.
Biotechnol. 44 (2) 125-140.

GROOPER SS, SMITH JL, GROFF, JL. 2009. Advanced Nutrition and Human
Metabolism. 5" edition. Wadsworth, Cengage Learning. 299 p.


GUINAGOSSIAN VY, VAN SCOYOC SW, AXTELL JD. 1977. Chemical and
Biological Methods for Grain and Forage Sorghum. Purdue University, West
Lafayette, Indiana,

GUTHRIE HA, PICCIANO MF. 1995. Human Nutrition. Mosby. 659 p.
HARRIS J. 2010. Antinutritional Factors: Phytate and Oxalate in Vegetarian Diets.

Retrieved May 2, 2013 from http://suite101.com/article/antinutritional-factors-
phytate-and-oxalate-in-vegetarian-diets-a304396.

HETTIARACHI UPK, EKANAYAKE S, WELIHINDA J. 2012. Prediction of
glycemic indices (Gl) of meals by starch hydrolysis indices. International Food
Research Journal. 19 (3): 1153-1159.

HWANG MY, GLASS RM, MOLTER J. 1999. Are you getting enough fiber? The
Journal of the American Medical Association. 281 (21): 2060.

HOSTETTMAN K, MARSTO A. 1995. Saponins. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press. p.3.

HOTZ C, GIBSON RS. 2007. Traditional food-processing and preparation practices to
enhance the bioavailability of micronutrients in plant-based diets. J.
Nutr. 137 (4): 1097-100.

HUI YH. 1992. Encyclopedia of Food Science and Technology. Volume 3. USA:
JohnWiley & Sons. Inc. p.213.

HULTIN E, TORSELL I. 1965. Alkaloid screening of Swedish plants. Phytochemistry.
4: 425-433,

INDAH VM. 2012. Sago championed as green alternative to Indonesia's appetite for
rice. Retrieved May 5, 2014 from http://www. youtrust.org/articles/sourceld.

ISHIZAKI A. 2002. Sago, an attractive renewable resource for the “lactate industry.”
In: Kainuma K, Okazaki M, ToyodaY, Cecil JE, editors. Proceedings of the
International Symposium on Sago (Sago 2001). Tokyo, Japan: Universal
Academy Press Inc. 313 p.

JENKINS AL. 2007. The Glycemic Index: Looking Back 25 Years. ACC International
Inc. Vol. 52, No. 2. pp. 50-53.

JENKINS DJA, KENDALL CWC, AUGUSTIN LSA, FRANCESCHI S, HAMIDI M,
MARCHIE A. 2002. Glycemic Index: overview of implications in health and
disease. Am Jour Clin Nutr.:76(1):266S-73S,


JENKINS DJA, WOLEVER TMS, JENKINS AL, JOSSE RG, WONG GS. 1984. The
glycemic response to carbohydrate foods. The Lancet 18, 388-391.

JENKINS DJA, WOLEVER TMS, TAYLOR RH, BARKER H, FIELDEN SRDH,
BALDWIN JM, BOWLING AC, NEWMAN HC, JENKINS AL, GOFF DV.
1981. Glycemic index of foods: a physiological basis for carbohydrate
exchange. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 3: 362-366.

JOHNSON M, JARAKIRAMAN N, CHALINI K, NARAYANI M, KALAIARASI V.
2012. Studies on developmental variation of isoperoxidase and protein profile of
Zea mays L. Journal of Stress Physiology and Biochemistry Vol. 8 No. 1. pp.
16-23.

JOHNFEL. 2012, DOST-TRC to Explore Cheaper Flour Substitute From Sago.
Retrieved February 12, 2014 from tre.dost.gov.ph.

JONG FS. 1995. Research for the development of sago palm (Metroxylon sagu Rottb.)
cultivation in Sarawak, Malaysia. Wageningen: Wageningen Agricultural
University.

JULIANO BO. 1992. Structure chemistry and function of the rice grain and its fraction.
Cereal Foods World 37:772-774.

JULIANO BO, PASCUAL CG. 1980. Quality Characteristics of milled rice grown in
different countries. IRRI Res. Paper Ser. 48. 25p.

KAMAL SMM, MAHMUD SN, HUSSAIN SA, AHMADUN FR. 2007. Improvement
on Sago Flour Processing. International Journal of Eng. and Tech.4(1):8- 14.

KARIM AA, TIE APL, MANAN DMA, ZAIDUL ISM. 2008. Starch from the Sago
(Metroxylon sagu) Palm Tree-Properties, Prospects, and Challenges as a New
Industrial Source for Food and Other Uses. Vol 7. Issue 3. Comprehensive
Reviews in Food Science and Food Safety. pp. 215-288.

KAZUKA H, KIHARU, I. 2003. Effects of sago starch content in the diet on lipid
peroxidation and antioxidative enzyme activities in rats. Journal of Nutritional
Science and Vitaminology, 49(1):76-79.

KUMAR V, SINHA AK, MAKKAR HPS, BECKER K. 2010. Dietary roles of phytate
and phytase in human nutrition: A review. Food Chemistry 120 (2010) 945-959.

LANG, V. 2004, Development of a range of industrialized cereal-based foodstuffs, high
in slowly digestible starch. CRC Press LLC: Boca Raton, FL.pp. 477-504.


LAMPE JW. 1999. Health Effects of vegetables and fruit: Assessing mechanisms of
action in human experimental studies. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 70: 475S-90S.

LATTA M, ESKIN M. 1980. A simple and rapid colorimetric method for phytate
determination. J. Agric. Food Chem. 28: 313-315.

LIU RH. 2004. Potential synergy of phytochemicals in cancer prevention: mechanism
of action. Am. J. Clinical Nutrition. 134:3479S-3485S.

LOLA A. 2009. The effect of boiling on the nutrients and anti-nutrients in two non
conventional vegetables. Pak J Nutr 8: 1430-1433.

MALOLO M, MATENGA-SMITH T, HUGHES R. 1999. Pacific Foods: The Staples
We Eat. SPC Handbook No. 35. Noumea, New Caledonia. p. 102

MANSKE R. 1965. The Alkaloids. Chemistry and Physiology. Volume VII. New York:
Academic Press. p.673.

MARINOVA D, RIBAROVA F, ATANASSOVA M. 2005. Phenolics and Total
Flavonoids in Bulgarian Fruits and Vegetables. Journal of the University of
Chemical Technology and Metallurgy 40 (3): 255-260.

McWILLIAMS, M. 1997. Foods. Experimental Perspectives. 3rd edition. pp.264-265.

MILLER JB, PANG E, BRAMALL L. 1992. Rice: a high or low glycemic index food?
American Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 34, 1034-1036.

MOHAMED A, JAMILAH B, ABBAS, KA, ABDUL RAHMAN R, ROSELINA K.
2008. A review on Physicochemical and Thermorheological Properties of Sago
Starch. Am. J. Agric. Biol. Sci., 3: 639-646.

McCLEARY BV. 1999. Enzyme Purity and Activity in Fiber Determinations. Cereal
Foods World, 44(8): 590-596.

McEWAN R. 2008. Anti-nutritional Constituent of Colocasia esculenta (Amadumbe) a
Traditional Crop Food in Kwazulu-natal. PhD Dissertation. Univ. of Zululand.
pp 4-15.

MUNRO A, BASSIR O. 1969. Oxalate in Nigerian vegetables. W Afr J Biol Appl Chem.
12: 14-18.

NABAVI SM, EBRAHIMZADEH MA, NABAVI SF, FAZELIAN M AND ESLAMI B
(2009). In vitro antioxidant and free radical scavenging activity of Diospyros
lotus and Pyrus biossieriana growing in Iran. Pharmacognosy Magazine, 4(18):
123-127.


NAGARES ND, HURTADA WA, RODRIGUEZ FM, DIZON EI. 2011. Nutritional
Value, Physicochemical Properties and Acceptability of Rice (Oryza sativa L.)
Composite. Asia Life Sciences 20(1):199-214.

NJOKI_ JW, SILA DN, ONYANGO AN. 2014. Impact of Processing Techniques on
Nutrient and Anti-nutrient Content of Grain Amaranth (4. albus). Food Science
and Quality Management. Vol. 25. pp. 10-17.

NOONAN SC, SAVAGE GP. Oxalate content of foods and its effects on human. Asia
Pacific J. Clin. Nutr. (1999) 8 (1): 64-74.

OGUNLEYE DS, IBITOYE SF. 2003. Studies of Antimicrobial activity and chemical
constituents of Ximenia Americana. Tropical Journal of Pharmaceutical Research,
Volume 2, Issue 2, pp. 239-241.

OLAJIDE R, AKINSOYINU AO, BABAYEMI OJ, OMOJOLA AB, ABU AO,
AFOLABI KD. 2011. Effect of processing on energy values, nutrient and anti-
nutrient components of wild Cocoyam [Colocasia esculenta (L.) Schott] Corm.
Pakistan Journal of Nutrition. 10(1): 29-34.

OPIENSKA-BLAUTH JM, CHAREZINSKI M, BERBEC H. 1963. A new rapid
method of determining tryptophan. Anal. Biochem. 6:6976.

OKAMOTO A, OZAWA T, IMAGAWA H, ARAI, Y. 1986, Flavans from the pith of
sago palm. Agricultural and Biological Chemistry, 50(6),1655-1656.

OZAWATA, OKAMOTO A, IMAGAWA H, ARAI Y. 1991. Oxidases for phenolic
compounds contained in sago pith. Proceedings of the Fourth International Sago
Symposium, Sarawak, Malaysia. Ministry of Agriculture and Community
Development and Department of Agriculture. pp.173-187.

PANLASIGUI LN, BAYAGA CLT, BARRIOS EB, COCHON KL. 2010. Glycemic
Response to Quality Protein Maize Grits. Journal of Nutrition and Metabolism.
pp. 1-6.

PERSOON G. 1992. From sago to rice: changes in cultivation in Siberut, Indonesia. pp.
187-199.

PRASANNA BM, VASAL SK, KASSAHUN, SINGH NN. 2001. Quality protein
maize. Current Science, Vol. 81, No.10. pp. 1308-1314.

PRICE ML, BUTLER LG. 1977. Rapid visual estimation and spectrophotometric
determination of tannin content of sorghum grain. J. Agric. Food Chem. 25:
1268-1273.


PURCELL AE, WALTER WM JR. 1982. Stability of Amino Acids During Cooking and
Processing of Sweet Potatoes. J. Agric. Food Chen. 30.443-444,

RAMLE SF, KAWAMURA MF, SULAIMAN 0, HASHIMI R. 2008. Study on
Antioxidant Activities, Total Phenolic Compound and Antifungal Properties of
some Malaysian Timbers from Selected Hardwoods Species. International
Conference on Environmental Research and Technology. pp. 472-479.

(RENI] RECOMMENDED ENERGY AND NUTRIENT INTAKE. 2002 Edition.
FNRI, DOST Compound, Gen. Santos Avenue Bicutan, Taguig, Philippines.425p.

REDDY NR, SATHE SK.editor(s). 2001. Food Phytates. CRC Press. 280 p.

ROBERT SD, ISMAIL AA, WINN T, WOLEVER TMS. 2008. Glycemic index of
common Malaysian Fruits. Asia Pac J Clin Nutr, 17(1):35-39.

ROBERTS SB. 2000. High-glycemic index foods, hunger, and obesity: Is there a
connection? Nutrition Reviews, 58, 163-169.

RODRIGUEZ EV, FLAVIER ME, RODRIGUEZ-AMAYA DB, AMAYA-FARFAN J.
2006. Phytochemicals and functional foods. Currrent situation and prospect for
developing countries. Seguranca Alimentare Nutricional, Campinas, 13(1): 1-22.

RODRIGUEZ F, MENDOZA E. 1997. Methods of Analysis for Screening Crops of
Appropriate Qualities, vol. 2 (Institute of Plant Breeding, Analytical Services lab-
manual-unpublished), IPB-UPLB. pp 6-7, 34-36, 58-63, 50-51, 92-93.

SAHLIN E, SAVAGE GP, LISTER CE. 2004. Investigation of the antioxidant properties
of tomatoes after processing. Journal of Food composition and Analysis 17: 635-
647.

SATPUTE M, ANNAPURE U. 2012. Approaches for Delivery of Heat Sensitive
Nutrients Through Food System for Selection of Appropriate Processing
Techniques: A Review. Journal of Hygienic Engineering and Design. pp. 71-92.

SCALBERT A, JOHNSON IT, SALTMARSH M. 2005. Polyphenols: antioxidants
and beyond. Am J Clin Nutr; 81 (suppl):215S-7S.

SERRANO-CLAUDIO V, DIRIGE OF, JAMORABO-RUIZ ADELA. 2002. Basic
Nutrition for Filipinos. 5" edition. Merriam and Webster Bookstore Inc. p. I-6

SINGHAL RS, KENNEDY JF, SAJILATA MG, KACZMAREK A, KNILL CJ,
AKMAR PF, 2007. Industrial Production, Processing and Utilization of Sago
Palm-derived Products, Carbohydrate Polymers. 72: 1-20.


SHIMADA K, FUJIKAWA K, YAHARA K, NAKAMURA T. 1992. Antioxidative
properties of xanthan on the autoxidation of soybean oil in cyclodextrin emulsion.
J. Agric. Food Chem. 40: 945-948,

SNOW P, O’DEA K. 1981. Factors affecting the rate of hydrolysis of starch in food.
The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 34: pp.2721-2727.

SOFI PA, WANI SA, RATHER AG, WANI, SH. 2009. Review Article: Quality
protein maize (QPM): Genetic manipulation for the nutritional fortification of
maize. Journal of Plant Breeding and Crop Science Vol. 1(6). pp. 244-253.

THEBAUDIN JY. et al. 1997. Dietary fibres: nutritional and technological interest.
Trends in Food Science and Technology, v.8, pp.41-48.

TIBAO NY. 2009. Why does Philippines Import Rice: A solution to the rice shortage.
Retrieved May 5, 2013 from
http://www nodai.acjpl/iss/english/9"_iss/fullpaper/1-1-Snchu-tibao.pdf.

VELIOGLU YS, MAZZA YS, GAO L, OOMAH BD. 1998. Antioxidant and total
phenolics in selected fruits and grain products. J. Agric. Food Chem. 46 (10):
4113-4117.

WHITNEY E, ROLFES SR. 2005. Understanding Nutrition. 10th ed. Belmont, CA:
Thomson Wadsworth; 2005:p. GL-3.

[WHO] WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION. 2007. Assessing the iron status of
populations, 2™ edition. Geneva Switzerland: WHO Press.

WOLLGAST J. 2005. The contents and effects of polyphenols in chocolate: Qualitative
and quantitative analyses of polyphenols in chocolate and chocolate raw
products as well as evaluation of potential implications of chocolate
consumption in human health. Dissertation Paper. University of Gieben,
Germany. pp. 18-20.

ZHISHEN J. MENGCHENG T, JIANMING W. 1999. The determination of flavonoid
contents in mulberry and their scavenging effects on superoxide radicals. Food
Chem. 64: 555-559.
