Analysis of the Bacterial and Fungal Community Profiles in Bulk Soil and Rhizospheres of Three Mungbean [Vigna radiata (L.) R. Wilczek] Genotypes Through Polymerase Chain Reaction–Denaturing Gradient Gel Electrophoresis (PCR-DGGE)

ANNA MAE MONTANANO DE LOS REYES

UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES LOS BAÑOS

Master of Science in Molecular Biology and Biotechnology

December 2o17

ABSTRACT

Soil is a rich reservoir of immensely diverse microorganisms with established roles
in the environment and potential functions in agricultural and industrial perspectives. In
particular, rhizosphere microbial communities have strong correlations with plant health
and growth; thus, making them vital for sustainable agriculture. However, the investigation
of microbial communities in soil environment is challenging since majority of soil
microorganisms are unculturable. This study utilized the culture-independent PCR-DGGE
(polymerase chain reaction - denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis) method in order to
obtain an initial assessment of the bacterial and fungal communities associated in bulk soil
and rhizospheres of different mungbean genotypes under natural field conditions.
Microbial community structures and their changes as influenced by plant growth,
rhizosphere and mungbean genotype effects were examined through multivariate
techniques of principal components analysis and band-based clustering, and through
diversity analyses. Plant growth stage was found as the primary driver of community shifts
in both microbial groups. Rhizosphere effect was also detected but was less discrete in
fungal communities. On the other hand, genotype effect was not discernible although it
was not inferred to be absent due to possible lack of manifestations of differences between
genotypes based on tolerance to drought under non-stressed environment, and due to detection limits of DGGE. Additionally, the more prominent members of the bacterial and fungal communities were assigned with putative phylogenetic identities through sequence
analysis. Bacillus and Arthrobacter species were dominant in bacterial communities in
both plant growth stages whereas members of Ascomycota and Basidiomycota were
common in fungal communities of mungbean. Overall, fungal communities were found to
have higher estimated diversity and composition heterogeneity, and were more dynamic
under plant growth influence, rhizosphere effect and uncontrolled environmental
conditions than those of bacterial communities during mungbean growth in the field. Thus,
the use of PCR-DGGE substantially provided a general overview on the structural diversity
and the associated changes in these communities. Since this is a baseline study on the soil
microbial communities associated with mungbean, information gathered may be subsequently used as reference for exploring their roles and functions.

CHAPTER 1

INTRODUCTION

Soil is a complex and dynamic environment which harbors an immense diversity
of microbial communities. As many as 10 billion microorganisms comprising of thousands
of different species can be held in a gram of soil (Rosello-Mora and Amann, 2001). This
unsurpassed soil diversity, in which bacteria are the most prevalent, proportionally reflects
the range of functions microorganisms partake in ecological processes that sustain life
(Emmerling et al., 2002; Nesme et al., 2016). Critical roles of microorganisms encompass
biogeochemical cycles and food chains, maintaining essential relationships among
themselves and with higher order organisms, (Hunter-Cevera, 1998), as well as soil
formation (Rillig and Mummey, 2006). As such, these ‘unseen majority’ are essential
contributors in the sustainability of terrestrial ecosystems (Van Der Heijden, 2008) and are
recognized as useful indicators of soil health (Winding, 2004; Avidano et al., 2005).

Considering the link between microbial diversity and ecosystem functioning,
evaluations of the microbial characteristics of soil have been markedly regarded; among
which the rhizosphere has been one of the widely studied components (Berendsen et al.,
2012; Bakker e¢ al., 2012). The rhizosphere is the immediate region of soil surrounding
plant root systems where microorganism-mediated processes are influenced by the root
exudates (Berg and Smalla, 2009). As a result, microbial biomass and activities are
enhanced in this area in comparison to bulk soil (Sorensen, 1997; Raaijmakers et al., 2009).

Rhizosphere microbes are deemed major contributors for sustainable agriculture for they

have strong correlations with plant health and growth (Berendsen ef al., 2012). For
example, rhizobia and mycorrhiza provide nitrogen and phosphorous, respectively, to
plants while plant-growth-promoting rhizobacteria (PGPR) have been found to affect plant
growth via preventing pathogen colonization and priming of plant immunity (Bloemberg
and Lugtenberg, 2001; Van der Ent et a/., 2009; Lugtenberg and Kamilova, 2009). It has
been widely reported that plant species is one of the most important factors that shape these
microbial communities in soil suggesting that plants are thought to be selective with their
microbial populations (Berg and Smalla, 2009; Innes et al., 2004; Garbeva et al., 2008).

Since soil microbial communities have both indubitable and potential functions not
only in an environmental but also agricultural and industrial perspectives (Nesme et al.,
2016), it is of great importance to be able to routinely assess and compare their diversity
(Lalande et al., 2013). The study of microbial populations in soil, however, proves to be
difficult as majority of microorganisms are unculturable with only less than 1% identified
so far (Das et al., 2014; Torsvik and Ovreas, 2002). Nevertheless, the emergence of
‘metagenomics’ has allowed the investigation of total microbial genomic material obtained
directly from environmental samples without cultivation and without prior knowledge of
the constituent communities (Riesenfeld et al., 2004).

One such culture-independent technique is denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis
(DGGE). DGGE is a genetic fingerprinting method that is dependent on polymerase chain
reaction (PCR). It produces molecular fingerprints specific for a sample site by coupling
PCR amplification of taxonomical targets (e.g. 16S rDNA of prokaryotes and 18S rDNA
or internal transcribed spacer (ITS) of fungi) with variations in sequences analyzed by

DGGE. The obtained fingerprints allow the spatial and temporal comparisons of soil

communities from various locations or among treatments (Nakatsu, 2007; Muyzer et al.,
1993). Even though modem metagenomics can permit in-depth studies of complex
microbial communities (Simon and Daniel, 2011), the employment of cost-effective
methods for reliable and simultaneous diversity analysis of multiple samples is still
considered (Lalande et al., 2013). Fingerprinting techniques such as DGGE has been both
widely and successfully applied for community structure analyses (Nakatsu, 2007).
Legume (Fabaceae) is one of the two most functionally important plant groups on
the globe next to the grass family (Poaceae) (Graham and Vance, 2003). The group
includes mungbean, which has been transformed into a major crop in Asia for its value in
supplementing human nutritional needs, improved soil productivity, and cost-efficient
farming (AVRDC, 2010). It is also the principal food legume in the Philippines in terms of
land area and value of production (Altoveros and Borromeo, 2007). Members of the legume
family have been widely studied for plant-microbe interactions in the rhizosphere, owing
to their agricultural significance and ability to form symbiotic relationships with rhizobia
and arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi (AMF) (Denison and Kiers, 2011). Nevertheless, there
has been limited characterization of rhizosphere community diversity that could affect
legume-microbe symbioses for many members of the group including mungbean.
Knowledge of the composition of bulk and rhizospheric bacterial and fungal
communities during plant growth in natural field conditions could provide a primary
understanding their occurrence. How diverse are these microorganisms? Do microbial
community structures significantly change during plant growth? Would there be notable
differences between the community patterns of bacteria and fungi? What could be the

dominant species in these microbial populations? Gaining insights into these basic

questions can pave the way to a better understanding of their roles in soil ecosystems and
may serve as basis for hamessing agriculturally-beneficial microbes (Berg, 2009;
Gopalakrishnan et al., 2015).

Due to the lack of soil microbial assessments for mungbean, the general objective
of this research is to perform an initial assessment of the bacterial and fungal community
structures associated with mungbean under natural field conditions by using PCR-DGGE.
The specific objectives of this research are enumerated as follows:

1. Examine changes in the microbial community profiles through multivariate (i.e.
band-based clustering and principal component analysis) and diversity analyses as
influenced by (1) mungbean growth, (2) genotypes, (3) and rhizosphere effect, and
compare between bacterial and fungal community structures.

2. Identify dominant members of the bacterial and fungal communities through
sequence analysis.

The general findings of the study may serve as reference for possible future
investigations such as physiological functions of rhizosphere microorganisms, the impact
of drought stress on the microbiological aspect of the legume, comparison with other plant-
specific soil microbial community researches, and combined analysis with other culture-

dependent or —independent, and modern metagenomic approaches.

CHAPTER 2

REVIEW OF LITERATURE

Microbial Diversity and Function in Soil

Soil is a complex system comprised of a variety of microhabitats with different
physicochemical gradients and discontinuous environmental conditions (Torsvik and
Ovreas, 2002). Multiple factors such as climate, slope, location, bedrock and biotic
activities are responsible for the variation of soil types which can support very different
biological communities (Heritage et al., 1999). One of the most important components of
soil is the vast microbial diversity surpassing eukaryotic organisms in terms of number. A
gram of soil is estimated to have an impressive quantity of as many as 10 billion
microorganisms (Heritage et al., 1999; Rosello-Mora and Amann, 2001) and a species
diversity of between 4x10? (Torsvik et al., 1990) to 5x10* (Roesch et al, 2007). The number
of bacterial species is estimated at 6,000 to 50,000 (Curtis et a/., 2002) and fungal hyphae
to reach up to 200 m (Leake et al., 2004). This complexity and variability in communities
of microorganisms is investigated in studies of microbial diversity, which encompasses
genetic variability within taxons (species), and the number (richness) and relative
abundance (evenness) of taxons and functional groups (Torsvik and Ovreas, 2002).

Microbial diversity encompasses different groups of microorganisms, which
includes the prokaryotic bacteria and archaeal groups; the eukaryotic fungi, algae, and
protozoa; as well as the viruses. Given the breadth of their richness, microorganisms play

varied and essential roles in the soil environment. They are typically the first to colonize

and ameliorate effects of naturally occurring and man-made disturbed environments
(ASM, 2015). For instance, cyanobacteria are responsible for the initial deposition of
organic matter on exposed rocks. This event opens the feasibility of initiating biological
processes that lead to soil formation and subsequently, to nutrient cycling (Heritage ef al.,
1999). In the biogeochemical cycling of elements such as carbon, nitrogen, sulfur and
phosphorous, microbial activities help provide different elements required by many
naturally occurring biological processes by conversion to different chemical states or by
fixation. Thus, biochemical reactions of soil microbes, primarily of bacteria, are relevant
to human, crop production and environmental health. More so, life on Earth would not
continue without the cycling of nutrients in which microbes are of prime players (Heritage
et al., 1999; Topp, 2003).

Topp (2003) enumerates the significance and relevant references for other notable
functions of bacteria in agricultural soils, which include suppression of pathogens and
pests, plant growth promotion, immobilization of heavy metals, pesticide degradation,
maintenance of soil structure, and causative agents of plant disease. Fungi similarly have
pivotal roles in plant health and development ranging from providing nutrients to
destructing agricultural crops (Thorn, 1997).

These variety of functions correlate with the immense structural diversity of
microbial communities in soil. Given so, the complex and dynamic nature of these unseen
communities presents much to be explored and to be gained from this knowledge (Topp,
2003). To illustrate one application of such comprehension, Ahemad and Kibret (2013)
cites diverse soil bacteria, both symbiotic and non-symbiotic, being used as bio-inoculants

worldwide for the promotion of plant productivity under normal and _ stressed

environmental conditions such as contamination with heavy metals, herbicides, fungicides,
insecticides, and salinity. In this regard, microbial diversity in soil may be viewed as a
massive pool of biological resources that can be surveyed for potential applications in favor

of improved plant growth and adaptations in various environmental conditions.

Plant and Microbe Interactions in the Rhizosphere

The distribution of microorganisms in the soil environment is not even. In the
presence of higher plants, these microbes tend to cluster around the roots — a phenomenon
referred to as the “rhizosphere effect” (Heritage er al., 1999). Rhizosphere, from the Greek
term ‘rhiza,’ meaning root, was first described by Hiltner in 1904 (Hartmann et al., 2008).
Rhizosphere is the region of the soil that is under direct influence of plant roots (Tate,
2000) extending approximately to 2 mm from the tissue surface known as rhizoplane
(Dotaniya and Meena, 2015). The rhizosphere effect, however, can be up to 10 mm
(Hartmann et al., 2008; Niu et al., 2012). Microbial diversity is found to be greatest near
the rhizoplane and decreases with farther distance from the root surface (Paul and Clark,
1996) as influenced by the gradient of exudates lost from the roots (Tate, 2000). The
nutrients contained in leachates, sloughed cells, and decaying tissues stimulate the
community of soil microbes in the vicinity (Tate, 2000). Between bacteria and fungi, the
rhizosphere effect is greater for the former (Dotaniya and Meena, 2015).

The rhizosphere effect appears as a strategy useful for plants to be able to thrive in
nutrient-poor environments. In agriculture, plants are dependent on microbial activity,
apart from fertilizers and input by rain, to obtain their nutrient supply (Warembourg, 1997).

Plants release exudates such as carbohydrates, amino acids, organic acids,

purines/nucleosides, enzymes, vitamins, inorganic ions and gaseous molecules (Dakora
and Phillips, 2002) through the roots at different times in their life cycle to stimulate
microbial activities in the soil. In turn, bacteria that reside in the rhizosphere determine the
availability of many nutrients for plants, especially that of nitrogen and phosphorous; and
the micronutrients iron, manganese, zinc and copper; rising in the favor of plant growth
promotion (Dotaniya and Meena, 2015; Kent and Triplett, 2002). Nevertheless, plants may
also release toxins and antagonistic compounds that may result in a selective effect on
microbial communities while microorganisms may exert neutral or detrimental effects
towards plants. The different interactions between plants and microorganisms result either
in mutualistic, commensal or parasitic type of relationships (Warembourg, 1997).
Naturally, these interactions or symbiosis would also depend on prevailing environmental
conditions (Bais et al., 2006).

A characteristic of the soil microbial community is the predominant
microorganisms in the rhizosphere, which take origin in the soil. However, specific soil
microbes in the population do vary with the established vegetation and this is attributed to
the variation in the nature of root exudates between plant species, and with soil type (Tate,
2000; Grayston et al., 1998; Berg and Smalla, 2009). This observation may, thus, have
implications in agricultural applications where the crop species is considered with their
associated microorganisms, which possibly perform important functions for the plant’s
growth, health and quality (Berg and Smalla, 2009). Among known interactions of plants
with soil microbes, the symbiosis of legumes with rhizobia is one of the more explored

phenomenon (Hirsch et al., 2001).

Legumes and their Symbiosis with Rhizobia and Mycorrhizas

Legumes are members of the family Fabaceae (Leguminosae), with some 20,000
species (Gepts et al., 2005) that comprise the third largest group of higher plants (Judd et
al., 2002). In terms of agricultural importance, they come next to cereals based on area
harvested and total production partaking 27% of the world’s major crop production (Gepts
et al., 2005). The grain legumes, also known as pulses, are primarily grown for their edible
seeds, which are harvested at maturity and marketed dry to be variably used as food or feed
(Bareja, 2010). Pulses, such as the common bean, chickpea, cowpea, pigeonpea and
mungbean, complement cereal crops in dietary terms with more than twice the protein and
mineral content found in the latter (Beebe, 2006). Seeds of grain legumes contain 20 to
40% protein and have the potential to provide the 15 essential minerals in the human diet.
As much as a third of the nutritional nitrogen requirement of humans is derived from
legumes (Graham and Vance, 2003; Gepts et al., 2005). Agricultural practices have used
legumes as rotation crops with cereals (Beebe, 2006) as they render improved soil fertility
by adding nitrogen to the soil (Mooleki, 2009). This ability to fix nitrogen, most often
associated with legumes, is made possible by the formation of special structures in their
roots with rhizobia (Sprent, 2010).

Rhizobia are soil-inhabiting bacteria with the potential for forming specific
structures on roots, called nodules (Zahran et al., 2012). In the strictest sense, the term
“rhizobia” refers to members of the genus Rhizobium; however, overtime, the term has
been used to refer to all bacteria with the capability of nodulation and nitrogen fixation in
association with legumes and to bacteria that belong to genus that was previously part of

the genus Rhizobium (Sahgal and Johri, 2006). Study of rhizobia-legume symbiosis has


garnered interest due to the trend in emphasis on environmentally sustainable development
with the use of renewable resources. In particular, the potential role of biological nitrogen
fixation in supplying N for agriculture is being tapped into in view of lowering of the use
of N-fertilizers (Peoples et al., 1995). Nitrogen is a crucial limiting nutrient for plant
growth and development; however, its most prevalent form as atmospheric nitrogen (N2)
cannot be readily utilized by plants (Wagner, 2011). Biological nitrogen fixation (BNF) is
carried out by a specialized group of prokaryotes, called diazotrophs, which catalyze the
reduction of N2 to ammonia (NH3) with the aid of the enzyme complex nitrogenase.
(Wagner, 2011; Zahran, 1999). This nitrogenase complex, however, is highly sensitive to
inactivation by O2. The efficiency of nitrogen fixation via legume-rhizobia interaction is
fostered by the legumes’ ability to maintain a very low concentration of free Oz in their
root nodules by binding O2 to the hemeprotein called leghemoglobin. Legume-rhizobia
associations contribute about 10!' kilograms of fixed Nz per year (Berg et al., 2012). These
thizobium-legume symbioses prove to have significant roles in supplying N2 into soil
ecosystems delivering more than half of the biological source of fixed nitrogen (Tate,
1995).

Most of the legume-nodulating bacteria that have been described have been
classified to belong to the alpha Proteobacteria and to one of the six genera: Rhizobium,
Bradyrhizobium, Sinorhizobium, Azorhizobium, Mesorhizobium and Allorhizobium
(Postgate 1982, Relic et al., 1994; Rivas et al., 2009). In the presence of the host, a few
among the large number of rhizobial cells in the soil infect the plant roots and multiply in
root nodules to as many as millions of cells (Denison and Kiers, 2011). This relationship

between legume and rhizobia is not obligate for either partner; some rhizobia may inhabit


within tissues of non-legumes (Ji et a/., 2010), and non-symbiotic rhizobia may also be
present in greater numbers compared to symbiotic genotypes in soil (Segovia et al., 1991).

There are two main types of mycorrhiza associated with legumes; the arbuscular
mycorrhizas (AMs) and ectomycorrhizas (ECMs) (Sprent and James, 2007). Arbuscular
mycorrhizal fungi (AMF), also known as endomycorrhiza, are obligate symbionts as they
depend on plant roots for reduced carbon (Sikes, 2010). AMF, in turn, supply soil nutrients,
particularly nitrogen and phosphorous to their host plant (Smith and Read, 2008). The term
‘mycorrhiza’ was coined by Bernhardt Frank in 1885, originating from the Greek word
‘myces,’ which means ‘fungus’ (Sedzielewska, 2012). Arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi get
their name from the prominent branching structures called ‘arbuscules’ that they form
within the cortical cells of roots. These structures, formed by fungi of the phylum
Glomeromycota (SchiiBler et a/., 2001), are thought to facilitate exchange of the carbon
and phosphorous between the plant and fungus by increasing the contact area between the
two. Some AMF are also known as vesicular-arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi (VAM); these
fungi from the suborder Glominae also form sack-like structures or vesicles within cortical
cells (Bever et al., 2001). The life cycle of a mycorrhizal fungus begins when a spore
germinates and hyphae branch toward plant root tissue. Upon penetration of the host’s
parenchyma cortex, the fungus forms the relevant structures where the exchange of nutrient
occurs. Hyphae extending in the soil take up nutrients for the plant while the host transfers
carbon to the fungus to support its vegetative growth or spores (Denison and Kiers, 2011).

Meanwhile, ECMs, which have a sporadic occurrence in legumes, have received
less attention than the establishment of AMs in the crops. There have been no studies on

the molecular aspects of ECM development in spite of the deduction that legumes appear


to be versatile in their symbioses, having the potential to form both types (James and
Sprent, 2007). Nevertheless, general interest in ECM symbiosis has started to grow in
recent years with the notable accumulation of sequence data from fungi in their natural
environments, particularly from soil and roots (Tedersoo and Smith, 2013). The
understanding of how ECMs are able to colonize roots of plants is relatively still at its early
stage. Only a small number of studies at the molecular level are available and most have
mainly focused on model associations with forest trees (Martin et a/., 2016). Ultimately,
studies of these organisms in their inherent occurrence in nature would lead to

understanding of their roles and potential applications in agriculture.

Overview on Studies of Soil Microbial Communities

Microbial community refers to all the microbial populations coexisting in the same
space and time (Begon et al., 1986). Its structure describes the composition of the
community and the abundance of its members (Friedrich, 2011). In general, there are many
aspects considered in soil microbial diversity studies which make findings among relevant
experiments difficult to compare. For instance, a variety of environmental biotic and
abiotic factors as well as plant-microorganism interactions that may impact microbial
communities are involved in different researches. Berg and Smalla (2009) summarizes
biotic factors to include plant species, plant developmental stage, plant health, animals and
grazers, and human activities while abiotic factors encompass soil quality, geography,
climate and treatments or pesticides. Furthermore, the different systems used in
experiments - ranging from hydroponic set-ups, chamber or greenhouse conditions to field

tests - add complexity in making generalized conclusions (Berg and Smalla, 2009).


Assessment of results between studies is further complicated by the considered target
microbial group of interest (e.g. bacterial, fungal or both), not to mention the different
levels of resolution due to different approaches used (Fierer and Jackson, 2006; Roesch et

al., 2007)

Approaches in Soil Microbial Community Analysis

Methods for investigating soil microbial communities can be either culture-
dependent or culture-independent; the resolutions of which might be decisive for the
findings reported (Berg and Smalla, 2009). Each of these available approaches has their
advantages and drawbacks and so precaution must be taken in selecting the most suitable
methods; the basis of which typically relies on experimental goals. The various techniques
should be viewed as complementary for optimal access into the structural and functional

diversity of complex microbial communities (Rastogi and Sani, 2011).

Culture-dependent Methods

Traditionally, culture-dependent techniques involving dilution plating on culture
media has been used. The method makes use of different types of nutrient medium that
have been designed to maximize recovery of microorganisms (Hill et al., 2000). However,
it has been estimated that only less than 1% of the microorganisms found in soils can be
grown in laboratory media and conditions (Torsvik and @vreds, 2002) based on
comparisons between direct microscopic counts of cells and recovered colony forming

units in soil samples. When complex microbial communities are being studied, for


example, enumeration of bacteria may produce erroneous results not representative of the
population (Besnard et al., 2000).

A popular culture-dependent method is the community-level physiological profiles
(CLPP), which is used to identify bacterial species based on their utilization of different
carbon sources. CLPP is favored as a rapid screening method that measures not only
community structure but also reflects functional diversity (Garland and Mills, 1991; Zak
et al., 1994). The technique has been facilitated by the use of a commercial taxonomic
system, known as the BIOLOG® system, which has been extensively used for soil
microbial community analyses (Garland, 1996; Lehman et al., 1995). Although CLPP may
deliver useful information for soil microbial community assessments, the method suffers
from several limitations, which are discussed by Hill et a/. (2000). Essentially, it has the
same bias problems as culture plating (Hill er a/., 2000) and has been questioned to reflect

function rather than structure (Garland, 1997).

Culture-independent Methods

Given the limitation of revealing only a small portion of the total microbial
community populations, soil microbial ecologists have increasingly turned to the use of
culture-independent methods. Using such approaches may be based on: (1) the extraction,
quantification and identification of soil-sampled molecules that are specific to individual
microorganisms or microbial groups; or (2) advanced fluorescence microscopic techniques
(Hill et al., 2000). For the former, useful molecules include phospholipid fatty acids and
nucleic acids (Morgan and Winstanley, 1997); while the latter involves either the

hybridization of fluorescent-labeled nucleic acid probes with total RNA extracted from


soils or hybridizations with cells in situ (i.e. fluoresecent in situ hybridization or FISH).
Summaries of the principles, advantages and drawbacks of the techniques are also
discussed by Hill et al. (2000).

Among these practices, the use of nucleic acids molecules have been the most
useful in investigations of microbial community structures. Studies by Torsvik and
colleagues (1990; 1996) compared the re-association kinetics of DNA extracted from soil
with that of microbial pure cultures while using the reasoning that the greater the sequence
diversity of the DNA, the greater the DNA reannealing time. Their findings concluded that
the genetic diversity of soil was estimated to be 200 times greater than the diversity among
bacteria cultured from the same soil; thereby, illustrating soil bacterial communities to be
significantly more complex than what can be revealed by culture-dependent methods.

Kirk and colleagues (2004) enumerate these approaches utilizing DNA to include
guanine plus cytosine (G+C) content, nucleic acid reassociation and hybridization, DNA
microarrays and DNA hybridization. In particular, genetic fingerprinting techniques are
one of the most applied tools in microbial ecology. These techniques such as denaturing
and temperature gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE and TGGE), single strand
conformation polymorphism (SSCP), amplified ribosomal DNA restriction analysis,
(ARDRA) or restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP), terminal restriction
fragment length polymorphism (T-RFLP) and (automated) ribosomal intergenic spacer
analysis (RISA or ARISA), have been developed for qualitative and semi-quantitative
estimation of diversity in ecosystems, study of spatial and temporal variations in
community diversity, screening clone libraries, and species identification (Cetecioglu et

al., 2012; Hofman-Bang et al., 2003).


High-throughput 454 sequencing platform or ‘pyrosequencing’ has also been
significantly used for microbial diversity analyses in environmental systems (Lim et al.,
2010, Nacke et al., 2011; Kaiser et al., 2016). It is the first of the low-cost platforms known
as Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) that revolutionized metagenomics. However, the
Roche-acquired technology is now obsolete; support for the platform ended in mid-2016
(Karow, 2013). Escobar-Zepeda ef al. (2015) summarizes considerations for selecting
among new generation sequencing technologies; overall, immense data generated by these
technologies proportionally requires high computational resources and complex

bioinformatics analyses.

Polymerase Chain Reaction —

Denaturing Gradient Gel Electrophoresis (PCR-DGGE)

Denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE) is a well-established molecular
tool in microbial ecology for diversity analysis (Muyzer, 1999) in different environments
or samples such as soil and water. In this method, same-length, double stranded DNA
molecules are separated based on their melting behaviors that are attributed to differences
in their base sequences. It was originally developed for distinguishing point mutations in
defined genes in the 1980s; theoretically, a single base variation among DNA sequences
can be detected by DGGE (Muyzer et al., 1993).

DGGE separates same-length DNA fragments by electrophoresis in a gradient of a
denaturing conditions, which is established using denaturants such as urea and formamide.
The DNA fragments migrate in a linearly increasing gradient under the influence of an

electric field until they reach a position in the gradient in which the molecules melt. As the


DNA fragments separate, the mobility of the molecules decrease. In order to prevent the
complete disassociation of these fragments, a GC-rich sequence called a ‘GC clamp,’ is
attached to the 5’-end of either the forward or reverse primers used in PCR. The GC clamp
designed by Muyzer et al. (1993) - 5'-CGC CCG CCG CGC CCC GCG CCC GTC CCG
CCG CCC CCG CCC G-3' - is most frequently used for most applications. The
electrophoretic separation of mixed amplicons or PCR products results in a genetic profile
or fingerprint composed of bands at different migration distances and of different
intensities. The obtained fingerprint represents the community structure. The number of
bands is assumed to reflect the microbial diversity while band intensities relate to the
relative abundance within the amplified community (Muyzer et al., 2004; Oros-Sichler et

al., 2007).

Target Genes for PCR

Prior to electrophoresis procedure, proper markers must be selected to represent
target microbial community (Cetecioglu et al., 2012). In prokaryotic community analysis,
the 16S ribosomal RNA (rRNA) gene sequences (i.e. encoded by rDNA) have been most
widely favored (Nakatsu, 2007). These small subunit (SSU) rDNA molecules are found
universally in all domains Bacteria, Archaea and Eucarya (Woese et al., 1990) and are
composed of both highly conserved and variable sequence regions (Woese et al., 1987). In
particular, bacterial 16S rRNA gene has 9 hypervariable regions interspersed along its
length; the selection of which of these regions to use can notably affect the community
analysis (Schmalenberger et al., 2001; Yu and Morrison, 2004). The highly conserved

fragments are essential for primer design while the hypervariable regions are used for


phylogenetic characterization. The slow rate of change of certain regions of these
ribosomal genes had set them to be considered as the contemporary standard for life
detection in various environments (Isenbarger et al., 2008). To add to these properties, the
relatively large size of the 16S and 18S rDNA molecules (i.e. 1.5 kb and 1.8-2.0 kb,
respectively) (Bryant and Manning, 1999) and the presence of secondary structural
domains favor that these molecules hold greater phylogenetic information (Hill er al.,
2000). Aside from universal targets, group-specific primers can also be used for PCR-
DGGE (Nakatsu, 2007).

For eukaryotes, the 5S or 18S rRNA genes (Ward et al., 1992) have been the marker
of choice (Hill et al., 2000). However, Liu and colleagues (2015) recently suggested that
the ITS region is more precise and has more potential than the 18S rDNA. Their study
using PCR-DGGE has revealed greater richness and diversity of fungal communities in
both water and soil samples using ITS than with 18S rRNA gene. The difference between
the two is that ITS regions are hypervariable whereas rRNA gene subunits are more
conserved across the fungal kingdom. Consequently, ITS regions are particularly useful
for fungal identification at the species and even lower levels. The drawback though is that
subsequent multiple sequence alignments and phylogenetic analyses are limited by the
considerable variations (Toju et al., 2012). Liu et al. (2015) emphasizes that as a
consequence, the concurrent use of the both ITS and rRNA genes is growing for taxonomic

and phylogenetic fingerprinting studies.


Challenges and Advantages of DGGE

The optimization of procedures and conditions is imperative not only for the
performance of DGGE but also during DNA extraction and PCR amplification due to
inherent limitations and biases. For example, DNA extraction has issues in cell breakage
steps either being too harsh or insufficient for different bacterial groups (Schneegurt ef al.,
2003), and difficulty in separation of DNA from PCR-inhibiting components (e. g. humic
substances) (Tebbe and Vahjen, 1993), thereby causing misrepresentation of community
DNA. The choice of markers has also been demonstrated to notably affect PCR-DGGE
profiles for the same microbial group (Anderson et a/., 2003; Brons and van Elsas, 2008;
Zhang et al., 2009; Liu et al., 2015). Typically, primer annealing temperature, polymerase
enzyme cofactor (Mg), and nucleic acid template concentrations are most often optimized
for PCR (Boleda et al., 1996; Ishii and Fukui, 2001). On the other hand, electrophoresis
conditions such as the running time, voltage, and range of percent gradient of denaturant
to be used may be adjusted to suit among PCR product size and buffer properties (Muyzer
et al., 1993; Green et al., 2009). With regard to size of PCR targets, one limitation of
DGGE is that it is suitable for the separation of only smaller DNA fragments of up to 500
base pairs (Muyzer and Smalla, 1998). DGGE has also been found to be incapable of
clearly separating samples whose sequence differ from 0.1 to 1%; band appears more
intense or smeared, which may lead to misinterpretation of diversity in a given sample
(Jackson et al., 2000). The formation of heteroduplexes can be a source of artifacts in the
rDNA gene and their separation from homoduplexes can also result in more intense bands
that lead to overestimation of microbial diversity (Thompson et al., 2002). Neilson et al.

(2013) has published that while method-specific artifacts prevent its application for


quantitative aspects, PCR-DGGE does provide an excellent high-throughput tool for
comparative diversity analysis.

Although DGGE may be labor-intensive, the method still provides a fast
monitoring means for the determination of microbial community in a given ecosystem,
particularly on the changes in structural diversity over time or space or in response to
treatment. Both qualitative and semi-quantitative approach for such diversity estimations
are delivered by the technique (Muyzer and Smalla, 1998; ITRC EMD, 2011; Cetecioglu
et al., 2012). The notable advantage of DGGE is that it allows for further analysis of
sequences provided; bands of interest may be excised and reamplified to identify specific
operational taxonomic units (OTUs) (Valaskova and Baldrian, 2009). In general, it is
considered as one of the most reliably used or even routinely applied method not only for
microbial diversity analyses in soil (Oros-Sichler et al., 2007) but also in different
environments (Cetecioglu et al., 2012). Nakatsu (2007) emphasizes its application in
various environmental analyses and provides a substantial number of bacterial community
studies that have successfully used the method; the scope of these studies has covered
environments from agricultural soils, plant rhizospheres, forests, grasslands, upland,

wetlands, industrial sites, sand dunes, landfills to plant endophytes.

Mungbean as Subject Crop

Mungbean (Vigna radiata L. Wilczek) is one of the major legumes in Asia along
with chickpea (Cicer arietinum L.) and pigeonpea (Cajanus cajan L.) (Shanmugasundaram
et al., 2009). The pulse crop, which is also known as ‘green gram,’ is a small bush or vine-

like herb that has adapted itself to different agroclimatic conditions. It is predominantly


cultivated in Southeast Asia and is also grown in parts of Africa, Australia and USA.
Requiring 90-120 days of frost free conditions, mungbean is both a warm season and short
duration crop (Ranawake et al., 2011); the latter characteristic along with its property of
adding to soil nitrogen status via N2 fixation renders it to be commonly used as a rotation
crop with cereals. Furthermore, it is also used as an intercrop as it combines well with a
wide range of cereals and oil seed crops. The most important product of the mungbean is
its seed that is used in various food preparations such as vegetable dishes, noodles and
bakery products (Krishna, 2010). Similar to most legumes, its seeds are rich in protein and
complement cereals in providing nutrition. The seeds also contain vitamins A and C,
thiamin, iron, and magnesium among other nutrients, and is known as a good source of
folate (Department of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries, 2010). In Asia, it has been
transformed from a marginal to a major crop, which has ensued contribution to better
nutrition for the poor population, to improved soil productivity and to opening additional
income opportunities for farmers (AVRDC, 2010). Meanwhile, mungbean is the principal
food legume in the Philippines in terms of agricultural area and value of production
(Altoveros and Borromeo, 2007) with which the Ilocos Region, Autonomous Region of
Muslim Mindanao (ARMM), Western Visayas, Central Luzon and Cagayan Valley are the
major producers. In 2006, the production was 25,955 metric tons, which contributed
P790M to the local economy (PCARRD-DOST, 2003).

Mungbean can be grown year-round but, typically, these are cultivated when
harvesting time would fall during dry periods (PCARRD-DOST, 2003). Nevertheless,
adequate rainfall is desired from flowering to late pod fill to ensure good yield (Department

of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries, 2010). While it is considered a relatively drought-


tolerant crop (Morton et al., 1982), its yield is most dependent on ample supply of water
over any other single environmental factor (Kramer and Boyer, 1997). Accordingly,
mungbean has been widely examined in relation to its response to drought. The focus of
these researches have chiefly been on the morphological and physiological facets of the
crop (Ocampo and Robles, 2000a; Ocampo and Robles, 2000b; Dutta and Bera, 2008;
Kumar and Sharma, 2009; Ranawake et al., 2011, Aslam et al., 2013; Alzarqaa et al., 2014;
Narina et al., 2014; Kaur et al., 2017; Prakash et al., 2017). In contrast, there are limited
reports related to its microbial aspects; most of which doesn’t so much delve into its soil
microbial community but rather on the effects of inoculation with specific rhizobia or
mycorrhiza (Tien et al., 2002; Ahmed et al., 2006; Delic et al., 2011; Habibzadeh, 2014;
Mubeen et al., 2015). Among members of the Fabaceae family, general soil bacterial and/or
fungal communities have been investigated for but not limited to Cicer arietinum (Ellouze
et al., 2013) Glycine max (Sugiyama et al., 2014; Meriles et al., 2009), Acacia spp.
(Birnbaum et al., 2014), Stylosanthes guianensis (Aubl.) Sw., Trifolium pratense L.,
Medicago sativa L. (Zhou et al., 2017), and Medicago truncatula (Mougel et al., 2006). To
date, there has been no general survey of either bacterial or fungal communities in

rhizospheres of mungbean.

CHAPTER 3

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Field Site Background

The field experiment was performed in upland soil condition during the transition
from dry to rainy season (April through June 2016) at Tranca, Bay, Laguna, located at
latitude 14°08°22.2”N and longitude 121°15°33.7"E (Google Maps, 2017) as shown in
Figure 1. The land area is found near the edge of Mount Makiling forest reserve and has
been extensively used to grow a variety of vegetables and root crops since the 1980’s.
Typical harvests, which include okra, mungbean, squash, cassava and sweet potato are
grown in no particular pattern at about month-long intervals. Farming practices in the site
involve sourcing water from deep well reservoir for perforain and furrow irrigation

systems, supplying nitrogen and potassium fertilizers, and using insecticides as needed.

Field Experimental Design
Mungbean Genotypes and Field Lay-out

A repeated measures (RM) in randomized complete block design (RCBD) was
implemented wherein three mungbean genotypes were used based on their tolerance to
drought stress. Seeds of Accession 831, Pag-asa 3 and Pag-asa 7 (Figure 2), were obtained
from the University of the Philippines Los Bafios — Institute of Plant Breeding (UPLB-

IPB). Los Bafios, Laguna. Accession 831 has been observed to be resilient to drought


(Del Rosario et al., 1992). Pag-asa 7 has also been found to endure low moisture conditions
having relatively higher yields in such state. Conversely, Pag-asa 3 is intolerant to the
abiotic stress. Figure 3 shows the experimental lay-out, seed sowing and cultivated
mungbean plants. Adjacent plots A and B comprised of nine 5x5 m minor plots each,
among which the three mungbean genotypes were randomly sown. The individual minor

plots consisted of 10 rows in which 1000 seeds were equally distributed.

Soil Sample Collection

Sample collection of bulk and rhizosphere soils were performed during the
flowering (35 days after sowing) and physiological maturity (57 days after sowing)
developmental stages of mungbean (Figure 4). Bulk soil samples were collected by taking
soil cores between rows of mungbeans at an even depth of approximately 10 cm. Five soil
cores (2 cm diameter) from different points per subplot were completely mixed together in
sterile propylene bags. Pooled soil mass from subplots planted with the same mungbean
genotype were further combined together to obtain composite samples. An initial
composite bulk soil sample from each of major plots A and B were also obtained before
sowing to use as control. For rhizosphere soil, five plants per subplot were carefully
excavated with which the roots were vigorously shaken to remove soil not tightly adhering
to the roots. The remaining soil on the roots were then collected in sterile polypropylene
bags. Composite rhizosphere soil samples were prepared similarly as done for bulk soil
collection. Three composite bulk soil and rhizosphere samples were acquired from each
replicate plot at every sampling event. A total of 24 composite soil samples were taken

from the two major plots for the two sampling times. Soil samples were placed in sealed


container with ice during transport to the laboratory and were stored at -20°C prior to DNA
extraction. Independent soil samples from the replicate plots were submitted to IPB

Physiology Laboratory for physico-chemical analysis.

Figure 2. Seeds of mungbean genotypes Accession 831 (A), Pag-asa 3 (B) and Pag-asa 7
(C) obtained from the University of the Philippines Los Baiios — Institute of Plant Breeding,
(UPLB — IPB), Los Bajios, Laguna.


Direction of planting rows 10m sm
a peed ea en, =
Pag-asa Pag-asa Acc Pag-asa Acc Pag-asa 3
3 7 831 7 831 3
Pag-asa ‘Acc Pag-asa Acc Pag-asa Pag-asa
7 831 3 831 3 zp
Is
Acc Pag-asa Pag-asa Pag-asa Pag-asa Ace
831 3 7 3 7 831
Plot A Plot B

Figure 3. Experimental field lay-out (A), seed sowing (B) and cultivated mungbean plants
in the two major plots A (C) and B (D).


Figure 4. Growth stages of mungbean when soil samples were collected: (A) flowering and
(B) physiological maturity.

Molecular Analysis of Bacterial and Fungal Communities

DNA Extraction from Bulk and Rhizosphere Soils

The CTAB (cetyl trimethyl ammonium bromide) with mannitol DNA extraction
protocol based on Fatima ef al. (2011) was used with modifications for all soil samples.
One gram of soil per sample was ground in liquid nitrogen and subsequently mixed with 2
ml extraction buffer comprising of 0.2 M Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 0.02 M Na2-EDTA (pH 8.0),
1.5 M NaCl, 0.30 M SDS (sodium dodecyl sulfate), 0.5 M mannitol and 1% CTAB.
Samples were then incubated at 65°C in water bath for 1 hr with occasional stirring
followed by centrifugation at 12,000 rpm for 15 min at 4°C. The resulting supernatants
were transferred to new tubes and added with equal volumes of 0.5 M NaCl and 0.5 M
CTAB. After incubation at room temperature for 10 min, the samples were mixed with
approximately equal volumes of chloroform:isoamyl alcohol (C:1) solution and centrifuged

again at 12,000 rpm for 15 min at 4°C. The aqueous layers were precipitated by addition


of isopropanol and by centrifugation using the same parameters in previous steps.
Recovered pellets were washed with 95% ethanol, air dried and dissolved in 20 pl TE-
RNase (mg/ml) for 1 hr at 37°C water bath. The solution was spun down at 10,000rpm
for 10 min prior to transferring 20 pl supernatant to new tubes. Extracted DNA were kept
at -20°C.

The quality and quantity of DNA samples were initially assessed through
electrophoretic run on 1.0% (wt/vol) agarose gels along with a series of lambda (4) DNA
standards. Direct nucleic acid concentration and purity (UV absorbance ratio at 260/280
nm) were determined using Epoch™ with Take3™ micro-volume plates (BioTek

Instruments Inc., Winooski, VT, USA).

PCR Amplification from Bacterial 16S rDNA Genes

All primers used in the study are presented in Table 1. A GC clamp is added to
forward primers used for the amplification of DNA that will be directly used for DGGE.
To target the V6-V8 hypervariable region of the bacterial 16S rDNA, universal primer pair
968F-GC and R1378 were used following a modified procedure of Valaskova and Baldrian
(2009). PCR was carried out in 25 1 reaction mixtures, which contained 1X PCR buffer
with MgCl, 0.1mM dNTPs, 0.1 1M forward primer, 0.1 1M reverse primer, 0.5 U Taq
polymerase, 25-50 ng template DNA (1 ng/pl) and sterile ultrapure H20 to bring to total
volume. Cycling conditions included an initial denaturation of 94°C for 2 min, followed
by 35 cycles of 92°C for 30 s (denaturation), 55°C for 1 min (annealing), and 72°C for
45 s (extension) with a final extension step at 72°C for 5 min. Obtained PCR products were

subsequently verified by electrophoresis in 1.0% (wt/vol) agarose gels with SYBR® Safe


pre-staining. Gel electrophoresis was ran with 0.5X TAE (Tris-acetate-EDTA) buffer at

100 V for 30 minutes using Mupid®-One System (Takara Bio USA, Inc.).

PCR Amplification from Fungal ITS Regions

The ITS1 region of fungal rDNA was amplified using nested PCR. The first PCR
reaction used the primer pair ITS1f and ITS4 to amplify a longer fragment comprising both
ITS1 and ITS2. To specifically amplify the ITS1 region, the product from the first reaction
was directly utilized as template in the second PCR using ITS1f-GC and ITS2 primers.

The first PCR reaction consists of 1X PCR buffer with MgClz, 0.1 mM dNTPs, 0.1
uM forward primer, 0.1 1M reverse primer, 0.5 g/ml bovine serum albumin (BSA), 0.5
U Taq polymerase and 50 ng DNA template (2 ng/pl). Sterile ultrapure H20 was added to
bring the total volume to 25 yl. The amplification cycle consisted of an initial denaturation
step of 94°C for 5 min, followed by 35 cycles of 94°C for 1 min, 50°C for 1 min, and 72°C
for 1 min. Final extension step is at 72°C for 10 min.

The second PCR reaction used 2.5 1 PCR product from the first reaction as DNA
template for a 25 pl mixture. Each reaction consisted of 1X PCR buffer with MgClz, 0.2
mM dNTPs, 0.2 1M forward primer, 0.2 1M reverse primer, 0.1 pg/ml bovine serum
albumin (BSA), 0.5 U Taq polymerase and ultrapure H20 to bring to final volume. The
cycling conditions were initial denaturation at 94°C for 5 min, 40 cycles of 94°C for 30 s,
55°C for 30 s and 72°C for 30 s, and a final extension step at 72°C for 10 min. The PCR
products were visualized using 1.5% (wt/vol) agarose gel electrophoresis using the same

conditions described for bacterial DNA.


Each DNA sample was amplified with three replications. PCR of positive controls
E. coli and F. verticillioides DNA were also included. The PCR protocols performed for
bacteria and fungi were based on recommended procedures by Valaskova and Baldrian
(2009); modified conditions were done as applicable. All PCR events were conducted using

Bio-Rad T-100™ Thermal Cycler (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Inc., Hercules, CA, USA).

Table 1. PCR primers used in the amplification of bacterial 16S rDNA and fungal ITS
regions from community DNA extracted from bulk and rhizosphere soils of mungbean.

Primer Target Sequence (5' to 3’) Reference
968F-GC* Bacterial 165 ge ceg egg cee gcc cog Bac Bee Eve BEE Ba CER Felske et al. (1996)
rDNA geg gAA CGC GAA GAA CCT TAC
R1378 Bacterial 16S.» CGG TGT GTA CAA GGC CCG GGA ACG Heuer and Smalla (1997)
rDNA
ITSIF Fungal ITS CTT GGT CAT TTA GAG GAA GTA A Gardes and Bruns (1993)
ITs4 Fungal ITS TCC TCC GCT TAT TGA TAT GC White et af. (1990)
ITSIF-GC* — Fungal ITS. ce cog ecg cge ace ce Bec Bee BCE eee ca cee Gardes and Bruns (1993)
ggg eCT TGG TCA TTT AGA GGA AGT AA
ITs2 Fungal ITS GCT GCG TTC TTC ATC GAT GC White et al. (1990)

*GC - 40 bases GC-rich nucleotide sequence (GC clamp) attached to 5' end of
primer

Denaturing Gradient Gel Electrophoresis (DGGE)

The PCR products were separated by denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis
(DGGE) using the DCode™ Universal Mutation Detection System (Bio-Rad Laboratories,
Inc., Hercules, CA, USA) (Figure 5A). Twenty microliters DNA samples were added with
10 pl 1 X BlueJuice™ gel loading dye prior to use. For bacterial community analysis, PCR
products were loaded onto 6% acrylamide/bisacrylamide (37.5:1) gel. A denaturing
gradient of 50% to 70% was used for separation of PCR amplicons. The denaturant (100%)

contained 7 M urea and 40% formamide. Electrophoresis was initially started at 100 V for


10 min and was then lowered to 60 V and ran for 17 h in a 0.5 X TAE buffer at a constant
temperature of 60°C. Post-staining was done with Gel Red nucleic acid stain for at least 1
hr in 0.5 X TAE buffer with gentle shaking. Subsequently, gels were imaged under UV
transillumination using Bio-Rad Gel Doc™ XR+ system (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Inc.,
Hercules, CA, USA) and QuantityOneTM 1-D Gel Analysis Software.

Fungal community banding profiles were obtained following DGGE protocol as
done for bacteria with modifications in gel specifications and running conditions. DNA
samples were loaded onto 8% acrylamide/bisacrylamide gels with a linear gradient of 20%
to 45%. Additionally, the DGGE system was set at 50 V with a run time of 19 h.

Prominent bands from the DGGE profiles were excised for sequence analysis.
Excision was done under UV transillumination (Figure 5B) using sterile forceps. Excised
bands were placed in 50 pl sterile ultrapure H2O, macerated, and centrifuged for 1 min.
After incubation in 37°C water bath for 30 min, the resulting DNA were kept at -20°C prior

to re-amplification and sequencing.

Figure 5. DGGE set-up (A) and gel viewing under UV transillumination (B).


Analysis of DGGE Profiles

DGGE profiles were examined through digital image analysis using BioNumerics
7.6 Software (Applied Maths, Kortrijk, Belgium) following the manufacturer’s
instructions. Band detection was done by using the band-search algorithm and following
background subtraction. Manual verification of undetected bands and removal of uncertain
identifications were made for every gel image processing. Banding profiles were
normalized using a known species standard as reference for inter-gel comparisons.
Analyses of community fingerprints through clustering, principal components analysis
(PCA), and calculation of diversity index for each gel track were all proceeded with the

software.

Clustering and Principal Components Analysis (PCA)

Multivariate analyses were applied to DGGE data. Similarities among the banding
patterns of the bacterial and fungal communities were analyzed using the Dice coefficient.
The band-based coefficient was used along with a band matching tolerance of 1.0% to
produce similarity matrices. To convert the matrices to dendrograms, the unweighted pair
group method with arithmetic means (UPGMA) clustering algorithm was utilized.
Cophenetic correlations were employed to express consistency of dendrogram sub-clusters.
DGGE profiles were further analyzed through principal components analysis (PCA) to
show the spread of entries according to relatedness. Band-matching was done as

prerequisite for construction of PCA plots.


Diversity Index

The structural diversity of the microbial communities was analyzed through
calculation of Shannon diversity index, H (Shannon and Weaver, 1963) for every gel lane
by means of a script provided in BioNumerics (Applied Maths 2016a). Results were
corroborated through manual computation using exported densitometric curves data of

individual lanes. The Shannon diversity index (Hs) was calculated as:

where n is the total number of bands in the profile, hi is the intensity of the individual band,
and H is the total intensity of all bands in a profile. Average diversity indices per
experimental variable were compared for differences. To determine which factors are

significant sources of variation, F-test using ANOVA at 5% level of significance was used.

Sequence Analysis of Bacterial 16S rDNA and Fungal ITS Regions

Excised DNA bands were re-amplified using primer sets without the GC-clamp;
968F-R1378 and ITSIf-ITS2 were used for bacterial and fungal DNA amplification,
respectively. PCR products were verified as described previously prior to submission to
First BASE Laboratories (Selangor, Malaysia) for sample purification via gel extraction
and double-pass sequencing.

Consensus sequences were obtained for the forward and reverse sequences of each
DNA sample through pairwise alignments using BioEdit Sequence Alignment Editor (Hall,

1999). The nucleotide sequences from DGGE gels were compared with those from


GenBank (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/) using the BLASTN program (Altschul et al.,
1997) to obtain putative phylogenetic identities for the extracted bands. Six partial 16S
rDNA and 22 ITS region sequences were assigned with nearest phylogenetic neighbors.
Sequence matches with >90% similarity were aligned using ClustalW tool in the Molecular
Evolutionary Genetics Analysis (MEGA) software 7.0.26 (Kumar et al., 2016). The
alignment for each microbial group was then used to create bootstrapped (n = 1,000)
neighbor joining trees. Methanobacterium oryzae and Corallochytrium limacisporum were

used as outgroup for bacterial and fungal phylogenies, respectively.

CHAPTER 4

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Soil Preparation and Physico-chemical Properties

Soil samples for both physico-chemical and molecular analyses were prepared
using the approach of forming composite samples. Given the inherent heterogenous nature
of soils, several samples are typically collected from different points and homogenized to
form a larger quantity of composite soil sample. This method attempts to attain good
representation of the site (Nakatsu, 2007). Soil physico-chemical analyses of the
experimental site in Tranca, Bay, Laguna are presented in Table 2. Parameters measured
from replicate field plots generally show no significant discrepancies supporting that there
is minimal variation in the soil conditions between the adjacent replicate plots. As such,
variations that may observed in the soil microbial community of mungbean can be chiefly

correlated with the imposed variables of mungbean genotypes and growth stages.

DNA Extraction and PCR Amplification

The total microbial community DNA extracted from bulk soil and rhizosphere
samples (Appendix A) were of sufficient molecular weight and purity (Appendix B) for
successful amplification of 16S rDNA and ITS fragments. Partial 16S rDNA fragments for

bacteria were obtained through direct PCR amplification whereas fungal ITS fragments


were obtained through nested PCR. Positive controls E. coli and F. verticillioides DNA
were used to verify the efficacy of the PCR mixture and cycling parameters.

Direct PCR procedure for bacterial DNA amplification involved the use of
universal primers 968F-GC and R1378 which have been successfully used in analysis of
bacterial communities by PCR-DGGE (Duineveld er al., 2001; Hernesmaa et al., 2005;
Brons and Elsas, 2008). The hypervariable (V) regions V6 to V8 of the 16S rDNA are
amplified with the primers; the V6 region, in particular, has the highest phylogenetic
variability among the nine hypervariable regions in bacterial 16S rRNA genes (Heuer et
al., 1999). As such, it is expected to allow significant access into the study of genetic
profiles of bacterial communities (Brons and van Elsas, 2008). The target fragment has a
size of approximately 430 bp (Yu and Morrison, 2004), which was observed in all PCR
amplicons prepared in triplicates (Appendix C-1 to C-2). The amplified region corresponds
to positions 968 to 1378/1401 in the 16S rDNA of E. coli.

A nested PCR approach was used for fungal community analysis to improve
specificity and sensitivity of PCR for DGGE (Muyzer, 1993). The first round of PCR was
performed using the pair of forward primer ITS] f and reverse primer ITS4, which amplifies
a fragment comprising of non-coding ITS1 and ITS2, and the 5.8S coding sequence in the
rDNA region of fungi (White er al., 1990). The conjunct use of these markers specifically
target fungal templates from mixed community DNA samples (Anderson et al., 2003)
where the ratio of fungal DNA to non-fungal DNA may be low. The first PCR amplicons,
which exhibit considerable size variability of 420 to 825 bp (Manter and Vivanco, 2007),

were then directly used as template for subsequent PCR. In the second round of PCR,


ITS1f-GC and ITS2 were used to specifically amplify the ITS1 region. The use of these
primers in PCR-DGGE have been shown to effectively estimate soil fungal diversity
(Anderson et al., 2003; Artz et al., 2007). Amplicons obtained were found to have small

variations in size (Appendix C-3 to C-4) at more or less 300 bp (Liu et al., 2015).

Table 2. Physico-chemical analyses of soil from Tranca, Bay, Laguna experiment site.

Parameters Plot A Plot B
pH 6.1 6.0
Moisture content (%) 38.96 33.28
Organic matter (%) 2.93 2.93
K (ppm) 0.2953 0.2752
Ca (meq/100g) 5.000 4.878
Mg (meq/100g) 0.789 1.014

Analysis of Bacterial and Fungal DGGE Profiles

It is recognized that selection of DNA extraction methods, primers and PCR
technique may introduce bias and thus, influence PCR-DGGE band profiles. In order to
minimize potential impacts of the processes used in the current study, protocols adapted
from previous researches were tested and optimized for applicability, and for
reproducibility of results.

Molecular community fingerprints were prepared with three replications for each
sampling event. The obtained DGGE profile for each soil sample represents its community
structure. Upon visual inspection, DGGE profiles showed relatively little variation among
the replicates for each sampling time (Appendix D). This suggests good reproducibility of

the PCR amplification and DGGE procedures. The approximate number of populations


and their relative abundance are represented respectively by individual bands and band
intensity. DGGE profiles were subjected to automated band detection to avoid potential
biases associated with manual examination. Community fingerprints were analyzed as
affected by plant growth, mungbean genotype, rhizosphere effect, and by comparing

between bacterial and fungal communities through multivariate and diversity analyses.

Community Shifts Across Plant Growth

Initial inspection of bacterial DGGE profiles revealed relatively uniform patterns
between flowering and physiological maturity samples (Figure 6A). The occurrence of
dominant bands and dense array of faint bands among samples in both stages showed
substantial resemblance.

In order to extract more information from the DGGE profiles, two types of
multivariate analysis were applied. Multivariate analysis is a technique that integrates
different data from a given a sample, and infers relationships and interactions of factors
(Andreote et al., 2009). Firstly, the clustering approach, which is based on correlation of
densitometric curves, was used to demonstrate similarities in the data; the results of which
are presented in the form of hierarchal structures (Gafan et al., 2005). Additionally,
principal components analysis (PCA) was employed as ordination method that arranges
entries along axes on the basis of species composition data. (Andreote et al., 2009). The
technique generates a diagram where entries are spread according to their relatedness
(Applied Maths, 2016b); and thus, aids in determining the main sources of variation

observed between profiles (Wilbur et al., 2002).


Flowering Stage Physiological maturity
A Bulk soil Rhizosphere Bulk soil Rhizosphere
Plot A Plot 8 Plot A Plot B Plot A Plot B Plot A Plot 8
CA B AB31 P3 P7 AG31 P3 7 AB31 P3 P7 AB31P3 —P7 PC A B ABB1 P3 P7 AB31 P32 P7 AB31 PI PT ABI1 PI PT

{Br

| Wu iF W GSRRsmeeeeres
Hi

ry
" He it et et Ps
heh
Fl 2 FAFA FS FG FP FB FO FIO FAL FI P1 P2 P3. PA PS PG PY PB PO PIO PI P12
B Flowering Stage Physiological maturity
Bulk soil Rhiosphere Bulk soil Rhizosphere
Plot A Plot 8 Plot A Plot 8 Plot A Plot 8 Plot A Plot
PC A B ABS P3 P7 ABSI P3 P7 ABI P3 PY ABI P3 P7 PC A 6 ABSIP3 P7 ABSI PS P7 ABBIP3 P7 ABI PS P7
Tape
be
i] -
mo
= a
roves oo ee oe moked EP
== 525 2. = i ae
- — o> Goad oh ahr | — one (FO

Fl FS Fa FS FGF? FB FO FIO FA FID PL P2 P3 Pa PS PG P7 PB PO PIO PII P12

Figure 6. DGGE profiles of soil bacterial and fungal communities of mungbean. (A) DGGE
band profiles of V6 to V8 hypervariable regions of bacterial 16S rDNA amplified from
total genomic DNA extracted from bulk soil and rhizospheres of mungbean. The DGGE
image represents a 50 to 70% denaturant gradient. (B) DGGE band profiles of fungal ITS1
region amplified from total genomic DNA extracted from bulk soil and rhizospheres of
mungbean. The DGGE image represents a 20 to 45% denaturant gradient. Numbered labels
indicate sample name of excised bands for sequencing. Amplified 16S rDNA from E. coli
and ITS1 region from F. verticillioides were used for positive control (PC) markers for
bacterial and fungal profiles, respectively.


In comparison with initial inspection, clustering provided an estimate of the
similarities, and therefore, differences between community fingerprints. These similarities
were measured by the Dice coefficient based upon common and different bands. UPGMA
analysis of combined data sets revealed that bacterial DGGE profiles were clustered based
on plant growth stage (Figure 7A). Community fingerprints from pre-sowing, which were
included as reference, were situated between the two groups although these were clustered
with physiological maturity samples. DGGE profiles between flowering and physiological
maturity stages have approximately 65% similarity. This observation indicates that there
was a shift in bacterial community structure during plant growth. A closer examination
through clustering of individual factors (Figure 8) revealed a distinct clustering between
the two growth stages for bulk soil DGGE profiles (Figure 8C); the same can be observed
for DGGE profiles from Plot A samples (Figure 8E). PCA of combined data sets for
bacteria (Figure 10A) and of individual factors (Figure 11C to 11F) corroborates this
finding. Generally, two groupings among the PCA plots can be ascertained and this is
attributed to different sampling time.

Fungal DGGE profiles were significantly different from those of bacteria; the
occurrence of both dominant and faint bands were more variable among bulk and
rhizosphere samples, between the two plant growth stages, and between replicates (Figure
6B). Additionally, there appears to be more dominant populations particularly among
physiological maturity community fingerprints. Clustering results (Figure 7B) provide
estimation of how variable fungal DGGE profiles are over those of bacteria. Fungal DGGE

profiles have a lower similarity of ~50% and 60% among flowering and physiological


maturity samples, respectively. Whereas, bacterial DGGE profiles (Figure 7A) have
approximately 65% and 82% similarity for the two successive sampling events.

Change in the community fingerprints during plant development were also
observed for fungi although the clustering apart of DGGE profiles between the growth
stages are not as cohesive compared to that of bacteria. The collection of physiological
maturity profiles are located between those of flowering stage samples. There was a 50-
65% similarity among profiles between the two growth stages. Dendrograms concentrated
on soil environment (Figure 9C and 9D) showed more distinguishable clustering of DGGE
profiles between the growth stages. For Plot A and Plot B dendrograms (Figure 9E and
9F), the factor to which clustering can be attributed to was inconsistent. It appears that in
Plot A, clustering is more influenced by type of soil sample while in Plot B, both growth
stage and soil environment may be taken into account. PCA of total fungal (Figure 10B)
and bulk soil and rhizosphere (Figure 12C and 12D) fingerprints show grouping of entries
can be generally ascribed to growth stage although other subset plots do not project

apparent groupings (Figure 12E and 12F).


BB B-PM.AGs1
B-bu-8-PMP7
BBLAPMPS
B-BuAPM-PT
Bove PMPs
BBL APM.ARS1
BRNE-PMABSI
BRRBPMPT
BRDA-PMPS.
BRHA-PMPT
B-RDAPMABII
BRRBPMPS
Pre-sovang (A-16S)
Pre-sowing (8-16S)
BRHA-FL-AGS1
BRDAFLPS
BRAFLPT
BBE BLAST
BBLBFLPS
BBUAFLAGIT
BBEAFLPT
BBUBFLPT
BBLAFLES
BADE FLPS
BARDBL?
BRNBFL-ABIS

FeRnLFL ABDI
F-RMBFLPT
F-BUASL-ABSI
FeeuAFLS
FeevAFLPT
FeuBFLPS
F-BuB-FLAS
FeuerLe?
Feu .PMPS

1 reveemasst
F-ouBPMPT
F-BL-APMPS
F-eVAPMABS
F-BuAPMP7
Pre-sowing (B-ITS).
F-RRBPMARSH
Pre-soving (MT).
FRnBPMPS
FRNAPMPS
FRDAPILP?
FRMBPMPT
F-RNBFLPS
FRNAPMABS
PRRASL ABS
F-RDAFLPS
F-RDAFLPT

Figure 7. Clustering analyses for combined data sets of bacterial 16S rDNA (A) and fungal
ITS (B) DGGE profiles. Dendrograms represent the percent similarity of banding patterns
based on unweighted pair group method with arithmethic mean (UPGMA) cluster analysis.
Estimates of the reproducibility of each subcluster are represented by cophenetic
correlations shown at the nodes of the dendrogram. The sample IDs are shown to the right
of the DGGE image: B, bacteria; F, fungi; Bu, bulk soil; Rh, rhizosphere; A, plot A; B,
plot B; FL, flowering; PM, physiological maturity; A831, Acc A831; P3, Pag-asa 3; P7,
Pag-asa 7.


A. Mungbean flowering B. Mungbean physiological maturity
70 80 90 100 go. 84 88 92 96 100
herhaener-nlenchnabnenboperbann!
B-RH-A-FL- 1B-Bu-B-PM-AB31
Ban,

BRHAFL
1 B-Bu-B-FL.AGS1
1 B-Bu-B-FLPS
ee i
| BBUAFLPT =|BRDBPMABD!
| B-BUBFLPT BADE PPT
m1 B-BUA-FL-PS B-RHAPM-PS
B-RHEFL-ASSI | B.Rh-APM.P7
Pre-sowing (A-16S) B-RH-A-PM-AB3I
Pre-sowing (8-168) BRHB-PMPS
BARN BFLPS Pre-sowing (A-16S)
BRHBFLPT Pre-sowing (B-16S)
D. Rhizosphere soil
100 70 80 90 100
Peer sUUD\- SUD OOOO VSUUTODURS SURE TEES

=| 8-Bu-B-PM-AB31
| 8-8u-B-PMPT
BBUAPMP3
B-Bu-APMP7

B-Rh-B-PM.AB31
Te.RhB-PMP7

Boue-PMPS 04 e-RhA-PM-ABSI
=== B-BU-APMABSI =18-Rh-B-PMPS
Presowing (A168) Pre-sowng (A-165)
Pre-sowing (B-16S) Pre-sowing (B-16S)
=| 0481-0031 eRnorira
BBUBFLPa BRNGFLPT
5.bu “A-FL-ABS1 B-RDA-FL-AB31
He.5u.a FL-P7 B-RhA-FL-P3
| B-Bu-B-FL-P7 B-RH-A-FL-P7
V.Bu-AFL-PS B-RRB-FLA31
E. PlotA F, Plot B
70 80 90 100 LC) 80 90 100
30 90 Se EunNaDeR SER
J 8-Rh-A-PM-P3 ' B-Bu-B-PM-A831

18-Rh-A-PM-P7
109 9 -Rh-A-PM-ABBL
1Pre-sowing (A-165)
Pre-sowing (B-165)
B-Bu-A-PM-P3

B-Bu-A-PM-P7 Pre- sowing (A-168)
Bu-A-PM-AB31 Pre-sowing (8-165)
b-Bu-A-FLABSL BUR FL ARS

B.Bu-B-FL-PS
8-Bu-B-FL.P7
B-RHBFLPS
B-RNB-FLP7
O-RN-B-FL.AS31

te Bu-A-FL-P7
1B-Bu-A-FL-P3
B-Rh-A-FL-AB31

Figure 8. Clustering analyses of bacterial 16S rDNA DGGE profiles based on individual
factors of soil sampling time, soil environment and source plot. Scale denotes percent
similarity of banding patterns and numbers at the nodes of dendrograms represent

cophenetic correlations.


A. Mungbean flowering B. Mungbean physiological maturity
60, 70 80 90 100 60. 70 80 90 100

FRDBFLABS

Pre-sowing (ATS)
Pre-sowmng (BTS),
FARDAFLAGSI
F-RDAFLPS

C. Bulk soil

F.Bu-8-PMA8a1
F.Bu-BPMPT
FBUAPMPS
F-BU-APMAGST
F.BuAPMPT
Pre-sowng (ATS)
Pre-sowing (B:TS).

100 60 70 80 90 100
F-Bu-APM-AB31 Pre-sowing (BATS)
F-Bu-APMPT F-RDB-PMAS
F-Bu-APMPS Pre-sowing (ATS),
Vp-Bu.AFL-A8St F-RB-PMPS
IF-BUAFLPS F-BUB-PMABSI
SSS F-BU-AFL-PT F-BUB-PMP7
Pre-sowing (ATS),
Pre-sowing (B-ITS).
F-RAPMPS
F-RRAPMP?
F-RhAPM-ABSI
FRDAFLABS
FARRAFLPS
F-RAFLPT

F-RNB-FLPT
FRNBFLPS

Figure 9. Clustering analyses of fungal ITS DGGE profiles based on individual factors of
soil sampling time, soil environment and source plot. Scale denotes percent similarity of
banding patterns and numbers at the nodes of dendrograms represent cophenetic
correlations.

4s

A B
F7@ Fle Z
F3 \
3004 Pie sos F90. ~
an Re =
2 Foe) Fl P2
2° seoa aft
nepal F4 Be FooFi2 <P3, FB |
F5 oe F6 | oq Ph ee? Fae, i
vA Pa P3 ©, By Pa de Ps.
° alien ong Plo} GF
PSA °F: © Flb 8
Pa grr Ps Seoa if opi
104 11 PF 2008
©s19 PS “P12 p10 ba
aeoa P10 1208 1005
al ° Seod
° °
Py x 120s
eos 1208 2005

Figure 10. Principal component analysis (PCA) of all combined data sets for bacterial (A)
and for fungal (B) PCR-DGGE profiles. Entries are labeled according to order in gel lanes
based on Figure 6; flowering and physiological maturity samples are represented by F and
P, respectively; PSA and PSB are pre-sowing samples from the replicate plots.


A. Mungbean flowering B. Mungbean physiological maturity

E. PlotA F, Plot B

Figure 11. Principal components analysis (PCA) of bacterial 16S community PCR-DGGE
profiles according to plant growth stage (A,B), soil environment (C,D) and source plot
GF).


A. Mungbean flowering B. Mungbean physiological maturity

 Pag-asa 3
Pag-asa 7
mPsB
PSA

Figure 12. Principal components analysis (PCA) of fungal ITS1 community PCR-DGGE
profiles according to plant growth stage (A, B), soil environment (C,D) and source plot
GF).


Genotype Effect

The different plant genotypes based on drought tolerance does not appear to have
apparent effects on soil bacterial community compositions. Since it has already been
determined that bulk soil DGGE profiles cluster separately from those of rhizosphere,
inspection was narrowed down on rhizosphere DGGE profiles. It was observed that
community fingerprints of same genotypes from replicate plots do not cluster together
(Figure 8D). Higher similarities can be observed among different genotypes from the same
plot in comparison to same genotypes from different plots. This was consistent in both
flowering and physiological maturity stages. Furthermore, PCA did not exhibit close
relatedness between entries of the same plant genotype. It remains that distribution was
more affected by growth stage while grouping within DGGE profiles from the same
sampling event was attributed to source plot (Figure 11D). Observations from bacterial
clustering were similar to rhizosphere fungal DGGE profiles (Figure 9D). PCA for fungal
rhizosphere entries also did not display close distribution between entries of the same plant

genotype (Figure 12D).

Rhizosphere Effect

Dendrogram for each growth stage showed that rhizosphere bacterial DGGE
profiles tend to group separately from the corresponding bulk soil profiles (Figure 8A and
8B). Although flowering stage samples exhibited considerable range in variation (0 to
35%) among rhizosphere profiles, cluster of bulk soil samples was intact with a minimum
of ~84% similarity. Physiological maturity profiles yielded complete separation between

the two soil environments with a difference of almost 20%. Additionally, PCA (Figures


11A and 11B) expressed consistent findings. These observations suggest that there were
distinguishable rhizosphere effects on the bacterial community compositions.

DGGE profiles among fungal rhizosphere communities did not distinctly cluster
together in both growth stages (Figures 9A and 9B). Nevertheless, bulk soil DGGE profiles
were still observed to generally collect together. Differences between bulk soil and
rhizosphere profiles ranged from 30-46% at flowering stage and 33-40% at physiological
maturity. The grouping of fungal bulk soil communities was only clearly observed in subset
PCA for flowering stage (Figure 12A). Hence, it can be suggested that there was still some
rhizosphere effect in fungal communities even though it is not as significant in comparison
to that in bacterial communities.

These findings through multivariate analyses support that there were differences in
microbial populations between independent soil and rhizosphere soil. However, these types
of analysis provide more of the general picture of relatedness among soil microbial profiles.
Typically, rhizosphere effect is recognized as enrichments of certain bacterial or fungal
members in the root area compared to surrounding bulk soil. While it is possible to identify
bands which are not present or faint in bulk soils but became present or prominent in
corresponding rhizospheres, simple visual inspection is not sufficient and has potential
biases. Correspondingly, rhizosphere effect would also be further explored in terms of

microbial abundance by means of diversity index.


Bacterial and Fungal Diversity Analysis

The Shannon (H’) index was used for the estimation of community diversity. In
ecological studies, it is one of the commonly applied compound diversity measures that
inherently contains richness and evenness components (Morris et al., 2014). Typically, H’
values range between 1.5 and 3.5 (Margalef, 1972) where a greater H’ value implies greater
species diversity. H’ was calculated using densitometric curve data from band profiles and
mean values according to plant growth, genotype, soil environment and source plot were
obtained.

Figure 13 shows that there was no significant differences between the H’ computed
for bulk and rhizosphere samples although results were generally slightly lower for the
latter. This is true for nearly all mean diversity indices obtained among components of the
study. The exemption for this survey was only observed when the sampling time was taken
into consideration; there was a marginally higher H’ for both bacterial and fungal
rhizosphere communities at physiological maturity (Figure 13C and 13D) in comparison
to corresponding mean H’ in bulk soil. Moreover, the mean diversity of fungi in
rhizosphere samples at physiological maturity (3.0003) was notably higher to that of
flowering stage (2.0992). Mungbean genotypes (Figures 13E and 13F) and replicate plots
(Figures 13G and 13H) also yielded unremarkable differences in diversity.

Between microbial groups, fungal diversity was observed to be fairly higher than
bacteria in both bulk and rhizosphere soils. Mean diversity of fungi in rhizosphere soil was
particularly higher than that of bacteria (2.3036) at physiological maturity. The higher
standard deviation among mean H’ of fungal rhizosphere communities give the indication

that fungal diversity appears to be more dynamic than bacterial diversity.

A 320


=

2.00
1.60
o80

0.40
0.00

fo)

3.20
2.80
2.40
2.00
1.60
1.20
0.80
0.40
0.00

Shannon Index (H')

3.20
2.40
2.00
1.60
1.20
0.80
0.40
0.00

Shannon Index (H)

o

3.20
2.80
2.40
2.00
1.60
0.00

Shannon Index (H’)

Bacteria

Bulk

| I
22141 a 2.3036

Bulk

1 Flowering

Bulk
Acc 831

Bulk
mPlot A

Rhizosphere

Rhizosphere

Physiological maturity

pasin 2.4411 23471 2.2423

Rhizosphere

Pag-asa3 /Pag-asa 7

te) ,

Rhizosphere

= Plot B

B


Shannon Index (H)

n

Shannon Index (H)

Et

Shannon index (H)

3.60
3.20
2.00
1.60
1.20
0.80
0.40
0.00

3.60
3.20
2.80
2.00
1.60
0.80
0.40
0.00

3.60
3.20
2.80
2.00
1.60
1.20
0.40
0.00

3.60
3.20
2.40
2.00
1.60
1.20
0.80
0.00

Fungi

Bulk

Ie sgl
- e EI e

Bulk

1B Flowering

she I |
ead 72008 25193 2.4617

Bulk

Rhizosphere

Rhizosphere

Physiological maturity

Rhizosphere

WAcc831 mw Pag-asa3  Pag-asa7

Bulk
mPlot A

Rhizosphere

mw Plot B


Figure 13. Mean Shannon diversity index of soil bacterial and fungal communities obtained
for all combined data sets (A,B), and for separate factors of plant growth stage (C,D),
mungbean genotype (E.F), and source plot (G,H).


Significant Contributors to Variation in Soil Microbial Diversity

Changes in the structural diversity of soil microbial communities as a function of
plant growth stage, genotype, and soil environment were assessed using mungbean grown
in field conditions. As previously discussed, multivariate analyses have provided
indications as to which among these factors had impact on community structures. The next
approach was to corroborate these observations with statistical analysis of diversity.

F-test using ANOVA was applied to assess if measured diversity among bacterial
and fungal fingerprints (using data from Appendix E) were significantly different from
each other and therefore, to recognize what were the factors that significantly contributed
to cause these variations (Table 3). Independently, plant growth stage and source plot were
found to significantly contribute variations in bacterial diversity. More so, the interaction
between growth stage and soil environment also profoundly affects diversity (P<0.05).
Plant growth stage and soil environment were also found to significantly affect fungal
diversity, both as independent and interacting factors (Table 3). Bacterial and fungal
diversity in bulk soil lowers across plant development from flowering to physiological

maturity, whereas it increases in rhizosphere (Figure 14).


Table 3. Significant contributors to variation in Shannon diversity of bacterial and fungal
DGGE profiles determined through F-test using ANOVA.

Source P-value > F-value
Bacteria Fungi
Source plot 0.0141* 0.3837
Mungbean genotype 0.8118 0.5536
Soil environment 0.2626 —-0.0378°"
Mungbean genotype* Soil environment 0.6764 0.94
Growth stage 0.0219* — 0.0034°°
Mungbean genotype*Growth stage 0.6816 0.7744
Soil environment*Growth stage 0.0042** 0.0023"
Mungbean genotype*Soil environment*Growth stage 0.5919 0.8319
*Significant at 5%
**Highly significant at 5%
A Bacteria B Fungi


3.0003
2.836716667
‘09915

2.59565

ree

22328: 2.21405

Flowering Physiological Maturity Flowering Physiological Maturity

—e8ulk Soil ©—eRizosphere @—esulk Sol = © —eRhizosphere

Figure 14. Interaction between plant growth stage and soil environment affecting mean
Shannon diversity index of bacterial and fungal communities.

Soil Microbial Communities Shifts under Uncontrolled Field Conditions

This study investigated the soil microbial communities associated with mungbean
to provide baseline information on structural diversity and community shifts under natural

field conditions. In the interpretation of results, it must be considered that only predominant


microorganisms were represented by bands resolved in DGGE; the method is able to detect
only populations that are greater than 1% of the total target pool (Muyzer et al., 1993).
Furthermore, band intensities should not be taken as something that can be directly
translated to a numerical assessment as it is simply a reflection of the relative density of
different PCR products (Chandler et al., 1997) and therefore, diversity measured from
fingerprints is just an estimation. Ultimately, observations gathered from this study are
simply an initial characterization of more dominant populations rather than a
comprehensive analysis of entire bacterial and fungal communities in mungbean-grown

soil.

Bacterial Communities

Integration of multivariate and diversity analyses revealed that community shifts
occurred in rhizosphere bacterial populations across mungbean growth. Evident temporal
shifts have been previously reported for all plant species in a field study using pea, wheat
and sugar beet where bacterial rhizosphere communities were observed across five
developmental stages (Houlden et al., 2008). ). Seasonal changes were also cited in
rhizosphere bacterial communities of field-grown strawberry, oilseed rape, and potato
plants (Smalla ef a/., 2001). In another legume, both pot and field experiments using
soybean reported the same findings (Xu et al., 2009). While it was suggested that plant
growth stage was secondary to soil type in shaping the bacterial communities in soybean
rhizosphere (Xu et al., 2009), current analyses in mungbean rhizosphere present growth
stage emerging as the major factor. The shift in microbial communities across plant

developmental stages may be attributed to changes in the quality and quantity of root


exudates. Although these were not investigated in the present study, several publications
have supported that plant development significantly affects root exudates (Yang and
Crowley, 2000; Duinevald et al., 2001; Garbeva et al., 2004; Swinnen et al., 1994), which
in turn influences microbial community structures.

It was expected that bulk soil communities would be relatively stable across plant
growth stages but this was not the case. Bulk soil even exhibited greater difference in
bacterial diversity between flowering and physiological maturity stages in comparison to
rhizosphere. Inceoglu et al. (2010) similarly cited community changes over time in bulk
soil in a two-field experiment using potato while Houlden et al. (2008) reported otherwise.
Soil microbial communities may be affected by a number of factors other than root
exudates. Soil characteristics, environmental conditions and farming practices (Tian et al.,
2017; Zhao et al., 2016; Lo, 2010) may jointly contribute to their change through time.
Considering the extent of each plot in the experiment (17x17 m), soil sampling area was
largely susceptible to various environmental conditions such as irradiation, temperature
fluctuations, wind and moisture. Furthermore, it is noted that mungbean was grown during
the transition from dry to rainy season.

It is recognized that root exudates differ not only according to plant growth stage
but also according to plant species and cultivar (Rovira, 1959; Rengel, 2002; Schweitzer
et al., 2008; Micallef et al., 2009a). Study of Arabidopsis rhizosphere has demonstrated
that the rate and mechanism at which bacterial community succession progresses is
significantly dependent on plant genotype (Micallef et al., 2009b) whereas, it was
suggested that a small portion of total rhizosphere bacteria were influenced by soybean

genotype (Xu et al., 2008). However, there was no apparent genotype effect observed


among the three mungbean genotypes based on multivariate analyses. The differences in
performance among the cultivars based on their tolerance to drought may considerably
have been pronounced if these were subjected to the environmental stress. In turn, these
phenotype variations under drought conditions may potentially influence rhizosphere
microbiota to some degree. Such was the case in a recent study using four distinct rice
genotypes for drought-induced changes in soil bacterial as well as fungal and archaeal
communities. Santos-Medellin et al. (2017) reported that rice genotype influences
microbial composition in the rhizosphere; however, these effects were relatively minor and
overall impacts of drought stress on microbial compositions were consistent for the
different rice cultivars. Meanwhile, it is not firmly concluded that there was absolutely no
genotype effect. For example, a band (B2) specific to Pag-asa 7 rhizosphere was detected
at flowering stage (Table 4, Figure 6A); while it may be an indication of selection by
genotype, it wasn’t considered as definite since it was only observed from plot A replicate.
Furthermore, the technical limitation of DGGE of not being able to detect less abundant
(<1%) but potentially important members of the community may have hindered better
resolution of results. Ultimately, it is suggested that the influence of mungbean genotype
on bacterial community composition deserves a more intensive examination to obtain
better resolution on the matter.

At this point, it is evident that the rhizosphere is an area of complex interactions
between plant roots and soil that affects microorganism-driven activities (Berg and Smalla,
2009). The different compositions of root exudates are expected to elicit different responses
from bacteria, and therefore, there is selection of rhizosphere communities (Garbeva et al.,

2004). Accordingly, the rhizosphere effect describes the phenomenon that the biomass and


activity of microorganisms are enhanced as a result of root-released materials in
comparison with bulk soil (Raajmakers et al., 2009). Gomes et al. (2003) further describes
the phenomenon as a reduced diversity and an increased relative abundance of a few
populations.

Rhizosphere effect was detected in the present study; however, the degree as to how
significant this effect was cannot be stated but at most can be estimated by percentage
difference between bulk and rhizosphere fingerprints. Diversity analyses demonstrated that
there was a significant relationship between growth stage and soil environment. Bulk soil
bacterial diversity decreased as mungbean matured whereas rhizobacterial diversity
exhibited a slight increase. Even though the rhizosphere had lower diversity than bulk soil
at flowering stage and for total data sets, it does not lead to the inference that there was no
thizosphere effect. Inceoglu et al. (2010) reported that the influence of roots on bacterial
populations is still deemed present in such instances although the effect may be small or
transient. Furthermore, the presence of bands that were detected to be weak at bulk soil but
became intense at rhizosphere samples, and vice versa, provides another indication of root
influence. Previously mentioned field experiments by Smalla et al. (2001) and Inceoglu et

al. (2010) also reported rhizosphere effects.

Fungal Communities

As a response to root exudations, fungal communities in the rhizosphere also
underwent changes, albeit not as distinct as that of bacteria, during mungbean growth.
Genotype effect was also not discernible which may be ascribed to lack of manifestation

of differences of the cultivars based on drought tolerance under natural field conditions.


As for rhizosphere effect, it was also detected for fungal communities although less
apparent based on multivariate analyses. Fundamentally, plant growth and soil
environment significantly affects fungal diversity. These observations were parallel with
findings of both pot and field experiments using three soybean genotypes regarding growth
stage and genotype effect (Wang et al., 2009), and a field experiment using 2 maize
cultivars with respect to the three factors investigated (Gomes et al., 2003).

Fungal communities exhibited greater increase in relative abundance in rhizosphere
from flowering to physiological maturity compared to rhizobacteria. In contrast, Wang et
al. (2009) suggested more complex fungal community in soybean early reproductive stages
than that in later stages due to decreasing trend in DGGE band count from early to late
growth stages. Taking combined data sets into account, lower rhizosphere fungal diversity
compared to bulk soil was also observed similar to bacteria. Finally, bulk soil and
rhizosphere fungal communities were found to have high heterogeneity between replicates,
and appears to be more dynamic in comparison to bacterial communities. It is considered
that under field conditions, the experimental plots were exposed to intermittent rain and
dry intervals (Appendix F) from near flowering to physiological maturity stage. This link
may be supported by a microcosm study by Kaisermann et al. (2014), which tested the
impact of small water content fluctuations in non-extreme conditions on bacterial and
fungal community composition. They reported that there was no robust change in bacterial
community composition, molecular microbial biomass, and fungal:bacterial ratio
associated with soil water content change. In contrast, water fluctuation induced a strong
change in the fungal community structure and rapidly alternated between states

corresponding to the high and low levels of soil moisture content. Referring to previous


publications, they offered that the rapid shift could be explained by rapid hyphal tumover
and the ability of some taxa to grow even in drying periods. As such, high plasticity is
conferred to fungal communities. Moreover, the changes in community composition did
not affect metabolic performance as supported by the idea that it is maintained by

functional redundancy in non-extreme moisture conditions (Kaisserman et al., 2014).

Sequence Analysis of DGGE Bands

One of the advantages of DGGE analysis is the possibility of identifying members
of the community by extracting bands from the gels and performing sequence analysis on
re-amplified DNA. Tentative phylogenetic affiliations of six 16S rDNA gene and 22 ITS
partial sequences are presented in Table 4.

Bacterial DGGE band Bl, which became discernible among bulk soil and
rhizosphere samples at flowering stage but appears to have diminished at physiological
maturity, showed 96% similarity to Bacillus megaterium. On the other hand, the band that
became prominent at physiological maturity (band B6) was recognized as a Bacillus sp.
with a 73% similarity. Bands B3 and B6 from separate developmental stage sampling were
both found to be related to Arthrobacter sp. with 98% and 78% similarity, respectively.
Additionally, it was also observed to be dominant in both bulk and rhizosphere soils. One
band was found specific to Pag-asa 7 at flowering stage in all replicate DGGE gels; band
B2 was found related to Pseudomonas sp. with 97% similarity. This observation is
indicative of genotype effect; however, the lack of consistency in the two replicates make
it inconclusive. Band B4, which was distinctly present from pre-sowing to physiological

maturity, had the closest match to an uncultured Rhodocyclaceae clone (66%). A neighbor-


joining phylogenetic tree was constructed using DGGE band and GenBank sequences with

higher percent similarities to show the relationship among partial 16S rDNA sequences

(Figure 15A).

Table 4. Presumptive phylogenetic affiliations of bacteria and fungi present in bulk soil
and mungbean rhizosphere recovered from DGGE bands.

DGGE band ‘Closest relative? E-value % Similarity Phylogenetic assignment ‘accession mumber
Bacterial 165
sDNA DGGE
Bi Bacillus megaterium strain MER_2 0 96%  Bacilli - Bacillales ‘KT719586.1
B2 ——_Uncultured Pseudomonas sp. clone 3.14 ° 97%  Gammaproteobacteria - Pseudomonadales _DQ144425.1
B3° ——_Arthrobacter sp. strain JWp9 0 98% Actinobacteria - Micrococcales KUS97206.1
Uncultured Rhodocyclaceae bacterium clone
B4 —- FSOHPNUO7UUZF 1.00E-48 66% —_Betaproteobacteria - Rhodocyclales 11Q086737.1
BS Bacillus sp. R21 1,00E-92 73% — Bacilli- Bacillales KJ499789.1
Bob —_Arthrobacter sp. strain TWp9 4.00E-105 78% Actinobacteria - Micrococcales KUS97206.1
‘Fungal ITS
DGGE
Fi —_Uncultured fungus clone 039451958 BOOE-156 95% =~ F5386905.1
F2 —_Uncultured fungus clone 7 T00E-146 (99% =~ 3X343327.1
F3_Uncultured soil fungus clone 366 _0090 4006-133 96% 1DQ980588.1
F4 —_Laccarta laccata vas. pallidifolta voucher FF-52 400E-102 96% Basidiomycota- Agaticales ‘KFO07942.1
F5 —_Aureobasidtum sp. 3 BRO-2013 7.00E-141 98% Ascomycota - Dothideales KF367567.1
F6 Uncultured fungus clone 036427186, 2.00E-96 8% - 7x3813021
F7 —_Uncultured Psathyrella clone B17 1.00E-154 95% | Basidiomycota- Agaricales 3X135080.1
FB ‘Uncultured fungus clone 036A19053 ‘S.00E-107 9% - (3X373320.1
F9® —Uncultured Dic)mella clone 191_K2_K8_K10_ Kilov 3.00E-28 73% Ascomycota - Pleosporales KY430455.1
Fiot Uncultured Plectosphaerella clone TVD_ITS1F-ITS4_66 ‘8.00E-125 ‘98% — Ascomycota - Glomerellales KF493966.1
FUL ‘Uncultured Athelia clone B10-1 ‘S.00E-158 98% — Basidiomycota - Corticiales FM866386.1
Fi2 ‘Uncultured fungus clone 038442871 2.00E-95 9% - JX3S9671.1
F13 —_Uncultured fungus clone ZSY201307-5 SOUE-117 93% = - KX515726.1
Fla Hannaella oryzae $.00E-107 96%  Basidiomycota - Tremellales ‘KUI82505.1
FIS — Fusartum delphinotdes isolate AmEc3 4.00E-123 96% Ascomycota - Hypocreales KJ690090.1
FI6 Alternaria sp. Z39-6B 3.00E-134 97% — Ascomycota - Pleosporales HM754629.1
ria ‘Uncultured fungus clone Singleton_(216-1634_3172) 6.00E-96 N%  - F3780492.1
F18 —_Payronellaea glomerata strain D-1-6 1.00E-57 76% © Ascomycota - Pleosporales 12233321
FIS® —_Uncultured Diehmella clone PPO 100-4 6.00E-121 97% Ascomycota -Pleosporales KU245689.1
F20 ‘Uncultured eukaryote clone 163 ‘2.00E-26 9% - ‘KY690339.1
Fai Uncultured fungus clone Unisequence#16-3745_0746 4.00E-113 9% - GQ514351.1
£224 _Uncultured Peciosphoeella clone TVD TISIF-TTS4 6§ 4006-103 91% Ascomycota Glomerliles KF 493966 1.

‘2 First hit result from GenBank by BLASTN program.
bd Bands from separate sampling time (mungbean flowering and physiological maturity) returned similar phylogenetic afiliations.

DGGE band B3

Arthrobacter sp. strain JWp9

Methanobacterium oryzae strain FPI

—
0.050

B 39) DGGE band F2
94] Uncultured fungus clone F7
DGGE band FS
©" Aureobasidlum sp. 3 BRO-2013
$8 /— DGGE band F3
‘Uncultured soll fungus clone 366 0090
[— DGGE band F13
71" Uncultured fungus clone ZSY201307-5
OGGE band Fas
Fusarium delphinoldes \solate AmEc3
DGGE band F17
77 Uncultured fungus clone Singleton (216-1634 3172)
97) DGGE band F16
Alternaria sp. 219-68
L_Dcce band Fis
#91 Uncultured Didymella clone PPO 100-4
[—— DGGE band F20

94) DGGE band Fa
Laccaria laceata var. pallidifolia

*L) DGGE band F14

9" Hannaella oryzae
DGGE band F12
92 'Uncultured fungus clone 038442871
DGGE bend FB
w2l Uncultured fungus clone 036419053.
DGGE band F11

$9) DGGE band F1
Uncultured fungus clone 039A51958

@|_¢ DGGE band F7

95! Uncultured Psathyrella clone 817
DGGE band F10
DGGE bend F21
DGGE band F22
Uncultured Plectosphaerella clone
Uncultured fungus clone Unisequence 16-3745 0746
Uncultured Athella
Uncultured eukaryote clone 163,
‘#1 Corallochytrium limacisporum 142528.1,

A OGGE band B1
99 a
x, Bacilli
7 Bacillus megaterlum strain MER 2
DGGE band B2
\___{ A- Proteobacteria
Uncultured Pseudomonas sp. clone 3.14

| Actinobacteria

Ascomycota

Basidiomycota

Ascomycota

} Basidiomycota


Figure 15. Neighbor-joining tree showing the phylogenetic relationship between partial
sequences of 16S rDNA (A) and ITS (B) from DGGE bands, and retrieved sequences from
GenBank database. The major groups of putative relatives are indicated along the right side

of the figure. Bootstrap values (n = 1,000) are indicated at the nodes.


Gram-positive bacteria belonging to the Bacilli and Actinobacteria groups were
prominent populations in both bulk soil and rhizosphere of mungbean. As with a related
study using potato, Bacillus megaterium was found to be dominant in both bulk soil and
rhizospheres (Smalla et al., 2001). Bacillus species were also identified as dominant
populations in the rhizospheres of chrysanthemum (Duineveld et al., 2001), barley
(Normander and Prosser, 2000), and of grass (Felske et al., 1998). Arthrobacter species
have also been reported to occur significantly in bulk soil of potato (Smalla et al., 2001),
and in the rhizosphere DNA of chrysanthemum (Duineveld et al., 2001), maize grown in
tropical soil (Gomes et al., 2001), Medicago sativa and Chenopodium album (Schwieger
and Tebbe, 2000). These findings add to the growing evidence that gram-positive bacteria
are profoundly more dominant in the rhizosphere than previously supposed (Smalla et al.,
2001).

In comparison to DGGE profiles of bacteria, there are notably more dominant bands
of varying electrophoretic mobility in the community fingerprints of fungi (Figure 6B).
Half of the ITS sequences from flowering stage bands (F1 to F10) returned uncultured
clones as closest match. Band F7 from bulk soil was 95% similar to an uncultured
Psathyrella clone. On the other hand, bands F4, F5, F9 and F10 from rhizosphere were
assigned as Laccaria laccata var. pallidifolia (96%), Aureobasidium sp. (98%), uncultured
Didymella clone (73%) and uncultured Plectosphaerella clone (98%), respectively.
Several of the remaining bands from physiological maturity (F11 through F22) were also
found to match uncultured clones with similarities ranging from 91 to 97%. The
observation of these uncultured fungi exemplifies the presence of soil microbiota that can

only be explored through cultivation-independent methods such as DGGE. Distinct bands


from the rhizosphere were recognized to be related to uncultured Athelia clone (F11, 98%)
and Hannaellla oryzae (F14, 96%). Unfortunately, the presence of these bands in replicate
plots were inconsistent and so it cannot be affirmed that these were dominant fungal
populations in mungbean rhizosphere. Other phylogenetic affiliations that were associated
to bands from rhizosphere and bulk soils include Fusarium delphinoides (F15, 96%),
Alternaria sp. (F16, 97%), Peyronellaea glomerata (F18, 76%), and the uncultured clones
Didymella (F19, 97%) and Plectrosphaerella (F22, 91%). Among the recognized fungal
identities, the ascomycetes Didymella (Order Pleosporales) and Plectosphaerella (Order
Glomerellales) were recovered from both mungbean growth stages.

The relationship between DGGE bands and GenBank sequences are presented in
Figure 15B. Although 97% is the typical minimum level of sequence similarity for
comparative analysis of not just ITS regions (O’Brien et al., 2005) but also whole and
partial 16S rRNA sequences (Konstantinidis et al., 2006), at least 90% were still included
for examining phylogeny since E-values were considerably high. It is notable that an
uncultured eukaryote clone clustered with the outgroup Corallochytrium limacisporum,
which has been previously used for the same purpose in AMF communities in legumes
(Scheublin et al., 2004). Corallochytrium is a marine protist that possesses molecular
evidence of fungal signatures (i.e. alpha-aminoadipate reductase) and has been essential
for understanding the evolutionary origin of animals and fungi. Moreover, the eukaryote
clone (KY690339.1) from GenBank was detected from benthic sediments. It may be
reckoned the DNA amplified by ITSIf and ITS2 had portions of conserved fungal
sequences but may potentially be a eukaryote other than fungi. Essentially, dominant

members found in soil fungal communities of mungbean were found to belong to


Ascomycota and Basidiomycota. Members from the two fungal divisions have also been
found to be largely present in rhizospheres of maize (Gomes et al., 2003) and in soybean
where the ascomycete Plectosphaerella was also detected (Wang et al., 2009).

For the present study, the identification of significant microbial groups associated
with mungbean-grown soil is at its most rudimentary level. The molecular community
fingerprints obtained through PCR-DGGE represent major populations in the soil and the
less abundant but potentially valuable members are left undetected. The dense frequency
of bands in bacterial and fungal DGGE profiles, as well as the erratic patterns observed in
the latter, illustrate the complexity of highly diverse microbial communities in bulk soil

and rhizosphere of mungbean.

CHAPTER 5

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION

PCR-DGGE was used to gain insight on the structural diversity of bacterial and
fungal communities in bulk and rhizosphere soils of three mungbean genotypes cultivated
in natural field conditions. The method, in combination with multivariate and diversity
analyses, was able to reveal an overview of community structure and its dynamics.
Bacterial community changes were primarily influenced by mungbean growth. Moreover,
the community composition also considerably differed between bulk and rhizosphere soils.
Mungbean genotype did not appear to have significant selection among the predominant
populations that are within detection limits of DGGE. Hence, the effect of mungbean
genotype on less abundant or specific microorganisms under appropriate experimental
conditions deserve further investigation. Fungal communities were generally influenced by
the given factors in the same manner although plant growth and rhizosphere effects were
not as explicit in comparison to bacterial communities. Between the two microbial groups,
the fungi had more heterogeneity in community profiles and were more dynamic under
uncontrolled environmental field conditions.

Likewise, PCR-DGGE was able to provide an approximation of microbial
diversity. The trend in both bacterial and fungal diversity was that it decreased in bulk soil
while it increased in rhizosphere as the plant matured. Nevertheless, bacterial and fungal
diversity between bulk and rhizosphere soils were generally not significantly different

except for fungal diversity in the rhizosphere when only growth stage is considered


among the influencing factors. Overall, fungal diversity was found to be greater than that
of bacteria from the same soil environment.

Sequence analysis of partial 16S rDNA and ITS sequences from prominent DGGE
bands revealed that gram-positive groups Bacilli and Actinobacteria and several members
of Ascomycota and Basidiomycota are commonly present in soil bacterial and fungal
communities of mungbean, respectively.

With this, the primary advantage of DGGE, which is to process multiple samples
simultaneously in a relatively shorter time, was evident. It was effective to use as an initial
screen and for comparison of the mungbean soil microbiota especially since both bacterial
and fungal groups were taken into account. Additionally, it permitted the recognition of
dominant populations in mungbean-grown field soil. The method has its limitations,
however, where target DNA that is less than 1% of the total sample cannot be detected
especially in highly diverse environments such as soil. This matter was encountered in the
study where dense occurrence of bands make it difficult to discern discrete bands and so
the aid of a relevant software for image analysis was imperative. Other studies have
addressed this through the subsequent use of group-specific primers to gain better
resolution among members of the community. Further recommendations include the use of
polyphasic approaches ranging from traditional cultivation techniques to modern
metagenomics in order to better understand not just the structure but also functions of soil

microbial communities.

LITERATURE CITED

AHMED, Z.I, S.A. MUHAMMAD and C.A. RAUF. 2006. Effect of Rhizobium
inoculation on growth and nodule formation of green gram. International Journal
of Agriculture & Biology, 8(2): 235-237.

AHEMAD, M. and M. KIBRET. 2013. Mechanisms and applications of plant growth
promoting rhizobacteria: Current perspective. Journal of King Saud University —
Science, 26: 1-20.

ALTOVEROS, N.C. and T.H. BORROMEO. 2007. The state of the plant genetic resources
for food and agriculture of the Philippines — a country report. Department of
Agriculture. Bureau of Plant Industry.

ALTSCHUL, S.F., T.L. MADDEN and A.A. SCHAEFFER. 1997. Gapped blast and psi-
blast: a new generation of protein database search programs. Nucleic Acids Res,
25, 3389-3402.

ALZARQAA, A.A., S.S. ROUSHDY, A.A. ALDERFASI, F.A. AL-YAHYA and A.A.M.
DAWABAH. 2014. The physiological response of mungbean (Vigna radiata) to
water deficit stress and Meloidogyne javanica infection. WIT Transactions on
Ecology and the Environment, 185: 89-100.

ANDERSON, I.C., C.D. CAMPBELL and J. I. PROSSER. 2003. Diversity of fungi in
organic soils under a moorland — Scots pine (Pinus sylvestris L.) gradient.
Environmental Microbiology, 5(11): 1121-1132.

ANDREOTE, F.D., J.L. AZEVEDO and W.L. ARAUJO. 2009. Assessing the diversity of
bacterial communities associated with plants. Brazilian Journal of Microbiology,
40: 417-432.

APPLIED MATHS. 2016a. BioNumerics tutorial: Importing and processing a DGGE gel
image. Retrieved from http://download.applied-maths.com/sites/default/files/
whitepapers/Import_DGGE_gel .pdf Accessed 10 July 2017.

APPLIED MATHS. 2016b. BioNumerics tutorial: calculating a PCA and a MDS on a
fingerprint data set. Retrieved from http://download.applied-
maths.com/sites/default/files/
whitepapers/Dimensioning_techniques_fingerprints.pdf. Accessed 10 July 2017.

ARTZ, R.R.E., I.C. ANDERSON, S.J. CHAPMAN, A. HAGN, M. SCHLOTER, J.M.
POTTS and C.D. CAMPBELL. 2007. Changes in fungal community composition
in response to vegetational succession during the natural regeneration of cutover
peatlands. Microbial Ecology, 54: 508-522.


ASLAM, M., M.A. MAQBOOL, Q.U. ZAMAN, M.Z. LATIF and R.M. AHMAD.
Responses of mungbean genotypes to drought stress at early growth stages.
International Journal of Basic & Applied Sciences, 13(5): 22-25.

ASM (American Society for Microbiology). 2015. Microbial diversity research priorities
- A working document for multi-agency consideration. Retrieved from
http://www.asm.org/index.php/public-affairs-report/1 14-unknown/unknown/5046
-microbial-diversity-research-priorities-a-working-document-for-multi-agency-
consideration.

AVIDANO, L., E. GAMALERO, G. PAOLO COSSA and G. CARRARO. 2005.
Characterization of soil health in an Italian polluted site by using microorganisms
as bioindicators. Appl. Soil Ecol. 30, 21-33.

AVRDC (Asian Vegetable Research and Development Center) — The World Vegetable
Center. 2013. Making room for mungbean. Retrieved from
http://avrdc.org/making-room-for-mungbean/.

AVRDC (Asian Vegetable Researcch and Development Center) - The World Vegetable
Center. 2010. Counting on beans: mungbean improvement in Asia. UK Aid
Department of International Development. Retrieved from
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/media/57a08b 1 ced915d3cfd000b38/DFID
_impact_case_study_Mungbean_FINAL_1_.pdf.

BAIS, H.P., T.L. WEIR, L.G. PERRY, S. GILROY and J.M. VIVANCO. 2006. The role
of root exudates in rhizosphere interactions with plants and other organisms. Ann.
Rev. Plant Biol., 57:233-266.

BAKKER, M.G., D.K. MANTER, A.M. SHELLIN, T.L. WEIR and J.M. VIVANCO.
2012. Harnessing the rhizosphere microbiome through plant breeding and
agricultural management. Plant Soil, 360: 1-13.

BAREJA, B.G. 2010. List of pulses or grain legumes and their various names. Retrieved
from http://www.cropsreview.com/grain-legumes.html.

BEEBE, S. 2006. Successes and challenges in improving common bean productivity.
International Center for Tropical Agriculture (CIAT), Colombia. Retrieved from
http://www.cgiar.org/www-archive/www.cgiar.org/pdf/Beebe-%20Summary-
Challenges%20in%20Bean%20improvement.pdf.

BEGON, M., J.L. HARPER, and C.R. TOWNSEND. 1986. Ecology: Individuals,
Populations and Communities. Oxford: Blackwell Scientific Publications.

BERENDSEN, R.L., C.M.J. PIETERSE and P.A. BAKKER. 2012. The rhizosphere
microbiome and plant health. Trends Plant Sci, 17: 478-486.


BERG, G. 2009. Plant-microbe interactions promoting plant growth and_ health:
perspectives for controlled use of microorganisms in agriculture. Applied
Microbiology and Biotechnology, 84(1): 11-18.

BERG, G., C. ZACHOW, J. LOTTMANN, M. GOTZ, R. COSTA and K. SMALLA. 2005.
Impact of plant species and site on rhizosphere-associated fungi antagonistic to
Verticillium dahlia Kleb. Appl Environ Microbiol, 171: 4203-4213.

BERG, G. and K. SMALLA. 2009. Plant species and soil type cooperatively shape the
structure and function of microbial communities in the rhizosphere. FEMS
Microbiol Ecol, 68(1):1-13.

BERG, J.M., J.L. TYMOCKZKO, L. STRYER and GJ. GATTO. 2012. Biochemistry. 7"
edition. New York: W.H. Freeman and Company. pp 706-708.

BESNARD, V., M. FEDERIGHI and J. M. CAPPELIER. 2000. Development of a direct
viable count procedure for the investigation of VBNC state in Listeria
monocytogenes. Lett. Appl. Microbiol. 31, 77-81.

BEVER, J.D., P.A. SCHULTZ, A. PRINGLE and J.B. MORTON. 2001. Arbuscular
mycorrhizal fungi: More diverse than meets the eye, and the ecological tale of why.
BioScience, 51(11): 923-932.

BIRNBAUM, C., A. BISSETT, P.H. THRALL and M.R. LEISHMAN. 2014. Invasive
legumes encounter similar soil fungal communities in their non-native and native
ranges in Australia. Soil Biology & Biochemistry, 76: 210-217.

BLOEMBERG, G.V. and B.J.J. LUGTENBERG. 2001. Molecular basis of plant growth
promotion and biocontrol by rhizobacteria. Curr Opin Plant Biol, 4: 343-350.

BOLEDA, M.D., P. BRIONES, J. FARRES, L. TYFIELD and R. PI. 1996. Experimental
design: a useful tool for PCR optimization. Biotechniques, 21:134-140.

BRONS, J.K. and J.D. VAN ELSAS. 2008. Analysis of bacterial communities in soil by
use of denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis and clone libraries, as influenced by
different reverse primers. Appl Environ Microbiol, 74(9): 2712-2727.

BRYANT, S. and D.L. MANNING. 1999. Formaldehyde gel electrophoreses. In, R.
Rapley (Ed.), The nucleic acid protocols handbook. New Jersey: Humana Press Inc.

CETECIOGLU, Z., O. INCE and B. INCE. 2012. Gel electrophoresis based genetic
fingerprinting techniques on environmental ecology. Jn S. Magdeldin (Ed.) Gel
Electrophoresis — Advanced Techniques, ISBN: 978-953-51-0457-5, InTech,
Retrieved from: http://www.intechopen.com/books/gelelectrophoresis-advanced-


techniques/application-of-genetic-fingerprinting-techniques-on-
environmentalecology

CHANDLER, D.P., J.K. FREDERICKSON and F.J. Brockman. 1997. Effect of PCR
template concentration on the composition and distribution of total community 16S
rDNA clone libraries. Mol Ecol, 6:475-482.

CURTIS, T.P., W.T. SLOAN and J.W. SCANELL. 2002. Estimating prokaryotic diversity
and its limits. Proc Natl Acad Sci, USA, 99: 10494-10499.

DAKORA, F.D. and D.A. PHILLIPS. 2002. Root exudates as mediators of mineral
acquisition in low-nutrient environments. Plant Soil, 245:35-47.

DAS, S., Dash, H. R., Mangwani, N., Chakraborty, J., & Kumari, S. (2014). Understanding
molecular identification and polyphasic taxonomic approaches for genetic
relatedness and phylogenetic relationships of microorganisms. Journal of
Microbiological Methods, 103, 80-100.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mimet.2014.05.013

DELIC, D., O. STAJKOVIC-SRBINOVIC, D. KUZMANOVIC, N. RASULIC, V.
MRVIC, S. ANDJELOVIC and J. KNEZEVIC-VUKCEVIC. 2011. Effect of
bradyrhizobial inoculation on growth and seed yield of mungbean in Fluvisol and
Humofluvisol. African Journal of Microbiology Research, 5(23): 3946-3957.

DEL ROSARIO, D.A., E.T.M. OCAMPO, A.C. SUMAGUE and M.C.M. PAJE. 1992.
Adaptation of vegetable legumes to drought stress. In: Kuo CG (ed). Adaptation of
Food Crops to Temperature and Water Stress: Proceedings of an International
Symposium. Asian Vegetable Research and Development Center, 93-410: pp 360-
371.

DENISON, R.F. and E.T. KIERS. 2011. Life histories of symbiotic rhizobia and
mycorrhizal fungi. Curr Biol 21: R775-R785.

DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE, FORESTRY AND FISHERIES. 2010. Mungbean
— production guideline. South Africa: Directorate Agricultural Information
Services.

DOTANIYA, M.L. and V. MEENA. 2015. Rhizosphere effect on nutrient availability in
soil and its uptake by plants: a review. Proc Natl Acad Sci., India, Sect B Biol Sci,
85(1):1-12.

DUINEVELD, B.M., G.A. KOWALCHUK, A. KEIJZER, J.D. VAN ELSAS and J.A.
VAN VEEN. 2001. Analysis of bacterial communities in the rhizosphere of
chrysanthemum via denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis of PCR-amplified 16S
rRNA as well as DNA fragments coding for 16S rRNA. Appl Environ Microbiol,
67(1): 172-178.


DUTTA, P. and A.K. BERA. 2008. Screening of mungbean genotypes for drought
tolerance. Legume Research, 31 (2): 145-148.

ELLOUZE, W., C. HARNEL, V. VUJANOVIC, Y. GAN, S. BOUZID and M. ST-
ARNAUD. 2013. Chickpea genotypes shape the soil microbiome and affect the
establishment of the subsequent durum wheat crop in the semiarid North American
Great Plains. Soil Biology & Biochemistry, 63: 129-141.

EMMERLING, C., M. SCHLOTER, A. HARTMANN and E. KANDELER. 2002.
Functional diversity of soil organisms — a review of recent research activities in
Germany. J Plant Nutr Soil Sci, 165: 408-420.

ESCOBAR-ZEPEDA, A., A.V. DE LEON and A. SANCHEZ-FLORES. 2015. The road
to metagenomics: From microbiology to DNA sequencing technologies and
bioinformatics. Frontiers in Genetics. https://doi.org/10.3389/fgene.201 5.00348.

FATIMA, F., I. CHAUDHARY, J. ALI, S. RASTOGI and N. PATHAK. 2011. Microbial
DNA extraction from soil by different methods and its PCR amplification.
Biochem. Cell. Arch 11(1).

FELSKE, A., A. WOLTERINK, R. VAN LIS and A.D.L. AKKERMANS. 1998.
Phylogeny of the main bacterial 16S rRNA sequences in Drentse A grassland soils
(The Netherlands). App] Environ Microbiol, 64: 4950-4957.

FELSKE, A., B. ENGELEN, U. NUBEL and H. BACKHAUS. 1996. Direct ribosome
isolation from soil to extract bacterial rRNA for community analysis. Appl and
Environ Microbiol, 62:3034-3036.

FIERER, N. and R.B. JACKSON. 2006. The diversity and biogeography of soil bacterial
communities. Proc Natl Acad Sci, 103: 626-631.

GAFAN, G.P., V.S. LUCAS, G.J. ROBERTS, A. PETRIE, M. WILSON and D.A.
SPRATT. 2005. Statistical analyses of complex denaturing gradient gel
electrophoresis profiles. Journal of Clinical Microbiology, 43(8): 3971-3978.

GARDES, M. and T.D. BRUNS. 1993. ITS primers with enhanced specificity for
basidiomycetes — application to the identification of mycorrhizae and rusts. Mol
Ecol, 2:113-118.

GARBEVA, P., J.A. VAN VEEN, and J.D. VAN ELSAS. 2004. Microbial diversity in
soil: selection microbial populations by plant and soil type and implications for
disease suppressiveness. Annu Rev Phytopathol, 42:243-270.


GARBEVA, P., J.D. VAN ELSAS and J.A. VAN VEEN. 2008. Rhizosphere microbial
community and its response to plant species and soil history. Plant Soil, 302: 19-
32.

GARLAND, J. L. 1997. Analysis and interpretation of community-level physiological
profiles in microbial ecology. FEMS Microbiol. Ecol. 24:289-300.

GARLAND, J.L. 1996. Patterns of potential C source utilization by rhizosphere
communities. Soil Biol Biochem, 28: 223-230.

GARLAND, J.L. and A.L. MILLS. 1991. Classification and characterization of
heterotrophic microbial communities on the basis of patterns of community-level
sole-carbon-source utilization. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 57:2351-2359.

GEPTS, P., W.D. BEAVIS, E.C. BRUMMER, R.C. SHOEMAKER, H.T. STALKER,
N.F. WEEDEN and N.D. YOUNG. 2005. Legumes as a model plant family.
Genomics for food and feed report of the cross-legume advances through genomics
conference. Plant Physiology, 137:1228-1235.

GIRMA, G. 2015. Microbial bioremediation of some heavy metals in soils: an updated
review. Indian J Sci Res, 6(1): 147-161.

GOMES, N.C.M., H. HEUER, J. SCHONFELD, R. COSTA, L. HAGLER-MENDONCA,
and K. SMALLA. 2001. Bacterial diversity of the rhizosphere of maize (Zea mays)
grown in tropical soil studied by temperature gradient gel electrophoresis. Plant
Soil, 232: 167-180.

GOMES, N.C.M., O. FAGBOLA, R. COSTA, N.G. RUMJANEK, A. BUCHNER, L.
MENDONA-HAGLER and K. SMALLA. 2003. Dynamics of fungal communities
in bulk and maize rhizosphere soil in the tropics. Applied and Environmental
Microbiology, 69(7): 3758-3766.

GOOGLE MAPS. 2017. Tranca, Bay, Laguna. Retrieved from
https://www.google.com.ph/maps/place/14%C2%B008'22.2%22N+121%C2%B0
15'33.7%22E/@14.1375981,121.2610989,85a,35y,310.67h,74.88t/data=!3m1 !1e3
!4m6!3m5!1s0x0:0x0!7e2!8m2!3d14.1395082!4d121.2593539. Accessed 19 Sept.
2017.

GOPALAKRISHNAN, S., A. SATHAYA, R. VIJAYABHARATHI, R.K. VARSHNEY,
C.L.L. GOWDA and L. KRISHNAMURTHY. 2015. Plant growth promoting
rhizobia: challenges and opportunities. 3 Biotech, 5(4): 355-377.

GRAHAM, P.H. and C.P. VANCE. 2003. Legumes: Importance and constraints to greater
use — update on legume utilization. Plant Physiol, 131(3): 872-877.


GRAYSTON, S.J., S.Q. WANT, C.D. CAMPBELL and A.C. EDWARDS. 1998. Selective
influence of plant species on microbial diversity in the rhizosphere. Soil Biol
Biochem, 30: 369-378.

HABIBZADEH, Y. 2014. Response of mung bean plants to arbuscular mycorrhiza and
phosphorous in drought stress. International Journal of Innovation and Applied
Studies, 6(1): 14-20.

HALL, T.A. 1999. BioEdit: a user-friendly biological sequence alignment editor and
analysis program for Windows 95/98/NT. Oxford University Press. Nucleic Acids
Symposium Series (41): 95-98.

HARTMANN, A., ROTHBALLER, M., SCHMID, M. and L. HILTNER. 2008. A pioneer
in rhizosphere microbial ecology and soil bacteriology research. Plant Soil 312:7—
14.

HERITAGE, J., EVANS, E.G.V. and R.A. KILLINGTON. 1999. The microbiology of soil
and nutrient cycling. Jn: Microbiology in action. Cambridge University Press, UK.

HERNESMAA, A., K. BJORKLOF, O. KIIKKILA, H. FRITZE, K. HAAHTELA and M.
ROMANTSCHUK. 2005. Structure and function of microbial communities in the
thizosphere of Scots pine after tree-felling. Soil Biology & Biochemistry, 37: 777-
785.

HEUER, H. and K. SMALA. 1997. Application of denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis
(DGGE) and temperature gradient gel electrophoresis (TGGE) for studying soil
microbial communities. In: van Elsas J.D., Wellington E.M.H., Trevors J.T. (eds):
Modern Soil Microbiology. Marcel Dekker New York, 353-373.

HEUER, H., K. HARTUNG, G. WIELAND, I. KRAMER and K. SMALLA. 1999.
Polynucleotide probes that target a hypervariable region of 16S rRNA genes to
identify bacterial isolates corresponding to bands of community fingerprints. Appl
Environ Microbiol, 65(3): 1045-1049.

HILL, G.T., N.A. MITKOWSKI, L. ALDRICH-WOLFE, L.R. EMELE, D.D.
JURKONIE, A. FICKE, S. MALDONADO-RAMIREZ, S.T. LYNCH. And E.B.
NELSON. 2000. Methods for assessing the composition and diversity of soil
microbial communities. Applied Soil Ecology, 15: 25-36.

HIRSCH, A.M., M.R. LUM and J.A. DOWNIE. 2001. What makes the rhizobia-legume
symbiosis so special?. Plant Physiology, 127: 1484-1492.

HOFMAN-BANG, J., D. ZHENG, P. WESTERMANN, B.K. AHRING and L. RASKIN.
2003. Molecular ecology of anaerobic reactor systems. Advances in Biochemical
Engineering and Biotechnology, 81: 151-203.


HOULDEN, A., T.M. TIMMS-WILSON, M.J. DAY and M.J. BAILEY. 2008. Influence
of plant developmental stage on microbial community structure and activity in the
rhizosphere of three field crops. FEMS Microbiol Ecol, 65: 193-201.

HUNTER-CEVERA, J.C. 1998. The value of microbial diversity. Curr Opin Microbiol,
1(3): 278-285.

INCEOGLU, O., J.F. SALLES, L.V. OVERBEEK and J.D. VAN ELSAS. 2010. Effects
of plant genotype and growth stage on the betaproteobacterial communities
associated with different potato cultivars in two fields. Applied and Environmental
Microbiology, 76(11): 3675-3684.

INNES, L., P.J. HOBBS and R.D. BARDGETT. 2004. The impacts of individual plant
species on rhizosphere microbial communities in soils of different fertility. Biol
Fertil Soils, 40:7-13.

ISENBARGER, T.A., C.E. CARR, S.S. JOHNSON, M. FINNEY, G.M. CHURCH, W.
GILBERT, M.T. ZUBER and G. RUVKUN. 2008. The most conserved genome
segments for life detection on earth and other planets. Springer Science. Orig Life
Evol Biosph, DOI 10.1007/s1 1084-008-9148-z.

ISHII, K. and M. FUKUI. 2001. Optimization of annealing temperature to reduce bias
caused by a primer mismatch in multitemplate PCR. Appl Environ Microbiol, 67:
3753-3755.

ITRC EMD (Interstate Technology & Regulatory Council — Environmental Molecular
Diagnostics). 2011. Microbial fingerprinting methods. EMD Team Fact Sheet.
Accessed from
http://www. itreweb.org/documents/team_emd/Microbial_Fingerprinting_Fact_
Sheet.pdf.

JACKSON, C., E.l. RODEN and P.F. CHURCHILL. 2000. Denaturing gradient gel
electrophoresis can fail to separate 16s rDNA fragments with multiple base
differences. Molecular Biology Today, 1:49-51.

JI, K.X., F. CHI, M.F. YANG, S.H. SHEN, Y.X. JING, F.B. DAZZO and H.P. CHENG.
2010. Movement of rhizobia inside tobacco and lifestyle alternation from
endophytes to free-living rhizobia on leaves. J Microbiol Biotechnol, 20: 238-244.

JUDD, W.S., C.S. CAMPBELL, E.A. KELLOGG, P.F. STEVENS and MJ.
DONOGHUE. 2002. Plant Systematics: A Phylogenetic Approach. 2™ ed. Sinauer
Associates, Sunderland MA.

KAISER, K., B. WEMHEUER, V. KOROLKOW, F. WEMHEUER, H. NACKE, I.
SCHONING, M. SCHRUMPF and R. DANIEL. 2016. Driving forces of soil


bacterial community structure, diversity, and function in temperate grasslands and
forests. Scientific Reports, 6:33696. DOI: 10.1038/srep33696.

KAISERMANN, A., P.A. MARON, L. BEAUMELLE, and J.C. LATA. 2015. Fungal
communities are more sensitive indicators to non-extreme soil moisture variations
than bacterial communities. Applied Soil Ecology, Elsevier, 86: 158-164.

KAROW, J. 2013. Following Roche’s decision to shut down 454, customers make plans
to move to other platforms. GenomeWeb._ Retrieved from
https://www.genomeweb.com/sequencing/following-roches-decision-shut-down-
454-customers-make-plans-move-other-platform. Accessed 17 October 2017.

KAUR, R., J. KAUR and T.S. BAINS. 2017. Screening of mungbean genotypes for
drought tolerance using different water potential levels. Journal of Advanced
Agricultural Technologies, 4(2): 159-164.

KENT, A.D. and E.W. TRIPLETT. 2002. Microbial communities and their interactions in
soil and rhizosphere ecosystems. Ann. Rev. Microbiol., 56: 211-236.

KIRK, J.L., L.A. BEAUDETTE, M. HART, P. MOUTOGLIS, J.N. KLIRONOMOS, H.
LEE and J.T. TREVORS. 2004. Methods of studying soil microbial diversity.
Journal of Microbiological Methods, 58: 169-188.

KONSTANTINIDIS, K.T., A. RAMETTE and J.M. TIEDJE. 2006. The bacterial species
definition in the genomic era. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci, 361(1475):
1920-1940.

KRAMER, P.J. and J.S. BOYER. 1997. Water relations of plants and soils. Academic
Press, San Diego.

KRISHNA, K. R. 2010.Agroecosystems of South India: Nutrient Dynamics, Ecology and
Productivity. Nature; Universal Publishers. pp. 358-371.

KUMAR, A. and K.D. SHARMA. 2009. Physiological responses and dry matter
partitioning of summer mungbean (Vigna radiate L.) genotypes subjected to
drought conditions. J Agronomy & Crop Science, 195: 270-277.

KUMAR, S., G. STECHER and K. TAMURA. 2016. MEGA7: Molecular Evolutionary
Genetics Analysis version 7.0 for bigger datasets. Molecular Biology and Evolution
33:1870-1874.

LALANDE, J., R. VILLEMUR and L. DESCHENES. 2013. A new framework to
accurately quantify soil bacterial community diversity from DGGE. Microb Ecol,
66(3): 647-658.

LEAKE, J.R., D. JOHNSON, D.P. DONNELLY, G.E. MUCKLE, L. BODDY and D.J.
READ. 2004. Networks of power and influence: the role of mycorrhizal mycelium


in controlling plant communities and agroecosystem functioning. Can J Bot, 82:
1016-1045.

LEHMAN, R.M., F.S. COLWELL, D.B. RINGELBERG and D.C. WHITE. 1995.
Combined microbial community-level analyses for quality assurance of terrestrial
subsurface cores. J Microbiol Meth, 22: 263-281.

LIM, Y.W., B.K. KIM, C. KIM, H.S. JUNG, B.S. KIM, J.H. LEE and J. CHUN. 2010.
Assessment of soil fungal communities using pyrosequencing. J Microbiol, 48(3):
284-289.

LIU, J., ¥. YU, Z, CAI, M. BARTLAM and Y. WANG. 2015. Comparison of ITS and 18S
tDNA for estimating fungal diversity using PCR-DGGE. World J Microbiol
Biotechnol, 31: 1387-1395.

LO, C.C. 2010. Effect of pesticides on soil microbial community. Journal of Environmental
Science and Health, Part B, 45(5), 348-359. doi.org/10.1080/0360123 1003799804

LUGTENBERG, B. and B. KAMILOVA. 2009. Plant-growth-promoting rhizobacteria.
Annu Rev Microbiol, 63: 541-556.

MANTER, D.K. and J.M. VIVANCO. 2007. Use of the ITS primers, ITS1F and ITS4, to
characterize fungal abundance and diversity in mixed- template samples by qPCR
and length heterogeneity analysis. Journal of Microbiological Methods, 71: 7-14.

MARGALEF, R. 1972. Homage to Evelyn Hutchinson, or why is there an upper limit to
diversity. Transactions of the Connecticut Academy of Arts and Sciences, 44, 211-
235.

MARTIN, F., A. KOHLER, C. MURAT, C. VENEAULT-FOURREY and DS.
HIBBETT. 2016. Unearthing the roots of ectomycorrhizal symbioses. Nature
Reviews, 14: 760-773.

MERILES, J.M, S. VARGAS GIL, C. CONFORTO, G. FIGONI, E. LOVERA, G.J.
MARCH and C.A. GUZMAN. 2009. Soil microbial communities under different
soybean cropping systems: characterization of microbial population dynamics, soil
microbial activity, microbial biomass, and fatty acid profiles. Soil and Tillage
Research, 103(2): 271-281.

MICALLEF, S.A., M.P. SHIARIS and A. COLON-CARMONA. 2009a. Influence of
Arabidopsis thaliana accessions on rhizobacterial communities and natural
variation in root exudates. J Exp Bot, 60: 1729-42.

MICALLEF, S.A., S. CHANNER, M.P. SHIARIS and A. COLON-CARMONA. 2009b.
Plant age and genotype impact the progression of bacterial community succession
in the Arabidopsis rhizosphere. Plant Signaling & Behavior, 4(8): 777-780.


MOOLEKI, P. 2009. Benefits of including legumes in your crop rotation. Saskatchewan
Pulse Growers, Agriculture Knowledge Center.

MORGAN, J.A.W. and C. WINSTANLEY. 1997. Microbial biomarkers. In: van Elsas,
J.D., Trevors, J.T., Wellington, E.M.H. (Eds.), Modern Soil Microbiology. Marcel
Dekker, New York, pp. 331-352.

MORRIS, E.K., T. CARUSO, F. BUSCOT, M. FISCHER, C. HANCOCK, T.S. MAIER
et al. 2014. Choosing and using diversity indices: insights for ecological
applications from the German Biodiversity Exploratories. Ecol Evol, 4(18): 3514-
3524.

MORTON, F., SMITH, R.E. AND J.M. POEHLMAN. Morton, F., Smith, R.E. 1982. The
Mungbean. University of Puerto Rico; College of Agricultural Sciences.
AID/DSAN-G-0101 / US Agency for International Development.

MOUGEL, C., P. OFFRE, L. RANJARD, T. CORBERAND, E. GAMALERO et al. 2006.
Dynamic of the genetic structure of bacterial and fungal communities at different
developmental stages of Medicago truncatula Gaertn. Cv. Jemalong line J5. New
Phytol, 170: 165-175.

MUBEEN, R.B., M.D. SHAMIM, A.H. KHAN, A.K. SINGH, S.P. SINGH, R.K. YADAV
and U. SINGH. 2015. Response of mungbean (Vigna radiata L.) to Rhizobium
inoculation and growth regulators on biochemical changes and yield. Environment
& Ecology, 33(1): 105-109.

MUYZER, G., DE WAAL, E.C., and A.G. UTTERLINDEN. 1993: Profiling of complex
microbial populations by denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis analysis of
polymerase chain reaction-amplified genes coding for 16S rRNA. Appl Environ
Microbiol, 59: 695-700.

MUYZER, G. and K. SMALLA. 1998. Application of denaturing gradient gel
electrophoresis (DGGE) and temperature gradient gel electrophoresis (TGGE) in
microbial ecology. Antonie Leeuwenhoek, 73: 127-141.

MUYZER, G. 1999. DGGE/TGGE: A method for identifying genes from natural
ecosystems. Current Opinion in Microbiology. 2: 317-322.

MUYZER, G., T. BRINKHOFF, U. NUBEL, C. SANTEGOEDS, H. SCHAFER and C.
WAWER. 2004. Denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE) in microbial
ecology. In: Kowalchuk G.A., de Bruijn F.J., Head I.M., Akkermans A.D.L., van
Elsas J.D. (Eds.): Molecular Microbial Ecology Manual. Kluwer Academic
Publishers Dordrecht, 743-769.

NACKE, H., A. THURMER, A. WOLLHERR, C. WILL, L. HODAC, N. HEROLD, I.
SCHONING, M. SCHRUMPF and R. DANIEL. 2011. Pyrosequencing-Based


Assessment of Bacterial Community Structure Along Different Management Types
in German Forest and Grassland Soils. PLos ONE,  6(2).
doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0017000

NAKATSU, C.H. 2007. Soil microbial community analysis using denaturing gradient gel
electrophoresis. Soil Sci Soc Am J, 71(2): 562-571.

NARINA, S.S., S.C. PHATAK and H.L. BHARDWAJ. 2013. Chlorophyll fluorescence to
evaluate pigeonpea breeding lines and mungbean for drought tolerance. Journal of
Agricultural Science, 6(11): 238-246.

NEILSON, J.W., F.L. JORDAN and R.M. MAIER. 2013. Analysis of artifacts suggests
DGGE should not be used for quantitative diversity analysis. Journal of
Microbiological Methods, 92: 253-263.

NESME, J., W. ACHOUAK, S.N. AGATHOS, M. BAILEY, P. BALDRIAN, D.
BRUNEL, ... and P. SIMONET. 2016. Back to the future of soil metagenomics.
Frontiers in Microbiology, 7(FEB), 1-5. doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2016.00073.

NIU, Y.F., CHAI, R.S., JIN, G.L., WANG, H., TANG, C.X. and Y.S. ZHANG. 2012.
Responses of root architecture development to low phosphorus availability: a
review. Ann Bot. doi:10.1093/aob/mces285.

NORMANDER, B. and J.I. PROSSER. 2000. Bacterial origin and community composition
in the barley phytosphere as a function of habitat and presowing conditions. Appl
Environ Microbiol, 66:4372-4377.

O'BRIEN, H.E., J.L. PARRENT, J.A. JACKSON, J.M. MONCALVO and RYTAS
VILGALYS. 2005. Fungal community analysis by large-scale sequencing of
environmental samples. Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 71(9): 5544-
5550.

OCAMPO, E.T.M. and R.P. ROBLES. 2000. Drought tolerance in mungbean I. osmotic
adjustment in drought stressed mungbean. Philipp J Crop Sci, 25(1): 1-5.

OCAMPO, E.T.M. and R.P. ROBLES. 2000. Drought tolerance in mungbean II. stomatal
movement, photosynthesis and leaf water potential. Philipp J Crop Sci, 25(1): 7-15.

OROS-SICHLER, M., R. COSTA, H. HEUER and K. SMALLA. 2007. Molecular
fingerprinting techniques to analyze soil microbial communities. In Van Elsas, J.D.,
Jansson, J.K. and J.T. Trevors (Eds.), Modern soil microbiology. 2"4 Edition.
Florida: CRC Press, Taylor & Francis Group.

PAUL, E.A. and F.E. CLARK. 1996. Soil microbiology and biochemistry. Academic
Press, San Diego.


PCARRD-DOST. 2003. Mungbean. Philippine Council for Agriculture, Forestry and
Natural Resources Research and Development — Department of Science and
Technology. Retrieved from _ http://www.pcaarrd.dost.gov.ph/home/joomla/
index.php?option= com_content&task=view&id=544&Itemid=418

PEOPLES, M.B., D.F. HERRIDGE and J.K. LADHA. 1995. Biological nitrogen fixation:
an efficient source of nitrogen for sustainable agricultural production. Plant Soil
174:3-28.

POSTGATE, J. R. 1982. The Fundamentals of Nitrogen Fixation. New York, NY:
Cambridge University Press.

PRAKASH, M., B. SUNILKUMAR, G. SATHIYANARAYANAN and J.
GOKULAKRISHNAN. 2017. Screening for drought tolerance in mungbean.
Legume Research: An International Journal, 40(3): 423-428.

RAAIJMAKERS, J.M. , C.T. PAULITZ, C. STEINBERG, C. ALABOUVETTE and Y.
MOENNE-LOCCOZ. 2009. The rhizosphere: a playground and battlefield for
soilborne pathogens and beneficial microorganisms. Plant soil, DOI:
10.1007/s11104-008-9568-6.

RANAWAKE, A.L., N. DAHANAYAKA, U.G.S. AMARASINGHA, W.D.R.J.
RODRIGO and U.T.D. RODRIGO. 2011. Effect of water stress on growth and
yield of mungbean (Vigna radiata L.). Tropical Agricultural Research & Extension,
14(4).

RASTOGI, G. and R.K. SANI. 2011. Molecular techniques to assess microbial community
structure, function and dynamics in the environment. Ahmad et al. (Eds.) Jn
Microbes and Microbial Technology: Agricultural and Environmental
Applications. Springer Science+Business Media.

RELIC, B., X. PERRET, M.T. ESTRADA-GARCIA, J. KOPCINSKA., W.
GOLINOWSKI, H.B. KRISHNAN, S.G. PUEPPKE and W.J. BROUGHTON.
1994. Nod factors of Rhizobium are a key to the legume door. Mol Microbiol
13:171-178.

RENGEL, Z. 2002. Genetic control of root exudation. Plant and Soil, 245: 59-70.

RIESENFELD, C.S., P.D. SCHLOSS and J. HANDELSMAN. 2004. Metagenomics:
genomic analysis of microbial communities. Ann Rev Gen, 38: 525-552.

RILLIG, M.C. and D.L. MUMMEY. 2006. Mycorrhizas and soil structure. New Phytol,
171: 41-53.

RIVAS, R., P. GARCIA-FRAILE and E. VELAZQUEZ. 2009. Taxonomy of Bacteria
Nodulating Legumes. Microbiol Insights, 2: 51-69.


ROESCH, L.F.W., R.R. FULTHORPE, A. RIVA, G. CASELLA, A.K.M. HADWIN, A.D.
KENT, S.H. DAROUB. F.A.O. CAMARGO, W.G. FARMERIE and E.W.
TRIPLETT. 2007. Pyrosequencing enumerates and contrasts soil microbial
diversity. ISME J I: 283-290.

ROSELLO-MORA R. and R. AMANN. 2001. The species concept for prokaryotes. FEMS
Microbiol Rev, 25:39-67.

ROVIRA, A.D. 1959. Root excretions in relation to the rhizosphere effect. IV. Influence
of plant species, age of plant, light, temperature, and calcium nutrition on
exudation. Plant and Soil, 11: 53-64.

SANTOS-MEDELLIN, C., J. EDWARDS, Z. LIECHTY, B. NGUYEN and V.
SUNDARESAN. 2017. Drought stress results in a compartment-specific
restructuring of the rice root-associated microbiomes. MBio, 8(4): 1-15.
https://doi.org/10.1128/mBio.00764-17.

SAHGAL, M. and B.N. JOHRI, 2006. Taxonomy of rhizobia: current status. Current
Science, 90: 486-487.

SCHEUBLIN, T.R., K.P. RIDGWAY, J.P.W. YOUNG and M.G.A. van der HEIJDEN.
2004. Nonlegumes, legumes, and root nodules harbor different arbuscular
mycorrhizal fungal communities. Applied and Environmental Microbiology,
70(10): 6240-6246.

SCHMALENBERGER, A., F. SCHWIJEGER and C.C. TEBBE. 2001. Effect of primers
hybridizing to different evolutionarily conserved regions of the small-subunit
tRNA gene in PCR-based microbial community analyses and genetic profiling.
Appl Envrion Microbiol, 67(8): 3557-3563.

SCHNEEGURT, M., S. DORE and C. KULPA. 2003. Direct extraction of DNA from soils
for studies in microbial ecology. Current issues in molecular biology, 5(1):1-8.

SCHUBLER, A., D. SCHWARZOTT and C. WALKER. 2001. A new fungal phylum, the
Glomeromycota: phylogeny and evolution. Mycological Research, 105(12): 1413-
1421.

SCHWIEGER, F. and C.C. TEBBE. 2000. Effect of field inoculation with Sinorhizobium
meliloti L33 on the composition of bacterial communities in rhizospheres of a target
plant (Medicago sativa) and a non-target plant (Chenopodium album) — linking of
16S rRNA gene-based single-strand conformation polymorphism community
profiles to the diversity of cultivated bacteria. App! Environ. Microbiol, 66: 3556-
3565.


SCWEITZER, J.A., J.K. BAILEY, D.G. FISCHER, C.J. LEROY, E.V. LONSDORF, T.G.
WHITHAM and S.C. HART. 2008. Plant-soil microorganism interactions:
heritable relationship between plant genotype and associated so? microorganisms.
Ecology, 89(3): 773-781.

SEDZIELEWSKA, K.A. 2012. A molecular approach to characterize the arbuscular
mycorrhizal fungus, Glomus sp. AMykor isolate. Inaugural Dissertation. University
of Greifswald, Germany.

SEGOVIA, L., D. PINERO, R. PALACIOS and E. MARTINEZ-ROMERO. 1991. Genetic
structure of a soil population of nonsymbiotic Rhizobium leguminosarium. Applied
and Environmental Microbiology, 57: 426-433.

SHANMUGASUNDARAM, S., J.D.H. KEATINGE and J.A. HUGHES. 2009. The
mungbean transformation: diversifying crops, defeating malnutrition. International
Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI). IFPRI Discussion Paper 00922.

SHANNON, C.L. and W. WEAVER. 1963. The Mathematical theory of Communication.
University of Illinois Press. Urbana, IL.

SIKES, B.A., POWELL, J.R., and M.C. RILLIG. 2010. Deciphering the relative
contributions of multiple functions within plant-microbe symbioses. Ecology, 91:
1591-1597.

SIMON, C. and R. DANIEL. 2011. Metagenomic analyses: past and future trends. Appl
Environ Microbiol, 77(4):1153-1161. doi:10.1128/ aem.02345-10.

SINGH, R., P. SINGH and R. SHARMA. 2014. Microorganism as a tool of bioremediation
technology for cleaning environment: a review. Proceedings of the International
Academy of Ecology and Environmental Sciences, 4(1): 1-6.

SMALLA, K., G. WIELAND, A. BUCHNER, A. ZOCK, J. PARZY, S. KAISER, N.
ROSKOT, H. HEUER and G. BERG. 2001. Bulk and rhizosphere soil bacterial
communities studied by denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis: plant-dependent
enrichment and seasonal shifts revealed. Applied and Environmental Microbiology,
67(10): 4742-4751.

SMITH, S.E. and D.J. READ. 2008. Mycorrhizal symbiosis. p. 787. San Diego, London,
Academic Press.

SORENSEN, J. 1997. The rhizosphere as a habitat for soil microorganisms. Modern Soil
Microbiology (Van Elsas, J.D., Trevors, J.T. and Wellington, E.M.H., eds). Pp. 21-
45. Marcel Dekker Inc., New York.


SPRENT, J.I. 2010. Biological nitrogen fixation associated with angiosperms in terrestrial
ecosystems. Jn: Nutrient Acquisition by Plants: An Ecological Perspective.
Hormoz BassiriRad (Ed.). Springer Berlin Heidelberg.

SPRENT, J.I. AND E.K. JAMES. 2007. Legume evolution: where do nodules and
mycorrhizas fit in? Plant Physiology, 144: 575-581.

SUGIYAMA, A., Y. UEDA, T. ZUSHI, H. TAKASE and K. YAZAKI. 2014. Changes in
the bacterial community of soybean rhizospheres during growth in the field. PLoS
ONE, 9(6): 1-9.

SWINNEN, J., J. A.V. VEEN and R. MERCKX. 1994. 14-C pulse labeling of field-grown
spring wheat: an evaluation of its use in rhizosphere carbon budget estimations.
Soil Biol Biochem, 26: 161-170.

TATE, R.L. 2000. Soil microbiology. 2" edition. New York: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

TALBOT, N. N.D. DNA _— extraction for fungi. Retrieved from
www.exeter.ac.uk/media/universityofexeter/schoolofbiosciences/nicktalbotgroup/
documents/DNA_Extraction_for_fungi.doc. Accessed February 2017.

TEBBE, C.C. and W. VAHJEN. 1993. Interference of humic acids and DNA extracted
directly from soil in detection and transformation of recombinant DNA from
bacteria and a yeast. Appl Environ Microbiol, 59: 2657-2665.

THOMPSON, J.R., L.A. MARCELINO and M.F. POLZ. 2002. Heteroduplexes in mixed-
template amplifications: formation, consequence and elimination by reconditioning
PCR. Nucleic Acids Research, 9: 2083-2088.

THORN, G. 1997. The fungi in soil, p. 63-127. In J. D. van Elsas, J.T. Trevors, and E.M.H.
Wellington (Ed.) Modern soil microbiology. Marcel Dekker, Inc., New York, N.Y.

TIAN, Q., T. TANIGUCHI, W.Y. SHI, G. LI, N. YAMANAKA and S. DU. 2017. Land-
use types and soil chemical properties influence soil microbial communities in the
semiarid Loess Plateau region in China. Scientific Reports, 7(October 2016),
45289. https://doi.org/10.1038/srep45289.

TIEN, H.H., T.M. HIEN, M.T. SON and D. HERRIDGE. 2002. Rhizobial inoculation and
N? fixation of soybean and mungbean in the eastern region of South Vietnam. In D.
Herridge (ed) Inoculants and Nitrogen Fixation of Legumes in Vietnam. ACIAR
Proceedings 109e. pp 29-36.

TOPP, E. 2003. Bacteria in agricultural soils: diversity, role and future perspectives.
Canadian Journal of Soil Science, 83:303-309.


TORSVIK, V., J. GOKSOYR and F.L. DAAE. 1990. High diversity in DNA of soil
bacteria. Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 56(3): 782-787.

TORSVIK, V., R. SORHEIM and J. GOKSOYR. 1996. Total bacterial diversity in soil
and sediment communities — a review. Journal of Industrial Microbiology, 17: 170-
178.

TORSVIK, V. and L. OVREAS. 2002. Microbial diversity and function in soil: from genes
to ecosystems. Current Opinion in Microbiology, 5:240-245.

VALASKOVA, V. and P. BALDRIAN. 2009. Denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis as
a fingerprinting method for the analysis of soil microbial communities. Plant Soil
Environ 55(10):413-423.

VAN DER ENT, S., M. VAN HULTEN, M.J. POZO, T. CZECHOWSKI, M.K.
UDVARDI, et al. 2009. Priming of plant innate immunity by rhizobacteria and
beta-aminobutyric acid: differences and similarities in regulation. New Phytol, 183:
419-431.

VAN DER HEIJDEN, M.G.A., J.N. KLIRONOMOS, M. URSIC, P. MOUTOGLIS, R.
STREIWOLF-ENGEL, T. BOLLER, A. WIEMKEN and I.R. SANDERS. 1998.
Mycorrhizal fungal diversity determines plant biodiversity, ecosystem variability
and productivity. Nature, 396: 69-72.

VAN DER HEIJDEN, M., R. BARDGETT, and N. VAN STRAALEN. 2008. The unseen
majority: soil microbes as drivers of plant diversity and productivity in terrestrial
ecosystems. Ecology Letters, 11(3): 296-310.

WAGNER, S.C. 2011. Biological nitrogen fixation. Nature Education Knowledge,
3(10):15.

WANG, G., Y. XU, J. JIN, J. LIU, Q. ZHANG and X. LIU. 2009. Effect of soil type and
soybean genotype on fungal community in soybean rhizosphere during
reproductive growth stages. Plant Soil, 317: 135-144.

WARD, D.M., M.M. BATESON, R. WELLER and A.L. RUFF-ROBERTS. 1992.
Ribosomal RNA analysis of microorganisms as they occur in nature. Jn: Marshall,
K.C. (Ed.), Advances in Microbial Ecology. Plenum Press, New York, pp. 219-
286.

WAREMBOURG, F. R. 1997. The ‘rhizosphere-effect’: a plant strategy for plants to
exploit and colonize nutrient-limited habitats. Bocconea 7:187-194.

WHITE, T.J., T. BRUNS, S. LEE and J. TAYLOR. 1990. Amplification and direct
sequencing of fungal ribosomal RNA genes for phylogenetics. In Innins M.A.,


Gelfand D.H., Sninsky J.J., White T.J. (eds): PCR Protocols. Academic Press San
Diego, 315-322.

WILBUR, J.D., J.K. GHOSH, C.H. NAKATSU, S.M. BROUDER and R.W. DOERGE.
2002. Variable selection in high-dimensional multivariate binary data with
application to the analysis of microbial community DNA fingerprints. Biometrics,
58: 378-386.

WINDING, A. 2004. Indicators of soil bacterial diversity. In: Agricultural impacts on soil
erosion and soil biodiversity: developing indicators for policy analysis. Proceedings
of an OECD expert meeting on soil erosion and soil biodiversity indicators, 25-28
March 2003, Rome, Italy, OECD, Paris, pp 495-504.

WOESE, C.R. 1987. Bacterial evolution. Microbiol Rev, 51: 221-271.

WOESE, C.R., O. KANDLER and M.L. WHEELIS. 1990. Towards a natural system of
organisms: proposal for the domains Archaea, Bacteria, and Eucarya. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA, 87: 4576-4579.

XU, Y., G. WANG, J. JIN, J. LIU, Q. ZHANG and X. LIU. 2009. Bacterial communities
in soybean rhizosphere in response to soil type, soybean genotype, and their growth
stage. Soil Biology & Biochemistry, 41: 919-925.

YU, Z. and M. MORRISON. 2004. Comparisons of different hypervariable regions of ms
genes for use in fingerprinting of microbial communities by PCR-denaturing
gradient gel electrophoresis. Appl Environ Microbiol, 70(8): 4800-4806.

ZAHRAN, H. H. 1999. Rhizobium-legume symbiosis and nitrogen fixation under severe
conditions and in an arid climate. Microbiology and Molecular Biology Reviews,
63(4): 968-989.

ZAHRAN, H.H., M. ABDEL-FATTAH, M.M. YASSER, A.M. MAHMOUD and E.J.
BEDMAR. 2012. Diversity and environmental stress responses of rhizobial
bacteria from Egyptian grain legumes. Australian Journal of Basic and Applied
Sciences, 6(10): 571-583.

ZAK, J.C., M.R. WILLIG, D.L. MOORHEAD and H.G. WILDMAN. 1994. Functional
diversity of microbial communities: a quantitative approach. Soil Biol.
Biochem. 26:1101-1108.

ZHANG, H.L.Y., D. LI, H. XU, G. CHEN and C. ZHANG. 2009. Comparisons of different
hypervariable regions of rrs genes for fingerprinting of microbial communities in
paddy soils. Soil Biology and Biochemistry, 41: 954-968.

ZHAO, C., Y. MIAO, C. YU, L. ZHU, F. WANG, L. JIANG, D. HUI and S. WAN. 2016.
Soil microbial community composition and respiration along an experimental


precipitation gradient in a semiarid steppe. Scientific Reports, 6(1), 24317.
doi.org/10.1038/srep24317.

ZHOU, Y., H. ZHU, S. FU and Q. YAO. 2017. Variation in soil microbial community
structure associated with different legume species is greater than that associated
with different grass species. Frontiers in Microbiology, 8: 1-13.
