Pre-Service Biology Teachers’ Exposure, Understanding, Attitude, Self-Efficacy, Predisposition, Progressivist Views, and Application of Inquiry-Based Instruction

APLER J. BAINSIONG

University of the Philippines OPEN UNIVERSITY

Doctor of Philosophy in Education Major in Biology

June 2020

Abstract

This piece of work described pre-service biology teachers (PSBTs) in
terms of their exposure to inquiry-based science instruction (IBSI), and how
they were able to apply IBSI practices during teaching practicum. Moreover,
the study profiled the PSBTs according to their IBSI understanding, attitudes,
sett-efficacy, and predispositions, including their learner-centered views.
Finally, the study determined the inter-relationships among the PSBTs' IBSI
variables. Sixty-six (66) PSBTs from three teacher-education institutions in
Baguio City and Benguet participated in the study. Eight instruments were
used to gather data -Science Teachers’ Inquiry Practices Scale (STIPS),
Pedagogy of Science Testing Test - Biology Items (POSTT-B), Attitude Scale
for IBSI Use (ASIU), Inquiry-Based Science Instruction Self-efficacy Scale
(IBSISES), Test for Inquiry Pedagogy in Science — Biology (TIPS-B), Modified
Reformed Teaching Observation Protocol (mRTOP), Modified Inquiry
Teaching Self-Assessment Instrument (mITSAl), and the Educational
Philosophies Self-Assessment Instrument (EPSAI). The PSBTs lesson plans
were also analyzed to support the result on the level of IBSI application during
teaching internship. Follow-up interviews on both PSBTs and their
cooperating teachers were also conducted to supplement the quantitative results gathered from the research instruments. Descriptive statistics (mean and standard deviation) were used to
summarize data, while inferential statistics (Analysis of Variance and Tukey
HSD) were used to test for significance among means. Pearson correlation
and step-wise multiple regression procedures were employed to describe the
relationship among the PSBTs' IBSI variables. Based on the findings, the study concludes that the PSBTs were
sufficiently exposed to IBSI in all of its aspects — lesson planning and
implementation, content knowledge, and classroom culture. They possessed
a strong IBSI foundation which was built not only during their collage science
courses but also during their field study experiences and even during their
pre-college science courses. While their BSI knowledge and understanding
were both insufficient, they nevertheless hold a very positive attitude toward
the teaching approach, even regarding it as useful, interesting, and likable.
The PSBTs highly adhere to the learner-centered philosophies, specifically
constructivism and progressivism. They are highly selt-efficacious toward
IBSI specifically along classroom culture, but are moderately predisposed to
select IBSI teaching practices among other pedagogical methods and
techniques. Finally, the PSBTs were able to apply IBSI practices during
teaching internship sufficiently. As to the relationship among the variables, the
PSBTs' learner-centered views significantly correlated with their IBSI
understanding and attitude, while attitude, self-efficacy, and learner-centered
views significantly correlated with IBSI application during teaching internship.
Moreover, the PSBTs' progressivist views significantly predicted their IBSI
attitudes, and their IBSI exposure at field study was the only predictor of their IBSI self-efficacy. Meanwhile, IBSI understanding during lesson proper, and IBSI self-efficacy along classroom culture emerged as the significant
predictors of IBSI predisposition. Finally, IBS! exposure at field study, IBS!
understanding during lesson proper, overall IBSI attitudes, progressivist
views, and overall IBSI self-efficacy, significantly predicted IBSI application
during teaching internship. Of these variables, overall, IBSI self-efficacy was
the best predictor of IBSI application, followed by the PSBTs' progressivist
views. It is recommended that science professors should team up with
science education professors in further strengthening the inquiry foundations
of pre-service science students. Science education professors may
emphasize the true nature of IBSI in their science teaching methods courses.
Pre-service science teachers may be given more time to observe and
experience inquiry practices in actual classes. Furthermore, some of the
instruments used in this study could be polished so that they will effectively
measure the constructs they are intended to measure. A more direct data-
gathering procedure such as lesson plan analysis and/or actual teaching
observation is likewise recommended for future researchers who want to
duplicate this study. Moreover, syllabi and/or their laboratory manuals may
also be analyzed as to how they emphasize on IBSI. Pre-service science
teachers may also be exposed to the practices of lesson study, emphasizing
on IBSI to instill its principles and practices better. For future research, the
IBSI implementation among in-service teachers, how Filipino pre-service
teachers implement IBSI practices during the first three years of teaching, how experiences or exposure with IBSI affect pre-service and in-service science teachers’ basic and integrated science process skills and scientific literacy, among others, may be explored.

Chapter 1
INTRODUCTION

Background of the Study

The dilemma in the preparation of teachers has been on whether to
emphasize on the content or the development of pedagogical skills (Lowenberg,
2000). Today, after more than a century, people are still asking the same old
question. But decades of research on pedagogy contend that subject knowledge as
a single ingredient for good teaching is not enough. Prospective teachers must also
learn pedagogical techniques particular to the different disciplines to help them
convey information and teach skills. Knowing subject matter and translating that
knowledge to the lives of students is the key to learning (Wandberg & Rohwer,
2003).

The discussion on whether to emphasize content or pedagogy seems
especially crucial in the teaching of science (Ward, 2012), since science educators
and teachers are expected to foster in their learners the development of critical
thinking and independent learning (Reaume, 2011). Besides, the scientific literacy
goal of science education, according to the National Science Education Standards
(NSES), is laid in the hands of science teachers [National Research Council (NRC),
2012]. To be scientifically literate, one must be able to read science materials with
understanding, develop a full appreciation of where scientific information comes
from, distinguish between science and technology, and explain how science and
technology affect society (Trowbridge, Bybee, & Powell, 2000). Such abilities can be
developed if K-12 science learners have experienced the process of inquiry and

have used inquiry to learn science (NRC, 2012; Ward, 2016). With the study and

Pre-service Biology Teachers and inquiry-Based Science Instruction

use of inquiry processes, K-12 learners become more scientifically literate — i.e., they
can make sense of how the world works, and understand the scientific principles
they encounter every day.

Inquiry-based science instruction (IBSI) is a set of teaching strategies that
attempts to bring into the classroom the practices of the scientist. In IBSI, there is an
emphasis on student questioning, investigation, and problem-solving. Like real
scientists, students conduct their inquiries and investigations in the library, field sites,
or laboratory, and discuss with their colleagues, in inquiry-based classrooms
(DeBoer, 2004).

The goal of scientific literacy and the use of IBSI are the primary mandates in
the Philippine national standards for science education (Department of Education,
2012). Curriculum experts in the field support these curriculum mandates for
science education. Ogena (1998), for instance, emphasized that among other
things, science education in the K-12 program must focus on hands-on science
activities, emphasize on student research, and give attention to higher-order-thinking
skills.

Informed with these current reforms in science education, teachers must
adopt teaching and assessment strategies that develop scientific literacy among their
learners. While in-service teachers of science may be trained using inquiry-based
science instruction (IBSI), training must begin as early as during teacher-preparation.
Pre-service science teachers (PSSTs) must be exposed to such pedagogical
approaches. Researchers have found that modeling inquiry in pre-service classes
helps students move away from didactic instruction to inquiry approaches (Schwartz

& Guekwerere, cited in Martin, 2012). They must be trained in investigating

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

phenomena that can be studied scientifically, interpreting results, and making sense
of findings consistent with currently accepted scientific understanding.

There are gaps in literature that this study addresses. Little has been written
about the practice of inquiry-based instruction by science teachers in the Philippines,
despite the recommendations in science reform standards. There is a dearth of
research that documents the experiences of science teachers on the use of inquiry
and other constructivist pedagogical approaches in the Philippines. Studies on these
themes among pre-service science teachers are even scarcer. Hence, this study is
proposed.

Moreover, the few international studies on pre-service science teaching and
inquiry-based instruction documented the understanding and views about IBSI, or
their self-efficacy to teach using the approach. Still, these constructs were not linked
with the pre-service science teachers’ actual application of IBSI in their actual
student teaching experience. This gap is also addressed in this study

Another gap that this study wishes to address is whether or not pre-service
science teachers are exposed to IBSI practices during their pre-college, college, and
the teacher-observation phase of their student teaching experience. Also, this study
sheds light on the PSTs' predisposition to teach using IBS! and whether these
predispositions translate into actual application during practice teaching. This
important relationship has yet to be explored in literature. Finally, this study wishes
to explore the moderating effect of the PSSTs' educational philosophies on their self-
efficacy and predisposition to teach using IBSI, and their actual application of this

teaching approach in their teaching internship experience.

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

Statement of the Problem
This study was conducted to determine the factors that influence the pre-
service biology teachers’ (PSBTs) IBSI understanding, attitudes, self-efficacy, extent
of application of IBSI during their teaching internship experience, and their level of
IBSI predisposition. Specifically, this study was undertaken to answer the following
questions:
1. How do the following variables, taken singly, influence the PSBTs’ IBS!
self-efficacy?
a) IBSI exposure
b) IBSI understanding
c) IBS| attitudes
d) learner-centered views
2. How do the following variables, taken singly, influence the PSBTs’ extent
of application of IBSI during their teaching internship experience?
a) IBSI exposure
b) IBSI understanding
c) IBSI attitudes
d) fearer-centered views
e) IBSI self-efficacy
f) IBSI predisposition
3. How do the following variables, taken singly, influence the PSBTs’ level of
IBSI predisposition?
a) IBS| exposure
b) IBS! understanding
c) IBS! attitudes

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

d) learner-centered views
e) IBSI self-efficacy
4. How does the PSBTs' IBSI exposure influence their IBSI understanding?
5. How do the following variables, taken singly, influence the PSBTs' IBSI
attitudes?
a) IBSI exposure
b) IBSI understanding
c) learner-centered views
6. How are the following variables correlated?
a) IBSI exposure
b) IBSI understanding
c) IBS| attitudes
d) learner-centered views
f) IBSI self-efficacy
g) IBSI predisposition
h) extent of IBS! application during teaching internship
Significance of the Study
Inquiry-based learning has been a national goal for most countries for decades.
However, little is known about teachers’ (pre-service and in-service teachers alike)
views about the goals, purpose, or educational significance of IBSI. Moreover, more
research is needed as to how pre-service teachers are exposed to it, their
understanding and attitudes toward its use, their self-efficacy and predisposition to
teach using the strategy, and their application of its principles during praxis. All of
these endeavors are crucial since these pre-service science teachers are the ones
who will lead the future facilitation of scientific literacy. Few studies dealt with some

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

of the above needs, but they focus on one or two concerns. One can hardly find
studies on IBSI and Philippine pre-service science education as these studies have
been conducted mostly in foreign settings.

The prospective science teachers’ views about teaching and learning shape
their future instructional approaches. Thus, as Crawford (2007) remarked - “Itis a
vital undertaking for science education professors to explore the PST views and
make these views explicit in the context of teaching and learning.”

As one of the first studies that explore IBSI and pre-service science teachers in
the Philippines, the study contributes knowledge on how Teacher Education
Institutions (TEls) are performing their roles in instilling the principles of IBS! to their
science education students. The result of the study could impact policies and
decisions concerning the preparation of future science teachers. Some specific
policies may include the strengthening or focusing on IBSI during science teaching
methods courses, or the assignment of science major courses to instructors with
strong foundations on reformed science teaching pedagogies. It might likewise
‘strengthen the PSBTs’ understanding of IBSI if lecture and laboratory classes in their
science courses are integrated and not taken as separate courses. The practice in
the case institution is that lecture and laboratory classes are taken separately, and
sometimes taught by different teachers. Moreover, efforts must be made to
reformat traditional laboratory exercises or experiments into inquiry-based activities.
Other specific policy changes for science teacher preparation might include
mandating all science education majors to use the 5E and related lesson plan
models during teaching internship, using adherence to constructivist philosophies
and inquiry-based teaching as an additional criterion in selecting future science

teachers, emphasizing and strengthening IBS! during science methods courses,

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

providing in-service training to cooperating teachers and in-service teachers, strict
monitoring of IBSI use in cooperating schools, among others.

Itis likewise the intention of the study to develop a model that will explain the
use of inquiry-based instruction by pre-service biology teachers during their teaching
internship. Such a model may extend to the use of such a teaching strategy among
in-service teachers in Biology. Another output of the study was a curriculum model
intended for the use of pre-service science teachers in their methods of teaching
courses. Specifically, a scope and sequence and a syllabus for a course on inquiry-
based science instruction were included in the study.

Scope and Delimitation of the Study

This study involved pre-service biology teachers who are in their off-campus
practice teaching stage in three teacher training institutions in Baguio City and
Benguet, Philippines.

While reform documents also mandate inquiry instruction as a strategy among
science and mathematics teachers, the pre-service mathematics and physical
science teachers were not covered in the study. Moreover, while it may be beneficial
to observe actual classes to see how the pre-service science teachers implemented
inquiry instruction, it would be impractical as the use of such strategy is dependent
on the subject matter and the teacher's objectives for the day. With the number of
pre-service science teachers and the distance from the college to their cooperating
schools, it would be challenging to observe every lesson they would deliver. To
address this issue, the PSBTs' responses in the self-assessment questionnaires
were validated by analyzing how they delivered the various instructional events in
their lesson plans. Another limitation of the study is that it just involved three

institutions in Baguio and Benguet. It would have been more desirable to look at

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

how other institutions in different parts of the country, and those with different set-up
(such as the use of the self-contained scheme) view and apply inquiry instruction in
their teaching internship experience.

Another limitation of the study is the use of arbitrary data that were mostly
based on the PSBTs and their cooperating teachers’ and students’ potentially
subjective assessments. Hence, the primary assumption of the study is that the
above participants were honest in their assessments. This limitation was addressed
by collecting qualitative data from interviews, lesson plans, and weekly journals. The

findings of this study were thus interpreted in consideration of these constraints.

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

Chapter 2

REVIEW OF LITERATURE AND CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK

This chapter presents relevant information from research literature and
studies that provide the relevant background information needed to understand the
context of this paper. At the end of this review, the need for this study is justified to
address the gaps in knowledge. The conceptual framework of the study, the
hypotheses, and the definition of terms are also contained in this chapter.

Two Contrasting Teaching Models in Science

The various methods and strategies used in science teaching can be
classified into two broad categories: (1) the behaviorist learning model, and (2) the
constructivist-learning model (Roster, 2006).

The behaviorist model defines learning as observable changes in behavior
(Llewellyn, 2005). A behaviorist teacher breaks the curriculum into smaller pieces of
information, then evaluates how the students demonstrate their understanding of the
new knowledge. The teacher sequences learning events from simple to more
complex, which, in effect, is sending the message that learning can be predicted and
controlled. The students’ minds are seen as blank slates or empty vessels, ready to
be filled by the teacher. The learner is treated as a passive participant. Rewards
are given to the learners when their level of knowledge becomes similar to that of the
teacher, or any other authority (Leonard, 2000). The behaviorist teaching model is
teacher-centered, traditional, and predominantly lecture-based. Such a learning
model has dominated educational institutions for the past century (Llewellyn, 2005;

Roster, 2006).

Pre-service Biology Teachers and inquiry-Based Science Instruction

In stark contrast to the behaviorist learning model is the constructivist learning
model. Advocates of constructivism assert that the teacher cannot provide
knowledge. Instead, knowledge is something directly experienced, acted upon,
tested, or revised by the learner (Papert & Harel, as cited in Wandberg & Rohwer,
2003). Constructivism in the classroom implies that the learners are responsible for
their learning, and the teacher is responsible for creating an appropriate learning
environment (McNergney & Herbert, 2001; Wandberg & Rohwer, 2003).

A constructivist classroom is described by Bredekam and Copple (as cited in

Wandberg & Rohwer, 2003) in the following words:

“In the constructivist classroom, the learners are presented
with opportunities to build on prior knowledge and understanding to
construct new knowledge and understanding from authentic
experience. Also, the students are allowed to confront problems full
of meaning because of their real-life context. To solve these
authentic problems, students are encouraged to explore possibilities,
invent alternative solutions, collaborate with other students, try out
ideas and hypotheses, revise their thinking, and finally, present the
best solution they can derive.”

Constructivist approaches permeated much of educational practice in the
1970s, but it became particularly popular in science education (Minner, Levey &
Century, 2010). Constructivism occupied the centerpiece in the current reform
efforts in science education, and this has resulted in the shift in the focus of teaching
and learning from how students learn science to how teachers learn to teach science
in teacher education programs (Taskin-Can, 2011).

The principles of constructivism as applied to science and mathematics
teaching are outlined by Ishii (2003) as follows: (1) learning must start with the
issues around which students are actively trying to construct meaning; (2) learning

Process focuses on primary concepts, not isolated facts; and (3) the purpose of

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science instruction

learning is for an individual to construct his or her meaning, not just memorize the
correct answers and regurgitate someone else's meaning.

Constructivism comes in two forms — cognitive constructivism and social
constructivism. The former, which was developed by Jean Piaget, believed that
children learn through personal interactions with physical events and objects in their
daily lives. When applied to teaching and learning, cognitive constructivists
recommend the provision of opportunities and practical activities that challenge
learners’ prior conceptions and encourage them to recognize their personal beliefs
and theories (Piaget, as cited in Holloway, 2015).

Social constructivism, on the other hand, emphasizes the importance of
culture in the understanding of what is occurring in society and then constructing
knowledge based on this understanding (Kim, 2001). According to Vygotsky (as
cited in Holloway, 2015), who is the originator of the learning theory, learning is
neither a purely internal process nor a passive shaping of behavior. It is a social
construct, mediated by language via social discourse. In Vygotsky's words, “social
interaction should be between an expert and the student and that the teacher is
present to help students construct answers for themselves.” The teacher models the
disposition on how to view objects and events in new and imaginative ways, but
he/she should neither dispense knowledge directly nor act as a mere observer
(Prawat, 1996). In a nutshell, social constructivism tenets that people create
meaning through their interactions with each other and with the objects in their
environment (Prawat, 1996).

There are two main assumptions in the social constructivist theory. These are

(a) knowledge is constructed by people who are active participants in the process,

Pre-service Biology Teachers and inquiry-Based Science Instruction

and (b) social interactions within an individual or between individuals play an
important role in constructing knowledge (Ferguson, 2007).

The teachers’ use of either behaviorist or constructivist teaching models is
largely dependent on their beliefs about teaching and learning. These held beliefs
about the purpose of education, what should be taught and how it should be taught,
the role of the teacher and the learners, all constitute a teacher's educational
philosophy (Arends, Winitzky, & Tannenbaum, 2001).

Educational philosophies can be grouped into two broad categories — teacher-
centered or learner-centered. The teacher-centered educational philosophies
include perennialism, essentialism, and behaviorism. On the opposite side of the
spectrum are the predominantly learner-centered philosophies of progressivism,
social reconstructionism, and constructivism (Sadker & Sadker, 2003),

This study determines whether the respondents’ educational philosophies
moderate the influence of their IBS! background, understanding, and attitudes on
their self-efficacy and predisposition to teach and apply the methods of inquiry in
their teaching.

Constructivism and Inquiry-Based Instruction

Constructivism and inquiry-based learning are similar in that both stress that
learning is a social process and learning occurs when people are engaged in social
activities (Bybee & Fuchs, 2006; Kim, 2001; Prawat, 1996). Llewellyn (2002) even
posits that the most popular way to teach in a constructivist manner is through a
Process called inquiry teaching. Inquiry-oriented teaching is often contrasted with
more traditional behaviorism-inspired expository methods, and it reflects the
Constructivist model of learning (Haury, 1993). Constructivism-based materials are
commonly classified as inquiry-based and include hands-on minds-on activities as

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

means to motivate and engage students while making science concepts concrete
(Cakir, 2008; Minner, Levey, & century, 2010)

Both cognitive and social constructivist theories are useful in developing
lessons in an inquiry-based classroom. An inquiry-based classroom is one that
possesses the following characteristics: (1) the teacher should consider the
knowledge and experiences students bring to the class; (2) learning is presented as
a process of active discovery, not lecture; (3) teachers assist with assimilation of new
and old knowledge; (4) learning is sufficiently flexible to permit development along
lines of student inquiry; (5). teachers allow students to interpret information in
different ways; (6) teachers should create situations where the students feel safe
questioning and reflecting on their processes; (7) teacher should present authentic
tasks to contextualize learning through real-world, case-based learning
environments; (8) teacher should support collaboration in constructing knowledge,
not competition; (9) teacher should provide scaffolding at the right time, and the right
levels; and lastly, (10) teachers should provide opportunities for all students to learn
from each other (Jordan, Carlile, & Stack, 2008).

Features of Inquiry-Based Instruction

In the recent past, although standards have already been pushing for the use
of inquiry-based approaches as a form of science education reform efforts, there
seems to be a lack of a universally-accepted definition of inquiry-based teaching and
learning. As a result, science educators interpret scientific inquiry in many different
ways according to how they use the term in their teaching. These various
interpretations prompted the National Science Education Standards (NSES, NRC,
1996) to release a standard definition of inquiry. In the document, the NSES defines

inquiry as “a set of interrelated processes by which scientists and students pose

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

questions about the natural world and investigate phenomena. In doing so, students
acquire knowledge and develop a rich understanding of concepts, principles,
models, and theories” (p.214).

There are various terms in literature that are used interchangeably with
inquiry-based instruction — inquiry learning, inquiry-based learning, or inquiry-based
teaching (Sureci, Tarihi, & Tarihi, 2016). These terms were treated the same in this
study, and each term can substitute for another without changing its meaning.
Generally, these pedagogical approaches involve inquiry skills from asking questions
about the topic to be learned, then searching for possible answers, and constructing
new knowledge during the research, to discussing the findings and experiences, and
reflecting on the newly acquired knowledge (Taskoyan, as cited in Sureci, et al.,
2016).

As the Philippines sees the attainment of scientific literacy as its ultimate goal
for science education, the national standard for K-12 Science Education
recommends the use of inquiry-based instruction approaches at all levels of
education (DepEd K-12 primer, 2012). With this mandate, learners are expected to
be engaged in inquiry activities and to learn science through inquiry. Engaging in
inquiry and learning science through inquiry could imply similar ideas. The term
inquiry instruction is used to refer to how teachers structure learning activities to
target the goals of having students do inquiry to learn science concepts (Ward,
2016).

Inquiry-based instruction requires or subsequently develops problem-solving
skills, and inquiry and documentation skills, among others (Friesen & Scott, 2013).

Stripling (as cited in Sureci et al., 2016) had visualized inquiry-based learning as a

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

model which covers the following six steps: Curiosity, inquiry, construction,
description, reflection, and association.

There is apparent confusion in literature as to the relationship between
inquiry-based learning and other heuristic teaching strategies such as project-based
learning, problem-based learning, and design-based learning. Such confusion may
have resulted from the absence of a clear-cut definition of inquiry-learning in the first
place. For instance, Stephenson (2014) regarded project-based learning, problem-
based learning, and design-based learning as specific strategies used in inquiry-
based instruction. The notion of problem-based learning as a method of teaching
through inquiry is supported by Allen and Duch (as cited in Roster, 2006). Other
authors argued that inquiry-based learning, together with project-based learning, and
discovery learning, are under the bigger umbrella of problem-based learning
(Kauchak & Eggen, 2012). Still, others would see inquiry-based learning as
pedagogically distinct from problem-based learning (Oguz-Unver & Arabacioglu,
2014).

To guide teachers in their attempt to incorporate inquiry instruction into their
classroom, the National Science Education Standards (NRC, 2000) provided a list of
five essential features of inquiry. These steps are linked to particular cognitive
behaviors that students should engage in during inquiry learning events. These five
essential features are (1) students should engage in scientifically-oriented questions,
(2) students give priority to evidence, (3) they construct explanations using evidence,
(4) they connect these explanations to scientific knowledge, and (5) they
communicate and justify their explanations. In reality, however, there are multiple
variations of what this might consist of in any teaching and learning event. So, the

NRC (2000), released a matrix in the form of a continuum that delineates inquiry

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

events from structured, or highly guided inquiry to open inquiry. This continuum
moves from inquiry events of more teacher guidance (structured or guided inquiry) to
less teacher guidance (open inquiry) (Bell, Smetana, & Binns, 2005; NRC, 2000;
Ward, 2016).

In guided discovery, the teacher selects the topic, introduces the unit and the
lessons, and provides a structure for the investigation. The teacher develops the
initial activity, asks questions, and helps the students in their endeavors, not his or
her endeavors. The teacher probes by asking more questions — some leading and
others intended to find out what the learners are thinking. In a nutshell, the teacher
is a guide, a resource person, and a co-inquirer (Martin, 2012).

In open inquiry, sometimes called free discovery, the learners decide on what
is essential for them to learn. These learners set up their unique learning activities to
explore the topics they have chosen; they devise and explore their inquiry situations.
They look at reference books, electrical and digital resources, magazines, peers, the
Internet, and other sources of information to see what has been learned before. The
teacher acts as a resource and co-inquirer, and the students are deeply involved
cognitively (Martin, 2012; Trowbridge et al., 2000)

Obviously, not all teaching and learning events involve the five features of
inquiry. As such, inquiry events may be described as full or partial inquiries
depending on the number of essential features present (NRC, 2000). The level of
inquiry is dependent in part on the context (e.g., students, topic, previous
experiences with inquiry, time, and resources available) and in part by the goals of
the lesson and the skills of a teacher (Ward, 2016). While the students are not

expected to participate in all the inquiry practices during any given learning event,

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science instruction

the components of these practices should pervade all inquiry-based teaching and
learning events (Osborne, 2014; Ward, 2016).

It should not be misconstrued from the inquiry continuum that one level is
better than the other, say open inquiry is better than guided inquiry. As earlier
described, the level of inquiry used is dependent on teaching and learning goals as
well as on other factors (e.g., grade level, subject matter, student and teacher
experiences, intended learning outcomes, resource availability). To illustrate this
point, if the goal of instruction is to help students develop their abilities to do inquiry,
then varying levels of openness should be provided. If the goal is for the learners to
master conceptual knowledge, then more teacher-guided inquiries should be used.
The goal of the NSES is for teachers to provide students multiple opportunities to
engage in all inquiry practices at various times in their learning careers (NRC, 2000).

The goal of education is not to have students do science as scientists do. The
advocacy of the NSES is that students participate in science-like processes, or do
inquiry processes. The inquiry activities students engage in are asking questions,
developing and conducting investigations, analyzing data, formulating explanations
from evidence, and communicating findings (Ward, 2016). As emphasized in some
reform documents (NRC, 1996; 2000), in doing inquiry, students use critical thinking
during multiple and diverse inquiry contexts (e.g., laboratory, field studies, computer,
or library research). To be truly engaged in an inquiry-based lesson, students should
go beyond finding answers to their questions. They must also use scientific
knowledge to evaluate their results and critique the findings of others (NRC, 2012;
2000). The use of IBSI is then based on the premise that learning is an active

Process, and it involves both hands-on as well as minds-on approach to teaching

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

(NRC, 2000). Such an approach in science teaching is unfortunately far removed
from what is happening in most science classrooms today.

Finally, it should be noted that not all science subject matter could or even
should be taught by inquiry method (NRC, 2000). To insist on the inquiry approach
as a single pedagogical mode is also impractical, impossible, and unwarranted
(Osborne, 2014; Ward, 2016). The expository methodology still has a place in
science education. This direct instructional approach could be valuable when a
teacher needs to present new information to the whole class as a background for
upcoming lessons. Direct instruction is likewise useful when a teacher gives useful
directions involving safety measures, or when an activity needs to be demonstrated
by the teacher before the learners work on their own (Martin, 2012).

Inquiry-Based Instruction and the Philippine
Science Education Framework

In the Philippines, as in many countries, the current direction of curriculum
development is toward scientific literacy, where the science education needs of all
students are differentiated from those who have an interest in scientific careers (SEI-
DOST & UP NISMED, 2011). According to the Science Framework for Philippine
Basic Education, the vision of science education in the country is “the development
of scientifically, technologically, and environmentally literate and productive
members of society. These skills will be acquired through a curriculum that focuses
on knowledge relevant to the real world and encompasses methods of inquiry.” (p.

3). Thus, the Philippine science education framework advocates the use of inquiry-
based instruction (IBI) as a teaching approach in science for the Filipino learners to

develop scientific and technological literacy.

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

With the recommendation of inquiry-based science instruction (IBS!) as a sine
qua non in science teaching and learning, every science teacher must fully
understand the real nature of the approach. Without a genuine knowledge and
understanding of the nature of IBSI, a science teacher would not fully appreciate the
approach, which in turn, will undermine its enactment in actual classes. Therefore,
various education stakeholders and science teachers themselves need to take
initiatives in teacher professional development activities for them to acquire a full
appreciation of the approach and learn how it is implemented (Gutierez, 2015).

The professional development activities for teachers may come in many
forms: peer coaching, collaborative teacher consultation, teacher study groups, and
teacher mentoring (Brownwell, Adams, Sindelar, Walderon & Vanhover, 2006).
Through these activities, teachers are gradually transformed into professionals who
acquire knowledge through the processes of social participation in a learning
community (Shriki & Movshovitz-Hadar, 2011).

According to Gutierez (2015), inquiry-based instruction as a term is not
especially new to teachers. Various stakeholders have implemented professional
development efforts that are designed to model inquiry teaching and actively engage
the teacher participants as learners rather than as information gatherers. However,
despite these ongoing teacher professional development efforts, there still exists
uncertainty about how inquiry is implemented in science classes. Some researchers
(Gutierez, 2015; Stigler & Hieber, 1999) have seen lesson study as a promising

school-based professional development activity that can be used in the Philippines.

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science instruction

Inquiry-Based Instruction and Professional
Development: The Role of Lesson Studies

To many scholars, central to any educational reform, such as the enactment
of inquiry-based instruction in science iessons, is through coliaborative working
toward a common goal (Darling-Hammond & McLaughlin, 2011; Pugach & Johnson,
2002). More than improving their professional well-being and their students’ learning
(Louis, 2006), collaboration provides an opportunity for teachers to improve with the
help of the thought processes of their peers (Bower & Richards, 2006). A productive
professional development endeavor is something that provides teachers with
opportunities and appropriate support structures that encourage them to work
critically on the continuous improvement of their pedagogical knowledge (Darling-
Hammond & McLaughlin, 201 1).

The principles of lesson study capture the essence of collaboration,
emphasizing on the importance of social interaction through negotiation, discourse,
reflection, and explanation in the construction of knowledge. Lesson study coincides
with the idea of situated learning where their classrooms are the best venue for
teachers to learn and improve their teaching practice (Gutierez, 2014; UP NISMED,
2015).

A lesson study involves a group of three to five teachers, usually within the
same grade level, who meet regularly and collaboratively to investigate a “research
lesson" that is designed to impact student achievement (Cheung & Wong, 2014)
Initially, the lesson study group members work together to identify a curricular goal
within a content area, and set goals for their students’ improvement (Puchner &

Taylor, 2006; Saito & Atencio, 2013).

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

Lesson study, which originated from Japan, follows a cyclical step which
involves: 1) collaborative goal setting and planning the study lesson (Fernandez &
Yoshida, 2004; Gutierez, 2015) or research lesson (Lewis, 2002); 2) implementing
and observing the research lesson; 3) debriefing and reflecting on the observed
lesson; 4) revising the research lesson (optional or whenever necessary); 5)
teaching the revised research lesson (optional or whenever necessary); and 6)
sharing of thoughts about the outcomes of the research lesson or post-lesson
teflection and discussion (Gutierez, 2014; 2015).

Through observation, post-lesson reflection, and discussion, teachers are
provided the opportunities to discuss the challenges they encountered during lesson
implementation. More importantly, the lesson study group could suggest possible
improvements for the teachers to address, and for him or her to eventually develop
new teaching techniques (Saito & Atencio, 2013). A synthesis of the teachers’
professional learning, which incorporates the revised research lesson to be
pondered upon in subsequent research lesson implementations, will serve as the
final activity (Chokshi, 2002; Takahashi & Yoshida, 2004).

With the qualities mentioned earlier and the importance of professional
development, the lesson study framework is seen as a potential professional
development model in the Philippine educational setting, especially in the
understanding of inquiry-based instruction. The lesson study procedure can help
deepen the content knowledge of teachers, which, according to the National Science
Education Standards (NSES), must be the essence of most professional
development activities (NRC, 1996).

The University of the Philippines National Institute for Science and
Mathematics Education Development (UP NISMED) promotes lesson study as a

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

professional development model for teachers, and its experiences and research
findings were published in two volumes on lesson study. One study investigated the
practice of inquiry-based teaching and learning among elementary science teachers
from a public school in Metro Manila (Gutierez, 2015). Using a qualitative case study
design, the researcher gathered the teachers’ insights, experiences, and challenges
in implementing inquiry-based teaching. Results of the interviews and post-lesson
reflections and discussions revealed three barriers to inquiry teaching: 1) the lack of
support, training and available inquiry-based materials; 2) the overemphasis on
assessing content learning rather than learning through inquiry; and 3) the
misconception, difficulty, and time - consuming nature of inquiry-based teaching.
Inquiry Teaching Methods

Roster (2006) identified four methods that are often used in inquiry teaching.
While all four methods tend to overlap in some respects, there are some distinctions
among them. These four methods are experimental projects, problem-based
learning, learning-cycle, and the scientific inquiry method.

One inquiry teaching method is to involve students in long-term experimental
projects. A long-term experimental project is an authentic method by which students
understand how scientists think and work, and for them to acquire the skills and
knowledge they need to think and act themselves scientifically. One example of the
application of such a method is when an instructor replaced the ecology and
environmental science unit with a five-week-long class project (Petersen, 2000).
Here, students were asked to conduct an experiment and analyze their results

statistically. Students in these classes were required to perform all the tasks faced by

contemporary scientists, including such trivial matters as balancing a fictitious
budget, and applying for collection permits. The subjects consisted of honors

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

students and regular students. Both groups showed development and improvement
in interdisciplinary skills related to science and a greater understanding of scientific
papers and data interpretation. Interestingly, the honors students gained more
understanding and appreciation for science than did regular students.

A local example of experimental projects as inquiry methods is the
requirement of an investigatory research project among high school students and
elementary pupils in the Philippines. Here, students are asked to formulate a
research question based on a local problem, and use the inquiry processes to come
up with solutions to these problems. Results are presented both orally and in poster
form in science fairs.

Problem-based learning (PBL) is a form of guided inquiry that centers on the
solution of problems (Martin, 2012). Here, the students are presented with a
problem, a query, or a puzzle that they will solve (Allen & Duch, 1998, cited in
Roster, 2006). The problems to be presented must be both complex and authentic
so that students are motivated to search for answers or solutions.

The main principle of PBL is based on maximizing learning through
investigation, explanation, and resolution by starting from real and meaningful
problems. Therefore, PBL is the art of problem-solving (Oguz-Unver & Arabacioglu,
2014).

The problems used in PBL must be ill-structured and allow for free inquiry
(Oguz-Unver & Arabacioglu, 2014). The teacher continually probes learners’ thinking
and learning by asking the questions, “Why?” “What do you mean?” “How do you
know that's true?” (Oguz-Unver & Arabacioglu, 2014). The instructor's role is that of
a facilitator and a coach rather than a leader. Moreover, the problem-solving element
Of PBL requires learners to look at multiple perspectives and domains. According to

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

Savery (as cited in Oguz-Unver & Arabacioglu, 2014), learners should be able to
access, study, and integrate information from all the disciplines. These multiple
perspectives lead learners to a more thorough understanding of the issues and the
development of a more robust solution through PBL.

A familiar teaching approach to inquiry teaching is the learning cycle
approach. The cycle consists of three to five phases. In the three-phase model, the
first phase is the Exploration Phase, where students generally interact with each
other to solve a problem or complete a task (Allard & Barman, as cited in Roster,
2006). The problem is open-ended to allow students to be creative yet directed in
their problem-solving. However, the teacher can narrow the field of possibilities. This
phase also allows students to share ideas about something familiar to them, and try
to relate the problem to different concepts (Beisenherz, Dantonio, & Richardson,
2001). For example, to begin a unit on plant organs, students may investigate the
differences between monocot and dicot roots by observing different live specimens.
They then draw and discuss observed differences.

During the second phase of the cycle, Concept Introduction, the students are
introduced to the main concepts of the lesson and any pertinent vocabulary. Here,
students report findings accumulated during the exploration phase. The instructor
then uses the information provided by the students as a springboard to discussions
(e.g., the difference between monocot and dicot roots).

The final phase of the learning cycle is Concept Application. In this phase,
students study additional examples of the main concepts. Such additional studies
may lead to a new task where students are asked to apply learned concepts to new

situations such as identifying unknown root specimens (Allard & Barman, 1994).

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

The five-step version of the learning cycle is also known as the 5-E model. In
the 5-E model, the first phase is engagement. Here the teacher sets the stage for the
lesson, explains the objectives, and focuses the students’ attention. During the
Engagement phase, the instructor can also assess prior knowledge and have
students share their experiences. Such an instructional sequence is reflective of the
constructivist view (Llewellyn, 2002).

The second phase is the Exploration phase, where students raise questions,
develop hypotheses to test, gather evidence and data, and share with other groups.

The third phase of the SE model is the Explanation phase. The teacher
guides the students through data-processing techniques and how their data relate to
scientific concepts. The teacher may introduce more details and vocabulary to
provide a common language for discussion of their results (Llewellyn, 2002).

The next phase in the model is the Elaboration or Extension phase. The
teacher reinforces concepts by applying gathered evidence and data to new and
real-world situations. Here, new knowledge is added to the learners’ conceptual
framework.

The final phase of the 5-E method is the Evaluation phase. During this phase,
both the teacher and the students summarize the relationships among the variables
in the exploration and explanation phases. The teacher may also pose questions to
the students to get them to make judgments and analyze their work (Llewellyn,
2002). The teacher can likewise make comparisons between knowledge shared in
the Engagement stage and new knowledge acquired throughout the lesson. This
evaluation then may lead to another Engagement.

The fourth inquiry teaching method is scientific inquiry. In contrast with the
three other teaching methods described in the preceding section, scientific inquiry is

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

not easily described apart from the context of particular investigations. There simply
is no fixed set of steps that scientists always follow, no one path that leads them
unerringly to scientific knowledge. There are, however, certain features of science
that give it a distinctive character as a mode of inquiry. Although those features are
especially characteristic of the work of professional scientists, everyone can exercise
them in thinking scientifically about many matters of interest in everyday life (AAAS,
as cited in Roster, 2006)

Scientific inquiry learning can also be viewed as a cycle (Llewellyn, 2002) and

is divided into phases. These phases are 1) Inquisition where the lesson starts with
a question to be investigated; 2) Acquisition where students brainstorm possible
solutions to the problem; 3) Supposition where students select which solution to test.
4) Implementation: Students design and carry out an experiment. 5) Summation:
Upon collecting evidence, students draw conclusions. 6) Exhibition: Students
communicate their findings to other students. During this exhibition phase, students
may discover more questions to be answered and thus start back at the inquisition
phase.

Some subtle differences separate the learning cycle and the scientific inquiry
method. One difference is that during the learning cycle, the second step is devoted
to learning the terminology and the main concepts. This stage is absent in the
‘scientific inquiry method and could be done before, during, or after the inquiry
process. Also, the scientific inquiry method more closely models the scientific
method and that which scientists do every day (Windschitl & Buttemer, 2000), than
does the learning cycle. Finally, the scientific inquiry method is more flexible than the
learning cycle and is more representative of how scientists engage in problem-

solving.

Pre-service Biology Teachers and inquiry-Based Science Instruction

The subtle differences among the four inquiry teaching models can be
summarized as follows: The experimental project method involves more long-term
projects that may have research teams and even fictitious budgets. Problem-based
learning generally employs case studies. The learning cycle is a structured method
that may give inexperienced students a better idea of the process of science. Finally,
the scientific inquiry method is somewhere in between these methods. It allows for
the flexibility of short and long-term projects, it may follow defined steps or allow
students the freedom to jump around within the process, and it may start with a case
study (Roster, 2006).

Benefits of Inquiry-Based Instruction

The rationale for the focus on inquiry learning is multifaceted and is
embedded in research about learning (Bransford, Brown & Cocking, as cited in
Ward, 2016), and more specifically, how students learn science in the classroom
(Donavon & Bradsford, 2005). An inquiry-oriented classroom is one that has a
constructivist learning atmosphere that encourages students to raise questions and
be able to propose feasible ways to solve problems (Lee & Shea, 2016; NRC, 1996).
When students acquire ideas through inquiry-based instruction, whether through
short-term or long-term investigations, they learn better than through traditional
didactic or direct instruction approaches (Blanchard, Southerland, Osborne,
‘Sampson, Annetta & Granger, 2010; Lee & Shea, 2016). Also, with IBSI, students
can construct their knowledge based on their authentic experience and questions to
be investigated. This knowledge construction is far more meaningful learning than
merely verifying the correct answer from “cookbook" laboratories. Moreover, inquiry-

based instruction provides students with repeated exposure to science concepts. It

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

allows them to scaffold their understanding into what becomes their long-term
memory (Marshall, as cited in Lee & Shea, 2016).

Another benefit one can derive from inquiry-based instruction is its ability to
promote more in-depth and more meaningful learning (NRC, 2000; Tatar, 2012).
When learners interact with teachers, other learners, and learning materials, they
develop deeper meaning and understanding of new knowledge, as well as higher-
level thinking skills (Anderson, 2007).

Inquiry-based teaching approaches do not only develop the learners’ cognitive
faculties. This approach also affects learners’ affective skills (Gibson & Chase,
2002; Yager & Akcay, 2010). When exposed to IBS! approaches, learners claim that
they were more involved in the learning process, and they find the approach more
favorable to their learning (Abd-El-Khalic, BouJaoude, Duschl, Lederman, Namlok-
Naaman, Hofstein, Niaz, Treagust, & Tuan, 2004). They took responsibility for their
learning (Plevyak, 2007). In other studies, the benefits of inquiry-based instruction
that have been observed were enhanced students’ performances in laboratory skills
and interpreting data (Mattheis & Nakayama, 1988). An inquiry-based classroom
promotes critical thinking skills. It empowers students to become independent and
lifelong learners (Llewellyn, 2005). According to Reagan, Brubacker, and Case
(2000, p. 2), “inquiry-based classrooms promote critical thinking skills and habits of
mind.”

Another study examined the effects of IBSI on the academic achievement,
attitudes, and engagement of fifth-grade science students (Maxwell, Lambeth & Cox,
2015). Using quasi-experimental procedures, the team of researchers gave the
experimental group IBSI instruction while the control group received traditional

instruction. Pretests and posttests were used to measure academic achievements

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

during the six-week study. The Science Attitudes Survey was administered to
students to assess overall student attitudes toward science. Student engagement
was measured three days a week with a student engagement checklist. Though
statistically insignificant, the results saw students in the IBSI group scoring higher
than students in the traditional group. Students who received IBSI instruction
showed a slight statistically insignificant decrease in their positive attitudes toward
science but higher engagement as compared to students who received traditional
instruction.

Science Teachers’ Beliefs about Teaching and Learning Science

The role that teachers’ personal beliefs about teaching and learning and how
these beliefs influence their instructional decision (Luft & Roehrig, 2007; Pajares;
1992), and the role that teacher education has impacted these beliefs (Crawford,
2007; Keys & Bryan, 2001; Luft & Roehrig, 2007) have been the focus of studies for
several years. Several researchers asserted that the teachers’ beliefs about
teaching and learning science are likely predictors of their intentions to teach science
through inquiry (Crawford, 2007; Luft & Roehrig, 2007; Tillitson & Young, 2013).

In a study by Crawford (2007), five intern teachers over one year were
followed to explore their beliefs about teaching, understanding of inquiry, and how
they attempted to carry it out in actual practice. With semi-structured interviews,
inquiry-based unit plans, classroom observations, and journal entries documenting
informal conversations as data-gathering procedures, it was suggested that the
“prospective teacher's personal view of teaching science as inquiry, comprised of his
or her knowledge of scientific inquiry and inquiry-based pedagogy and his or her
beliefs of teaching and learning, is a strong predictor of a prospective teacher's
actual practice of teaching science” (p. 636). In this study, the interns who espoused

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

informed views of inquiry were able to carry it out in practice. This study further
suggested that prospective science teachers need to clearly articulate to themselves
and to potential critics why an inquiry approach is a valuable pedagogy. They should
be able to articulate personal learning philosophies supported with evidence that
make connections between inquiry instruction and how students learn.

Teachers’ belief about teaching and learning science is sometimes subsumed
under the umbrella of orientations to teaching science (Cobern et al., 2014;
Friedrichsen, Van Driel, & Abell, as cited in Ward, 2016). According to Friedrichsen
and his colleagues, science-teaching orientations have three dimensions: “Beliefs
about the goals or purposes of science teaching, beliefs about the nature of science,
and beliefs about science teaching and learning” (p. 373, cited in Ward, 2016). In
this study, teachers’ beliefs about teaching and learning, the role of schools,
teachers, and learners, were treated as the respondents’ predominant educational
philosophies.

Inquiry-Based Instruction and
Science Teacher Preparation

The primary aim of science teacher education is to prepare pre-service
teachers for teaching science through inquiry as supported by the constructivist
theory (NRC, 1996; Tatar, 2012). Science teacher education is a crucial task as its
purpose is to develop future teachers of science who will become the
representatives of the science community in their future classrooms. These future
science teachers are to model the process of scientific enterprise in their
classrooms, and they form much of their image of science through the science

courses that they take in college (p. 61).

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

It is then a must that professors in college science design courses that are
heavily based on investigations. Here, future science teachers have direct contact
with phenomena, and they are to gather and interpret data using appropriate
technology. Likewise, they are involved in groups working on real, open-ended
problems. Science courses must allow teachers to develop a deep understanding of
accepted scientific ideas and how they were formulated. They must also address
problems, issues, events, and topics that are important to science, the community,
and teachers (NRC, 2012).

Inquiry instruction is a complex and dynamic activity (Crawford, as cited in
Ward, 2016), and helping pre-service science teachers learn to plan for and utilize
this engaging pedagogical approach is a daunting challenge that is not well
understood. It is mandated in some reports that teacher preparation should include
some of the same elements recommended for the K-12 instruction (NRC, 2012;
2000; 1996). Prospective science educators must then be prepared for K-12 science
teaching by providing them opportunities to (a) do science inquiry, (b) learn about
scientific inquiry, and (c) learn science through inquiry (Ward, 2016). In the National
Science Education Standards (NRC, 1996), prospective and practicing science
teachers must take science courses in which they learn science through inquiry,
having the same opportunities as their students will have to develop an
understanding (p.62).

However, the authors of the 1997 Salish | Research Project indicate that
many pre-service teachers do not apply inquiry-based instruction in their courses
after their undergraduate education (Brown & Melear, 2006; Tatar, 2012). The lack
of inquiry-based science in schools could be attributed to the limited enactment of
inquiry methods in science classrooms, both in high schools and undergraduate

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

schools (Roth, & McGinn, 1998). Pre-service science teachers took science courses
that did not prepare them for authentic scientific inquiry. Similarly, Duschl and
Osborne (2002) argued that the use or non-use of inquiry-based principles is
affected by a teacher's experiences in the science classroom. Also, pre-service or
in-service science teachers may believe in the value of hands-on experiences for
children, but they may not know how to translate these into classroom content for the
children. Such facts imply that pre-service science teachers must be allowed to learn
the IBSI way, i.e., learn new (and rigorous) content by building on prior knowledge
and engaging in social interactions. As stated by Crawford (as cited in Tatar, 2012),
pre-service teachers should make explicit the connections between an inquiry
process, their understanding of how people learn science, and their teaching
practice.

Teachers’ Conceptions and Views
of Inquiry-Based Learning

Most of the envisioned reforms in science education are seen to be mostly
incongruent with classroom practices (Lakin & Waiiace, 2015; Osborne, 2014).
Many science teachers are not familiar with the contemporary views of science
education reforms, such as constructivist theories of learning, conceptual change
theory, and the learning cycle. They also have limited knowledge of teaching and
learning theories (Young, 2013). Even experienced teachers lack knowledge of
reform documents related to inquiry-based teaching and learning (Kang, Orgill &
Crippen, 2008; Young, 2013).

In his literature review, Llewelyn (2002) noted that teachers have many
misconceptions and myths about inquiry-based science teaching (as cited in Lee &
Shea, 2016). He found out that most teachers in the elementary claim that they are

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

using inquiry-based science as they are doing hands-on activities. Many teachers
think they are doing inquiry instruction when, in fact, they do not (Capps & Crawford,
2013). Such an erroneous notion of inquiry enactment holds among Filipino
elementary science teachers, who equate inquiry-based instruction with giving
activities or laboratory experiences (Gutierez, 2015). These teachers mistakenly
equate inquiry-based instruction and hands-on. It is clear then that not all hands-on
activities are inquiry and vice versa. Haury (1993) clarified the seemingly superficial
notion of inquiry by stating that physically doing the activity is not the most essential
element of learning about science. To be classified as inquiry-based, an activity
should involve students posing questions, gathering data, reasoning from evidence,
and communicating explanations based on the collected data. While hands-on
activities are essential, the students must also be engaged in minds-on activities
(NRC, 1996). In addition, Llewelyn (2002) points out that the questions asked must
be open-ended, leading students to design investigations to answer their questions.
Clearly, in-service and pre-service teachers alike, have an insufficient understanding
of scientific inquiry. Both groups are not confident about their understanding of
inquiry (Tatar, 2012). Such insufficient understanding of inquiry can undermine their
self-efficacy to teach science through inquiry.

Other myths that teachers hold on inquiry-based learning is that the strategy
is useful in developing laboratory skills by using laboratory tools and following
cookbook-style procedures and confirming predetermined outcomes or verifying the
existence of a scientific principle (Osborne, 2014). These descriptions certainly do
not fall under the definition of inquiry. More importantly, these naive ideas about
inquiry teaching and learning preclude the rich and robust nature of true inquiry
teaching (Ward, 2016).

Pre-service Biology Teachers and inquiry-Based Science Instruction

Many individuals view scientific inquiry as a sequence of steps that scientists
follow when they conduct investigations. This myth is often perpetuated in science
textbooks as the “Scientific Method” (McComas, 1998). The use of a single scientific
method is a gross misrepresentation of both the nature of inquiry and the nature of
science (McComas, 1998).

One popular myth about inquiry-based instruction is that it is equivalent only
to minimally-guided instruction or discovery learning (Clark, Kirschner & Sweller,
2012). These ideas seem to raise the wrong message that neither structured nor
open inquiry work for students. Such a notion negates the significant role the
teacher plays in carefully designing and scaffolding the learning activities to ensure
the attainment of the learning goals (Hmelo-Silver, Duncan, & Chinn, 2007; Llewelyn,
2002, Wilcox, Kruse, & Cloughs, 2015).

On the other hand, there is a persistent idealized notion that an open inquiry
is the preferred form of inquiry that teachers should strive for in their classrooms. In
a survey among 19 college professors, it was noted that these professors viewed
inquiry as totally student-driven, with students asking questions, designing
investigations, and collecting data. These ideas communicate the wrong notion that
inquiry is “unstructured, time-consuming, and difficult to enact” and applicable only to
higher-level students (Brown et al., 2006, p. 798). These ideas are inaccurate and
Problematic and need to be extinguished as they could discourage teachers from
implementing inquiry practices in their classrooms.

Pre-service science teachers as well, hold certain myths about inquiry-based
learning. However, research in this field is quite limited. In a study conducted by Lee
and Shea (2016), most pre-service science teachers hold a simplistic view of inquiry-
based learning. Most of them think that inquiry learning is asking students questions

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

rather than it being a formal set of pedagogical tools. Similarly, Magee and Flessner
(2012) examined pre-service elementary teachers’ concepts of inquiry-based
teaching. Most of them believe that inquiry is “laissez-faire” and chaos. To the pre-
service science teachers involved in a study, IBS! allows teachers to teach anything
or in whatever way they prefer, and that it is unorganized pedagogy. All of these
misconceptions are indicative of their inexperience with inquiry-based science
instruction, both in their science content and teaching methods courses.

There is considerable evidence that the beliefs or views of pre-service
teachers affect how they learn and how they approach teaching in the classroom
(Richardson, 2003). Several factors influence these views or beliefs. These factors
include teacher beliefs about students and student learning, the nature of science,
epistemology, and the role of a teacher (Wallace & Kang, as cited in Tatar, 2012). A
teacher who wants to implement inquiry-based science education must have rich
and deeply developed understandings of science content, student learning, the
nature of science, and ways to engage students in investigative practices (Keys &
Bryan, 2011). He or she must adhere to and accept the more constructivist views of
learning, rather than on the behaviorist perspectives. Science teacher preparation
programs must continue to promote inquiry instruction and explicitly target helping
pre-service teachers develop accurate conceptions and how to identify it from other
teaching strategies (Binns & Popp, 2013; Ozel & Luft, 2013; Saad & BouJaoude,
2012).

Pre-service Science Teachers’ Exposure with IBSI

Pre-service teachers bring varying experiences with inquiry-based science
instruction when they come to their teaching preparation programs. These variations
may come in the form of the degree of exposure, or the feelings and attitudes

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

evoked during the inquiry experience. These experiences on inquiry instruction can
contribute to the identities they develop on the use of such teaching approaches
(Melville, Fazio, Bartley & Jones, 2008). These experiences can potentially
encourage or discourage the development of a teacher's confidence in the use of
inquiry in the classroom (Flores & Day, 2006; Melville et al., 2008)

Several studies have reported on pre-service teachers’ inexperience with
inquiry-based instruction both in their basic education and teacher-preparation years
(Anderson, 2007; Crawford, 2000; Friesen & Jardine, 2010; Windschitl, 2004). The
majority of science students are not exposed to teaching that “encourages
undergraduates to become actively involved in their learning (i.e., scientific learning)”
(DeHaan, as cited in Melville, et al., 2008). These result in pre-service science
teachers who have undergraduate degrees in science struggling with the purpose
and pedagogy of an inquiry-based science curriculum.

The importance of pre-service teachers’ inquiry experience and their capacity
to use inquiry in the classroom is reflected in the work of Windschit! (2002). In his
research, he noted that the three participants who regularly used inquiry instruction
in their teaching were those who had previous long-term research experiences in
which they played significant roles in authentic investigations. Conversely, the two
participants with no research experience did not use inquiry instruction in the
Classroom (pp. 138-139). Similarly, Eick and Reed (2002) found out that pre-service
teachers who needed to experience doing science for them to learn science (i.e.,
learning science through inquiry) were more likely to use inquiry instruction in their
lessons than pre-service teachers who learned science best through teacher

explanations.

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science instruction

Clearly, if pre-service teachers are expected to implement an inquiry-based
curriculum successfully, they must have the opportunity to experience “active
learning strategies to engage their students in the process of science (Handelsman,
as cited in Melville et al., 2008). They must be given a context in which they can
develop their understanding of science as a subject and an understanding of the
challenges they will encounter in using inquiry as a teaching strategy (Melville, et al.,
p. 479)

Pre-service Teachers’ Self-efficacy to Teach Using IBS!

One crucial factor that determines the success of the use of IBSI among
future science teachers is their belief in their capability to organize and execute such
a strategy. This belief in one's ability is called self-efficacy (Bandura, as cited in
Chichekian & Shore, 2016). Self-efficacy, which is related to the concept of self-
confidence, can impact the amount of perseverance and effort an individual
undertakes when working toward achieving an objective (Bandura, as cited in
Chichekian & Shore, 2016, p.2). Self-efficacy can powerfully influence the choices
individuals make and the courses of actions they pursue (Chichekian & Shore, 2016;
Pajares, 1996). As such, self-efficacy is seen as a powerful predictor of a teachers’
behavior and success in classroom teaching (Velthuis, Fisser, & Pieters, 2014).
Self-efficacious teachers will tend to set higher goals, be less afraid of failure, and
find new strategies when old ones fail.

The supporters of the concept of self-efficacy contend that it is not a one-
dimensional construct. In reality, self-efficacy is commonly understood to be domain-
and context-specific (Chichekian & Shore, 2016; Velthuis et al, 2014). Thus, the
self-efficacy of teachers may vary within different subjects, such as in teaching
mathematics or history. Moreover, within the domain of mathematics, teachers may

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

be self-efficacious in teaching algebra, but not statistics. Such domain and context-
specific sense of self-efficacy does not apply only on the teaching of content, but
also in the use of a teaching strategy.

According to Bandura (as cited in Chichekian & Shore, 2016; Roster, 2006;
Velthuis et al., 2014), self-efficacy is influenced by four types of experiences:
mastery experiences, vicarious experiences, social persuasions, and psychological
and emotional states. Of these four, mastery experiences are most effective in
creating a feeling of self-efficacy (Velthuis et al., 2014). By completing a task, the
individual should feel more efficacious to complete other tasks of a similar nature
(Roster, 2006). Vicarious experiences, on the other hand, are experiences or
examples observed from others who are similar to oneself. As pre-service teachers
observe experienced teachers deliver instruction, they acquire pedagogical skills and
acquire the confidence to apply what is observed in practice.

One's personal ability to succeed at a given task, can also be enhanced by
social persuasions — which are positive written or auditory feedback from a
knowledgeable person, such as an instructor. Such positive remarks from a person
of higher authority could instill a higher sense of efficacy on current or future tasks
(Roster, 2006). The last factor that affects one’s sense of self-efficacy in Bandura’s.
list is affective (emotional and psychological) states. Indeed, moods, emotions, and
physical states (e.g., empty stomach) can all affect one’s sense of self-efficacy about
a given task.

Aside from the four factors identified by Bandura, other authors identify
‘subject matter knowledge as a source of self-efficacy. Science content knowledge is
reported to predict science teaching self-efficacy (Rohaan, Taconis, & Jochems,

2012).

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

Some research has looked into how pre-service teachers assess their
preparedness to use inquiry instruction in their teaching (Roth et al., 1998; Windschit!
& Thompson, 2006). Roth and colleagues (1998) reported on pre-service teachers
claiming that they are not prepared to incorporate inquiry instruction, even if they had
taken science methods courses and held science degrees. Their samples were
unable to engage with a scientific problem at a level higher than a group of eighth-
graders that had been enrolled in a 10-week open inquiry study (Binns & Popp,
2013). These findings were supported by Windschitl and Thompson (2006).

In their study on whether or not Spanish pre-service primary school teachers
are prepared to teach science by inquiry, Montero-Pau & Tuazon (2017) reveal that
their respondents fail when they attempt to build a learning sequence based on
inquiry. They noted further that their participants did not reverse the current situation
in Spain, where the introduction of inquiry-based science in primary schools is rare
or incipient. Moreover, the authors noted that these pre-service primary teachers
have a lack of knowledge of science process skills. They scored slightly higher than
the random group of non-teachers acting as a comparison group.

The difference between a teacher who allows more inquiry-based instructional
time for a subject and one who does not could be related to self-efficacy (Smolleck &
Mongan, 2011). The self-efficacy of pre-service and in-service teachers to
implement inquiry-based instruction was explored by Chichekian & Shore (2016).
Some general ideas that are expounded are as follows: (1) Self-efficacy has been
correlated with teachers’ beliefs about and willingness to improve methods of
instruction using inquiry (Leonard, Barnes-Johnson, Dantley, & Kimber, 2011;
Smolleck & Mongan, 2011), (2) Highly efficacious teachers attributed their high
sense of teaching efficacy to their increased knowledge of teaching strategies,

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

among them inquiry, interactive, and hands-on learning (Swars Auslander & Dooley,
2010), and (3) Those with higher self-efficacy for teaching were more likely to be
aware of various instructional approaches and were more open and willing to
experiment with innovative approaches to promote autonomous learning among and
better meet the needs of their students (Ross, Bradley Cousins, & Gadalla, 1996).

Some interesting trends arose from the fore-mentioned review. In the context
of science education (Narayan & Lamp, 2010) and mathematics teaching (Cakiroglu
& Isiksal, 2009), experienced teachers and those with high self-efficacy were more in
favor of creating inquiry-based classroom environments. This high level of self-
efficacy has been attributed to the continuous success in understanding the science
content taught, learning different pedagogical techniques and practices, and being
able to teach the science content learned to primary school children during teaching
internship. In another study, elementary science teachers who are autonomous and
professionally active have demonstrated higher self-efficacy for teaching inquiry than
those driven by external motivators.

In contrast, it was found out that teachers with low-self-efficacy often avoid a
particular subject matter (Enochs, Scharman, & Riggs, 1995). Also, several studies
have described how beginning teachers with low general self-confidence for teaching
(at both elementary and secondary levels) avoided using an inquiry approach
Instead, they resorted to the use of low-risk instructional activities such as textbook
reading and using reading and writing-based strategies rather than on hands-on and

minds-on activities.

Pre-service Biology Teachers and inquiry-Based Science Instruction

Pre-service Science Teachers’ Application of IBSI During
Teaching Internship and Their Experiences

In the study on the experiences of pre-service teachers to teach using inquiry-
based instruction, Binns and Popp (2013) noted that their pre-service teacher
sample found it challenging to incorporate inquiry instruction in their classroom. This
is despite the emphasis of inquiry instruction as a teaching approach in their teacher
preparation programs and their positive view about inquiry instruction. There
obviously is a disconnect between what the pre-service teachers believe in and in
what they learn in teacher preparation courses with what they experience in their
student teaching placements.

In a case study involving the use of inquiry-based instruction of three pre-
service science teachers during teaching internship, Nuangchalern, Dostal, & Luo
(2016) found that the participants differed in how they planned and conducted their
lessons during their teaching internship teaching. They exhibited some key
similarities that seemed to characterize their sense of making use of inquiry
approaches. However, although some of the elements of inquiry-based instruction
are seen in their lesson plans, the actual applications of these elements in actual
teaching seem to be wanting. Participant 1, for instance, emphasized the 5E
learning model in the lesson plan, but she did not emphasize on the process of
inquiry during the actual presentation. She failed to work with questions, nor guide
the students to empower their inquiring minds. Her classroom reflected the
traditional, teacher-centered set-up, and she dominantly taught using worksheets
(pp. 490-491).

The limited use of inquiry-based instruction during teaching internship
experience could be attributed to several factors. The most important factor

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

identified in literature is that the pre-service teachers were themselves unlikely to
have been taught with this strategy. The use of reformed teaching approaches such
as inquiry could have conflicted with the apprenticeship they have experienced as
students in secondary school settings. They, therefore, had minimal direct
experience with the execution of inquiry instruction outside the methods course
(Binns & Popp, 2013). In addition, the cooperating teacher with whom the pre-
service teacher was paired may have used more traditional teacher-centered
approaches over student-centered ones. This assumption is supported by Lotter
(2004), who found out that in a group of pre-service teachers, most disagreed with
their cooperating teacher's instructional methods” and wished to “see more inquiry-
based instruction” (as cited in Binns & Popp, 2013). Indeed, when a pre-service
teacher's core beliefs conflict with inquiry or constructivist practices, “they act as
barriers in the development of constructive beliefs, almost despite their desire to put
the constructivist beliefs into practice (Haney & McArthur, 2002).

Another barrier to the use of inquiry-based science education in teaching
internships is that pre-service teachers are often concerned about adhering to the
local curriculum and become focused on day-to-day survival, instead of putting into
Practice their beliefs about inquiry instruction (Gabrielle & Joran, 2007). These
conflicts cause a mismatch between their idealization of inquiry instruction and what
they are probably able to accomplish.

The fear of not being able to meet national mandates or standards and the
feeling of incompetence pose a challenge when teachers consider committing to use
inquiry-based instruction (Chichekian & Bruce, 2016). Because inquiry-based
instruction is seen to be chaotic for young teachers to handle, many experience the
fear of losing control of the learning environment. Also, because IBSI is a

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

constructivist and a student-centered approach, many teachers might feel that they
are not covering the content they are expected to teach. Some pre-service teachers
hold the wrong notion that they are compelled to teach using teacher-centered
approaches as they are to showcase their mastery of the content they are to teach.
Such is the case, aside from the prevailing tendencies of pre-service teachers to
teach in the same way they are taught in their undergraduate courses.

A group of science teachers with limited inquiry experience and did not
identify any inquiry exposure during their undergraduate degrees have identified
time, curriculum, and materials as the significant barriers to the use of the teaching
approach. Also, the reactions of students — frustration, reluctance, intimidation, and
apathy — are the major impediments to the use of inquiry. Other issues impeding
inquiry use are the negative reactions of parents, colleagues, and school personnel.
The ability to plan developmentally suitable lessons, balancing inquiry with academic
standards, and lack of resources were often provided as reasons for the non-
implementation of inquiry-based science education (Melville et al., 2008; Smolleck &
Mongan, 2011). In the case of pre-service teachers, lack of support from supervising
teachers and cooperating teachers are the major barriers to their inquiry use.

To increase pre-service teachers’ self-efficacy and tendency to use inquiry-
based instruction, a total of 33 studies highlighted nine prior experiences that are
necessary for this purpose. These specific examples reported in the studies were:
(1) receiving extensive practice implementing inquiry instruction; (2) modeling inquiry
instruction; (3) having research experiences during teacher education; (4) support
from mentors for trying inquiry, such as from instructors and teaching internship
teachers; (5) visiting inquiry classes in action; (6) experiencing out-of-school
teaching sites such as museums and nature centers; (7) reflecting on past inquiry

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

experiences concerning planning instruction; (8) examining personal beliefs about
learning and teaching and (9) having had earlier research experiences (Chichekian &
Shore, 2016).
Need for the Study

Little is written about pre-service science teaching and their experiences or
exposure to inquiry-based instruction, or how these pre-service science teachers are
prepared to teach using these reformed teaching approaches in science. Such is
especially the case among prospective science teachers in the Philippines. Most
local related studies covered broader scopes in terms of context — content-wise or
participant-wise. Examples of studies on pre-service teaching deal with more
general themes such as their self-efficacy to teach the 21*-century skills (Balaan,
2016), or on how these pre-service science teachers deliver lessons during their
teaching internship experience (Ulla, 2016). Some studies investigated the teaching
efficacy of elementary teachers (Quinco-Cadosales, 2017). These broad approaches
are likewise seen in studies involving pre-service science teachers, such as
pedagogical-content knowledge, or technological-pedagogical content knowledge.
The only research that is most related to this current endeavor is the one conducted
by Gutierez (2015). Using the procedure of lesson study, the author explored how
Public elementary school science teachers in the Philippines enact inquiry-based
instruction in their teaching. The study revealed three major challenges in the
implementation of IBSI. These challenges include the lack of support, training and
materials, overemphasis on content assessment, and the nature of inquiry itself.

These challenges, incidentally, are consistent with international trends.

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

This study is worth investigating since the pre-service science teachers are
the future implementers of inquiry instruction, and they are given the responsibility to
bring the true essence of science to the next generation of Filipinos.

Notable among the few international studies on pre-service science teaching
and inquiry-based instruction that documented the understanding and views about
IBSI, or their self-efficacy to teach using the approach, is the non-linking of these
constructs with the PSTs' actual application of IBSI in their student teaching
experience. There was no attempt to correlate these constructs. Such a gap was
addressed in this study.

This study also wishes to address the gap as to whether or not pre-service
science teachers are exposed to IBS! practices during their pre-college, college, and
field study experiences. The important question the researcher wants to answer is
whether or not teacher-training institutions are properly equipping the science
teacher education candidates with the knowledge and skills for them to teach
science following science education reforms. Also, this study will shed light on the
PSBTs' predisposition to teach using IBSI, and whether these predispositions
translate into actual application during practice teaching. This important relationship
was so far not extensively explored in literature. Finally, this study wishes to explore
the moderating effect of the PSBTs’ educational philosophies and on their self-
efficacy and predisposition to teach using IBSI, and their actual application of this.
teaching approach in their teaching internship experience.

Conceptual Framework

The responsibility of sowing the seeds of inquiry-based science instruction on
future science teachers lies more on science education professors, not on teacher-
education professors (Pushkin, 2001, cited by Buck ef a/., 2008). This view is

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

supported by Winchschitl and Thompson (2006), who stated that science teacher
educators are the agents to model inquiry practices for pre-service science teachers.
However, both teacher educators and science educators must be conscious of their
responsibility for sowing the seeds of inquiry in the minds of these future teachers.

The successful implementation of IBS| in science teaching depends on
several factors. These factors might include the PSBT background, exposure, or
experiences with such teaching methods throughout all science classes (Binns and
Popp, 2013), and even methods courses (Buck et al., 2008). This claim is supported
by a popular adage in education, which says one cannot teach or implement what
he/she does not know.

Another factor that could influence the use of inquiry-based instruction could
be the degree by which the pre-service teachers understand the nature of inquiry.
Related to exposure or background, one cannot implement a teaching strategy that
one does not fully understand. Bybee (2000) explained, “To develop good inquiry-
based science teaching, teachers need to understand the precise nature of inquiry,
and also need to have sufficient knowledge of the discipline itself.". However, as
noted by Llewellyn (2002) and Gutierez (2015), teachers have many misconceptions
and myths about inquiry-based science teaching. Such issues could have been
confounded by the fact that even the term inquiry has multiple and no exact
definitions (Buck, Bretz, & Towns, 2008). Such a dilemma would certainly affect
how educators and pre-service teachers expound and understand inquiry-based
learning as a teaching strategy. In turn, their understanding and application of the
‘strategy could be compromised.

The successful implementation of IBSI may also be influenced by the pre-
service teacher's attitude toward a teaching strategy (Uredi, 2013). Attitude, after

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

all, is a powerful predictor of future behavior (Xie & Tariff, 2014). Attitudes are
opinions or general feelings one holds on something, and they have a great
influence on how successful people are in attaining higher outcomes (Cole & Levine,
2000). These attitudes affect how a person uses or does not use (or even forgets) a
certain skill or methodology. Attitudes can be closely tied to motivation within a
subject, and typically correlate to achievement. So, it can be assumed that the more
positive the PSTs' attitudes toward the IBSI, the higher their tendencies to apply
such a strategy (Sherman & Fazio, as cited in Frymier & Nadler, 2017).

These attitudes towards a teaching approach, method, or strategy can, in
turn, be based on one’s educational philosophy (Sadker & Sadker, 2003).

According to Austin & Reinhardt, as cited in Melehat Gezer (2018), educational
philosophy is influential in gauging prospective teachers’ perceptions, decisions on
curricula and teaching practices, and behaviors and practices in the classroom.
Thus, the pre-service teachers who are more inclined to the learner-centered
educational philosophies would tend to be oriented toward learner-centered
pedagogical approaches, such as IBSI.

Another factor that could influence the application of IBSI by pre-service
teachers might be their self-efficacies. The role self-efficacy on ones’ capacity to
implement a strategy also plays an important role in the actual use of that teaching
Strategy. If teachers believe that they can implement a strategy without much
difficulty, then it is no doubt that they will use such strategy in their teaching, either at
will or when asked (Chichekian & Shore, 2016; Swars Auslander & Dooley, 2010;
Velthuis et al., 2013). Also, the predisposition to teach a certain strategy could be

related to one’s actual application of such a strategy.

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

In this study, the interretationships among the variables were explored. The
interrelationships among PSBTs' IBS! exposure during their pre-college science and
college science, and field study courses and their IBSI understanding, attitude, self-
efficacy, predisposition, and applications during interrelationship were explored.
Also, the interrelationships were explored among overall IBS! exposure along lesson
planning and implementation, content knowledge, and classroom culture and the
other IBSI variables. These procedures were done to provide a more extensive
picture of the factors that influence the PSBTS’ enactment of IBSI.

The interrelationships among the other IBSI variables and their elements or
components were also explored. Learner-centered views were also included in the
exploration of interrelationships.

The variables IBS| exposure, IBS! self-efficacy, and IBS! application included
three elements: lesson planning and implementation, content knowledge, and
classroom culture. Meanwhile, the elements under IBS! understanding and IBS!
predisposition included the three phases of a lesson — lesson beginning, lesson
proper, and lesson ending. The elements under IBS! attitudes are the three
dimensions of attitudes — liking, interest, and perceived usefulness and learner-
centered views. Finally, the learner-centered views included constructivism,
progressivism, and social reconstructionism as its elements.

The interrelationship among the variables is shown in the conceptual

framework of the study in Figure 1

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

IBS| Exposure
* Pre-college
* College
« Field study


|

IBSI Understanding
« Lesson

beginning 4

« Lesson proper

* Lesson ending

Level of IBSI self-
efficacy
« Lesson planning and
implementation
« Content knowledge
* Classroom culture

|

| Extent of IBSI
| application during
internship

|

IBS! Attitudes
« Interest
|, Liking LI
° Perceived
usefulness

t

Learner-centered
views

+ «Lesson planning and
implementation
| © Content knowiedge
* Classroom culture

t

Level of IBSI
predisposition

« Progressivist

* Social
reconstructionist

© Constructivist |

‘+ " «Lesson beginning
« Lesson proper

+ Lesson ending

Figure 1. Conceptual Framework of the Study

Research Hypotheses

The research hypotheses of the study were as follows:

_—t

Hat: The following variables, taken singly, are significant predictors of the PSBTs’

IBSI self- efficacy:
a) IBSI exposure,
b) IBSI understanding,

c) IBS! attitudes,

d) and learner-centered views;

Pre-service Biology Teachers and inquiry-Based Science Instruction


Ha2: The following variables, taken singly, are significant predictors of the PSBTs'
extent of application of IBSI during their teaching internship experience:
a) IBS! exposure,

b)

IBSI understanding,

¢)

IBS| attitudes,
d)

learner-centered views,

e)

{BSI self-efficacy,

f) and IBSI predisposition;
H.3: The following variables, taken singly, are significant predictors of the PSBTs'

level of IBSI predisposition:

a) IBS! exposure,

b) IBSI understanding,

c) IBSI attitudes,

d) learner-centered views,

e) and IBS! self-efficacy;
Ha4: The PSBTs’ IBSI exposure is a significant predictor of their IBSI understanding.
Ha5: The following variables, taken singly, are significant predictors of PSBTs' IBSI
attitudes:

a) IBS! exposure,

b) IBSI understanding,

¢) and learner-centered views;
H26: The following variables are significantly correlated:

a) IBSI exposure,

b) IBS! understanding,

c) IBSI attitudes,

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

d) learner-centered views,

f) IBSI self-efficacy,

9) IBSI predisposition,

h) and extent of IBSI application during teaching internship.
Definition of Terms

Classroom culture. This is one of the three elements of IBSI that was used
to describe the PSBTs’ IBSI exposure during pre-college, college, and field study
courses, IBSI self-efficacy, and IBS! application during internship. It particularly
tefers to the aspect of IBS! that involves communicative interactions and
‘student/teacher relationships.

Content knowledge. In this study, content knowledge is another IBSI
element that was used to describe the PSBTs’ IBSI exposure, self-efficacy, and
application during internship. Content knowledge refers to the aspects of IBSI
dealing with the development of the learners’ propositional and procedural
knowledge, including metacognitive knowledge.

Inquiry-based instruction (IBI). This study used the term inquiry-based
instruction as synonymous with inquiry-based learning, or inquiry instruction. IBI is
a learner-centered, constructivist approach in teaching. It is one of the teaching
approaches advocated by the science education standards in most parts of the
world, including the Philippines. It is believed that IBI promotes the learners’
attainment of scientific, technological, and environmental literacy (DepEd, 2012).
More than a “hands-on” approach, it emphasizes a “hands-on-minds-on” learning
experience.

Inquiry-based science instruction (IBSI). This term was used to refer to
the application of the principles of inquiry-based instruction (IBI) in the teaching and

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

learning of science in all levels of education. Most of the IBS! descriptions of
Llewellyn (2013) were used in this study.

IBSI attitude. IBS! attitude is one of the PSBTs' IBSI variables investigated in
this study. Measured by the Attitude Scale for IBS! Use (ASIU), it determines
whether or not the PSBTs’ favor the practices and classroom applications of IBSI.
The PSBTs' IBSI attitudes were then categorized into the attitude dimensions of
interest, liking, and the perceived usefulness of the strategy.

IBSI application. This is another IBSI variable of interest in this study. IBSI
application refers to the manner, extent, or degree by which the PSBTs implement
IBS| principles and practices during their teaching internship. This variable was
measured by the PSBTs' self-assessment and by their cooperating teachers’
observation ratings.

IBS! exposure. This study also explored the PSBTs’ exposure to IBSI. IBS!
exposure was used to profile the experiences of the PSBTs with inquiry-based
science instruction. This variable was measured with an instrument that required the
PSBTs' to recall and rate the extent of their IBSI experiences during pre-college,
college science courses, including their field study observation courses.

IBSI predisposition. |BSI predisposition was another variable of interest in
this study. IBSI predisposition was used to describe the PSBTs natural tendencies
to choose inquiry-based instruction instead of direct instruction models in their future
teaching. IBSI predisposition was measured in this study by an instrument involving
simulated teaching scenarios followed by options depicting inquiry and non-inquiry
teaching

IBSI self-efficacy. This explored IBS! variable refers to the PSBTs' self-
confidence, or belief that they can successfully implement IBSI principles and

Pre-service Biology Teachers and inquiry-Based Science Instruction

practices in the present or the future. The PSBTs’ IBSI self-efficacy was determined
by an instrument that required the respondents to rate their confidence in
implementing specified IBS! practices using a 10-point scale.

IBSI understanding. This IBSI variable was used in the study to refer to the
PSBTs’ ability to distinguish the principles and practices of IBSI, whether guided or
open inquiry, against the direct instruction methods (such as lectures or
demonstrations). This IBS! understanding was gauged by asking the PSBTs to
choose the options that depict IBSI practices in the Biology section of the Pedagogy
of Science Teaching Test (POSTT).

Learner-centered views. This variable was measured using the scores that
the PSBTs got in a standardized educational philosophy self-assessment instrument
of Cohen in 1999. They determined the PSBTs’ level of learner-centered views
categorized as progressivism, constructivism, and social reconstructionism defined
as follows:

Constructivism. Constructivism is one of the three -learner-centered
views explored in this study. Based on the work of Cohen (1999), this study
describes constructivism as an active learning approach where the learners
construct their understanding of reality through acting upon and reflecting on
their experiences in the world. The role of teachers in a constructivist
classroom is to facilitate environmental conditions and mediate learning
experiences.

Progressivism. This study adopts how Cohen (1999) and Sadker and
‘Sadker (2003) describes this educational philosophy. According to Cohen,
“progressivism believes that education should focus on the child rather than
‘the subject matter. Learners are seen as active in solving problems by

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

experimenting and reflecting on their experience’ (p. 8). Sadker and Sadker
added that in progressivism, “the role of schools is to help students develop
personal and social values so that they become thoughtful and productive

citizens” (p. 112).

Social reconstructionism. Again, Cohen's description of this
educational philosophy was adopted in this study. This educational
philosophy advocates that “schools should take the lead to change society in
order to create a better world. Social reconstructionist teachers use critical
thinking skills, inquiry, questioning, and action as teaching strategies. Here,
students learn to handle controversy and to recognize multiple perspectives”
(Cohen, 1999).

Lesson planning and implementation (LPI). LP! is another IBS! element
used to provide a detailed description of the PSBTs’ IBSI exposure, self-efficacy, and
application during internship. This element particularly refers to the stage where an
IBSI lesson is conceptualized and planned, until its enactment in an actual science
class.

Pre-service biology teachers (PSBTs). These are the main participants in
this study. They are senior biological science education students from Baguio City
and Benguet who are currently in or have completed their teaching internship
experience.

Teaching internship. Teaching internship refers to the practicum stage that
culminates all teacher-preparation programs in the Philippines. It is the stage where
the PSBTs IBSI application was determined. This stage is also called student

teaching, practice teaching, practicum, or teaching practice

Pre-service Biology Teachers and inquiry-Based Science Instruction

Chapter 3

METHODOLOGY

This chapter is organized into four sections: (a) discussion of the research
design; (b) characterization of the locale and participants of the study; (c) description
of the research instruments and procedures; and (d) the procedure for data analysis.
Research Design

This study used both qualitative and quantitative methods of research. In
particular, survey, ex — post facto, or causal-comparative and correlation procedures
were employed.

The survey method was used to collect most of the major data needed to
answer the research questions. The PSBTs' lesson plans were likewise analyzed to
validate the quantitative results. Interviews and focus-group discussions were
employed to triangulate the data collected.

Locale of the Study

The study was conducted in Baguio City and Benguet province on three
teacher-training institutions (TEIs) offering specializations in the biological sciences.
These TEls were recently designated as Centers of Excellence or Centers of
Development in teacher education by the Philippine Commission on Higher
Education (CHED). The deans of these TEls responded positively to the
Tesearcher’s request that their students be involved in the study as participants.

One of the case institutions is the Benguet State University - La Trinidad
Campus (BSU-LTC), located in Benguet’s capital town of La Trinidad. The
institutions’ College of Teacher Education holds the distinction as one of CHED's

centers of excellence in its secondary education program. The college currently

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

holds Level Ill accreditation from the Philippine Association of State Universities and
Colleges.

The second case institution is the Saint Louis University (SLU), a private
sectarian university that holds the distinction of having the highest number of student
enrolment in all schools north of Manila. Its secondary education program is likewise
one of CHED's centers of excellence in teacher education and is Level Ill accredited
by the Philippine Accrediting Association of Schools, Colleges, and Universities.

The third institution is the University of Baguio (UB), a private non-sectarian
university that remains the third largest university in the Cordillera region in terms of
student enrolment. Its secondary education program currently enjoys the center of
development distinction from CHED. The program likewise is granted Level IV Re-
accredited status by the Philippine Association of Colleges and Universities
Commission on Accreditation.

There are unique schemes for science education in these case institutions. In
BSU-LT and UB, biology courses are not taught in the College of Teacher Education.
They are instead taught in the College of Science or the College of Allied Medical
Sciences (Medical Technology or Dentistry). However, in BSU-LT, the biological
sciences students are handled as a single class, unlike in UB, where the students
are mixed with the students from other degrees related to the biological sciences.
Meanwhile, in SLU, most biology courses are taught by teachers in the College of
Education, or by some adjunct faculty members in the College of Science who hold a
teacher's license. This practice in SLU is according to an existing CHED

requirement for science education programs.

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

Participants of the Study

The participants of the study were 66 pre-service Biology teachers who have
finished two semesters of teaching internship during the academic year 2017-2018.
Forty-one of these participants came from Benguet State University — La Trinidad
Campus (BSU-LT), while 12 and 13 participants were from Saint Louis University
(SLU), and the University of Baguio (UB), respectively. More participants came from
BSU - LT because they belong to the regular cohorts of students. The participants
from SLU and UB do not belong to the regular cohort.

Before taking part in the study, a consent form indicating the purpose of the
study and the voluntary nature of their participation was signed by the participants.
The cover letter of the consent form is shown in Appendix B. Alll pre-service biology
teachers from BSU-LT voluntarily participated in the study. Meanwhile, in both SLU
and UB, one PSBT each either opted not to participate or was absent during the
data-gathering. Since the participants’ ages ranged from 19 to 22, no parental
consent was required. Moreover, the participants’ consents were solicited for the
researcher to gather information about their teaching performance during internship
from their cooperating teachers.

As per institutional policy, SLU and UB allow their pre-service teachers to
teach in both junior and senior high schools, while BSU-LT deploys its interns only in
junior high schools. As they teach in both junior and senior high schools, the PSBTs
are given teaching loads not only in the biological sciences but also in the other
science fields. This practice has become the norm as the Philippine basic education

has shifted to the interdisciplinary, spiral progression approach.

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science instruction

Research Instruments

Instrument used to measure the PSBTs’ IBSI exposure. The Science
Teachers’ Inquiry Practices Scale (STIPS, Appendix D) was used to determine the
PSBTs’ IBSI exposure during their pre-college science, college science, and field
study courses. The instrument was based on the Characteristics of an Inquiry
Classroom (CIC) identified by Llewellyn (2013). The STIPS is a 30-item observation
or evaluation tool used to assess the participants’ perceptions of how their former
subject and cooperating teachers employed IBSI practices in teaching.

The items were clustered into three elements based on the clustering
identified in the Reformed-Teaching Observation Protocol [(RTOP); (Sawada,
Sawada, Falconer, Turley, Belford, & Bloom, 2002)]. The cluster names, number of
items, and the internal consistencies of the items are presented in Table 1. The
items were pre-tested to 229 science education majors who were not involved in the
study. These are the science education majors who recently graduated or those
who are in the lower years.

Table 1. Structure and reliability of the Science Teachers’ Inquiry Practices Scale (STIPS)

Elements Name No. of Item placement a
items
1 Lesson planning and 9 4,5,6,7,8, 12, 13,21, 22 886
implementation
2 Content knowledge 12 2,9, 14, 16, 17, 18, 20, 24 ,25, 960
26, 29, 30
3____ Classroom culture 9 14,3, 10, 11, 15, 19, 23, 27, 28 875
Overall 961

As shown in Table 1, the overall and component internal consistency of the
instrument is very high at r = .961, indicating that the items are homogeneous. Using
an online readability calculator (Readabilityformulas, nd) that reports results from
eight different tools, the instrument is suitable for students whose ages range from

14 to 15, who are approximately in Grade 10. Although the instrument is labeled as

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

difficult to read, the recommended age and grade levels are younger than the target
participants of this study. Finally, the mean of participants’ ratings of their IBSI
exposure from pre-college, college, and field study courses were obtained to
determine their overall level of exposure on this teaching approach.

All items in the STIPS are declarative statements about inquiry use, as
described in literature (Llewellyn, 2013). The scale was answered using a five-point
scale, described and interpreted as follows:

Table 2. Scale, description, and interpretation of the responses to the STIPS

SCALE FREQUENCY OF OCCURRENCE INTERPRETATION
1 1% - 20% of the time Very Limited (VL)
2 21% - 40% of the time Insufficient (InS)
3 41% - 60% of the time Moderate (M)
4 61% - 80% of the time Sufficient (S)
5 81% - 100% of the time Extensive (E)

Instrument used to measure the PSBTs’ IBSI understanding. The level of
the PSBTs' understanding of IBS! was assessed quantitatively using the biology
items in the Pedagogy of Science Testing Test (POSTT-B), developed and validated
by Cobern, Schuster, Adams, Skjold, Mugaloglu, Bentz, & Sparks (2014). The
POSTT-B is in Appendix E. The PSBTs' ability to identify the options involving IBSI
principles in the POSTT-B indicates their level of understanding of IBSI. The
Mallinson Institute for Science Education of the Western Michigan University, from
which the instrument developers are based, is granting permission to science
educators and researchers for the use of the instrument. The developers of the
instrument even encourage interested parties to use the instrument as a summative
assessment tool, as the POSTT is originally intended for formative assessment.

Furthermore, the readability levels of the items are within the standard/average

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

reading level. It is suitable for Grade 7 learners, with ages from 13 to 14
(Readabilityformulas, n.d.).

The original POSTT has four versions, composed of items from earth and
space science, biology, chemistry, and physics. Only the Biology items of the test
were used in the study to eliminate content-related bias. Each of the 16 items in the
POSTT contains a classroom vignette followed by response choices carefully crafted
to include four basic pedagogies (didactic direct, active direct, guided inquiry, and
open inquiry). There are items involving how to begin, teach, or end a science
lesson. A sample item in the POSTT is given as follows:

(8) Photosynthesis

Ms. Hamid has been teaching her 8th-grade students
about photosynthesis, and in particular, that
chlorophyll production in plant leaves is light-induced.
She sets up an example to illustrate this. She has placed fast-growing seedlings
where they are exposed to different levels of light intensity. The students observe the
growing plants over several days and estimate the amount of chlorophyll using a
color chart to record leaf color. They record their data in their science notebooks and

on a classroom data table. On the last day, Ms. Hamid reviews the role of light in
chlorophyll production, as illustrated by the activity.

Thinking about how you would teach this topic, of the following, which is the best
evaluation of her lesson?

A. This is a good lesson design overall because Ms. Hamid begins with an
explanation of the concepts that she wants the students to learn, followed by an
activity for students to confirm that chlorophyll production is light-induced. (Active
direct)

B, Ms. Hamid begins appropriately with an explanation of the concepts she wants
the students to lear. This being so, it is not clear that the activity is needed,
especially since it requires so much class time. (Didactic direct)

C. Ms, Hamid’s approach is too pre-organized and prescriptive. It would be better for
‘students themselves to decide how to set up plants and lights, see what happens,
and figure out a way to compare chlorophyll production in the leaves. (Open inquiry)

D. The instructional sequence would be better if the students do the plant
observations first, showing that chlorophyll is light-induced, after which Ms. Hamid
can explain the process more fully. (Guided inquiry)

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

In a way, the PSBTs' levels of IBSI understanding were gauged in their ability
to distinguish which among the choices manifest IBSI practices. The PSBTs were
asked to identify the choice or choices that manifest the principles of IBSI, either in
the form of guided inquiry or open inquiry. They were informed that there could be
more than one answer per item, but they were penalized for every wrong option that
they chose. The items were scored based on whether or not the participants
identified the options that characterize IBSI principles. Hence, since each item has
two options that manifest IBSI (guided and open inquiry), the maximum points per
item were awarded. One point was awarded if a participant picked only one correct
option. The right minus wrong scoring scheme was used. For instance, if a
participant provided two answers in an item, where one answer is correct and the
other wrong, then no point was given for that item. If two wrong options were
selected, then the participant was given negative 2 points. Thus, scores in the
POSTT-B can range from a minimum of below zero to a maximum of 32 points.

The participants’ level of understanding about IBS! was determined based on
their scores in the POSTT-B. The following scale was used to interpret their level of
understanding:

Table 3. Interpretation of mean scores in the POSTT-B used to gauge IBSI
understanding

MEAN SCORES INTERPRETATION
0.00 or lower Very Limited
0.01 -0.50 Limited
0.51 - 1.25 Moderate
1.26 -1.75 Sufficient
1.76 - 2.00 Extensive

Pre-service Biology Teachers and inquiry-Based Science Instruction

As a validating procedure, the PSBTs were asked to give their definition of
IBSI and to describe their best experiences with the approach. The quality of their
definitions and descriptions were analyzed and reported in the results section.

Instrument used to measure the PSBTs’ IBSI attitude. To determine the
PSBTs' attitudes toward IBSI, the Attitude Scale for IBS] Use (ASIU), adopted from
Evrekli, Inel, Balim & Kesercioglu (2010), was used. The ASIU instrument is found
in Appendix F.

Of the 14 items in the ASIU, 11 were positively stated, while four were stated
in the negative. When the readability level of the instrument was entered on an
online readability analyzer, the readability consensus revealed that the instrument is
“fairly easy to read, suitable for readers ages eight to nine.”

The ASIU instrument measures three dimensions of attitude (Evrekii et al.,
2010). The attitude dimensions being measured and the corresponding number of
items are as follows: a) interest (five items), b) liking (four items), and perceived
usefulness (five items).

The items in the ASIU were answered with Yes, Somewhat, or No. The
responses were then scored following the manner of scoring attitude scales
described in literature (Gronlund & Keith - Waugh, 2009; Popham, 2011). Two
points were awarded for a positive response to a positive statement, and negative
two was given for a positive response to a negative statement. Conversely, two
points were awarded for a negative response given to an item stated negatively, and
negative two were awarded for a positive response to a negatively stated item. A
somewhat answer to a positive statement received a score of one, while a somewhat
answer to a negative statement received a negative one. With this scoring scheme,

the highest possible score in the ASIU is 44, and the lowest is -44.

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

The PSBTs' attitudes toward inquiry use were gauged based on their scores
in the ASIU. The scores were then interpreted using the scale shown in Table 4.

Table 4. Interpretation of the scores in the ASIU used to gauge IBS! attitudes

MEAN SCORE RANGES TOTAL SCORE RANGES. INTERPRETATION
0 and below and below Very low (VL)
0.01 to 0.50 1-7 Low (L)
0.51- 1.25 8-16 Moderate (M)
1.26 -1.75 17-23 High (H)
1.76 - 2.00 24-28 Very high (VH)

Instrument used to measure the PSBTs’ learner-centered views. The
PSBTs' learner-centered views (LCV) were assessed using the educational
philosophy self-assessment scale (EPSAS) developed by Cohen (1999). The
original scale included eight educational philosophies, but only the items under
perennialism, essentialism, behaviorism, progressivism, social reconstructionism,
and constructivism were used as the other items are more of psychological views
and not strictly educational philosophies (Sadker & Sadker, 2003). The first three
educational philosophies were predominantly teacher-centered, while the remaining
ones were student-centered philosophies (Parkay & Stanford, 2007; Sadker &
Sadker, 2003). The revised instrument is in Appendix G.

While the participants’ teacher-centered philosophical views were also taken,
it was done simply to compare these views with their learner-centered views. Only
the PSBTs' learner-centered views were presented and analyzed in this study since
IBS! is basically a learner-centered teaching approach.

Instrument used to measure the PSBTs’ self-efficacy to teach using IBSI.
The PSBTs' self-efficacy for IBS! was determined using the Inquiry Use of Self-
Efficacy Scale (IUSES), which was adapted from literature (Appendix H). The items

in the IUSES were based on Isola and Wenning’s (2007) Inquiry-Based (Reformed)

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

Teaching Self-Assessment Inventory (ITSAl). The ITSAl, in turn, was a modification
of the Reformed-Teaching Observation Protocol (RTOP) developed by Sawada et al
(2002).

The RTOP is a formal and structured observation method designed for
trained observers to score a videotaped lesson. It is a 25-item classroom
observation protocol that is (a) standards-based, (b) inquiry-oriented, and (c)
student-centered (Sawada et al. 2002). The scores are then used as a way to
measure the amount of “reformed teaching” that is occurring in a classroom. The
RTOP has a high level of reliability (Cronbach a for the whole test is 0.97, interrater
reliability estimate = 0.95) and validity and provides education researchers a way to
compare the effectiveness of various teaching practices and to correlate such
practices with student achievement (p. 247). The RTOP provides an operational
definition of what is meant by “reformed teaching.” The items arise from research-
based literature that describes inquiry-oriented standards-based teaching practices
in mathematics and science” (Sawada et al. 2002).

The ITSAI, meanwhile, is a simplified version of the RTOP. It is modified to
make it more of a guide for personal reflection of one’s teaching. The idea was to
change the focus of each item to direct it inward and to change the terminology to
describe the same characteristics it was designed to measure in more common
everyday terms (Isola & Wenning, 2007).

Table 5 illustrates the similarity among the items in the three instruments.

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

Table 5. Comparison of the sample items in the RTOP, ITSAI, and the IUSES

RTOP

ITSAIL

1USES

1. The instructional
strategies and
activities respected
students’ prior
knowledge and the
preconceptions
inherent therein

2. The lesson was
designed to engage
students as
members of the
leaming community.

3. In this lesson,
student exploration
preceded formal
presentation.

T. My instructional strategies
and activities show respect
for students’ prior knowledge
and their preconceptions or
misconceptions found within
that knowledge.

2. My lessons are designed
to engage students as
members of a “leaming
community,” intellectual
igor, constructive criticism,
and the challenging of ideas
are valued.

2. In my lessons, student
exploration precedes format
presentation.

1.1 CAN use strategies and
activities that show respect for
students’ prior knowledge and
their preconceptions or
misconceptions found within
that knowledge.

7.1 CAN design lessons that
engage students as members
of a “leaming community,”
intellectual rigor, constructive
criticism, and the challenging
of ideas are valued.

3. | CAN provide opportunities
for students to explore first
before they are provided with
formal presentation (lecture or
demonstration, etc.)

The structure of the IUSES is shown in Table 6.

Table 6. Structure of the |USES used to measure IBSI self-efficacy

Elements Name No.of Item placement a
items
1 Lesson planning and 8 1, 2,3, 4.5.6, 7.17 885
implementation
2 Content knowledge 9 8,9, 10, 11, 12,13,14, 15,16 905
3 Classroom culture 7 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24 878
Overall instrument 956

The levels of self-efficacy were determined based on the PSBTs' scores on the

scale. Mean scores were obtained per participant, and their self-efficacy were interpreted

following the scale shown in Table 7.

Table 7. Interpretation of the scores in the IUSES used to gauge IBS! self-efficacy

SCALE MEAN SCORE RANGES INTERPRETATION
1-2 1,00-2.49 Very low (VL)
3-4 2.50-4.49 Low (L)

5-6 4.50-6.49 Moderate (M)
7-8 6.50-8.49 High (H)
9-10 8.50-10.00 Very High (VH)

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction


Instrument used to measure the PSBTs’ predisposition to teach using
IBSI. In determining the PSBTs’ predisposition to teach using IBSI practices, the
researcher developed and used the Test for Inquiry Pedagogy in the Science of
Biology (TIPS-B) (see Appendix I). The TIPS-B was content-validated by three
experts. One of the validators was a professor/research director at a State
University. He holds a Ph.D. in Biology Education and teaches Educational
Measurement and Evaluation in both the undergraduate and graduate levels. The
second validator Ph.D. in Science Education degree holder with a Master's degree in
Science education. She is currently a biology and science education professor in the
largest private sectarian university north of Manila. The third validator is a retired
professor in Biology and science education. She obtained a Ph.D. in science
education major in Biology and a national board member in the largest national
organization for biology teachers. Alll content validators had specialized in either
Biology or Biology Education at the undergraduate levels.

The comments and suggestions were incorporated based on a consensus
that if two out of three agreed on such suggestions, then these suggestions were
incorporated into the instrument. There was one suggestion that some items should
be shortened, but the other two did not agree as shortening the item might reduce
the ability of the item to picture the situation desired to be analyzed. Another
evaluator suggested that one option appeared to be an inquiry situation, but the two
other evaluators did not agree. Since there was no consensus on the suggestions,
the instrument was used as it was, except on some minor corrections on grammar
and syntax.

The TIPS-B consisted of 15 classroom vignettes involving Biology teaching.
Each vignette is followed by four options depicting teaching strategies with one or

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

two inquiry-based science instruction (IBSI), and two or three non-inquiry strategies.
For items with two options manifesting IBSI, one option involved open inquiry, and
another option depicted guided inquiry. This variation was done in the attempt to
eliminate some answers that appear quite obvious. Also, the non-inquiry items were
crafted in such a way that they manifest more active direct pedagogies, rather than
passive, didactic direct instructional models. The TIPS-B was tried out with biology
teachers, and biology education graduates and undergraduates in three different
universities. This procedure was done to determine if all options are all attractive by
attracting at least 5% of those who will answer the instrument. The results favored
the affirmative, so the instrument was adopted in the study.

The readability of the instrument was likewise determined to ensure its
reading ease. Using the online readability calculator Readabilityformulas.com (nd),
the instrument is in the average or standard reliability level and is suited for Grade 8
learners, with ages ranging from 12 to 14.

To accomplish the instrument, the PSBTs chose among the four options the
strategy they will most likely use when they teach a given Biology lesson. Their
answers were scored, depending on whether or not they chose the options that
manifested the IBSI practices. The PSBTs were given no points if they chose an
option that is a non-IBSI, and one point was awarded when they chose any of the
options that manifest IBSI. With this scoring scheme, the highest possible score
was 15, and the lowest score was zero. The participants’ scores were used to
indicate their predisposition to teach using IBS! practices. The scores in the TIPS-B

were as interpreted as follows:

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

Table 8. Interpretation of the scores in the TIPS-B used to gauge IBS! predisposition

MEAN SCORE RANGE TOTAL SCORE RANGE INTERPRETATION
0.00 - 0.15 0-2 Very low (VL)
0.16 -0.35 3-5 Low (L)
0.36 - 0.65 6-10 Moderate (M)
0.66 - 0.85 11-13 High (H)
0.86 - 1.00 14-15 Very High (VH)

Instrument used to measure the PSBTs’ application of IBSI during
teaching internship. Finally, to assess the PSBTs’ extent of application of IBSI in
teaching, the modified Reformed Teaching Observation Protocol (mRTOP), and the
modified inquiry-based teaching self-assessment inventory (mITSAI) were used. As
earlier illustrated, the RTOP and the ITSAI contain similar items, except that the
former is designed for observers in a teaching-learning process, while the second is
designed as a self-assessment tool (Isola & Wenning, 2007; Sawada et al., 2002).
The mRTOP was accomplished by the PSBTs’ cooperating teachers near the
culmination of the former's teaching internship experience. The mITSAI, on the
other hand, was accomplished by the PSBTs at the culmination of their student
teaching experience.

Before the cooperating teachers (CTs) accomplished the mRTOP, they were
told to assess their biology student teachers as objectively as they could as their
ratings would not be included in the student teachers’ grades. For confidentiality, the
CTs were asked to place the accomplished questionnaires in a sealed envelope.

The CTs’ ratings in the mRTOP were combined with the PSBTs’ self-assessments in
the mITSAI. The scores were then averaged to provide a more valid assessment of
the PSBTs' use of inquiry-based instruction in their science classes. The mRTOP.

and the mITSAI are in Appendix J and Appendix K, respectively.

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

Both the mRTOP and the mITSAI are 23-item instruments. Each item in both
instruments was answered on a scale of 0 (not true of me) to 4 (true of me ona
regular basis). The level of application of IBSI during teaching internship was
interpreted based on the obtained scores as follows:

Table 9. Interpretation of the combined ratings in the mRTOP and the mITSAI used to
gauge IBS! application during teaching intemship

SCALE MEAN RANGE FREQUENCY OF EXTENT OF APPLICATION
OCCURRENCE
0 0.00-0.49 Never Very Limited (VL)
1 0.50-1.49 Seldom Insufficient (In)
2 1,50-2.49 Sometimes Moderate (M)
3 2.50-3.49 Often Sufficient (S)
4 3.50-4.00 Very often Extensive (E)

Furthermore, to validate the quantitative results, the PSBTs’ lesson plans
were analyzed for some manifestation of IBSI use.
Data Analysis Procedure

Both descriptive and inferential statistics were used in the treatment of the
quantitative data gathered. As for the IBSI variables that were measured using
Likert-type items (IBSI exposure, attitude, self-efficacy, and application, including
learner-centered views), the data gathered in both the overall and the components or
elements were the composite scores. Hence, these data were in the interval scale.
This action justifies the adoption of the parametric statistics procedures instead of its
non-parametric equivalents in the analysis of data.

According to Clason and Dormody, (1994), “a Likert scale is composed of a
series of four or more Likert-type items that are combined into a single composite
‘score or variable during the process of data analysis. The combined items are used
to provide a quantitative measure of a character or a personality trait. The researcher

is only interested in the composite score that represents the character/personality

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

trait.” (p. 12). From this initial work, Boone and Boone (2014) explained that the data
obtained from Likert-type scales could be analyzed at the interval measurement
scale, since a composite score (sum or mean) from four or more type Likert-type
items were computed and utilized.

Other justifications for the adoption of parametric statistics despite the use of
Likert scales are the works of Norman (2010), Rickards, Magee, and Artino (2012),
and Sullivan and Artino (2013). For his part, Norman (2010), a leading figure in
medical education research methodology, has comprehensively reviewed the
controversy and provided compelling evidence, with actual examples using real and
simulated data, that parametric tests can be used with ordinal data. Meanwhile,
Rickards et al., (2012), remarked that researchers in the field of education and
medicine commonly create several Likert-type items, group them into a “survey
scale,” and then calculate a total score or mean score for the scale items. This
practice, according to and Sullivan and Artino (2013), particularly recommended
when “researchers are attempting to measure less-concrete concepts, such as
trainee motivation, patient satisfaction, and physician confidence - where a single
survey item is unlikely to be capable of fully capturing the concept being assessed.”
(p. 2).

The normality of the data and the equality of the variances were likewise
ascertained to justify the use of parametric tests. Using the Shapiro-Wilk test, which
is considered the most powerful test for normality (Gashemi & Zahediasl, 2012; Peat
& Barton, 2005), and the Levene’s test for the normality of variance, all the Likert
scales data were able to satisfy the normality assumptions at p = 0.05. All the

obtained p-values in both tests were higher than a = 0.05. Thus, parametric tests

Pre-service Biology Teachers and inquiry-Based Science Instruction

were used in the analysis. The result of the Shapiro-Wilk test and Levene's test are
shown in Appendices O and P, respectively.

With the above justifications, the data were thus summarized using means
and standard deviations. Further, one-way analysis of variance (One-way ANOVA)
at p = 0.08 level. If applicable, Tukey's HSD was used to determine significant
differences along the subscales or elements of the IBSI variables.

Pearson-Product Moment Correlation (PPMC) was used to determine the
inter-correlations among the IBSI variables. Finally, simple linear regression
procedures were employed to determine if significant linear relationships exist
among the IBSI variables and their elements. All data were run using the statistical
package for the social sciences (SPSS) version 20. Meanwhile, the normality and
equality of variances were tested using the statistics kingdom (staskingdom.com,

nd), a statistics calculator on-line.

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

Chapter 4
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

This chapter covers the findings of the study and the explanations and
inferences the author made on these findings. Some of the findings were likewise
corroborated with the results of previous studies.

Characteristics of the Pre-service Biology Teachers
(PSBTs) According to their IBSI-related Attributes

PSBTs’ IBSI exposure. The PSBTs believe that they bring a sufficient level
of exposure to inquiry-based science instruction going into off-campus practice
teaching (Table 10). This finding is based on their assessment of their experiences
with IBS! practices during their pre-college, college science, and field study courses,
using a scale that ranges from one (lowest) to five (highest). This result implies that
the science teachers and professors who taught them have “often” used inquiry-
based practices in their science teaching. This result further implies that, in the mind
of the respondents, inquiry instruction practices are very much alive in the
Philippines, even though the respondents in this study are products of the pre-
science education reform era.

Table 10. IBSI exposure of the PSBTs along the IBSI elements in their pre-college (PC),
college (C), and field study (FS)

NO. ITEMS PC Cc FS Mea Int.
i

Lesson planning and implementation

4 Limit the use of lecture and direct instruction to 345 363 377 362 Ss
occasions where the lesson cannot be taught
through hands-on or inquiry-based instruction

5 — Demonstrate flexibility by balancing and 3.67 4.09 4.08 395 S
mediating their preplanned lessons and
questions with the activities and directions
prompted by student questions.

6 Assess students’ prior knowledge at the startof 3.74 3.91 4.11 392 S$
the lesson and adjust teaching accordingly.

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

7 Make leaming retevant and meaningful by 3.73 409 402 395 S
taking students’ interests into account and
basing lessons on students’ prior suppositions.
8 Use counterintuitive demonstrations and 3.44 3.74 368 3.62 s
discrepant events to pose contradictions and
challenge students’ previously held beliefs.
12 Arrange students’ desks for collaborative work 3.80 3.86 391 386 S
in small groups.
13 Move about the classroom andrrotate among «3.76. 3.74 3.74 3.75 S
small groups throughout the lesson.
21 Assess student performance in a variety of 383 403 409 399 S$
forms.
22 Initiate and orchestrate discourse and scientific 3.41 3.75 355 357 S
argumentation.
SUB-SCALE MEAN 365 3.87 387 3.80 _ 5
SD 0.80 0.62 0.67 0.61
Interpretation ss Ss
Content Knowledge
2 Provide opportunities for metacognitive 3.68 4.08 3.88 3.90 s
processes.
9 Use inquiries and investigations to “anchor" 353 4.03 380 384 Ss
new information to previously held knowledge.
14 Encourage students to design and carry out 3.44 405 3.72 3.73 s
their investigations.
16 Integrate science content with process skills 3.64 420 3.92 3.92 s
and problem-solving strategies, as well as
technology, environment, etc.
17 Actas facilitator, mediator, initiator, andcoach 3.98 4.38 4.21 4.21 S
while modeling behaviors of inquiry, curiosity,
and wonder.
18 Use primary sources of information (joumal 3.64 4.25 3.94 3.95 Ss
articles, etc.) rather than, or in conjunction with
prescribed textbooks.
20 Encourage students to use concept maps, 3.94 435 410 4.09 s
graphic organizers, and drawings of models to
explain and demonstrate newly acquired
knowledge.
24 Students showed an interest in science by 3.68 418 3.85 3.88 s
acting as researchers/investigators.
25 Students are engaged in diligent investigations 3.55 388 364 368 S
from their self-generated questions.
26 Students reflected on and took responsibility for 3.86 4.28 4.10 4.13 s
my/their leaming.
29 Students considered skepticism and altemative 3.82 4.11 4.00 3.99 Ss
models or points of view.
30 Students used claims and unbiased evidence 3.92 425 414 415 Ss
to form explanations and arguments.
SUB-SCALE MEAN 3.72. 417 3.94 3.94 s
SD 0:84 0.58 0.76 0.65
Interpretation Ss Ss Ss
Classroom culture
1 Create a classroom culture that encourages Ss
positive scientific attitudes and habits of mind, 9-79 4:11 4.02 3.97

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

3 Stimulate and nurture students’ curiosity. 3.83 411 394 3.96 Ss
10 Model inquisitive actions by posing prompting

and probing questions as well as asking s
questions that require higher-level and critical 9-59 «4:21 4.08 3.97
thinking skills.

41 Refrain from divulging the answers and pose > s
prompts to clarify students’ questions. SCS Cees comes 22)

15 Keep students on-task by having them support s
and debate their data, evidence, and 335 397 365 3.6
conclusion.

19 Encourage communication skills such as s
speaking and listening 400 4.34 4.26 4.21

23 Students enjoyed posing questions and s
demonstrating a desire to leam. oo COS Consol

27 Persisted in asking questions to clarify and s
Confirm the accuracy of their understanding. 400 4.11 4.15 4.08

28 Students worked respectfully and s
communicated in collaborative groups. 411 442 418 424
SUB-SCALE MEAN 3.78 4.14 400 3.97 s
SD 0.76 0.57 066 0.58
Interpretation ss Ss
OVERALL MEAN 36 42a $18 gop S
Di s s s §
sD 1.07 1.01 1.00 0.84

‘Subscale means (mean column) with the same letter are not significant at p = .05, Tukey
HSD, Means of the same letter are not significantly different at p = 0.05

SCALE RANGE FREQUENCY OF INTERPRETATION
OCCURRENCE
1 1,00-1.49 1% - 20% Very Limited (VL)
2 1.50-2.49 21% - 40% Insufficient (InS)
3 2.50-3.49 41% - 60% Moderate (M)
4 3.50-4.49 61% - 80% Sufficient (S)
5 4.50-5.00 81% - 100% Extensive (E)

The above result contradicts what seems to be the trend internationally.
According to the literature on science reform practices, the adoption of inquiry
instruction into the K-12 classrooms remains somewhat elusive, despite inquiry
instruction being a prominent feature of national science standards for the past 15
years (Binns & Popp, 2014; Smith, Desimone, Zednerm, Dunn, Bhatt &

Rumyantseva, 2007). Moreover, according to Smolleck and Mongan (2011), and

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

Ramnarain and Hlatswayo (2018), the implementation of such a pedagogical
practice continues to be a challenge for many teachers.

The PSBT respondents’ sufficient exposure to IBSI likewise contradicts
Anderson (2007), Crawford (2000), Friesen and Jardine (2010), Melville, et al.,
(2008), and Windschitl (2004) who all reported on the limited experience prospective
science teachers have on IBSI both in their basic education and teacher-preparation
years. This limited exposure to IBS! has also limited the implementation of IBS! by
these teachers in their science teaching.

The stark contrast between the result of the study and that of international
trend could be due to the differences in the manner of measuring the prevalence of
IBSI practices in science teaching and learning. While this study used a
questionnaire soliciting the participants’ self-assessment of their experiences, other
studies could have used more direct procedures such as actual classroom
observations triangulated with lesson plan/syllabus and/or the analysis of laboratory

manuals (National Research Council, 2006).

The PSBTs’ assessment of the levels of their overall IBSI exposure in the
three stages (pre-college, college, and field study) was all in the level of “sufficient.”
However, analysis of variance (ANOVA) indicates the perceived overall exposure
levels across the three stages differ significantly (F = 4.487, p = 0.012, 2-tailed)

Of the three IBSI elements, IBS! exposure in college science courses is
perceived to be highest, except along lesson planning and implementation.

Meanwhile, perceived IBSI exposure is lowest in the PSBTs’ pre-college courses.

Pre-service Biology Teachers and inquiry-Based Science Instruction

Table 11. One-way ANOVA and Tukey HSD on the PSBTs’ perceived level of IBS!
exposure during their pre-college, college science, and field study courses.

Source Sum of df Mean F statistic pvalue
squares square

Treatment 4.1531 2 2.0765 44877 0.0124

Error 90.2289 195 0.4627

Total 94.3819 197

Treatments pairs Q statistic p-value Inference

Pre-college vs. college science 4.1891 0.009 ** p<0.01

courses

Pre-college vs. Field study courses 2.6438 0.150 Ns

College science vs. Field study 1.5454 0.519 Ns

courses

The result on higher overall IBS! exposure in college science courses
contradicts the long-standing notion that college professors generally use lectures
and expository procedures in their teaching (Meyer, Hong, & Fynewever, as cited in
Holloway, 2015). Accordingly, there is very little learner involvement in most college
science courses, and experiments are only done in laboratory periods where very
little “real” inquiry activities are done (DeHaan, 2005; Jeanpierre, Oberhauser, &
Freeman, 2005; Melville et al., 2008). In particular, the result contradicts that of
Aulls, Tabatabai, and Shore (2016), who reported on their pre-service teacher
respondents identifying their inquiry experiences greatest during high school,
followed by university, then elementary.

The discrepancies in the result between the actual data and long-prevailing
notion can be explained by the fact that the data could have been gathered using
different tools. While this study gathered data by soliciting the students’ self-
assessments, other studies could have used more direct, first-hand methods such as
classroom observation, or document analysis. Likewise, since the definition of
inquiry teaching is still nebulous to the education community, and that no standard

instrument has been developed to measure inquiry experiences of students, true

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

inquiry exposure is difficult to gauge. The interpretation of these results should,

therefore, consider this constraint.

Meanwhile, when the perceived overall levels of exposure were compared
according to the IBSI elements, the greatest perceived exposure happened along
classroom culture, followed by content knowledge. However, variance analysis
(ANOVA) revealed that the exposures were statistically tied (F = 1.560, p = .213 2-
tailed). The PSBTs’ mean scores in each of these elements all translate to a
“sufficient” level of exposure.

Table 12. One-way ANOVA on the PSBTs’ overall perceived level of IBSI exposure

along fesson planning and implementation (LPI), content Knowledge, and classroom
culture

Source ‘Sum of df meansquare Fstalistic p-value
squares

Treatment 1.1635 2 0.5818 1.5598 0.2128

Error 72.7299 195 0.3730

Total 73.8935 197

Comparing IBS| exposure in the three stages according to lesson planning

and implementation, ANOVA indicates an

ence, despite higher
mean scores during college and field study stages. Meanwhile, according to both
content knowledge and classroom culture, there were significant differences in
exposure mean scores. In both elements, the PSBTs claim that their exposure
levels were highest during college, followed by field study, then pre-college.

Further analysis of the results show that overall, the IBS! practices the PSBTs
were least exposed to were Item 22 - “Initiate and orchestrate discourse and
Scientific argumentation,” Item 8 — “Use counterintuitive demonstrations and
discrepant events to pose contradictions and challenge students’ previously held

beliet

”, Item 4 — “Limit the use of lecture and direct instruction to occasions where
the lesson cannot be taught through hands-on or inquiry-based instruction” and Item

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science instruction

15 — “Keep students on-task by having them support and debate their data,
evidence, and conclusion.” All but one of these items pertains to lesson planning
and implementation. The other item (Item 15) came from school culture.

Table 13. One-way ANOVA and Tukey HSD on the PSBTs’ perceived level of IBS!

exposure along the three IBSI elements during their pre-college, college science, and
field study courses.

Lesson planning and implementation

Source  SumofSquares df Mean F statistic p-value
Square
Treatment 2.2226 2 11413 2.2610 0.1070ns
Error 95.8447 195 0.4915
Total 98.0673 197
Content knowledge
Source  SumofSquares df Mean F statistic pvalue
Square
Treatment 6.4447 2 3.2224 5.9141 0.0032"
Error 106.2474 195 0.5449
Total 112.6924 197
Treatments pairs Gsiatistic p-value inference
Pre-college vs. college science courses 48638 0.0020541_ —* p<0.01
Pre-college vs. Field study courses 2.4180 —0.2043023 Ns
College science vs. Field study courses 2.4458 0.1970091 Ns
Classroom culture
Source  Sumof Squares df Mean F statistic p-value
Square
Treatment 4.2196 2 2.1098 47227 0.0099"
Error 87.1146 195 0.4467
Total 91.3343 197
Treatments pairs Qstatistic p-value Inference
Pre-college vs. college science courses 4.3022 _0.0075014___ ™*p<0.01
Pre-college vs. Field study courses 2.6861 0.1416243 Ns
College science vs. Field study courses 1.6161 0.4904269 Ns

The items the PSBTs were less exposed to relate to the features that
characterize scientific inquiry and the 5E model of teaching (Llewellyn, 2012;
Petersen, 2000). The other items the PSBTs are least exposed to were: a) (Item 25)
“Students are engaged in diligent investigations from their self-generated questions”,
b) (Item 14) “Encourage students to design and carry out their investigations”, and c)

Pre-service Biology Teachers and inquiry-Based Science Instruction

(Item 13) “(Teacher) Move about the classroom and rotate among small groups
throughout the lesson.”.

The levels of IBSI exposure along the above areas were particularly lower
during the PSBTs’ pre-college years. This low exposure could be explained by the
fact that these “hard-core” inquiry practices are too advanced for younger learners.
As described by Banchi and Bell (2008) and Buck et al. (2008), inquiry activities are
events that advance with the learners’ age/maturity or experience. Hence, the
incidence of inquiry instruction is expectedly lower during the pre-college stages.

Meanwhile, the IBSI practices the PSBTs were most exposed to include items
28, 17, 19, 20, and 30. These items came from the domain of classroom culture.
The specific items with the greatest perceived exposures were: Item 28 - “Students
worked respectfully and communicated in collaborative groups” and Item 17 — “Act
as a facilitator, mediator, initiator, and coach while modeling behaviors of inquiry,
curiosity, and wonder" \tem 19 - “Encourage communication skills such as speaking
and listening,” \tem 20 — “Encourage students to use concept maps, graphic
organizers, and drawings of models to explain and demonstrate newly acquired
knowledge” and “item 30 — “Used claims and unbiased evidence to form
explanations and arguments.” Except for item 30, the above inquiry events are
general characteristics that define student-centered learning, which is also part of
science education reform efforts (Heim & Holt, 2018).

The qualitative data obtained in the semi-structured interview reveal that the
PSBTs were indeed least exposed to IBSI during their pre-college years than either
their college and field study observation and teaching internship courses. Close to
75% of the respondents claim that they had limited exposure to IBSI in high school.
In contrast, 71% claimed that they had sufficient to extensive experience with IBSI

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

during their college science courses. These findings seem to support the idea that
IBSI and other learner-centered strategies are more appropriate and more applicable
for older students and those more inclined into science courses (Banchi & Bell, 2008;
Buck et al., 2008)

PSBTs’ IBSI understanding. Table 14 reveals that, overall, the PSBT
respondents have a limited understanding of inquiry-based science instruction. This
level of understanding is gauged in the PSBTs’ ability to choose from the given
options the IBSI practice, which they think will manifest inquiry practices in the given
science lesson or situation. Based on their responses, it can be surmised that the
majority of these respondents (54.89%) have a limited to very limited understanding
of IBSI practices. They can hardly distinguish the teaching strategies and
techniques that reflect IBSI from those that manifest direct teaching approaches.
This limited understanding is true in all three lesson stages. Meanwhile, 39.39%
hold a moderate level of understanding, while only 6.06% hold an adequate
understanding of IBS! practices.

Table 14. Level of IBS! understanding by PSBTs according to lesson stages

‘According to lesson stage Mean St.Dev. Interpretation
Lesson beginning (3,5,9,14,15) 0.564ab (0.523 Moderate
Lesson proper (1,4,8,10, 11,12,13) 0.361b 0.579 Limited
Lesson ending/wrap-up (2,6,7,16) 0.606a 0.539 Moderate
Overall 0.485 0.462 Limited

Means of the same letter are not significant at p = 0.05, Tukey HSD

Mean scores Interpretation

0.00 or lower Very Limited
0.01 ~ 0.50 Limited
0.51 - 1.25 Moderate
1.26 - 1.75 Sufficient
1.76 - 2.00 Extensive

‘When compared according to the lesson stage, the PSBTs tend to identify

IBSI teaching techniques and principles better when these are used at the beginning

Pre-service Biology Teachers and tnquiry-Based Science instruction

and at the end of the lesson than at lesson proper (Table 5). Analysis of Variance
and Tukey's HSD (Table 6) indicate that the PSBTs' IBS! understanding at lesson
beginning and at lesson ending was significantly higher than their understanding at
lesson proper. Overall, the PSBTs have limited understanding of IBSI principles
when these principles are used at lesson proper.

Table 15. One-way ANOVA and Tukey HSD on the PSBTs' understanding of IBSI
practices at different lesson stages

Source Sumof Squares Df ___Mean Square Ftalistic __p-value
Treatment 2.2549 2 1.1274 3.7646 0.0249"
Error 58.3994 195 0.2995
Total 60.6542 197

Treatments pairs Q statistic p-value Inference
Tesson beginning vs. Lesson proper 3.0012 0.087952 Ns
Lesson beginning vs. Lesson ending 0.6298 0.889688 Ns
Lesson proper vs. lesson ending 3.6310 0.029462__* p<0.05

The items where the respondents had lowest overall understanding were
those on how IBSI is used to teach the following topics: “Sorting animals” (Item 10),
Frog dissection (Item 1), “Fossil analysis” (Item 11), and “A teachable moment on
hand sanitizers” (Item 12). Meanwhile, most respondents were able to demonstrate
a good understanding of IBSI application on Item 15 - “Chlorophyll.”

The PSBT respondents’ lack of understanding of IBSI was evident in their
answers on the item about “Sorting animals.” Most of the respondents mistakenly
thought of the didactic and direct option (teacher explaining the rules of classification
before allowing the students to apply these rules) and active direct (teacher
demonstrating the rules of classification using cards) as manifestations of IBS!
Practices. As for the item regarding “Frog dissection,” more respondents also
selected the options that did not reflect inquiry practices. They chose the direct and
didactic (teacher demonstration) or active direct methods (student dissection
following a focus question provided by the teacher) over the open (student

Pre-service Biology Teachers and inquiry-Based Science instruction

exploratory dissection) and guided inquiry (student exploratory dissection with
teacher probing) choices. Meanwhile, in the case of the item on “Fossil analysis,”
very few of the respondents chose the two options that reflected the 5E teaching
model. Instead of them choosing the options where students explore before teacher
presentation, the PSBTs opted for the more traditional approach of providing a
formal lecture followed by a confirmatory activity that will prove that such a
phenomenon or scientific principle is indeed real. Such confirmation activities are
considered non-inquiry activities as they simply verify scientific ideas or processes
that are previously learned (Banchi & Bell, 2008; Buck et al., 2008).

The PSBT respondents’ limited understanding of IBSI is evident in their
responses to the question “What do you understand about IBSI?” during the follow-
up interview. The PSBTs’ responses range from naive and simplistic to being over-

generalized. The two best answers to the above question are given as follows:

“IBSI focuses on the involvement of students in finding answers to questions
while they construct new information. IBSI helps the students develop their
skills and make students scientifically literate.”

“IBSI adopts an investigative approach in teaching and learning where
students are provided with opportunities to investigate a problem and search
‘for possible solutions.”

However, more IBSI definitions or descriptions indicate naive or limited
understanding. Some of these definitions or descriptions for IBSI include the
following:

“Using or posing questions throughout the discussion.”

“Teacher asking the ideas and opinions of the students.”
“An instruction that uses the art of questioning in the classroom.”

“Teacher leads a question-and-answer session.”
“Assess students with questions that are relevant to the topic.”

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

Other IBS! descriptions were either too general or were inappropriate. Some
of these descriptions are the following:

“IBSI encourages both teachers and students to be more knowledgeable in
ail areas.”

“In IBSI, both the students and the teachers share information, unlike the
traditional way that the teacher is the only source of knowledge.”

“Examples of IBS/ are experiments that have guide questions.”

“IBSI involves sharing ideas with the learners and expounding these ideas
through an activity or discussion.

“IBS is an interactive discussion or lecture where a teacher can formulate an
idea by gathering the students’ ideas about the concepts they have learned.”

The PSBTs' inappropriate ideas about IBSI were supported by their answers
when they were asked about their best experience with the teaching strategy. While
a few answers are acceptable, many responses reflect their limited understanding.
Some of the responses that manifest limited understanding include:

“When (as a student teacher) | let the learners have a short reporting as their
activity, then they will ask questions, or | will ask them questions regarding the
lesson (sic)” “When as a student-teacher | let the learners have a short reporting as.
their activity. Then, other learners or | asked ques garding the report.”

“(My best experience with IBS/ came with) recitations, group activities, and
reporting.”

“The teacher discussed the lesson, and as the discussion or the lecture is
going on, the teacher asks (sic) questions to the students.”

The accounts described earlier indicate that the PSBTs tend to equate IBS!
with mere teacher questioning, or teacher-led student recitation. Such a result
conforms to that of Lee and Shea (2016), who reported on pre-service science
teachers view of IBSI as a mere “asking students questions” rather than it being a
formal set of pedagogical tools. These descriptions are quite limited, oversimplified,
or too generalized. Asking a lot of questions does not necessarily make an inquiry

lesson. According to Llewellyn (2013), a question to be considered inquiry-oriented

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

must “initiate, engage, or provoke a lesson, discussion, or investigation,” “provide
direction to a lesson, discussion, or investigation,” “assess students’ prior
knowledge” and “undercover students’ naive conceptions.”

The result of pre-service teachers’ limited understanding of IBSI finds support
in some studies, but contradictions in others. For instance, Baykara, Yakar, and Liu
(2018) reported on Turkish pre-service science teachers’ naive views on scientific
inquiry. Of the eight aspects of inquiry identified in the instrument, Views about
Scientific Inquiry (VASI), the pre-service teacher respondents possessed informed
views in only three of these aspects (p. 132). These pre-service teachers hold naive
and unclear views on other aspects. ‘

However, the pre-service teachers in selected universities in Indonesia hold a
very good understanding of inquiry teaching (Zulfiani & Herlanti, 2018). Using the
Principle of Scientific inquiry Teacher (PSI-T) instrument (Campbell & Amd-Hamid,
2000), the authors found that the majority of the respondents hold a high (61%)
inquiry perception. These conflicting results could have been contributed by the
difference in the instrument used in measuring inquiry perceptions or understanding.
With no standard instrument to measure IBSI conceptualization, there will always be
Conflicting results from the international community, and researchers, readers, and
the end-users must be cautious in interpreting the results.

The limited or insufficient understanding of inquiry-based instruction is true,
not only for pre-service teachers. Even in-service teachers hold an incomplete or
even incorrect notion of inquiry. Many of these in-service teachers equate all

laboratory works with inquiry, even if the activities provided are mere confirmation

activities or cookbook activities (Capps & Crawford, 2013; Llewelyn, 2013). Such
conclusions were echoed in the IBSI conceptions of Filipino science teachers, as

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

reported by Gutierez (2015). It is quite apparent that the in-service science teachers
are aware only of the “hands-on” component, and not the minds-on nature of IBSI.

It is, however, quite consoling to know that the PSBT respondents in this
study were aware of their lack of understanding of the IBS! as a strategy. When they
were asked to assess their readiness to teach using IBSI, many were hesitant to
score themselves high. These respondents claim that they still “have to learn more of
the strategy” and that they are still “confused as to how IBSI is implemented in
science classes.” Such admission of lack of knowledge is a positive indication that
they are willing to learn more about the strategy and hopefully apply IBSI in their
future classrooms.

The PSBTs’ moderate but apparent lack of confidence in their understanding
of IBSI complements the findings of Lilitsis and Piegaro (2010), and Tatar (2012)
This level of understanding about IBSI could act as a barrier in the PSBTs’ ability to
apply IBS! practices during actual teaching (Binns & Popp, 2014; Blanchard,
Southerland, & Ganger, 2009). Teachers must first have enough understanding of
teaching with inquiry if they are to enact such a pedagogical approach (Chichekian &
Shore, 2016)

On the other hand, many of the PSBTs were aware that IBSI is a student-
centered, hands-on, and an inductive teaching model. However, these inquiry
descriptions are insufficient as, according to Haury (1993), IBSI is more than just
hands-on. Physically doing the activity is not the most essential element of science
teaching. This especially true when laboratory activities are of the "cookbook" style
or confirmatory in nature, i.e., labs that provide the students with the questions to
investigate, what materials to use, and how to go about solving the problem
(LLewelyn, 2013). According to Haury (1993), IBSI involves lessons or activities that

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

allow students to pose questions, gather data, reason from evidence, and
communicate explanations based on the collected data. In other words, IBS!
involves not only “hands-on,” but more importantly, “minds-on" activities.

This limited understanding of IBS! can be attributed to the fact that up to this
time, there is still much confusion on the real meaning of the word inquiry (Banchi &
Bell, 2008). As such, even science and teacher education professors could hold
their misconceptions about IBSI. Indeed, inquiry instruction is a complex and
dynamic activity (Ward, 2016) that is not very easy to understand. Such a limited
understanding of the true nature of IBSI has important implications on the teaching
and demonstration of the strategy in the undergraduate science teaching methods
course. As future teachers of science, the respondents are expected to enact IBSI
practices in their K-12 science classrooms. It is then imperative that the pre-service
science teachers must recognize the importance of participating in professional
development activities even as early as their teaching-training years. These
professional development activities may come in many forms, from training and
seminars, demonstration teaching festivals, or even lesson study activities.

PSBTs’ attitudes toward IBSI. A scale of zero to two was used to describe
the PSBTs' attitudes toward IBSI. Overall, the PSBTs hold a highly positive attitude
toward the use of inquiry-based science instruction as a teaching strategy. Their
very high overall attitude scores indicate this level of attitude. This result implies that
the teaching and learning practices embedded in IBSI are desirable to the
respondents.

Such a result is a positive and welcome development for science teaching
and learning, as positive attitudes and high levels of motivation toward a particular
Practice or action propel someone to act or behave toward these practices. As

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

Lyngdoh and Sungoh (2017) succinctly point, “Attitude is the most important factor

that guides motivation and behavior.” Therefore, in the context of this study, a

positive attitude toward IBSI will contribute toward the successful implementation of

IBSI teaching in the classroom. In contrast, an unfavorable attitude will hinder its

application.

Table 16. PSBTs' attitudes toward iBSi

tems MEAN _Inter.
Interest
1. | would do anything to leam about the inquiry-based instruction AH
(1S!) 1.86
4. | am not interested in the IBS| approach. * 183. VH
8. The IBSI approach is not interesting for me in any way. * 185 VH
9. like reading books about the IBS! approach 114 M
14. Lwould like to research the IBS| approach 1.47 H
Attribute mean 4.63b H
StDev. 0.36
Liking
3. IBSI is my desired teaching approach 1.35 H
5. like the IBSI approach. 188 VH
7. 1 do not enjoy performing activities conceming the IBS! Vu
approach*. 1.53
11. like informing others around me about the IBSI approach. 1.39 H
Attribute mean 154) =H
St.Dev. 0.47
Usefulness 7 Oe
2. IBSI is an approach that deserves much emphasis. 174 VH
6. I like using the IBS! approach in my classes 1.62 H
10. | would like to use the IBSI approach in my future teaching. 195 VH
12. IBSI is a useful teaching approach 180 VH
13. | believe that | can benefit much from the IBS| approach 188 _VH
Attribute mean 1.802 VH
St.Dev. 0.29
Overall Mean 1.66 H
StDev 0.28
“items are reverse scored.
Attribute means of the same letter are not significant at p = 0.05, Tukey HSD

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

Mean score ranges Total score ranges Interpretation

0 and below O and below Very low (VL)

0.01 to 0.50 1-7 Low (L)
0.51- 1.25 8-16 Moderate (M)
1.26 -1.75 17-23 High (H)
1.76 ~ 2.00 24-28 Very high (VH)

The attitude subscale on usefulness received the highest mean attitude
scores from the PSBTs, falling under the “very high” category. The result suggests
that the PSBT respondents do recognize the curricular benefits of the strategy in
science teaching. ANOVA and Post hoc (Tukey's HSD) reveal significantly higher
attitude scores along this subscale than the subscales of liking and interest. In
particular, the highest rating was given to the item, “/ would like to use the IBS/
approach in my future teaching.” Of the 66 respondents, only two indicated that they
were not entirely resolved in using IBSI in their future teaching. This finding is an
indication of the respondents’ willingness and desire to apply IBSI in their future
teaching. Such results are encouraging as they indicate the future biology teachers’
open-heartedness to embrace the science teaching reforms mandated in science
education standards in many countries. Under this subscale, the only item that did
not receive a “very high” attitude score was “/ like using the IBS/ approach in my
classes," which was given a “high” rating.

Table 17. One-way ANOVA and Tukey HSD on the PSBTs' IBS| attitudes along liking,
interest, and usefuiness

Source _Sumof Squares Df ‘Mean Square F statistic _—_ p-value
Treatment 2.3330 2 1.1665 7.9773 0.0005
Error 28.5147 195 0.1462
Total 30.8477 197

Treatments pairs Qstatistic p-value _inference
Tiking vs. interest 1.9635 0.349768 Ns
Liking vs. Usefulness 3.6052 0.030927 * p<0.05
Interest vs. Usefulness 5.5687 0.001005 _** p<0.01


Pre-service Biology Teachers and inquiry-Based Science Instruction

The attitude subscale on interest was rated by the respondents as the second
highest. The mean attitude scores under this subscale fell under “high.”
Interestingly, the negatively stated item, “The IBS! approach is not interesting for me
in any way,” received the highest attitude score. Such results suggest that the IBSI
approach attracts the majority (98%) of the pre-service biology teacher respondents.
Itis just hoped that the PSBTs’ interest in IBSI will translate into the utilization of this
approach in their future classrooms.

The attitude attribute on general liking received the lowest scores from the
PSBTs. However, the mean subscale rating still fell under “high,” suggesting that the
IBS| approaches are likable to the respondents. Under this subscale, the items
receiving higher attitude scores from the PSBTs’ were those of their natural liking of
IBSI and their enjoyment of the activities in IBSI formats.

The PSBTs' positive view of IBSI is consistent with previous research (Binns
& Popp, 2014; Eick & Reed, 2002; Lotter, 2004). In these studies, all the pre-service
teacher participants indicated to use inquiry instruction in their careers as teachers.
While the respondents recognize that it would not be easy to implement inquiry
instruction, they were resolved to implement IBS in the future, never-the-less.

Other studies investigated on in-service teachers’ attitudes toward inquiry
instruction and conflicting results have emerged. Ina large study involving Chinese
teachers, Xie and Sharif (2014) found that in-service primary teachers in China hold
a moderate level of attitudes toward inquiry-based learning. Moreover, Ramnarain
and Hlatswayo (2018) revealed that the African science teachers they sampled hold
@ positive attitude toward inquiry in the teaching and learning of Physical Sciences.

These teachers recognize the benefits of inquiry, such as addressing learner

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

motivation and supporting learners in the understanding of abstract science
concepts.

Other studies investigated pre-service teachers’ (Llyngdoh & Sungoh, 2017)
and in-service teachers’ (Sthapak & Singh, 2017) attitudes toward constructivist
teaching. In these studies, the pre-service teachers and in-service teachers hold a
different attitude toward constructivist teaching. While the Indian in-service teachers
had demonstrated a positive attitude toward constructivism (Sthapak & Singh, 2017),
the opposite is held by Iranian pre-service teachers in the study by Lyngdoh and
Sungoh, (2017).

PSBTs’ learner-centered views (LCV). The PSBTs scored higher in the
learner-centered philosophies (Mean = 21.3) than in the teacher-centered
pedagogical views (Mean = 17.6). These differences were tested using the t-test
for independent samples. A t value of 13.3 was obtained, with a tertical value of 2.00
(p = 0.000, 2-tailed). These values mean that the difference between the views was
significant

Of the 66 respondents, only one scored higher in the teacher-centered
Philosophical views. Meanwhile, seven (10.61%) were fairly neutral, while the
majority (58, 87.88%) hold a learner-centered philosophy.

The only area under teacher-centered philosophy where the PSBTs scored
higher was on behaviorism. The respondents’ behaviorism score was significantly
higher than their scores for either perennialism or essentialism (p = 0.000, 2-tailed).

The PSBT respondents’ adherence to the learner-centered educational
Philosophies is inconsistent with the teaching approach preferences of pre-service
teachers in Ethiopia, as reported by Dejene, Bishaw, and Dagnew (2018). In their
study, the pre-service teachers have entered their teacher-education program with a

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

behaviorist orientation, which is not in harmony with the current reform in science
education (p. 8)

However, with Filipino pre-service teachers in focus, more students have
expressed adherence to the learner-centered philosophies of progressivism,
existentialism, and social reconstructionism (Magulod, 2017; Tupas & Pendon,
2016). Such a philosophical orientation of Filipino pre-service teachers is consistent
with the result of this study.

Table 18 below shows the PSBTs’ mean ratings on the three learner-centered
philosophies. The PSBTs' claim that they are most predisposed toward
constructivism, then progressivism, and then social reconstructionism.

Table 18. Leamer-centered philosophy orientation of PSBTs

Educational philosophy Mean St.Dev.
Leamer-centered philosophy
Progressivism 21.48ab 2.37
Social reconstructionism 20.58b 2.46
Constructivism 21.894 2.31
Total 21.32 1.85

Means of the same letter under each educational philosophy type are not
significantly different.

Despite the apparent similarity of the mean scores, there are significant
differences among the PSBTs' scores along the learner-centered educational
Philosophies (p = 0.006, 2-tailed). One-way variance analysis and post-hoc
procedures (Tukey's HSD) in Table 10 show the mean differences of the three
teacher-centered views. The PSBTs scored higher under progressivism and
constructivism over social reconstructionism, although their constructivism and
progressivism scores and their progressivism and social reconstructionism scores do
Not significantly differ.

In the progressivist view, the learners should be active, and they must learn to

solve problems by experimenting and reflecting on their experiences. The students’

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

interests are vital, as is the integration of thinking, feeling, and doing (Cohen, 1999).
On the other hand, constructivists focus on processes of learning rather than on
learner behavior (Parkay & Stanford, 2007). They concentrate on the mental
processes and strategies that students use to learn, and the students are seen as
continually involved in making sense out of activities around them (p. 92). Finally,
social reconstructionists use critical thinking skills, inquiry, question-asking, and
taking of action as teaching strategies (Cohen, 1999). Students learn to handle
controversy and recognize multiple perspectives (p.8).

Table 19. One-way ANOVA and Tukey HSD on the PSBTs' leamer-centered

philosophical views
Leamer-centered philosophical views
Source _Sumof Squares df___‘ Mean Square F statistic __ p-value

Treatment 60.0909 2 30.0455 5.3028 0.0057
Error 1,104.8636 195 5.6660
Total 1,164.9545 197

Treatments pairs Qslatistic_ p-value Inference
Progressivism vs. Social reconstructionism 3.1027 0.075 Ns
Progressivism vs. Constructivism 1.3962 0.580 Ns
Social reconstructionism vs. 4.4989 0.005 =“ p<0.01
Constructivism

The three learner-centered educational philosophies have explicit ties with
each other. All three provide opportunities for extensive interaction between teacher
and students and among students themselves. Furthermore, all three philosophical
views place a premium on bringing the community, if not the whole world, into the
classroom (Parkay & Stanford, 2007). All of these characteristics of teaching-
learning conditions are consistent with IBSI.

The above result brings a lot of promise to science education in the future, as
science education reforms have emphasized on teachers’ adoption of learner-

centered teaching and learning practices (DepEd, 2012; NRC, 2006).

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

PSBTs’ self-efficacy to teach using IBSI. Using the scale from one (very
low) to 10 (very high), the PSBT respondents are highly self-efficacious to teach
using the IBSI strategy (Table 20). This high self-efficacy to teach using IBSI was
true in the areas of lesson planning and implementation and content knowledge.
Meanwhile, the IBSI self-efficacy along classroom culture was even “very high.”

Table 20. PSBTs' self-efficacy to employ IBS! in their teaching

St
ISI elements Mean pay,
Lesson planning and implementation
1. CAN use strategies and activities that show respect for
students’ prior knowledge and their preconceptions or 812 1.41 H
misconceptions found within that knowledge.
2. CAN design strategies and activities that aliow students to
use their prior knowledge to explain or predict phenomena and 7.92 1.41. -H
then resolve any results or answers that are surprising to them.
3. CAN provide opportunities for students to explore first before
they are provided with formal presentation (lecture or 849 135 H
demonstration, etc.).
4. CAN modify my lesson depending on the ideas or questions
originating from students.
5. CAN modify my lesson based on the results of my formative
assessment strategies (checks for understanding, quick 827 1.17 H
questions, etc.).
6. CAN pose questions or problems that encourage students to
seek and value different ways to investigate or solve a problem.
7. CAN design lessons that engage students as members of a
“learning community," intellectual rigor, constructive criticism, 748 161 H
and the challenging of ideas are valued.
17. CAN use a range of assessment strategies that measure ma ED
the depth of student understanding and the application thereof. :
‘Subscale Mean 796b_ 1.09 _H
Content Knowledge
8. CAN focus on fundamental concepts of the subject. There are
always some significant scientific or mathematical ideas atthe 8.16 159 H
heart of each lesson.
9. CAN implement lessons that emphasize the strong inter-
relatedness (how similar or different from previous concepts) of 8.04 1.39 H
scientific thinking.
10. CAN see quickly what students are trying to say, how it
connects with science concepts, and bring up questions, ideas, 7.98 139 H
or examples that help the student clarify their thinking
11. CAN help and encourage students to foilow general
guidelines, laws, or theories to develop a solution (a model). In
my future lessons, relationships or pattems are represented in
abstract or symbolic ways (graphs or equations).

DI

787 #148 =H

780 180 H

786 130 H

Pre-service Biology Teachers and inquiry-Based Science instruction

12. CAN use many different real-world phenomena as teaching

tools to help students understand basic science and math 811 142 +H
concepts, not just to entertain them or keep their attention.
13. CAN require students to use a variety of means (models,
drawings, graphs, symbols, concrete materials, manipulatives, 8.29 1.61 H
lab materials, etc.) to represent phenomena.
14. CAN allow the students to make predictions and/or
hypotheses, and they are encouraged to devise meanstotest 7.76 149 H
and then validate or reject these predictions/hypotheses.
15. CAN let students be actively engaged in thought-provoking
activities that often involve the critical assessment of
procedures. Students actively think about what they are doing 7.67 «1.30 -H
and about how they were doing. From here, they are clarified
the next steps in their investigation.
16. CAN require students to be reflective about their learning
Student reflections could start with questions like, “How did | AC)
used to think about this?” “What caused me to change my ‘
mind?” “What made it difficult for me to understand this?” etc.
Subscale Mean 7.94 1.40 _H
Classroom culture
18. CAN require students to communicate their ideas to others
using a variety of means and media (Making presentations, ea 120 4H
brainstorming, critiquing, listening, making videos, group work, 7 .
etc.).
19. CAN implement a lesson or activity where there is a high
proportion of student talk (student discussion), anda significant 8.07 1.24 H
amount of it occurs between and among students.
20. CAN require that students always respect what each student
has to say. (Students express their ideas and opinions without 8.86 1.14 VH
fear of censure or ridicule).
21. CAN lead or direct unanticipated behavior torich leaming 7.53 44g
opportunities.
22. CAN act as a resource person, working to support and on an
enhance student investigations and problem-solving. :
23. CAN be called “teacher as a listener” (This metaphor
describes a teacher who is often found helping students use 873 1.16 VH
what they know to construct further understanding).
24. CAN be approachable and encouraging to students. eae) 093) Vi
Students can come to me for consultation/clarifications. ! :
Subscale Mean 8.50a__0.88_VH
‘Overall Mean 7.98 1.11 H
Subscale means of the same lefter are not significant at p = 0.05, Tukey's HSD.
SCALE MEAN SCORE RANGES — DESCRIPTIVE INTERPRETATION
1,00-2.49 Very low (VL)
3-4 2.50-4.49 Low (L)
5-6 4.50-6.49 Moderate (M)
7-8 6.50-8.49 High (H)
9-10 8.50-10.00 Very High (VH)

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction


The high self-efficacy to teach using IBSI signals a bright future for science
education, as the PSBTs were very confident that they can perform IBSI practices
identified, and they can apply these strategies in their future teaching.

The result of the analysis of variance and Tukey's HSD indicate that the
PSBTs were most self-efficacious along the “Classroom Culture” element of IBSI.
Meanwhile, their self-efficacies toward “Content Knowledge” and “Lesson Planning
and Implementation” do not significantly differ.

Table 21. One-way ANOVA and Tukey HSD on the PSBTs’ IBSI self-efficacy along
Lesson planning and implementation (LPI), content knowledge (CK), and classroom
culture (CC).

Source Sumofsquares __df___—‘Mean square ‘FF statistic __ p-value
Treatment 13.3188 2 6.6594 6.3284 0.0022"
Error 205.2000 195 1.0523
Total 218.5188 197

Treatments pairs Q statistic p-value Inference
UPI vs. CK 0.1537 0.899994 Ns
LPI vs. CC 4.2783 0.007903 **p<0.01
CK vs. CC 4.4320 0.005626 ** p<0.01

Itis noteworthy to emphasize on some specific IBSI items where the PSBTs
are most self-efficacious. The PSBTs were very confident that they can “be
approachable and encouraging to students as they come for consultations and
clarifications,” “require students to express their ideas without fear of ridicule,” and
“be called “teacher as a listener.” In contrast, the PSBTs were less confident in
“designing lessons that engage students as members of a learning community,”
“engaging students in thought-provoking activities that involve critical assessment of
procedures," and “requiring students to be reflective of their learning.” Also, the
PSBT respondents were less confident in enabling students to “pose questions or
problems that encourage students to seek and value different ways to investigate or

Solve a problem,” “use a range of assessment strategies that measure the depth of

Pre-service Biology Teachers and inquiry-Based Science instruction

student understanding and the application thereof,” and “give the students the
opportunity to make predictions and/or hypotheses, and they are encouraged to
devise means to test and then validate or reject these predictions/hypotheses.”
Incidentally, most of these items are “hard-core” events that characterize authentic
inquiry (Llewellyn, 2013).

The PSBT respondents’ high self-efficacy to teach using IBSI was supported
by their answers in the follow-up interview. When they were asked if they were
ready to teach using IBSI, 26 out of 32 (81.25%) answered in the affirmative, with
90.25% of them rating their readiness from three to five in a one - to - five scale.
Such results contradict that of Roth et al., (1998), and Windschitl and Thompson
(2006) who noted on their pre-service teacher respondents’ non-readiness to
incorporate inquiry instruction in their lessons. Such non-readiness happens despite
the pre-service teachers taking science methods courses in their undergraduate
level. This result means that after a decade of emphasis on IBSI, future science
teachers are developing higher confidence to implement practices related to inquiry
teaching.

The PSBT respondents’ high self-efficacy to teach using IBS! is a bright spot
for the future of science teaching and learning. As self-efficacy is seen as a powerful
predictor of teacher's behavior and success in the classroom (Velthius, 2014), self-
efficacious teachers will tend to set higher goals toward IBSI teaching, are less afraid
to fail, and will find new strategies when old ones fail

Few published studies described the pre-service science teachers’ level of
self-efficacy to teach using IBSI. One study (Chichekian, 2014) compared the self-
efficacy of pre-service elementary and secondary teachers to enact inquiry
instruction using the McGill Enactment of Inquiry Questionnaire-Self-Efficacy-

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

Teacher version (MEIQ-SET). Results revealed that the elementary and secondary
pre-service teachers generally held a high sense of self-efficacy in carrying out most
of the pedagogical tasks as described in the MEIQ-SET. Such a result is very similar
to the findings of this present study.

Another study investigated classroom teachers’ self-efficacy to implement the
constructivist approach in teaching (Uredi, 2015). The results showed that these
teachers’ self-efficacy toward constructivist teaching was high (p. 261).

Finally, one qualitative study determined the factors that affect pre-service
teachers’ self-efficacy to teach using problem-based learning instead of describing
the PSTs’ level of self-efficacy (Cyprian, 2014). In this study, the factors that were
seen to influence the prospective teachers’ self-efficacy are course content, the
classroom setting, teachers’ self-efficacy, and the formation of peer relationships.

PSBTs’ predisposition to teach using IBSI. Overall, the PSBT respondents
were moderately predisposed to teach using IBSI (Table 22). However, more than
half (57.45%) were highly predisposed to teach using this pedagogical approach.

Table 22. PSBT predisposition to teach using IBS| (HPS = 1.00)

1BS| application in each lesson stage Mean StDev. DI
Lesson beginning (2,3,6,10) 0.553b 0.242 M
Lesson proper (1,4,5,7, 8, 11,15) 0.734a 0.196 H
Lesson ending (9,12,13,14) 0.564b 0.268 M
Overall 0.640 0.146 M

Means of the same letter are not significantly different t at p = 0.05, Tukey
HSD

Mean score range Total score range or
0.00 - 0.15 0-2 Very low (VL)
0.16 -0.35 3-5 Low (L)
0.36 - 0.65 6-10 Moderate (M)
0.66 - 0.85 11-13 High (H)
0.86 - 1.00 14-15 Very High (VH)

*DI— Descriptive interpretation
Variance analysis (ANOVA) reveais significant differences in the respondents’

predisposition to use IBSI strategies along the three lesson stages — beginning,

Pre-service Biology Teachers and inquiry-Based Science Instruction

proper, and end (F = 36.14, Fert = 3.08, p = 0.000). The respondents were most
predisposed to employ IBSI principles during the lesson proper, while they were
less-predisposed to employ IBS! practices at lesson beginning and lesson wrap-up.
The PSBTs must, therefore, be trained more on how to employ IBSI practices in
these stages of the lesson.

Table 23. One-way ANOVA and Tukey HSD on the PSBTs' IBS! predisposition along
the three lesson stages

Source Sum of Squares Df ____Mean Square F statistic ___p-value
Treatment 1.3526 2 0.6763 72.0290 0.000
Error 10.9634 195 0.0562
Total 12.3160 197

Treaiments pairs Qstatistic p-value inference
Lesson beginning vs. Lesson proper 6.1924 0.001 **p<0.01
Lesson beginning vs. Lesson ending 0.3893 0.899 Ns
Lesson proper vs. Lesson ending 5.8031 0.001 “*p<0.01

The PSBTs’ moderate predisposition to teach using IBSI contradicts their high
self-efficacy to teach using the strategy. While they were highly confident that they
can employ IBSI practices in the future, their orientation or tendencies to select these
practices over other alternatives was moderate. This difference could be explained
by the nature of the instrument used to measure the two constructs. While the
instrument used to measure self-efficacy was a Likert-type survey involving the
respondents’ self-assessment, the other tool requires them to analyze the actual
teaching scenario. The respondents’ answers to a self-assessment instrument and a
“cognitive” test will differ.

The particular items where the PSBTs were lowly predisposed toward IBS!
were 13 and 6. Item 13 pertains to how a teacher should synthesize a chapter or
unit. Many respondents chose the option that is “active,” but does not reflect the
IBSI practices to wrap a chapter or unit. Item 6, meanwhile, involves a lesson on

food chains. Instead of the respondents choosing the option involving student

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

exploration before a formal presentation, many of the answers were geared toward
the opposite, i.e., a formal definition followed by an activity that further explains or
demonstrates the principle. Such confirmation activities, as previously noted, are
non-inquiry procedures. It appears that the respondents equate IBSI only with
“active,” “hands-on approaches,” without them considering the “minds-on,”
“inductive,” and “discovery” elements of the approach. Such observations could be
explained by their limited understanding of the true nature of IBSI, as described in
the previous sections.

There are few studies to which this particular result on the pre-service
teachers’ predisposition to teach using IBSI can be corroborated. The closest
related research is the one by Feyzioglu (2015) on pre-service science teachers’
pedagogical orientations of science inquiry continuum. Using an instrument called
the Pedagogy of Science Inquiry Continuum Test (PoSICT), the researcher
instructed the pre-service science teachers to choose which among the different
levels of inquiry (confirmation to open inquiry) they will they use to teach the six
different inquiry characteristics (problem/question, procedures/design, results
analysis, conclusions, alternative conclusions, results communication). The results
of the research showed that the pre-service teachers’ orientations were at the
structured inquiry level. This result, however, indicates that the pre-service teachers
were more oriented on a teacher-centered pedagogy, i.e., the characteristics that
would require the student to think independently were given to the student by the
teacher.

Another study closely related to this present undertaking is a study on science
teachers’ pedagogical orientations toward direct and inquiry instructional
approaches. The study is an investigation by Sahingoz (2017) among Turkish

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

middle school science teachers. Using the respondents’ answers to the Turkish
version of the Pedagogy of Science Teaching Test (POSTT), the author found that
37.88% are more inclined to teach using guided inquiry. In comparison, 24.80% are
more predisposed to teach using open inquiry. The other respondents are more
inclined to follow the active direct (23.66%), and didactic direct (13.66%) pedagogical
approaches. Overall, a more significant number of Turkish science teachers who
participated in the study are inclined to use inquiry teaching compared to those who
will use the direct instruction models.

PSBTs’ application of IBSI during teaching internship. In general, the
PSBT respondents were able to sufficiently apply the principles of IBSI during their
teaching internship experience (Table 24). Both the pre-service teachers’ self-
assessment (ITSAI) and their cooperating teachers’ ratings (RTOP) indicate that the
PSBTs have “often” employed the IBSI practices during their student teaching
internship. Many of the respondents (87.90%) were able to “sufficiently” apply IBSI
principles. Three respondents (4.55%) were able to extensively apply IBSI practices,
while only five (7.58%) were able to apply IBSI practices at a “moderate” extent.

Meanwhile, when the RTOP and ITSAI scores were correlated, the result is a
“high correlation” (r = 0.881). Such computed value indicates that as regards the
PSBTs’ application of IBSI during teaching internship, there is a high degree of
agreement between the ratings of the cooperating teachers and the PSBTs.

The above results indicate that the PSBTs were able to utilize IBS! principles
and practices during their teaching internship experiences. Although the PSBTs did
not fully maximize the implementation of IBSI practices, it is nevertheless uplifting to
know that these PSBTs have started sowing the seeds of inquiry instruction in the
consciousness of their learners. It is likewise fantastic to know that despite the many

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

demands and concerns of student teaching — class control and classroom
management, dealing with individual learners, meeting the expectations of mentors,
etc., the PSBTs were able to employ the teaching practices expected of them as
future science teachers.

Table 24. PSBTs' extent of application of IBSI practices during teaching internship.

IBSI elements MITSAL_mRTOP Mean DI
Lesson planning and implementation (LPD.
1. Use teaching procedures or activities that show
respect for students’ prior (previous) knowledge.
This prior knowledge could be wrong and needs to
be corrected.
2. Designing strategies and activities that allow
students to use their prior knowledge to explain or 289 303 296 Ss
predict phenom
3. Providing opportunities for students to explore first
(do an activity) before he/she provides a formal 303 «291 «4297 S
presentation (lecture or demonstration, etc.).
4. Modifying lessons depending on the ideas or
questions originating from students.
5. Modifying lessons based on the results of
students’ answers to her formative assessments 289 «271 «280 «6S
(checks for understanding, quick questions, etc.).
6. Asking questions or problems that encourage
students to use different ways to investigate orsolve 280 282 281 S
a problem.
7. Designing lessons that engage students as
members of a “learning community,” Here,
classmates can give constructive criticisms, or
challenge the ideas of others.

2.94 3.14 3.04 Ss

2.82 268 275 §

2.67 277 «272 §

‘Sub-scale Mean 286a -287a 2.86a Ss
St.Dev. 0.54 0.60 0.44
Interpretation s s s

Content Knowledge (CK)
8. Focusing on fundamental concepts of the subject.
There are aways some significant scientific or 282 308 295 §
mathematical ideas at the heart of his/her lesson
9. Connecting present lessons with past or future
lessons, or relating present lessons with other 327 323 «(3.25 S
subjects.
10. Seeing quickly what students are trying to say
and how these thoughts connect with science 298 849265 282 §
concepts.
11. Helping and encouraging students to follow
general guidelines, laws, or theories to develop a 300 305 302 S$
solution or a model.
12. Using many different real-world examples as
teaching tools to help students understand basic 348 «6283 3.01_sS
science concepts.

Pre-service Biology Teachers and inquiry-Based Science instruction

13. Requiring students to use a variety of means.
(models, drawings, graphs, symbols, concrete

materials, manipulatives, etc.) to represent their 2.82 ot aoe 5
knowledge/understanding
14. Giving the students the opportunity to make
predictions and/or hypotheses, and encourage them
to devise means to test and then validate or reject ae aw che ul
these predictionsihypotheses.
15. Engaging students in thought-provoking activities
that often involve the critical assessment of what they 258 271 264 S
are doing
16. Requiring students to be reflective about their
leaming. Student reflections could start with
questions like, “What made it difficult for me to BS eS
understand this?”, etc.
17. Using a range of assessment strategies that
measure the depth of student understanding and the 2.86 2.89 2.88 Ss
application thereof.
‘Sub-scale Mean 26a 28a 2.86
StDev. 063 «063 «(0.41
Interpretation s s 8
Classroom culture (CC)
78. Requiring students to communicate their ideas to
others using a variety of means and media (Making 39g g47 gts
presentations, brainstorming, critiquing, listening, ‘ : E
making videos, group work, etc.)
19. Implementing a lesson or activity where there is a
high proportion of student talk (student discussion)
and a significant amount of it occurs between and 270) bed 2.72 s
among students.
20. Establishing a climate of respect for what each
‘student has to say. oat sae a s
21. Being approachable and encouraging to
students, both in and out of class. CL a Oak
22. Students are guided to construct their 392 324 ages
understanding. BE
23. Students can come to him/her for clarification. 3.71 3.76 3.73 s
Sub-scale Mean 3.30b 3.33b 3.32b s
StDev. 051 0.53 0.35
Interpretation $ s 8
Overall Application Mean 2.97 2.98 2.98
StDev. 046 (054 (0.36
Interpretation s 5 s
Frequency of Descriptive Interpretation
Scale Meanrange  Scorerange ««Frequencyot Descriptive Interpretation
0 ~—0.00-0.49 0-11 Never Very Limited (VL)
1 0.50-1.49 12-34 Seldom Insufficient (InS)
2 1:50-2.49 35-57 Sometimes Moderate (M)
3 2.50-3.49 58-80 Often Sufficient (S)
4 3.50-4.00 81-92 Very often Extensive (E)

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction


Comparing the overall level of application of IBS! principles during the three

lesson stages, ANOVA indicates a highly significant difference. Moreover, Tukey's

HSD revealed that the PSBTs’ IBS! applications in the areas of lesson planning and

implementation and content knowledge were significantly higher than in classroom

culture. Such a trend of result is consistent in both the cooperating teachers’ ratings

(RTOP) and the PSBTs’ self-assessment (ITSAI).

Table 25. One-way ANOVA and Tukey HSD on the PSBTs' IBSI application along
Lesson planning and implementation (LP!), content knowledge (CK), and classroom

culture (CC).
‘Overall application

Source Sumof Squares Df __Mean Square F statistic __ p-value
Treatment 9.2467 2 4.6234 28.5040 ooo"
Error 31.6290 195 0.1622
Total 40.8757 197

Treatments pairs Qstatistic p-value _ inference
TPivs. CK 0.3893 0.899 Ns
LPI vs. CC 6.1924 0.899 **p<0.01
CK vs. CC 5.8031 0.001 **p<0.01
ITSAI (Self-assessment)

Source Sumof squares Df ____Meansquare F statistic __ p-value
Treatment 8.6394 2 4.3197 15.4362 0.000%
Error 54.5691 195 0.2798
Total 63.2085 497

Treatments pairs statistic p-value Inference
TPlvs. CK 0.2560 0.899994 Ns
UPI vs.CC 6.6735 0.001005“ p<0.01
CK vs. CC 6.9294 0.001005 * p<0.01
RTOP (Cooperating teacher assessment)

Source Sumof Squares Df ‘Mean Square‘ F statistic__p-value
Treatment 9.8877 2 4.9438 74.4047 0.000%
Error 66.9259 195 0.3432
Total 76.8136 197

Treatments pairs Qstatistic _p-value_Inference
UPlvs. CK 0.1771 0.899994 Ns
LPI vs. CC 6.4834 0.001005 “*p<0.01
CK vs. CC 6.6605 0.001005 ** p<0.01

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction


The specific IBS! practices that the PSBT respondents manifested best were
“being approachable and encouraging,” “Students can come to me for clarifications,”
and “My classes were dominated by a climate of respect for what each student has
to say.” These items received the highest scores in both ITSAI and RTOP.
Meanwhile, the item least manifested was “Giving students the opportunity to make
predictions and/or hypotheses, and encourage them to devise means to test and
then validate or reject these predictions/ hypotheses.” The other items with relatively
lower scores include “Requiring students to be reflective about their learning” and
“Engaging students in thought-provoking activities that often involve the critical
assessment of what they are doing.”

The PSBTs’ sufficient application of IBSI during teaching internship somewhat
contradicts the findings of Binns and Popp (2013). They noted that the pre-service
teachers they sampled found it challenging to incorporate inquiry instruction in their
lesson. Also, Nungchalem and his colleagues (2016) noted in their case study of
three pre-service teachers that there is a limited application of the IBSI practices
among these teaching internship teachers. The classroom of one participant, for
example, reflected the traditional, teacher-centered classroom set-up, and has
dominantly taught using worksheets.

Meanwhile, when the PSBT respondents’ lesson plans were analyzed, there
appears to be a limited degree of implementation of the IBSI practices. Further
scrutiny of the lesson plans revealed some interesting findings. For instance, some
PSBTs did not stick to one type of lesson plan, depending on the nature of their
lessons. For lessons that require mastery learning, for example, they used the
Madeline Hunter lesson plan model. For those lessons requiring skill development,
they shifted to the 5E and other related models. However, many of the respondents

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

have consistently used one lesson plan format, regardless of the competencies they
wished to develop in their learners. This flexibility in lesson planning, however,
depends on whether or not the cooperating teacher or the college supervisors allow
such freedom. Many college supervisors and cooperating teachers still prescribe the
lesson plan format, and they do not allow the pre-service teachers to deviate. Such
is manifested among the respondents coming from Institutions B and C.

The application of IBS! principles by the PSBTs was also determined by the
nature of the lessons they were assigned to execute. For example, a PSBT who
was assigned to teach chemistry and physics for the whole duration of the internship
has manifested more of the elements of IBS!. Most of her lessons were laboratory-
based, although her procedures were not modified for the activity to manifest a
higher level of inquiry. She has operated mostly in the level of structured inquiry.
Meanwhile, the PSBTs whose lessons were on human body systems, biodiversity,
and space science tend to apply the IBSI to a lesser extent.

Another factor that influenced the application of IBSI by PSBTS appears to be
the age or educational level of the learners. The PSBTs who have had their
teaching internship among senior high school students have manifested a higher
level of IBS! application. On the other hand, those who were assigned to teach in
the lower grades (Grades 7 and 8) scored low on IBSI manifestation. Such results
are consistent with existing literature where the use of inquiry procedures increases
and the level of teacher guidance decreases as the learner advances in age and/or
educational levels (Banchi & Bell, 2008; Buck, Bretz, & Towns, 2008).

One possible hindrance to the PSBTs’ use of IBSI as described in literature is
the mismatch between their teaching orientation and that of their mentor teacher,
especially if the latter insists on his/her desired methods of delivery. Indeed, some

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

pre-service teachers hold a positive attitude toward IBSI, but their inability to observe
these practices from their mentor teachers have prevented them from implementing
this pedagogical approach (Binns & Popp, 2013). In the case of the participants in
this study, however, most of them reported that their cooperating teachers did not
dictate or insist on their desired strategy. Instead, these pre-service teachers were
permitted to use the strategies and techniques they think are appropriate. However,
the cooperating teachers sometimes suggest strategies that they know would work
best in a particular lesson or situation. These ideas were revealed during the follow-
up interview conducted among the participants.

Correlation Among the PSBTs’ IBSI Variables.

The PSBTs' IBSI exposure was negatively correlated to their IBS!
understanding and predisposition (Table 26) but positively correlated to their IBSI
attitude, self-efficacy, and actual application of IBS! during teaching internship.
However, their total BSI exposure correlated significantly with their understanding of
IBS! practices as they occur during lesson proper (LPUnd; r = .353). Meanwhile, the
PSBTs’ IBSI exposure during their field study courses (FSExpo) showed significant
correlations with their overall self-efficacy (r = .289) and with their application of IBS!
during teaching internship (r =.308). This result bears important implications on how
IBSI practices were demonstrated and practiced by the PSBTs' cooperating and
demonstration teachers during their field-study and teaching internship courses.
Finally, their pre-college and college IBS! exposures correlated significantly with their
interest in IBSI (IntAtt; r = -.278), their understanding during lesson beginning

(LBUnd; r = .271) and self-efficacy along classroom culture (CCSE; r = -.250).

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

Table 26. Inter-correlation matrix among the IBSI variables

1 2 3 4 5 6
7. BSI exposure

2. IBS! Understanding -4115,

3. IBS! Attitude 061.137

4. Leamer-centered views .002 341" 31

5. IBSI Self-efficacy 021.139.197.201

6. IBSI Predisposition -.103 309° 095 147 .150

7. IBS| Application 017 198 299389" 435" 130

“Significant at p = 0.05, “Significant at p = 0.01

The PSBT's IBS! understanding was found to be significantly and positively
correlated with their learner-centered views (r = .341) and with their overall IBS!
predisposition (r = .309). Also, their understanding of the IBSI principles when
employed during lesson proper (LPUnd) were significantly and positively correlated
with their IBSI self-efficacy along lesson planning and implementation (r = .246).

The PSBTs' overall IBS! attitude scores (r =.239), and their application of IBS!
during teaching internship were positively and significantly correlated. Moreover,
there was a positive and significant correlation between the PSBT's interest toward
IBSI (IntAtt) and their predisposition to use the IBSI principles at lesson proper
(LPPred, r = .256). The same positive and significant correlation was computed
between the PSBT’s interest toward IBSI (IntAtt) and their self-assessed IBSI
application (PTApp; r = .273). There was a positive and significant correlation
between their IBS! attitude scores and their learner-centered (r = .311) views.

The significant positive correlation between IBSI attitude and IBSI
implementation during internship echoes the result of Xie & Tariff (2014) on the
relationship between IBS| attitude and IBS! implementation among Chinese science

teachers.

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

Meanwhile, the PSBTs with leamer-centered views tend to apply IBSI
practices during teaching internship better, as the two IBSI variables were positively
and significantly correlated. Such a result is expected since IBSI is a learner-
centered pedagogical approach (Bybee, 2006; Kim, 2001; Prawat, 1997)

Finally, the PSBTs’ self-efficacy to teach using IBS! correlated positively and
significantly with their application of this teaching approach during their teaching
internship. Such a result implies that teachers’ pedagogical practices are influenced
by their beliefs in their abilities to implement such practices. Moreover, the above
significant association between self-efficacy and application was consistent in the
result of the two instruments that measure IBSI application, the ITSAI (r = .367), and
the RTOP (r= .267).

The data gathered from this investigation showed that the PSBTs’ previous
IBS! experiences did not influence their understanding of IBSI as a strategy. Such
non-influence means that the PSBTs with higher IBSI exposure did not develop a
more sophisticated understanding of the strategy than those with a lower extent of
exposure. Such a result seems to contradict the findings from literature, which
states that student-teachers’ learning histories might especially correlate with the
quality of their inquiry understanding (Aulls et al., 2016). Specifically, the two
experiences that correlated with higher IBS! understanding are taking a research
methods course and completing a thesis (Meijer, 2007) or a major/honors project
(Pruitt, 2013). Completing a thesis or project, however, became effective only if the
‘student is guided by a competent mentor (Crawford, 2007).

Predictors of the PSBTs’ IBSI Variables

Several simple regression procedures were employed to determine which

among the hypothesized IBSI variables could significantly predict the PSBTs' IBSI

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

understanding, attitude, self-efficacy, predisposition, and application during teaching
internship.

Predictors of IBSI understanding. The simple linear regression procedures
revealed that the overall and component exposures to IBS! did not predict the
PSBTs’ IBSI understanding. Similarly, none of PSBTs’ exposures to the various IBSI
elements emerged as significant predictors of their PSBTs' understanding. This
finding seems to draw support from the earlier result on the non-significant negative
correlation among their respondents’ IBSI exposure and understanding.

Predictors of IBSI attitude. None of the PSBTs’ overall and component IBSI
exposures were linearly associated with their IBSI attitudes. The IBSI attitude
appeared to be independent of IBSI exposure. The result suggests that the
respondents who had more experiences with IBSI were not able to develop a more
positive attitude toward the teaching approach. The same can be said about their
IBS| attitude and IBSI understanding. A greater understanding of IBS! does not
necessarily translate into a more positive IBSI attitude.

Concerning learner-centered views, only the PSBTs' scores along
progressivism emerged as a significant predictor of IBSI attitudes (Table 27). The
PSBTs' overall learner-centered views, and the two other learner-centered views, did
Not come out as significant predictors. Such a case was despite the earlier result on
the significant correlation between overall learner-centered views and IBSI attitude,
and of IBSI being a learner-centered pedagogy.

The regression model for the progressivist view predicting IBSI attitude is
significant (p = 0.001), and it means that every unit increase in the PSBTs’
progressivism score corresponds to a 0.668 proportionate increase in their IBSI

attitude scores.

Pre-service Biology Teachers and inquiry-Based Science Instruction

Table 27. Linear regression analysis on the relationship among the PSBTs' IBS!
variables
a. The PSBTs' IBS| attitudes in relation to their leamer-centered views

Leamer-centered views B e F Regression equation
Progressivism 410.168 12.936" _8.961 + 0.668 (Prog)
b. The PSBTs' IBSI seff-efficacy in relation to their IBSI exposure

IBSI Exposure B e F Regression model
IBSI exposure at field study 289 © 083. 5.821" 6.491 +0.014 (FSExpo)
(FSExpo)

c. The PSBTs' IBS! predisposition in relation to their IBS! understanding

IBSI Understanding B a F Regression model
IBSI Understanding at lesson 418 174 13.518" 9.035 + 0.226 (LPUnd)
proper (LPUnd)

d. The PSBTs' IBS! predisposition in relation to their IBSI self-efficacy

IBSI self-efficacy 8 r F Regression model
IBS| self-efficacy along 371.138 10.224"* 10.384 - 0.080 (CCSE)

classroom culture (CCSE)

e. The PSBTs' {BSI application in relation to their IBS| exposure

18S! Exposure 8 id F Regression model
IBSI exposure at field study 308 —.095-6.688** 56.610 +0.124
(FSExpo) (FSExpo)
f_ The PSBTs' IBS| application in relation to their IBSI understanding
1BSI Understanding B Gd F Regression model
IBS! Understanding at lesson 312.097 6.879" 66.832 + 0.638.
proper (LPUnd) (LPUnd)

_g. The PSBTs' IBS! application in relation to their IBSI attitude
18S! attitude B F Regression model
Overall IBSI attitude (OvAtti) 299 089 6.286" _ 53.440 + 0.644 (OvAtti)
h. The PSBTs' IBS! application in relation to their leamer-centered views
Leamer-centered views B td F Regression model
Progressivism A10_ 168 12.952" 37.548 + 1.438 (Prog)

i_The PSBTs' IBSI application in relation to their IBSI self-efficacy
IBSI self-efficacy B - F Regression model
Overall IBSI self-efficacy (OvSE) 435 __—.189__—*14.941** 38.081 + 3.745 (OvSE)

The emergence of the progressivist view as a significant predictor of IBS!
attitude is in place as the practices in BSI are consistent with the philosophy of

progressivism (Sadker & Sadker, 2003). According to some experts, it is from the

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

philosophy of progressivism where constructivism (which gave rise to IBS!) arose
(Bybee, 2006; Kim, 2001; Prawat, 1997; Sadker & Sadker, 2003). As such, it is quite
logical that one's belief in progressivism can easily translate to a more positive
attitude toward IBSI.

It is quite surprising to know that while the instrument developer of the
Educational Philosophy Self-Assessment Inventory (Cohen, 1999) explains that
social reconstructionist philosophy uses critical thinking and inquiry skills, scores in
such educational philosophy did not predict IBSI attitude scores. Also, it is equally
puzzling to know that the PSBTs’ scores along constructivism, which is believed to
be the basis of IBSI (Bybee, 2006; Llewellyn, 2002), did not come out as a significant
predictor of IBSI attitudes.

The inability of the level of constructivist and social reconstructionist beliefs to
predict IBSI attitude scores can be attributed to several factors. One of these factors
could be the limited number of the sample involved in the study. Had there been
more respondents, the trend could have been different. The second factor could be
the difference in the nature or composition of the instruments used to measure the
three constructs. While the IBSI attitude scale used statements that directly ask the
participants’ interest or preference to this approach, the educational philosophy self-
assessment instrument that measured constructivist and social reconstructionist
beliefs involved questions that dealt with the PSBTs' overall beliefs about schools,
and of teaching and learning as a whole. It seems logical to believe that IBSI has
‘some unique elements that are too specific to be captured by a five-item scale of
constructivism and social reconstructionism.

Predictors of IBSI self-efficacy. The hypothesized predictors for IBSI self-
efficacy were total and component IBS! exposure, IBSI understanding, IBSI attitude,

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

and learner-centered views. When these supposed predictors were used singly as
predictors using the simple linear regression, only IBS! exposure at field study
(FSExpo) came out as a significant predictor (8 = .289, r? = .083). The linear
regression model is

IBSI self-efficacy = 6.491 + .014 (IBSI Exposure at field study).

The above equation means that for every unit increase in the PSBTs’ IBSI
exposure at field study, a corresponding 0.014 increase occurs proportionately in
their IBS! self-efficacy.

The above result on the FS exposure significantly predicting IBSI self-efficacy
offers some important implications on how IBSI is demonstrated at field study. The
tole, therefore, of demonstration teachers and cooperating teachers is critical in
developing the PSBTs' self-efficacy to implement IBS|. Their demonstration of IBSI
practices is crucial for pre-service teachers to acquire higher self-efficacy to
implement reform-based teaching strategies.

It is quite surprising to note that none of the PSBTs’ overall and component
IBS| attitude scores predicted their self-efficacy, despite the apparent similarity in the
constructs. However, the results suggest that a positive attitude toward a
pedagogical approach does not mean an increased self-efficacy to teach using such
an approach.

Predictors of IBS! predisposition. The PSBTs’ predisposition to implement
IBSI practices is not predicted by their IBSI exposure, attitude, and learner-centered
views. However, their IBS! understanding at lesson proper (LPUnd; B = .418, r? =

174) and their IBSI self-efficacy along classroom culture (CCSE; 8 = .371, r? = .138)

arose as significant predictors.

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

The ability of IBSI understanding at lesson proper (LPUnd) to predict the
PSBT IBSI predisposition can be explained by the similarity in the instruments used
to measure understanding and predisposition. The instruments used to measure
these constructs were considered “cognitive” tests as the PSBTs were asked to
analyze teaching scenarios. Hence, their responses could have been affected by
their ability to comprehend the situations. The instruments used for the other IBSI
constructs were basically of the “inventory” types that solicited the respondents’ and
their cooperating teachers’ self-assessments. The interpretation of these results
must, therefore, be made in light of these constraints.

While self-efficacy can easily be considered as related to predisposition, only
the PSBTs' IBSI self-efficacy along classroom culture emerged as a predictor of their
IBSI predisposition. Such results can be attributed once more to the difference in the
instruments used to measure the two constructs.

Predictors of IBSI application during teaching internship. Of the PSBTs’
IBS! exposure, only their exposure during field study emerged as a significant
predictor of their IBS! application during teaching internship. Their IBSI exposure
during their high school and college science courses were insignificant predictors.

As for IBS! exposure at field study (FSExpo), the standard coefficient (B) was 0.308,
and the coefficient of determination (r2) was 0.905. Finally, the regression model
was IBSI application = 56.610 + 0.124 (FSExpo). From this equation, one can
predict a 0.124-point increase in their IBSI self-efficacy for every unit increase in their
IBSI exposure at field study (FSExpo) scores.

The ability of FSExpo to predict IBS! application is similar to its ability to
predict IBSI self-efficacy. Once again, it is worth highlighting the importance of how
IBSI is manifested by demonstration and cooperating teachers during pre-service

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

teachers’ classroom observations. As the results suggest, the PSBTs who were
better exposed to IBSI practices were able to implement these practices in their
classrooms. The assignment of PSBTs to cooperating teachers based on the
latter's use of IBSI principles is indeed crucial.

Meanwhile, of the PSBTs' IBSI understanding, their understanding at lesson
proper came out as the lone predictor (Table 27f). The standard coefficient,
coefficient of determination, and regression equation were B = .312, r? = .097, and
IBS| application = 66.832 + 0.638 (LPUnd). The association was significant at p =
0.01 level.

Itis notable that while the use of a novel teaching approach may depend
partly on how one understands its manner of implementation, the current findings
showed that only the understanding of its implementation at lesson proper emerged
as the predictor. These results may indicate the need for science education
professors to emphasize on how IBSI practices are demonstrated at lesson
beginning and lesson ending.

When the association among overall and component IBSI attitudes and IBS|
application during teaching internship was explored using stepwise linear regression,
the PSBTs’ overall IBS! attitude (OvAtti) came out as a significant predictor (Table
27g). The B value was .299 and the r? = 0.089. The result can be interpreted as the
PSBTs' IBS overall attitude contributes to 8.90% of the variance in their IBSI
application at teaching internship. The regression equation was |BSI application =
53.440 + 0.6444 (OvAtti). For every unit increase in the PSBTs' overall IBSI attitude
scores, there is a corresponding 0.644 increase in their IBSI application during

teaching internship.

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

The ability of the PSBTs' IBSI attitude to predict their IBSI application during
teaching internship was similar to the result among Chinese in-service science
teachers by Xie & Tariff. (2014). The authors’ findings were also consistent with
previous reports on in-service teachers’ positive attitudes toward inquiry teaching
having important associations with their inquiry practice (Molen & Aldheren-Smeets,
2013; Sumrall, 2008; Thomas, 2008; Tenaw, 2014). Indeed, as Chen and Roegno
(2000) contend, “teachers’ attitudes affect their degree of commitment to their duties,
the way they taught and treated their students, and how they perceive their
professional growth.” If teachers have positive attitudes toward inquiry teaching,
then it might be possible that these positive attitudes can be linked to their behaviors
in classroom practice (Xie & Shariff., 2014)

In contrast, the above association between IBS| attitude and IBSI application
during internship contradicts the findings of Ramnarain and Hlatswayo (2018). These
authors reported on physical science teachers’ lesser tendencies to enact inquiry
teaching in their lessons, despite their positive attitudes toward the teaching
approach. The teacher participants in this study claimed that the implementation of
inquiry-based learning is fraught with difficulties, such as availability of laboratory
facilities, teaching materials, time to complete the curriculum, and large classes,
which creates tension in their willingness to implement it (p. 6).

The PSBTs' overall and specific learner-centered views were also associated
with their ability to apply IBS! practices during teaching internship. Of these learner-
centered views, the PSBTs'’ scores along progressivism came out as a predictor of
their IBS! practice during their teaching internship (Table 27h). The B value was
0.410, and the R? value was 0.168. These obtained values indicate that 16.8% of
the variance in the respondents’ IBSI application can be attributed to their

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

progressivist views. Notably, the PSBTs progressivist views also emerged as the
sole predictor of their IBSI attitudes. In such attitudes translated positively to their
ability to manifest IBSI practices in their internship. Such results could have some
implications on the screening procedure for prospective science teachers in teacher-
training institutions. In the selection of prospective science majors, it might be
beneficial to consider the applicants’ level of progressivist beliefs about teaching and
learning, as the beliefs in this philosophy can positively predict their utilization of IBSI
in the future.

Literature is replete with a positive relationship among what teachers believe
in and what they practice. Indeed, these teachers’ beliefs about teaching and
learning are the major influences in their decisions and choices of pedagogical
strategies (Harwood, Hansen & Lotter, 2006; Sikko, Lyngved, & Pepin, 2012). The
seminal work of Pajares (1992) succinctly puts this in perspective when he said that
the belief teachers hold influence their perceptions and judgments, which, in turn,
affect their behavior in the classroom, or that understanding the belief structures of
teachers and teacher candidates is essential in improving their professional
Preparation and teaching practices.” Therefore, teachers who are inclined toward
student-centered, constructivist, and inquiry-oriented teaching tend to teach using
these pedagogical approaches.

The last variable that emerged as a predictor of IBSI use during teaching
internship was the PSBTs’ overall IBSI self-efficacy (B = 0.435, r2= 0.189.). Their
overall self-efficacy contributes 18.90% of the variance in their IBSI use. The linear
fegression equation was IBS! application = 38.081 + 3.745 (OvSE), which indicates
43.745 increase in the PSBTs’ IBSI use for every unit increase in their overall self-
efficacy.

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

Of the five significant predictors of IBSI application during teaching internship,
the PSBTs’ IBSI self-efficacy had the highest r?, followed by their progressivism
score. These two variables contribute 18.9% and 16.8% of the variance in the
PSBTs' IBSI application, respectively.

The ability of IBS! self-efficacy to predict IBS| implementation can be
explained by the definition of self-efficacy, as defined by its proponent, Bandura and
his colleagues (Bandura, Barbaranelli, Caprara, & Pastorelli, 1996). According to
these proponents, self-efficacy “affects the way people think, feel, and motivate. As a
tesult of these effects, self-efficacy is determinative of the levels of endeavoring and
being persistent of a student under conditions. The high levels of the feeling of
success, self-reliance, and the skills of motivating increase the success, but the low
levels of those features decrease the success.” Applying these in the context of this
study, the greater the self-efficacy towards IBSI, the higher is the tendency to enact
IBSI practices.

Many studies support the result on the ability of teachers’ IBSI self-efficacy to
predict IBSI use during teaching internship. For instance, Leonard, Barnes-Johnson,
Dantley, and Kimber (2011) and Smolleck and Mongan (2011) contended that self-
efficacy is correlated with teachers’ belief about willingness to improve their methods
of instruction using inquiry. This result likewise strengthens the contention that
teachers with higher self-efficacy for inquiry-based teaching are more likely to be
aware of various instructional approaches and were “more open and willing to
experiment with innovative approaches that promote autonomous learning” (Ross,
Bradley, Cousins, & Gladalla, 1996). Moreover, the result somewhat finds support

from Uredi (2015), who reported on science teachers’ self-efficacy related to

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

implementing the constructivist approach, positively predicting their level of creating

aconstructivist learning environment.

Reconceptualized Framework

In the original framework, the PSBTs’ IBSI exposure was hypothesized to
influence all other IBSI variables (IBSI understanding, attitudes, self-efficacy,
predisposition, and application). In turn, IBSI understanding and learner-centered
views were assumed to affect the PSBTs’ IBSI attitudes, self-efficacy, predisposition,
and application. Then IBS| attitude was hypothesized to affect IBSI self-efficacy,
predisposition, and application. It was likewise assumed that the PSBTs'’ IBSI self-
efficacy affects their IBS| predisposition and IBS! application and that their IBS!
predisposition influences their IBSI application.

In the reconceptualized framework, it can be seen that the PSBTs'’ overall
IBS! exposure did not significantly affect the other IBS! variables. Only IBSI
exposure at field study exerted a significant effect on their IBSI self-efficacy and
application. Thus, arrows connecting IBSI exposure at field study to IBSI self-
efficacy and IBSI application were drawn. No significant effects on the other IBSI
variables were noted with either overall IBS! exposure or its components.

Overall, IBS! understanding also did not significantly affect the other IBSI
variables. However, the understanding of IBSI practices applied at lesson proper
significantly affected the PSBTs’ IBSI application and IBSI predisposition. Such
felationships are indicated by arrows originating from IBSI understanding at lesson
Proper leading to IBS! application and IBS! predisposition.

Furthermore, the regression procedures showed that the PSBTs' progressivist
views significantly influenced their IBS! attitudes and application, although overall

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

learner-centered views did not exert the same effect. Neither overall IBSI self-
efficacy and predisposition nor their elements were significantly affected by any of
the learner-centered views. Arrows were drawn to show these relationships in the
reconceptualized framework.

The PSBTs'’ overall IBSI self-efficacy, meanwhile, significantly affected their
IBS| application. However, their IBS! self-efficacy along classroom culture was able
to influence their IBSI predisposition significantly. Finally, neither overall IBS|

predisposition nor its elements significantly affected the PSBTs' IBSI application.

Level of IBSI self-
efficacy

IBS! Exposure
At Field Study

Classroom culture

IBSI Understanding Extent of IBSI
nt of

At Lesson application during
proper teaching internship

IBSI Attitudes Level of IBS!
predisposition

Learner-centered views,

Progressivist

Figure 2. Reconceptualized framework of the study

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science instruction

Chapter 5

SUMMARY, CONCLUSIONS, AND RECOMMENDATIONS

This chapter presents the summary of the study, the highlights of findings, as
well as the conclusions and the recommendations deduced from the study's findings.
Summary

This study was conducted to determine the factors that influence the pre-
service biology teachers’ (PSBTs) IBSI understanding, attitudes, self-efficacy, extent
of application of IBSI during their teaching internship experience, and their level of
IBSI predisposition. Specifically, this study was undertaken to answer the following
questions:

1. How do the following variables, taken singly, influence the PSBTs’ IBSI self-
efficacy?
a) IBSI exposure
b) IBSI understanding
c) IBS! attitudes
d) learner-centered views
2. How do the following variables, taken singly, influence the PSBTs’ extent of
application of IBSI during their teaching internship experience?

a)

IBS! exposure
b) IBSI understanding

°)

IBS| attitudes

d)

learner-centered views

e)

IBSI self-efficacy

f)_IBSI predisposition

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

3. How do the following variables, taken singly, influence the PSBTs' level of
IBSI predisposition?
a) IBS! exposure
b) IBSI understanding
c) IBSI attitudes
d) learner-centered views
e) IBSI self-efficacy
4. How does the PSBTs' IBSI exposure influence their IBSI understanding?
5. How do the following variables, taken singly, influence the PSBTs’ IBS!
attitudes?
a) IBS! exposure
b) IBSI understanding
c) learner-centered views
6. How are the following variables correlated?
a) IBS! exposure
b) IBSI understanding
c) IBS! attitudes:
d) learner-centered views
e) IBSI self-efficacy
f)_ IBSI predisposition
g) extent of IBS! application during teaching internship
Sixty-six (66) pre-service biology teachers (PSBTs) from three teacher-
education institutions in the Baguio City and Benguet were the participants of the
Study. Survey and interview were the main data-gathering procedures employed.
Both quantitative and qualitative data were gathered from the respondents. The

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

following instruments were used: Science Teachers’ Inquiry Practices Scale

(STIPS), Pedagogy of Science Testing Test - Biology Items (POSTT-B), the Attitude
Scale for IBSI Use (ASIU), Inquiry Use Self-efficacy Scale (IUSES), Test for Inquiry
Pedagogy in Science — Biology (TIPS-B), Modified Reformed Teaching Observation
Protocol (mRTOP), Modified inquiry Teaching Self-Assessment Instrument (mITSAI),
and Educational Philosophies Self-Assessment Instrument (EPSAI). A researcher-
made rubric, the Rubric on IBSI Manifestation in Lesson Plans (RIMLP), was also
used to support the result on the level of IBSI application during teaching internship.
Follow-up interviews were also conducted to supplement the quantitative results
gathered from the research instruments.

Descriptive statistics (mean and standard deviation) were used to summarize
data, while inferential statistics (Analysis of variance and Tukey HSD) were used to
test for significance and to compare means. Pearson correlation and linear
fegression procedures were employed to describe the relationship among the
PSBTs' IBSI variables.

Findings

The summary of the findings of the study is presented vis-a-vis the research
questions asked.

1. The overall level of IBS! exposure is moderately high, with a mean of 4.08.
This moderately high level of exposure is consistent across stages and the IBSI
elements. Their highest IBSI exposure occurred in their college science courses
(mean = 4.24), followed by their field study courses (mean = 4.11), and then by
their pre-college science courses (mean = 3.69). While IBS| exposures were all
“sufficient” across the three stages, there was a statistically significant difference

in these exposures (F = 4.4877, p= 0.012). Pre-college science exposure was

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

significantly lower than college science exposure, but statistically even with field
study exposure. College science exposure did not significantly differ with field
study exposure.

Along the three areas of IBSI, the PSBTs’ exposure was highest along
classroom culture (CC; mean = 3.97), followed by content knowledge (CK; mean
= 3.94), and then lesson planning and implementation (LPI; mean = 3.80).
However, these differences are statistically insignificant.

Comparing the levels of IBS! exposure in the three stages along LPI, no
significant differences were noted (range = 3.65 to 3.87). However, along content
knowledge (range = 3.72 to 4.17) and classroom culture (range = 3.78 to 4.14),
college science exposures were statistically higher than pre-college science
exposures, but statistically tied with field study exposures.

2. Overall, the PSBTs’ scored low in the test for IBSI understanding (POST-B)
with a mean of 0.485. While their IBS! understanding at lesson beginning
(0.564), and at lesson ending was statistically higher (0.606) and falling under
moderate understanding, their IBS! understanding at lesson proper pulled them
down (mean = 0.361, limited). The level of understanding at the three lesson
stages was significantly different (F = 3.765; p = 0.025).

Further, qualitative results show that many PSBTs’ equate IBSI with teacher
questioning or teacher-led recitation. They see IBSI as mere teacher-questioning,
instead of looking at it as a formal pedagogical model where students make
questions, and explore answers to these questions.

3. The PSBTs' have high attitude scores about IBSI (mean = 1.66). They had
the highest attitude scores along the usefulness dimension (mean = 1.80, very
high), followed by the interest dimension (mean = 1.63, high), and then by liking

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

dimension (mean = 1.54, high). There was a significant difference in the PSBTs’
IBS! attitudes along the three dimensions (F = 9.977, p = 0.001). The difference
between liking and interest dimensions was insignificant, unlike the difference
between liking and usefulness, and interest and usefulness, where there was
significant, and highly significant difference, respectively.

4. In terms of learner-centered philosophical views, the PSBTs scored highest
under constructivism (mean = 21.89), then progressivism (mean = 21.48), and
then social reconstructionism (mean = 20.58). The scores in these three learner-
centered views are significantly different (F = 5.303, p = 0.006). The PSBTs’
scores under progressivism and constructivism are statistically even, while
scores in constructivism, but not progressivism, are statistically higher than their
scores in social reconstructionism.

5, The PSBTs' scores under IBSI self-efficacy were fairly high, with a mean of
7.98 out of 10. This high self-efficacy was consistent along lesson planning and
implementation (mean = 7.96, high) and content knowledge (mean = 7.9, high).
However, the PSBTs' IBSI self-efficacy along classroom culture was very high
(mean = 8.50, very high). The PSBTs' levels of self-efficacy are statistically
different (F = 6.324, p = 0.0002). The lesson planning and implementation (LPI)
and content knowledge (CK) self-efficacies are not different statistically. Still, LPI
and classroom culture (CC), and CK and CC self-efficacy differences, are
significant.

6. As to the PSBTs' predisposition to teach using the IBSI approach, they scored
a mean of 0.640 out of 1.00. While they have high predispositions to use IBSI at
lesson proper (0.734), their tendencies to use the strategy at lesson beginning
(mean = 0.553), and at lesson ending (mean = 0.564) are in the moderate. The

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

PSBTs' level of IBSI predisposition was significantly higher at lesson proper than
at lesson beginning and lesson ending. The difference in their levels of
predisposition before and after the lesson proper was insignificant.

7. The PSBTs scored a mean of 2.98 out of 4 in their ability to apply for IBSI
during their teaching intemship. Further, the PSBT respondents and their
cooperating teachers are consistent in their assessment of the PSBTs’ IBS!
application. The majority of the PSBTs (87.90%) were able to apply IBSI
practices sufficiently, while 4.55% and 7.58 were able extensively and moderately
to manifest IBSI practices, respectively.

The IBSI practices were best manifested along classroom culture (mean =
3.32), then along LP! (mean = 2.86) and content knowledge (mean = 2.85).
There was a significant difference in the PSBTs' IBSI application along the three
elements (F = 28.504, p = 0.000). Moreover, the IBSI application along
classroom culture was significantly higher than either along LPI or along content
knowledge. Applications along LPI and content knowledge, meanwhile, are
Statistically insignificant.

When the PSBTs’ lesson plans were analyzed, some trends emerged. For
instance, those who taught younger learners tend to have a limited application of
IBSI principles. Moreover, those who taught physical science (Chemistry and
Physics) had more inquiry-oriented lessons than those who taught Biology or
Earth Science lessons.

8. As to the correlation among the IBS| components, overall IBS| exposure was
negatively correlated with IBSI understanding (r = -.115) and predisposition (r= -
013), but positively, albeit weakly correlated with IBSI attitude (r = .061), self-

efficacy (r = .021), application (r =.017), and learner-centered views (.002). IBSI

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

understanding meanwhile, was significantly correlated with learner-centered
views (r = .311**) and IBSI predisposition (.309*), but weakly correlated with IBSI
attitude (r = .137), self-efficacy (r = .139) and application (.198). Furthermore,
IBS| attitude was significantly correlated with learner-centered views (r = .311*)
and IBSI application (.299*), and weakly correlated with self-efficacy (r = .197)
and predisposition (r = .095). There was significant correlation between learner-
centered views and IBS! application (r = .389**), and weak correlation with IBSI
predisposition (r = .147) and self-efficacy (.201). IBSI self-efficacy weakly
correlated with predisposition (r = .150), but significantly correlated with
application (r = .435**). Finally, the IBSI predisposition and application
correlation was weak (r = .130).

The results of simple linear regression procedures showed that none of the
PSBTs' overall and component IBSI exposures predicted their IBSI
understanding. Also, none of their overall and component IBS! exposures and
understanding emerged as predictors of their IBSI attitudes. However, their
progressivist views predicted their overall IBSI attitudes (8 = .410, R? = .168)
The regression equation was Attitudes = 8.961 + 0.668 (Progressivism score).

Meanwhile, when overall and component IBSI exposures, understanding,
attitudes, and learner-centered views were entered as predictors of the PSBTs’
IBSI self-efficacy, only their IBSI exposure at field study (FSExpo) came out as a
valid predictor. The obtained standardized coefficient B was = .289, and the R?
was .083. The regression equation was IBSI self-efficacy = 6.491 +0.014
(FSExpo).

As to IBSI predisposition, two valid predictors came out — IBSI understanding
at lesson proper (LPUnd), and IBSI self-efficacy along classroom culture (CCSE).

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

As for the former, B = .418, R? = .174 and the regression equation was IBSI
predisposition = 9.035 + 0.226 (LPUnd). In terms of CCSE, B = .371, R? = .138
and the regression equation was IBSI predisposition = 10.384 - 0.080 (CCSE).
Finally, the IBS! application at teaching internship was predicted by five
predictors. These predictors are as follows: FSExpo [8 = .308; R? = .095; IBS|

Application = 56.610 +0.124 (FSExpo)], LPUnd [8 = .312;

2 = 097; IBSI
Application = 66.832 +0.638 (LPUnd)], IBSI attitude [B = .299; R? = .089; IBSI
Application = 53.440 +0.644 (IBSI attitude)], Progressivism [B = .410; R2 = .168;
IBSI Application = 37.548 +1.438 (prog)], and IBSI self-efficacy [B = .435; R? =

189; IBSI Application = 38.081 +3.745 (IBSI Self-efficacy)]
Conclusions
Based on the findings of the study, the following conclusions are drawn:

1. The PSBTs possess a sufficiently firm foundation of IBSI in all of its aspects —
lesson planning and implementation, content knowledge, and classroom culture -
as they come into teaching internship. This strong IBSI foundation was built
particularly during their college science courses and field study experiences.
Likewise, their pre-college science courses have somehow introduced them to
IBSI practices.
2. The PSBTs still have a lot to learn about IBSI as their knowledge and
understanding of the approach was insufficient. Their IBSI definitions are still
unacceptable, as these definitions are laden with naive ideas or misconceptions.
3. The PSBTs hold a positive attitude toward IBSI. They particularly believe that

IBSI is a useful, interesting, and likable teaching approach.

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

4, The PSBTs had high adherence to the learner-centered philosophies.
Specifically, they identify themselves more as constructivists and progressivists,
rather than as social reconstructionists.

5. The PSBTs are highly self-efficacious in using IBSI in their future science
teaching. However, these IBS| self-efficacies differ across the three IBS!
elements. The PSBTs hold the greatest self-efficacies along classroom culture.
6. The PSBTs are moderately predisposed to employ IBSI practices in their
teaching. Their IBSI predisposition, however, differs along the three lesson
stages. IBSI predisposition is particularly high along lesson proper.

7. The IBSI application by the PSBT respondents was sufficient. The
cooperating teachers and the PSBT ratings were consistent in terms of the
latter's’ IBSI application. Moreover, while IBSI practices were sufficiently
manifested in all three IBSI elements, the manifestation along classroom culture
was the highest.

8. Learner-centered views significantly correlated with the PSBTs’ IBSI
understanding and attitude, and a linear association between IBS! predisposition
and understanding has surfaced. Meanwhile, IBS| attitude, self-efficacy, and
learner-centered views significantly correlated with IBSI application at teaching
internship. Moreover, the PSBTs’ progressivist views significantly predicted their
IBS| attitudes, and their IBSI exposure at field study was the only predictor of
their IBSI self-efficacy. Meanwhile, the PSBTs' IBSI understanding at lesson
proper, and their IBS! self-efficacy along classroom culture emerged as the
significant predictors of their IBSI predisposition. Finally, their IBS! applications
during teaching internship were significantly predicted by their IBS! exposure at
field study, IBSI understanding at lesson proper, overall IBSI attitudes,

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

progressivist views, and overall IBSI self-efficacy. Of these predictors, overall
IBSI self-efficacy seems to be the best predictor of IBS! application, followed by
the PSBTs’ progressivist views.
Recommendations
Based on the findings and conclusions, the following recommendations are put
forward:
1. For the science professors to team up with science education professors to
further strengthen the inquiry foundations of pre-service science students. This
collaboration can be accomplished by providing the maximum inquiry
experiences to these science education students. This way, the pre-service
science teachers will feel that indeed, IBS! is a default teaching approach, a sine
qua non, in science education, as described in science education reform
documents around the world.
2. Science education professors, those in charge of the teaching of methods to
pre-service science teachers, may strive harder to emphasize the true nature of
IBSI in their science teaching methods courses. More time should be provided
for the understanding of IBSI and its many variations, and the pre-service
teachers must be given more opportunities to observe and experience inquiry
practices in actual classes. These observations and experiences should be
efficiently monitored, and constant feedback must be done to improve the pre-
service teachers’ understanding of how IBSI is implemented in actual classes. A
learning module that focuses only on IBSI may also be provided as
supplementary materials for pre-service science teachers.
3. As often as necessary cooperating teachers must strive to employ IBS!
Practices in their teaching, especially when pre-service teachers are observing

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

them. When necessary, these cooperating teachers must be retooled on the
principles and practices of IBSI through a training-workshop.

4. Aside from science content knowledge, teacher education students who wish
to specialize in science may also be screened in terms of their attitudes toward
inquiry instruction, their levels of learner-centered views, and their self-efficacy to
teach using IBSI. All of these variables emerged as significant predictors of IBSI
application during internship.

5. As IBSI exposure at field study emerged as a significant predictor of IBS
application during internship, some mechanisms must be employed to place
prospective science teachers under demonstration teachers or mentors who are
adept at the use of IBSI in science teaching.

6. Since this study covers only the biological sciences majors, it does not provide
a comprehensive account of the IBSI features of those from the physical
sciences. It is thus recommended that a similar study be conducted among these
cohorts.

7. It might also be worth investigating to determine how those with science
teaching scholarships compare with non-scholars as to the various IBS!
variables. Also, an investigation on how pre-service science teachers from
Centers of Excellence or Centers of Excellence in Teacher Education and those
who belong to non-centers of excellence/development compare as to their IBS!
competencies is worthwhile.

8. The instruments used in this study can further be polished so that they will
effectively measure the constructs they are intended to measure.

9. More direct data-gathering procedures such as lesson plan analysis and/or
actual teaching observations are recommended for future researchers who want

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

to duplicate this study. The purpose of such is to prevent the tendencies of some
respondents to overrate themselves during self-assessments. As regards the
pre-service teachers IBSI application during teaching internship, the students.
may also be surveyed or interviewed on their teachers’ actions. Science
professors and teachers may also be tapped as respondents to determine their
BSI exposure or experiences. Moreover, the syllabi and/or the laboratory
manuals of science professors and teachers may also be analyzed as to how
these manuals emphasize IBSI.
10. The practice of lesson study must be introduced as early as during teaching
training, particularly during the methods of teaching courses of the pre-service
teachers. Through lesson studies, pre-service teachers are trained to collaborate
with their peers and with other experts and be reflective of their lessons and their
teaching practices. Moreover, lesson studies train pre-service teachers to
become more critical of a lesson in terms of its being inquiry-oriented and
constructivist-based.
11. The following studies are recommended for future research:

a. Tracking how Filipino in-service teachers implement IBSI practices in the
field.

b. Follow-up on how Filipino pre-service teachers implement IBSI practices

during the first three years of teaching.

c. How experiences or exposure to IBSI affect pre-service and in-service

science teachers’ basic and integrated science process skills.

d. How experiences or exposure to IBSI influence pre-service science

teachers’ level of scientific literacy.

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

e. Comparison of IBS| exposure and attitude of pre-service science teachers
who are taught following either the self-contained scheme or the inter-
college/department format.

f. Analysis of science teachers’ and professors’ attitudes and implementation

of IBSI practices in their science classes.

g. Analysis of how science cooperating teachers model inquiry-based

instruction and how these practices influence the pre-service teachers’

application of such teaching approaches.
IBS! - Use Capability Building for Pre-service
Biology Teachers and Cooperating Teachers

As suggested in the study, the PSBTs' understanding of IBSI as a teaching
strategy must be develoned, as an incomplete grasp of IBSI could undermine their
implementation of such a strategy in their future classes. Similarly, the study noted
that the PSBTs’ IBSI exposure at field study was a significant predictor of their IBSI
application during their teaching internship. It is, therefore, necessary to enhance
the knowledge, skills, and competencies of both pre-service biology and cooperating
teachers on IBSI. A capability building program designed specifically for these two
Cohorts of science teachers is, therefore, a must.

In the case of the PSBTs, one capability building program that could enhance
their IBS! competencies is through curriculum enhancement. In the latest curriculum
issuance for science education majors by the Philippine Commission on Higher
Education, a three-unit, one-semester course on teaching the specific field (Sci.Ed.
153 — The Teaching of Science) is mandated. It is in this course that IBSI can be

integrated into the existing curriculum. The discussion of IBSI can be enhanced in


Pre-service Bioiogy Teachers and inquiry-Based Science insiruciion

the course syllabus. The curriculum framework for IBSI integration is shown in
Appendix Q.

On the other hand, science cooperating teachers must be invited to
participate in an !BSI-use training-workshop. This training-workshop could be
sponsored by the teacher-education institution and will be provided for free as part of
the partnership program.

Below are the topics that are deemed essential and must be part of the
capability building program for both science pre-service and cooperating teachers
(CTs).

Topic 1: The national science education standards

Topic 2: Introduction to IBSI

Topic 3: The philosophy of IBSI

Topic 4: The different levels of IBSI

Topic 5: Modifying a laboratory activity into an inquiry-based investigation
Topic 6: Using the lesson study framework in analyzing IBSI lessons
Topic 7: Managing the inquiry classroom

Topic 8. Creating a classroom culture of inquiry

The details for the above topics were presented as a scope and sequence for
IBS| integration in Appendix R. As for cooperating teachers, a design for a proposed

training-workshop on the use of IBSI is shown in Appendix V.

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

LITERATURE CITED

Abd-El-Khalick, F., BouJaoude, S., Duschl, R., Lederman, N.G., Mamlok-Naaman,
R., Hofstein, A., Niaz, M., Treagust, D. & Tuan, H.L. (2004). Inquiry in science
education: International perspectives. Science Education, 88: 397-419

Allard, D., & Barman, C. (1994). The learning cycle: A sound alternative to current
college science teaching. BioScience. 44. 99-101.

American Association for the Advancement of Science. (1989). Project 2061.
Science for all Americans. Available from:
https://www.aaas.org/program/project2061/publications.

Anderson, C. W. (2007). Perspectives on science learning. In S. K. Abell & N. G.
Lederman (Eds.), Handbook of research on science education (pp. 3-30).
Mahway, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Arends, R.I., Winitzky, N.E., & Tannenbaum, M.B. (2001). Exploring teaching: An
introduction to education. 2% Ed. Boston: McGraw-Hill. pp.624

Aulls, M.W., Tabatanai, D., & Shore, B.M. (2016). What makes inquiry stick? The
quality of pre-service teachers’ understanding of inquiry. SAGE Open, 2016:

4-12. doi: 18.4 1/4258244016681394.

Balaan, D.P.T.P. (2017). Pre-service teachers in the 21% century: teaching
competence and challenges. Unpublished dissertations. Benguet State
University, La Trinidad, Benguet.

Banchi, H., & Bell, R. (2008). The Many Levels of Inquiry. Science and Children,
46(2), 26-29.

Bandura, A., Barbaranelli, C., Caprara, G. V., & Pastorelli, C. (1996). Multifaceted
impact of self-efficacy beliefs on academic functioning. Child Development, 67
(3), 1206-1222.

Baykara, H., Yakar, Z., & Liu, Shinag-Yao. (2018). Preservice science teachers’
views about scientific inquiry. European Journal of Education Studies, 4(10):
128-143. Doi:10.5281/zenodo.1311801

Bell, R. L., Smetana, L., & Binns, |. (2005). Simplifying inquiry instruction: assessing
the inquiry level of classroom activities. The Science Teacher, 72(7): 30-33.

Beisenherz, P.C., Dantonio, M. & Richardson, L. 2001. The learning cycle and
instructional conversations. Science Scope, Jan, 34-38.

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

Binns, 1.C., & Popp, S. (2013). Learning to teach science through inquiry:
Experiences of pre-service teachers. Electronic Journal of Science
Education, 17(1): 1-24.

Blanchard, M., Southerland, S. A., Osborne, J. W., Sampson, V. D., Annetta, L. A., &
Granger, E. M. (2010). Is inquiry possible in light of accountability?
quantitative comparison of the relative effectiveness of guided inquiry and
verification laboratory instruction. Science Education, 94(4): 577-616.

Boone, H.N., Jr., & Boone, D. A. (2014). Analyzing Likert Data. Journal of
Extension, 50(2): 1-2.

Bower, M. & Richards, D. (2006). Collaborative learning: Some possibilities and
limitations for students and teachers. In Who's learning? Whose technology?
Proceedings Ascilite Sydney 2006.
http:/Avww.ascilite.org.au/conferences/sydney06/proceeding/pdf_papers/p150
pdf

Brown, P. L., Abell, S.K., & Demir, A. (2006). College Science Teachers’ Views of
Classroom Inquiry. Wiley InterScience. Available online at
www. interscience.wiley.com. Doi:10.1002/sce20151.

Brown, S., & Melear, C. (2006). Investigation of secondary science teachers’ beliefs
and practices after authentic inquiry-based experiences. Journal of Research
in Science Teaching, 43: 938 - 962.

Brownwell, M. T., Adams, A., Sindelar, P., Waldron, N. & Vanhover, S. (2006).
Learning from collaboration: The role of teacher qualities. Exceptional
Children, 72(2), 169-186. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/001440290607200203

Buck, L.B., Bretz, S.L., & Towns, M.H. (2008) Characterizing the Level of Inquiry in
the Undergraduate Laboratory. Journal of College Science Teaching, 38 (1):
52-58.

Bybee, R.W., & Fuchs, B. (2006). Preparing the 21st-century workforce: A new
reform in science and technology education. Journal of Research in Science
Teaching, 43, 349-352.

Cakir, M. (2008). Constructivist approaches to learning in science and their
implication for science pedagogy: A literature review. International Journal of
Environmental and Science Education, 3(4): 193-206.

Cakiroglu, Erdinc & Isiksal, Mine. (2009). Preservice elementary teachers’ attitudes
and self-efficacy beliefs toward mathematics. Egitim ve Bilim. 34: 132-139.

Campbell, T., & Abd-Hamid, N.H. (2010). Development of Instruments to Assess
Teacher and Student Perceptions of Inquiry Experiences in Science

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

Classrooms. Journal of Science Teacher Education, 21: 13-30. Doi.
10.1007/s10972-009-9151-x.

Capps, D. K., & Crawford, B. A. (2013). Inquiry-Based instruction and teaching about
the nature of science: Are they happening? Journal of Science Teacher

Education, 24(3), 497-526. doi. 10. 1607/s10972-012-9314-z

Chan, O.N. (2010). How do teachers' beliefs affect the implementation of inquiry-
based learning in the PGS Curriculum? A case study of two primary schools
in Hong Kong., Durham theses, Durham University. Available at Durham E-
Theses Online: httn://etheses.dur.ac.uk/320/.

Chen, W., & Rovegno, |. (2000). Examination of expert and novice teachers’
constructivist-oriented teaching practice using a movement approach to
elementary physical education. Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sports,
71, 357-372.

Cheung, W. M. & Wong, W. Y. (2014). Does the lesson study work? A systematic
review on the effects of lesson study and learning study on teachers and
students. International Journal for Lesson and Learning Studies, 3(2), 137-
149. http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/IJLLS05-2013-0024

Chiapetia, E.L. (1993). Do middie school life science textbooks provide a balance of
scientific literacy themes? Journal of Research in Science Education, 30(1),
787-797.

Chichekian, T. (2014). Self-Efficacy for Inquiry-Based Instruction: Surviving the Leap
from Student-Teacher to an Inquiry-Oriented Novice Teacher Unpublished
Dissertation. Department of Educational and Counseling Psychology. McGill
University.

Chichekian, T., & Shore, B.M. (2016). Pre-service and practicing teachers’ self-
efficacy for inquiry-based instruction. Cogent Education, 3(1236872): 1-19.

Choi, S. (2007). Elementary teachers’ beliefs and practical knowledge about
teaching science as inquiry: The effects of an inquiry-based elementary
‘science course. Doctoral dissertation, University of Houston.

Chokshi, S. M. (2002). Impact of lesson study: Report for the NAS/National
Research Council Board on internati id Comparative Studies

Education. New York: Teachers College, Columbia University.

i

Clark, R.Z. Kirschner, P.A., & Sweller, J. (2012). Putting students in the path of
learning. The call for fully guided instruction. American Educator, 6-11.

Clason, D. L., & Dormody, T. J. (1994). Analyzing data measured by individual
Likert-type items. Journal of Agricultural Education, 35(4), 31- 35.

Cobern, W.W., Schuster, D., Adams, B., Skjold, B.A., Mugaloglu, E. Z., Bentz, A., &
Sparks, K. (2014). Pedagogy of Science Teaching Tests: Formative

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

assessments of science teaching orientations. Intemational Journal of
Science Education. 36. 10.1080/09500693.2014.918672.

Cole, S., & Levine, P. (2000). Cognition, study habits, test anxiety, and academic
performance. Journal of Educational Psychology, 75: 121-26.

Cohen, L.M. (1999). Educational philosophies self-assessment. School of
Education, Oregon State University. Available online at
https://oregonstate. edu/instruct/ed416/selfassessment.html

Crawford, B. A. edt Leaming t to ‘teach science as oe in the Nerd and tumble

Cyprian, T.E. (2014). Teacher Self-Efficacy in a Project-Based Learning (PBL)
Classroom. Unpublished Dissertation. The University of Texas at Arlington.

Darling-Hammond, | & Mclaughlin, M W (2011) Policies that support professional
development in an era of reform. Phi Delta Kappan, 92(6), 81-92.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/00317217 1109200622

DeHaan, R.L. (2005). The impending revolution in undergraduate science
education. Journal of Science Education and Technology, 14: 253-269.

Dejene, W., Bishaw, A., & Dagnew, A. (2018). Pre-service teachers’ approaches to
learning and their teaching approach preferences: Secondary teacher
education in focus. Cogent Education, 5: 1-15.
https://doi.org/10.1080/2331 1862018. 1502396.

Department of Education. (2012). Curriculum Guide for the K-12 Science Education
in the Philippines. Pasig City, Metro Manila.

Donavon, M. S., Bransford, J. D. (Eds.) (2005). How students learn science in the
classroom. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.

Duschl, R.A., & Osborne, J. (2002). Supporting and promoting argumentation
discourse in science education. Studies in Science Education, 38(2002): 39-
72.

Eick, C.J., & Reed, C.J. ee What makes an inquiry- -oriented teacher? The
influence of i ice.
Science Education, 786: 401-406.

Enochs, L. G., Scharmann, L. C., & Riggs, !. M. (1995). The relationship of pupil
control to preservice elementary science teacher self-efficacy and outcome
expectancy Science Education, 79(1): 63-75

Evrekli, E., Inel, D., Balim, A. G., & Kesercioglu, T. (2010). A confirmatory factor
analysis on the attitude scale of constructivist approach for science teachers.
Bulgarian Journal of Science Education Policy (BJSEP), 4(2), 185-201.

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

Ferguson, R.L. (2007). Constructivism and social constructivism. In G. M. Bodner &
M.K. Orgil. Theoretical frameworks for research in chemistry/science (pp. 28-
49). New Jersey: Pearson.

Fernandez, C. & Yoshida, M. (2004). Lesson study. New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.

Feyzioglu, E.Y. (2015). Pre-Service Science Teachers' Pedagogical Orientations of
Science Inquiry Continuum. Bati Anadolu Egitim Bilimleri Dergisi (BAED),
Dokuz Eylil Universitesi Egitim Bilimleri Enstitisi, izmir-Turkiye. ISSN 1308
— 8971., 1-36.

Flores, M. A., & Day, C. (2006). Contexts Which Shape and Reshape New Teachers’
Identities: A Multi-Perspective study. Teaching and Teacher Education, 22:
219-232. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016

Frymier, A.B., & Nadier, M.K. (2017). Persuasion: integrating theory, research, and
practice. 4'" Ed. Dubuque State: Kendall Hall Publishing.

Gabrielle, A. J. & Joram, E. (2007). Teachers’ reflections on their reform-based
teaching in mathematics: Implications for the development of teacher self-
efficacy. in Tea dl 6 40.1080/01628620.20

07.10463461

Gashemi, A. & Zahedias|, S. (2012) Normality Test for Statistical Analysis: A Guide
for Non-statisticians. International Journal of Endocrinology and Metabolism,
10(2): 486:489.

Gibson, H. L., & Chase, C. (2002). Longitudinal impact of an inquiry-based science
program on middle school students’ attitudes toward science. Science
Education, 86(5), 693-705.

Gronlund, N. E., & Keith - Waugh, C. (2009). Assessment of Student Achievement.

(ot Ed.). Pearson.

Gutierez, S. B. (2014). Identifying and addressing the challenges of inquiry-based
elementary science teaching and learning through lesson study. In Ulep, S.
A., Ferido, M. B., Reyes, R. L., & Punzalan, A. E. (Eds.), Lesson Study:
Learning Together, Growing More in Practice Together. (pp. 115- 146).
Quezon City: University of the Philippines, National Institute for Science and
Mathematics Development.

Gutierez, S. B. (2015). Collaborative professional learning: Implementing inquiry-
based teaching through lesson study. /ssues in Educational Research, 25(2),
118-134. http://www iier.org.au/iier25/gutierez. htm.

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

Haney, J. J., & McArthur, J. (2002). Four case studies of prospective science
teachers’ beliefs concerning constructivist teaching practices. Science
Education, 86: 783-802.

Harwood, W.S., Hansen, J., & Lotter, C. (2006). Measuring teacher beliefs about
inquiry: The deveiopment of a biended quaiitative/quantitative instrument.
Journal of Science Education and Technology, 15(1):69-79.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10956-006-0357-4

Haryadi, E.K., Priyono, A., & Retnonnhsih, A. (2015). Designing Literacy Learning
and Proviem-Based Learning to Foster Ci ing in Biology.
Proceedings of the International Conference on Mathematics, Science, and
Education. http://icmseunnes.com/2015/wp-

content/uploads/2016/03/32_BE.pdf

Haury, D. (1993). Teaching science through inquiry. ERIC/CSMEE Digest, doi:
ED359048.

Harlen W., (2001), The assessment of scientific literacy in the OECD/PISA project,
Studies in Science

Herr, N. (2007). The sourcebook in science teaching: San Francisco, CA: Wiley
and Sons/Jossey-Bass Publishers.

Hmelo-Silver, C. E., Duncan, R. G., & Chinn, C. A. (2007). Scaffolding and
achievement in problem-based and inquiry learning: A response to Kirschner,
Sweiler, arid Ciark (2606). Educationai Psychologist, 42(2), $5-107.

doi: 10. 1080/0046 1520701263368.

Holloway Jr., C.E. (2015). Teacher's level of inquiry-based chemistry and student's
attitude about high school chemistry. Unpublished Dissertation. University of
Alahama, Tuscaloosa, Alabama Available online at
http://acumen.lib.ua.edu/content/u0015/0000001/0001811/u0015_0000001_
0001811.pdf.

Ishii, D. K. (2003). Constructivist Views of Learning in Science and Mathematics.
ERIC Digest.

Isola, D., & Wenning, C. (2007). Inquiry-Based (aka Reformed) Teaching Self-
Assessment Inventory. Available online at
modeling.asu.edu/MNS/RTOP_SelfAssessment07.doc.

Jeanpierre, B., Oberhauser, K., & Freeman, C. (2005). Characteristics of
development that effect change in science teachers’ classroom practices.
Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 42: 668-690.

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science instruction

Jordan, A., Carlisle, O., & Stack, A. (2008). Approaches to learning: A guide for
teachers. New York: Open University Press.

Kang, N. H., Orgill, M., & Crippen, K. J. (2008). Understanding teachers’ conceptions
of classroom inquiry with a teaching scenario survey instrument. Journal of
Science Teacher Education, 19(4). 337-354.

Kauchak, D., & Eggen, P. (2012). Learning and Teaching. Research-Based
Methods.6" Ed. Boston: Pearson.

Keys, CW, & Bryan, | (2001) Co-constructing inquiry-hased science with
teachers: Essential research for lasting reform. Journal of Research in
Science Teaching, 38(6): 631-645.

Kim, B. (2001). Social constructivism. Emerging perspectives on learning, teaching,
and technology, 1(1): 16.

Kubiszyn, T. & Borich, G. (2007). Educational Testing and Measurement (8th Ed.).
MA, USA: John Wiley & Sons, 578 pp.

Lakin, J. M., & Wallace, C. S. (2015). Assessing dimensions of inquiry practice by
middle school science teachers engaged in a professional development
program. Journal of Science Teacher Education, 2: 1-24.

Lee, C.K., & Shea, M. (2016). An analysis of pre-service elementary teachers’
understanding of inquiry-based science teaching. Science Education
International, 27(2): 217-237.

Leonard, W. (2000). How Do College Students Best Learn Science? An Assessment
of Popular Teaching Styles and Their Effectiveness. Journal of College
Science Teaching, 29(6): 385-388. Retrieved from
http:/Avww.jstor.org/stable/42990320

(2074 7}. iG
science inquiry in urban contexts: The role of elementary pre-service
teachers’ belief. The Urban Review: 43:124-150. Doi:10.100/s1256-010-
0173-7.

fitiey, S.J., & Kimber, C. (2011). Tea

Lewis, C. (2002) Does lesson study have a future in the United States? Nagoya
Journal of Education and Human Development, 1, 1-23
http://eric.ed.gov/?id=ED472163

Llewellyn, D. (2002). Inquire within: Implementing inquiry-based science standards.
Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin Press.

Llewellyn, D. (2005). Teaching high school science through inquiry: A case study
approach. Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin Press.

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

Llewellyn, D. (2013). Teaching high school science through inquiry and
argumentation. 2" Ed. California: Corwin: A Sage Company. 258 pp.

Lotter, C. (2004). Pre-service science teachers’ concems through classroom
observations and student teaching: Special focus on inquiry teaching.
Science Educator, 13(4): 28-38.

Louis, K. S. (2006). Changing the culture of schools: Professional community,
organizational learning, and trust. Journal of School Leadership, 16, 477-489.

Lowenberg, D (2000) Bridging practices. Journal of Teacher Education. 51,3
(May): 241-252

Luft, J. A., & Roehrig, G. H. (2007). Capturing science teachers’ epistemological
beliefs: The development of the teacher beliefs interview. Electronic Journal of
Science Education, 11(2) 38-63

Magee, P. A., & Flessner, R. (2012). Collaborating to improve inquiry-based
teaching in elementary science and mathematics methods courses. Science
Education Intemational, 23(4): 353-365

Magulog, G.C. (2017). Educational Philosopnies Adnered by Filipino Pre-service
Teachers: Basis for Proposing Initiatives for the 21st Century Teacher
Education Preparation Program. Asia-Pacific Journal of Multidisciplinary
Research, 15(1):185-192.

Martin, D.J. (2012). Elementary Science Methods. A Constructivist Approach.6"" Ed
USA: Wadsworth, Cengage Learning.

Mattheis, F.E., & Nakayama, G. (1988). Effects of a laboratory-centered inquiry
program on laboratory skills, science process skills, and understanding in
middle grades students: ERIC Document Reproduction Service No.
0307148.

Maxwell, D.O., Lambeth, D.T., & Cox, J.T. (2015). Effects of using inquiry-based
learning on science achievement for fifth-grade students. Asia-Pacific Forum
‘on Science Learning and Teaching, 16(1), Article 2

McComas, W. F. (Ed.). (1998) The nature of science in science education:
Rationales and strategies (Vol. 5). Dordrecht, Netherlands: Kluwer.

McNergney, R.F., & Herbert, J.M. (2001). Foundations of Education: The challenge
of professional practice. 3 ed. Boston: Boston: Allyn and Bacon.

Meijer, D. (2007). Undergraduate psychology students’ ability to transfer critical
thinking skills (Doctoral dissertation, California State University, Fresno)
Available from ProQuest Dissertations and Theses database. (UMI No.
1451009)

Meiehat Geze

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

philosophy of education and their attitudes towards multicultural education,
Cogent Education, 5:1, 1475094

Melville, W., Fazio, X., Bartley, A., & Jones, D. (2008). Experience and reflection:
Pre-service science teachers’ capacity for teaching inquiry. Journal of
Science Teacher Education, 18: 477-484.

Minner, D.D., Levey, A.J., & Century, J. (2010). Inquiry-based science instruction—
What is it and does it matter? Results from a research synthesis year 1984 to

2002. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 47: 474 - 496.
40.1002/tea, 20247.

Molen, J.W., & Aaldern-Smeets, S. (2013). Investigating and stimulating primary

teachers’ attitudes towards science: Summary of a large-scale research
project. Frontline Learning Research, 2:1-11.

Montero-Pau, J. & Tuzon, P. (2017). Inquiry-based science education in primary
school in Spain: teachers' practices. Conference proceedings to the
Congreso internacional sobre investigacién en didactica de las ciencias.
Available online at
file:///C:/Users/PC/Downloads/Congreso_didactica_sevilla.pdf.

Narayan, R., & Lamp, D.H. (2010). "Me? Teach science?" Exploring EC-4 pre-
service teachers’ self-efficacy in an inquiry-based constructivist physics
classroom. Educational Research and Review, 5(12): 748-757.

National Research Council. (1996). National science education standards.
Washington, DC: National Academies Press.

National Research Council. (2000). Inquiry in science and classrooms. Washington,
DC: National Academies Press.

National Research Council (2012). National Science Education Standards.
Washington, DC: The National Academies Press. Doi: 10.17226/4962

Norman, G. (2010). Likert scales, levels of measurement, and the “laws” of
statistics. Advanced Health Science Education Theory and Practice,
15(5):625-632

Nuangchalerm, P., Dostal, D., & Luo, X. (2016). Investigating pre-service secondary
teachers’ practices about inquiry-based learning during school practicum
Chemistry: Bulgarian Journal of Science Education, 25(4): 487-495.

Ogena, Ester B. (1998). Science Education in the Philippines: An Overview. National
Science Education Congress, 27-28, 1990: 7-28.

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

Oguz-Unver, A., & Arabacioglu, S. (2014). A comparison of inquiry-based learning
(IBL), problem-based learning (PBL), and project-based learning (PJBL) in
science education. Acad. J. Educ. Res. 2(7): 120-128.

Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (2003). The PISA 2003
Assessment Framework—Mathematics, Reading, Science, and Probiem-
Solving Knowledge and Skills.

Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. (2009), "Teaching
Practices, Teachers’ Beliefs and Attitudes,” in Creating Effective Teaching
and Leaming Environments: First Results fram TALIS, OECD Publishing,
Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264068780-6-en.

Osborne, J. (2014). Scientific practices and inquiry in the science classroom. In N. G.
Lederman & S. K. Abell (Eds.), Handbook of research in science education
(Vol. 2, pp. 579-599). New York, NY: Routledge.

Ozel, M., & Luft, J. A. (2013). Beginning secondary science teachers’
conceptualization and enactment of inquiry-based instruction. School Science
and Mathematics, 113(6): 308- 316.

Pajares, Ml F. (1992). Teachers’ beliefs and educational research. Clearing up a
of Educational Research, 62(4}: 307-334.

Parkay, F.W., & Stanford, B.H. (2007). Becoming a Teacher. 7" Ed. Boston:
Pearson. 580. pp.

Peat, .J. & Barton, B (2005) Medical Statistics: A quide to data analysis and critical
appraisal. USA: Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 338 pp.

Petersen, C.E. (2000). An experimental approach to biology. Journal of College
Science Teaching, 30: 162 - 165.

Plevyak, L. (2007). What do pre-service teachers learn in an inquiry-based science
methods course? Journal of Elementary Science Education, 19: 1 - 12. Doi:
10.1007/BF03173650.

Popham, W.J. (2011). Classroom Assessment. What Teachers Need to Know. (6""
Ed.). Boston: Pearson.

Prawat, R. S. (1996). Constructivism, modem and postmodernism. Educational
Psychology, 31(3/4): 215-225.

Pruitt, J. (2013). Honors student perceptions of self-directed learning: When a
teacher becomes a facilitator. Teaching English in the Two-Year College, 40,
274-287.

Puchner, L. D. & Taylor, A. R. (2006). Lesson study, collaboration, and teacher

Pre-service Biology Teachers and inquiry-Based Science Instruction

efficacy: Stories from two school-based math lesson study groups. Teaching
and Teacher Education, 22(7), 922-934.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j. tate.2006.04.011

Pugach, M. C. & Johnson, L. J. (2002). Collaborative practitioners, collaborative
schools (2nd ed.). Denver. Love Pubiishing.

Quinco-Cadosales, M.N. (2017). Teaching Efficacy of Elementary Students
Teachers, Education, 7(1): 10-15. doi: 10.5923/j.edu.20170701.03.

Ramnarain, U., & Hlatswayo, M. (2018). Teacher beliefs and attitudes about inquiry-
based learning in a rural school district in South Africa. South African Journal
of Education, 38(1): 1-10.

Ramey-Gassert, L., & Shroyer, M. G. (1992). Enhancing science teaching self-
efficacy in pres fice elementary teachers. Journal of Elementary Science
Education, 4(1): 26-34.

Ramey-Gassert, L., Shroyer, M. G., & Staver, J. R. (1996). A qualitative study of
factors influencing science teaching self-efficacy of elementary level teachers.
Science Education, 80; 283-315.

Readability formulas. (nd). Free readability calculators. Automatic readability
checker. Available online at http://www.readabilityformulas.com/.

Reagan, T., Brubaker, L., & Case, C. (2000). Becoming a reflective educator: How to
buiid a cuiture of inquiry in schoois. 2nd ed. Thousand Oaks: Corwin Press
Inc,

Reaume, R. (2011). Pre-service teacher perceptions of and experiences with the
implementation of inquiry-based science teaching. Electronic Theses and
Dissertations. University of Windsor. Availabie oniine at
https://scholar. uwindsor.ca/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1108&context=etd

Richardson, V. (2003). Constructivist Pedagogy. Teachers College Record - Teach
college record. University of Michigan. Available online at
file:///C:/Users/PC/Downioads/ConsiructivistPedagogy.pdt

Rickards, G., Magee, C., & Artino, A.R., Jr. (2012). You can't fix by analysis what
you've spoiled by design: developing survey instruments and collecting
validity evidence. Journal of Graduate Medical Education, 4(4):407—410.

Riggs, |. M., & Enochs, L. G. (1990). Toward the development of an elementary
teacher's science teaching efficacy belief instrument. Science Education, 74:
625-637.

Pre-service Biology Teachers and inquiry-Based Science Instruction

Rohaan, E.J., Taconis, R., & Jochems, W.M.G. (2012). Analyzing teacher
knowledge for technology education in primary schools. International Journal
of Technology and Design Education. 22 (3): 271-280.

Roster, N.O. (2006). The effects of inquiry-based teaching on attitudes, self-efficacy,
and science reasoning abilities of students in introductory biology courses at a
tural, open-enrolment community college. Unpublished dissertation.
Oklahoma State University. Available online at
http://digital library.okstate.edu/etd/umi-okstate-1965. pdf.

Ross, J. A., Cousins, J.B., & Gadalla, T. (1996). Within-teacher predictors of teacher
efficacy. Teaching and Teacher Education, 12(4), 385-400.

Roth, W., & McGinn, M. (1998). Inscriptions: Toward a Theory of Representing as
Social Practice. Review of Educational Research, 68(1), 35-59. Retrieved
from http:/Avww jstor.org/stable/1 170689

Saad, R., & BouJaoude, S. (2012). The relationship between teachers’ knowledge
and beliefs about science and inquiry and their classroom practices. Eurasia
Journal of Mathematics, Science and Technology Education, 8(2): 113-128.

Sadker, M.P., & Sadker, D.M. (2003). Teachers, schools, and society. Boston:
McGrawHill. pp.614

Sahingoz, S. (2017). An Investigation of Turkish Middle School Science Teachers’
Pedagogical Orientations towards Direct and Inquiry Instructional
Approaches. Unpublished Dissertation. Western Michigan University.

Saito, E. & Atencio, M. (2013). A conceptual discussion of lesson study from a
micropolitical perspective: Implications for teacher development and pupil
learning. Teaching and Teacher Education, 31, 87-95.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tate.2013.01.001

Sawada, D., Piburn, M.D., Judson, E. J., Turley, K., Falconer, K., Benford, R., &
Bloom, |. (2002). Measuring Reform Practices in Science and Mathematics
Classrooms: The Reformed Teaching Observation Protocol Available from:
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/227733162_Measuring_Reform_Pra
ctices_in_Science_and_Mathematics_Classrooms_The_Reformed_Teaching
_Observation_Protocol.

SEL-DOST & UP NISMED. (2011). Science framework for Philippine basic education
Manila: Science Education Institute — Department of Science and Technology
and University of the Philippines National Institute of Science and
Mathematics Education Development.

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science instruction

Shriki, A. & Movshovitz-Hadar, N. (2011). Nurturing a community of practice through
collaborative design of lesson plans on a wiki system. Interdisciplinary Journal
of eLearning and Learning Objects, 7, 339-357.
http:/Avww..ijello.org/Volume7/IJELLOv7p339-357 Shriki768.pdf

Siegle, D. (2000). What Influences Self-efficacy? National Center for the Talented
and the Gifted (1990-2013). Renzulli Center of Creativity, Gifted Education,
and Talent Development. University of Connecticut. Available online at
https://gifted.uconn.edu/.

Sikko, S.A., Lyngved, R., & Pepin, B. (2012). Working with Mathematics and Science
teachers on inquiry-based learning (IBL) approaches: Teacher beliefs. Acta
Didactica Norge, 6(1): Art. 17. Available at
https://pure.tue.nl/ws/files/3761879/37603312500790.pdf.

Simon, S., Erduran, E., & Osborne, J. (2006). Learning to Teach Argumentation:
Research and development in the science classroom, /nternational Journal of
Science Education, 28:2-3: 235-260.

Smith, T.M., Desimone, L.M., Zeidner, T.L., Dunn, A.C., Bhatt, M. & Rumyantseva,
N.L. (2007). Inquiry-oriented instruction in science: Who teaches that way?
Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 29(3): 169-199.

Smolleck, L. A. & Mongan, A.M. (2011). Changes in pre-service teachers; self-
efficacy: From science methods to student teaching. Journal of Educationat
and Developmental Psychology, 1(1): 133-145

Statskingdom.com. (nd). Shapiro-Wilk Test Calculator. Available online at
http:/ww.statskingdom.com/320ShapiroWilk.htmI

Statskingdom.com. (nd). Levene's calculary Equality of Variances. Available online
at
http:/Awww. statskingdom.com/230var_levenes. htm

Stephenson, N. (2014). Introduction to inquiry-based learning. Galileo Educational
Network, retrieved from hittp:/Awww. teachinquiry.convindex/ Introduction. nti.

Stigler, J. W. & Hiebert, J. (1999). The teaching gap: Best ideas from the world’s
teachers for improving education in the classroom. New York: Summit Books.

Sullivan, G M. & Artino, A R, Jr (2013) Analyzing and interpreting data from a
Likert-type scale. Journal of Graduate Medical Education, 5(4): 541-542.

Sumrall, T.F. (2008). South Mississippi public elementary school teachers’
implementation of and attitudes toward inquiry-based science. UMI.

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

Sureci, Y., Tarihi, Y.G., & Tarihi, Y. (2016). An analytical study of primary school
teachers’ views towards research-oriented learning approach. The Journal of
Academic Social Science Studies, (48): 293 - 304.

Swars Auslander, S., & Dooley, C. (2010). Changes in Teaching Efficacy During a
Professional Development School-Based Science Methods Course. Schoo!
science and mathematics. 110(4): 193 - 202.

Takahashi, A. & Yoshida, M. (2004). ideas for establishing lesson study
communities. Teaching Children Mathematics, 10(9)
http:/Avww.nctm.org/Publications/teachingchildren-
mathematics/2004/Vol10/Issue9/Ideas-for-Establishing-Lesson-
StudyCommunities/

Taskin-Can, B. (2011). The perceptions of pre-service science teachers concerning
constructivist perspectives to teaching. Journal of Baltic Science Education,
10(4): 219 - 228.

Tatar, N. (2012). Inquiry-based science laboratories: an analysis of pre-service
teachers' beliefs about learning science through inquiry and their
performances. Journal of Baltic Science Education, 11: 248-266

Tenaw, Y.A. (2014). Teacher attitude, experience, and background knowledge
effect on the use of the inquiry method of teaching. International Research
Journal of Teacher Education, 1(1): 2-9.

Tillitson, J. W., & Young, M. J. (2013). The IMPPACT project: A model for studying
how preservice program experiences influence science teachers’ beliefs and
practices. Grantee Submission, 1(3): 148-161.

Thomas, J.D. (2008). A response to reform: teachers’ attitudes and practice of
inquiry-oriented instruction. UMI: 3327083.

Tupas, J., & Pendon, G. (2016). Prevailing Educational Philosophies among Pre-
Service Teachers. /RA International Jounal of Education and Multidisciplinary
Studies (ISSN 2455-2526), 3(3). doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.21013/jems.v3.n3.

Trowbridge, L. W., Bybee, R.W., & Powell, J.C. (2000). Teaching Secondary
School Science. New Jersey: Pearson Education, Inc.

Ulla, M. (2016). Pre-service Teacher Training Programs in the Philippines: The
Student-teachers Teaching internship Teaching Experience.

UP NISMED (2015). Bridging the challenges of inquiry-based teaching:
Commonwealth Elementary School teachers’ insights on lesson study.

Pre-service Biology Teachers and Inquiry-Based Science Instruction

University of the Philippines National institute of Science and Mathematics
Education Development Lesson Study Project.

Uredi, L. (2013). The effect of classroom teachers’ attitudes toward the constructivist
approach on their level of establishing a constructivist learning environment: A
case of Mersin. Educational Research and Reviews, 8(11): 668-
676.doi:10.5897/ERR2013.1468

Uredi, L. (2015). The Predictive Power of Classroom Teachers’ Self-Efficacy Beliefs
Related to Implementing the Constructivist Approach upon Their Level of
Creating a Constructivist Learning Environment: A Mersin Case.
Anthropologist, 20(1,2): 256-267.

Velthuis, C., Fisser, P., & Pieters, J. (2014). Teacher training and pre-service primary
teachers’ self-efficacy for science teaching. Journal of Science Teacher
Education, 25(4), 445-464.

Wandberg, R., & Rohwer, J. (2003). Teaching to the standards of effective practice.
‘A guide to becoming a successful teacher. Boston: Allyn and Bacon. pp.
292.

Ward, P.D. (2016). How select groups of preservice science teachers with inquiry
orientations view teaching and learning science through inquiry. Theses and
Dissertations. Available online at http://scholarworks. uark.edu/etd/1836.

Western Michigan University. (n.d.). Pedagogy of Science Teaching Test. Mallinson
Institute for Science Education. Available online at
http:/Awww.wmich.edu/science/inquiry-items.

Wilcox, J., Kruse, J. W., & Clough, M. P. (2015). Seven common myths about this
time-honored approach. The Science Teacher, 62-67.

Windschitl, M. & Buttemer, H., 2000. What should the inquiry experience be for the
learner? American Biology Teacher, 62: 346-350.

Xie, M., & Sharif, R. T. S. (2014). The Relationship between Teachers' Knowledge,
Attitude, and Belief with the Implementation of Inquiry-Based Learning in
Zhengzhou, China. Intemational Journal of Learning, Teaching and
Educational Research, 8(1), 149-161.

Yager, R., & Akcay, H. (2010). The advantages of an inquiry approach for science
instruction in middle grades. School Science and Mathematics, 110: 5 - 12.
Doi: 10 1111/).1949-8594 2009 00002

Young, A. M. (2013). Teachers’ understandings of inquiry and reported use of
scientific practices: A survey of NSTA Conference attendees [Thesis]. The
University of Maine.
