Predictors of Childhood Immunization Timeliness in the Philippines

Karen Joyce C. Pattaui

University of the Philippines Manila

Master of Science in Public Health (Biostatistics)

June 2022

ABSTRACT

Immunization has been proven to prevent a wide range of preventable diseases and
demise. Different countries, including the Philippines, implemented the Expanded Program
on Immunization (EPI) to ensure that children and mothers have access to routinely
recommended vaccines against diseases such as tuberculosis, diphtheria, tetanus, pertussis,
polio, and measles. However, many challenges have been affecting the implementation of
vaccination programs, resulting in vaccination delays and underimmunization. Against this
context, this paper applied methods in survival analysis to examine the timeliness of
vaccine administration among Filipino children aged 0 to 35 months and its predictors,
using data from the 2017 National Demographic and Health Survey. The estimated median vaccine delays among Filipino children were 5 days for BCG;
2.4 weeks for OPV1; 2.7 weeks for Pental; 4.0 weeks for OPV2; 4.4 weeks for Penta2; 6.4
weeks for OPV3; 6.6 weeks for Penta3; 2.3 weeks for MCV1; and 3.6 weeks for MCV2.
The Turnbull estimation revealed that the probability of timely vaccination (ie.,
vaccination within a month after the target administration age) was 67.32% for BCG;
69.17% for OPV 1; 63.95% for Pental; 53.97% for OPV2; 50.40% for Penta2; 39.79% for
OPV3, 38.69% for Penta3; 58.72% for MCV1; and 35.64% for MCV2. Semi-parametric and parametric survival models indicate that the child’s birth order,
mother’s age, father’s age, membership in other insurance, and awareness of free immunization programs were significant factors of the delay in full vaccination,

keywords: childhood vaccines, immunization timeliness, survival analysis, Turnbull estimation, full-vaccination delay, NDHS 2017

1. INTRODUCTION
1.1 Background of the Study

Over the past century, vaccines have been a key factor for the historic reduction in
child mortality and increase in life expectancy throughout the world (UNICEF, 2021). It is
estimated that immunization prevents 2-3 million fatalities every year worldwide and could
have avoided about 29% of deaths among children under the age of five (WHO, 2014).
Moreover, vaccines are currently being produced to prevent new strains and serotypes of
illnesses, such as dengue fever and influenza. However, despite the advancement in
immunizations, government intervention is still crucial in safeguarding public health
(Brownson et. al., 2009).

The Philippine government has enacted a number of measures aiming to eradicate
vaccine-preventable diseases (VPDs). For nearly four decades, the Department of Health
(DOH) has been implementing the Expanded Program on Immunization (EPI) program to
ensure that children and mothers receive routinely recommended vaccines against
diphtheria, pertussis, tetanus, poliomyelitis, measles, and tuberculosis. Mass vaccination
campaigns were held twice a year from 1977 to 1983 (DOH, 2021). During this period,
over 10,000-14,000 Filipinos died every year because of measles. By 1984, quarterly mass
campaigns were implemented, resulting in a significant reduction not only in measles-
related deaths but also in mortality from other VPDs (WHO, 2020). In 2011, Republic Act
‘No. 10152 was signed into law, ensuring mandatory vaccination of all infants and children
against VPDs. This law also stipulates that basic immunization, as well as vaccines against
mumps, rubella (German measles), and H. influenzae type B, should be provided free of
charge to newborns and children under the age of five at any government hospital or health

center (UNICEF, 2019).

The country has successfully eradicated polio in 2000 and eliminated maternal and
neonatal tetanus in 2017. However, the basic vaccination rate never really met the desired
target of 95% coverage for decades (Ulep & Uy, 2021), and outbreaks of measles and polio
were reported in 2019 (BBC, 2019; Crisostomo, 2019). Childhood vaccination rates have
also fallen throughout this time. According to a study conducted in January 2018, the
national immunization rate in a particular barangay in Pampanga fell from 89% to 49% in
the same month the previous year. This decline in vaccination rates was aggravated by the
media’s sensationalizing of the “Dengvaxia” dengue vaccination which began in April
2016 and ended in December 2017 (Migrifio et. al., 2020).

On the other hand, since the EPI program focuses primarily on vaccination coverage
as its success indicator, the timeliness of vaccine administration is often overlooked and
unmeasured. A high percentage of children, between 38% to 65%, had delayed vaccination
from 1993 to 2017, while only 10% of children received complete and timely immunization
(Ulep & Uy, 2021).

Delayed vaccination and underimmunization pose a great risk to public health. Thus,
it is crucial to determine the factors that may influence Filipino children’s timely and full
immunization. Factors that will be examined in this study include the sociodemographic
profile of the child’s parents such as education, employment, and living conditions, as well
as maternal autonomy and domestic violence experience. Healthcare utilization is also
another factor that will be considered in this study. The availability of health insurance,
distance to the health facility, cost of medical expenses, antenatal and postnatal care, the
child’s birthplace, and birth attendant will all be analyzed to evaluate the timeliness and

intake of EPI-recommended vaccines.

1.2 Statement of the Problem

The knowledge about the timeliness of EPI-recommended vaccines, which should be
evaluated as another success indicator of the vaccination program, is very limited in the
Philippines. This is also due to the fact that the success of an immunization program is

often measured by vaccination coverage, irrespective of the administration time.

Although some researchers investigated vaccination timeliness and its predictors in
the country, these studies were conducted on a smaller scale (Malecosio et. al, 2020), with
a limited number of factors (Raguindin et. al, 2021), or with specific vaccines (Wallace et.

al., 2012).

In addition, the use of survival analysis to examine vaccine delays has been utilized
in very few published articles. The majority of these studies employed semiparametric
survival models (Adetifa et. al., 2018; Akoth, 2020; Babirye et. al., 2012; Barman et. al.,
2015; Gram et al, 2014; Mokhtari et. al., 2015; Nakatudde et. al., 2019; Salam et. al.,
2017), while only two journals used parametric survival models (Boulton et.al, 2019;

Wagner et. al., 2021).

Hence, it is critical to determine the timeliness of the EPI-recommended vaccine
administration among Filipino children, as well as to assess its predictors in the country

using survival analysis.

1.3 Objectives of the Study
The primary objective of this study was to determine the factors that might influence
the timeliness of recommended vaccines under the Expanded Program on Immunization
(EPI) among Filipino children aged 0 to 35 months old using the National Demographic
and Health Survey (NDHS) 2017. Specifically, this research aimed to:
a. estimate the mean and median administration times of each EPI-recommended
vaccine;
b. estimate the probability of Filipino children getting the EPI-recommended
vaccines on time; and
c. evaluate predictors of delay in getting all the EPI-recommended vaccines from

the lens of survival analysis.

1.4. Significance of the Study

The study findings would reveal whether Filipino children were receiving timely
immunizations or not. The estimated probabilities of getting each EPI-recommended
vaccine would help determine the appropriate time between birth and the first birthday,
during which certain interventions could be done to promote timely vaccination.

This study would be the first to examine predictors of delay in full-vaccination of
Filipino children using both semiparametric and parametric models. This study would also
have estimates which are representative for the country by using the NDHS 2017 survey
weights in the analysis. With a national survey being used, this study would be able to

examine vaccine timeliness in a large number of Filipino children aged 0 to 35 months.

In addition, a unique application of an existing statistical method proposed by
Turnbull would be explored as an altemative in computing vaccine probabilities since the
majority of the published journals only used Kaplan-Meier estimation. The Turnbull
estimation, which employs an expectation-maximization (EM) algorithm, has only been
used in a few vaccine studies (Shrivastwa et. al., 2016; Wagner et. al., 2018). The EM
algorithm is a popular machine-leaming tool that is useful when there is missing data or

latent variables (Beffel, 2015).

Furthermore, the results of this study would give us a better understanding of the
effects of a multitude of factors on the promptness and completeness of the EPI-
recommended vaccines among Filipino children. With this in mind, health programs could
be tailored to specific demographics in promoting timely immunization and boost

immunization rates.

2. THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
2.1 Review of Related Literature
2.1.1 Childhood Immunization

Substantial progress has been made in the prevention of infectious diseases in the
past two centuries. At the forefront of this progress is the development and mass production
of vaccines, which have been demonstrated to be a simple, safe, and cost-effective way of
enhancing global welfare (UNICEF, 2021). The first vaccine was developed in 1798 in
response to the high morbidity rates caused by smallpox. In the late 18» century, a vaccine
using killed or attenuated bacteria to activate the immune system was developed against
tuberculosis. By the 1900s, more vaccines were developed against diphtheria, pertussis,
poliomyelitis, hepatitis, and measles. These vaccines were created by viral tissue culture
and whole-cell genetic modification (The Immunization Advisory Centre, 2020). Smallpox
was proclaimed eradicated worldwide in 1979 after mass vaccinations (CDC, 2017), and
cases of vaccine-preventable illnesses fell dramatically (Roser et. al., 2013).

The establishment of the Expanded Program on Immunization (EPI) by the World
Health Organization (WHO) in 1974 also played a significant role in the reduction of
VPDs. The main purpose of the initiative is to improve childhood and maternal
immunization by ensuring universal access to all recommended vaccines (Keja et. al.,
1988). This goal has been achieved through the safe transportation and management of
vaccine supplies, documentation of vaccine administration, training of healthcare workers,

and educational outreach activities.

The EPI standards were followed by every United Nations (UN) member state in
implementing their country’s immunization policies. Community-based surveys, as well
as the use of immunization data from public, private, and non-governmental healthcare
facilities, are used to monitor and evaluate immunization programs in each country (Hadler
et. al., 2004).

Immunization programs primarily target newborn infants up to children under one
year old, since they have an immature immune system and are more susceptible to
infections (Elahi et. al., 2013). Although infants can acquire passive immunity from their
mothers at birth (CDC, 2021), their immune system does not mature until they are two to
three months old. In addition, the development of cell-mediated immunity also occurs
during the first few months of life (Sabella, 2021). This fact had an impact on the
standardized immunization schedule focusing on newborns and children, which consisted
of several vaccine series administered through injection or oral drops. Originally, the EPI-
recommended vaccines included Bacillus Calmette-Guérin (BCG) vaccine, Diphtheria-
Tetanus-Pertussis (DTP) vaccine, polio vaccine, and measles vaccine. With the scientific
advancement in immunologic factors, new vaccines were added to the EPI’s list of
recommended vaccines such as Hepatitis B vaccine, Haemophilus influenzae type b (Hib)
vaccine, pneumococcal conjugate vaccine (PCV), and rotavirus vaccine (WHO, 2020). By
2012, the WHO and UNICEF recommended the use of the pentavalent vaccine in middle-
and low-income countries. This combination vaccine is also known as the 5-in-1 vaccine
which protects against five leading VPDs - diphtheria, tetanus, whooping cough, hepatitis

B, and Hib (Oxford Vaccine Group, 2019).

2.1.2 Challenges in Childhood Immunization

Despite the recognized advantages of vaccines, the worldwide immunization rate has
never reached the 90% public health target and has remained steady over the last ten years.
Most of the basic childhood vaccines have rates higher than 80%, but coverage for other
vaccines such as the Hib vaccine remains low. The global coverage even fell from 86% in
2019 to 83% in 2020. It is estimated that 23 million infants did not receive any basic
vaccines in 2020, the highest number since 2009 (WHO, 2020).

Delayed administration of age-recommended vaccines goes hand in hand with the
low vaccination rates. Among 45 low-income and middle-income countries, there were
significant childhood vaccination delays with BCG (at 2.3 weeks), the first dose of DTP
(DTP1 at 2.4 weeks), third dose of DTP (DTP3 at 6.2 weeks), and the first dose of measles-
containing vaccine (MCV1 at 2.7 weeks) (Clark & Sanderson, 2009). A significant delay
in vaccination means a child is being at risk of certain VPDs for a longer period, which has
a negative impact on herd immunity (Akmatov et. al., 2008).

For decades, various challenges have been affecting immunization completion and
timeliness. The majority of unvaccinated children reside in the world’s poorest nations,
where factors such as inadequate health care, challenging physical topography, and armed
conflict impact vaccination rates (Maurice & Davey, 2009). Poor communities also often
lack access to education, nutrition, clean water, and sanitation, as well as sexual and
reproductive health services. In addition, poor countries have three times the risk of under-
five mortality compared to developed countries. To support vaccination initiatives in low-
income countries, the Global Alliance for Vaccines and Immunization (GAVI) was created
in 2000. GAVI subsidizes immunization costs for half of the world’s children, vaccinating

nearly 760 million children and averting 13 million deaths globally (Ikilezi et. al., 2020).

Vaccine accessibility, including maintaining supply, safe transportation, and
affordability, has been a serious issue for several years. One-third of the 194 countries
reported having critically low vaccine supply for a month or more between 2011 and 2015.
Shortages of vaccines against hepatitis, diphtheria, tetanus, pertussis, and tuberculosis
occurred both in poor and wealthy counties in 2017 (Garrett, 2018). These shortages caused
considerable delays in vaccine administration (Boshnakova & Kamad, 2018; Stokley,
2004). Concerning this, logistical challenges, such as vaccine storage and transportation,
remain to be a problem. The temperature range under which vaccines are stored and
transported is critical to their effectiveness. The oral polio vaccine, for example, must be
maintained below 4°C during manufacture, shipping, and delivery. However, the
administration of warmed, biologically inactive polio in 1997 resulted in thousands of
Indian children being left unprotected. Vaccine transportation is also particularly more
difficult in poor countries with underdeveloped areas and civil unrest (PRB, 2001).
Additionally, the cost of basic vaccines has been a serious concern, especially for
low-income countries. In the past, vaccines were seen to be less profitable for
pharmaceutical corporations, but this has changed as the global market has grown. In fact,
about 80% of vaccines today are produced by only five pharmaceutical companies,
including GlaxoSmithKline, Merck, Novartis, Pfizer, and Sanofi Pasteur (Mackenzie,
2011). Some vaccines, particularly those that are under patent protection, are also still
expensive. To help address the gap, the public-private initiative GAVI allows developing
countries to access recommended vaccines at a discounted price. For one, vaccines that
were initially around $50-8200 per dose are now only $1-$22 per dose in developing

countries (Vanderslott et. al., 2019).

The government must also commit to a long-term strategy to boost immunization,
encompassing improved public health services, healthcare worker training, and infectious
disease surveillance (Institute of Medicine, 2003). A study conducted in 2007 revealed that
low vaccination rates were influenced by ill-trained medical staff, absence of missed
vaccination reminders, and the physician’s lack of knowledge about vaccine indications
and contraindications (Kimmel et. al., 2007). On the other hand, high immunization rates
‘were demonstrated by supportive medical personnel, convenient appointment hours, and a
short waiting time (Gore et. al., 1999). Furthermore, reliable surveillance procedures with
accurate documentation are essential to detect outbreaks and respond promptly in
protecting the high-risk population.

The WHO declared vaccine hesitancy to be a major global health threat. Vaccine
skepticism has been around since the advent of immunization, and the main reasons for it
include complacency, distrust, and inconvenient access in 2019 (WHO, 2019). Moreover,
while government agencies attempt to censor and fact-check scientific materials on
traditional media, the usage of social media contributed to increased skepticism
(Vanderslott et. al., 2019). Safety concems, alternative options, and conspiracy theories
about immunization can be seen on different social media platforms. As a result, social
media sites like Pinterest and Facebook began to filter the spread of false information by
only including credible public health links in vaccine-related searches and banning
advertisements that contain misinformation (Burki, 2019). Vaccine skepticism was also
revealed to be mainly caused by exposure to negative media information and concerns
about vaccine safety in the country. Approximately 96% of the Filipino mothers living in
Manila believed in the protective effect of vaccines, but 36.4% of them were still hesitant

due to negative media exposure and concerns about vaccine safety (Migrifio et. al., 2020).

In the Philippines, basic immunization coverage has remained between 70-80% in
the past 30 years, and the country has never reached the 95% target (Ulep & Uy, 2021). A
national report in 2017 found that only 48.4% of children were fully immunized and 9.4%
received no immunization at all (PSA, 2020). The country is also among the top 10
countries with the most unimmunized and under-vaccinated children worldwide (WHO,
2020), with the vaccination rate being lowest in the Administrative Region in Muslim
Mindanao (ARMM) at 9% and highest in the Davao region at 78% (PSA,
2020). Furthermore, the percentage of Filipino children who had delayed administration
was estimated to be between 38% to 65% (Ulep & Uy, 2019). The median administration
time among Filipino children was at 2.7 weeks for the BCG vaccine, 10.1 weeks for the
Pentavalent | vaccine, and 21.7 weeks for the Pentavalent 3 vaccine, all of which are
considered notable delays (Raguindin et. al., 2021).

Considering all the barriers affecting childhood immunization, including
administration delays, a child bom today has less than a 20% chance of being fully
vaccinated before the age of five (UNICEF & WHO, 2020). Thus, it is critical to look into

the various predictors that may influence Filipino children’s timely and full vaccination.


2.1.3 Factors Affecting Timely and Full Vaccination
Parental characteristics

Childhood immunization is mainly influenced by their parent’s social, economic, and
cultural backgrounds (Los Angeles Public Health, 2015), as well as their understanding of
how vaccines work (Downs et. al., 2008).

Maternal age was found to be positively associated with full vaccination (Borras et.
al., 2009; Salmon et. al., 2009). It was revealed that children of women aged 30-39 years
old had a higher chance of being fully vaccinated than children of mothers under the age
of 20 (Aalemi et. al, 2020). In a different study, children of women aged 25-34 years old
and of women aged at least 35 years old had a higher likelihood of being completely
vaccinated compared to children of women aged less than 25 years old (Nozaki et. al.,
2019). Advanced matemal age was shown to be a significant factor for delayed vaccination
in Eastern China (Hu et. al., 2014), Colombia (Narvaez et. al., 2017), Guatemala
(D’Ardenne et. al., 2016), and Kenya (Gibson et. al., 2015). Paternal age was also found
to be a factor for complete vaccination (Oleribe et. al., 2017). In comparison to younger
fathers, older fathers were more involved in their children’s health care, including up-to-
date vaccinations (Moore et. al., 2004).

In relation to understanding the significance of vaccines and how it works, the
educational attainment of both parents was revealed to be an important factor. In fact,
the lack of education of both parents has affected children’s underimmunization (Aalemi
et. al, 2020; Hussin & Marzo, 2020; Meleko et. al., 2017; Phukan et. al., 2008). Women
who completed primary, secondary, or higher education had nearly twice to threefold the
chance of having their children fully immunized compared to uneducated mothers in

Ethiopia (Desalew et. al., 2020; Kinfe et. al., 2019), India (Devasenapathy et. al.,

2016; Sissoko et. al., 2014), and Philippines (Bondy et. al., 2009). Children whose mothers
had higher education compared were more likely to be vaccinated on time in China (Hu et.
al., 2017), Ghana (Gram et. al., 2014), India (Barman et. al., 2015), Kenya (Calhoun et. al.,
2014), Tanzania (Le Polain de Waroux et. al., 2013), Uganda (Fadnes et. al., 2011), and
United States (Luman et. al., 2002, 2005). In Egypt, nearly half of educated mothers
vaccinated their children on time, compared to 50% of illiterate moms who failed to
vaccinate their children on time (Ahmed et. al., 2013). Meanwhile, no patemal schooling
compared to higher education was associated with non-vaccination among children
(Sissoko et. al., 2014). This was consistent with various studies which found that having a
high school and college graduate father increases the chances of their children being
completely and timely immunized in Greece (Danis et. al., 2010), India (Barman et. al.,
2015), Iran (Mokhtari et. al., 2015), and Nigeria (Oleribe et. al., 2017).

With more children being born in non-traditional households (i.e., cohabitation and
single parenthood) than in traditional families, different studies also attempted to determine
the link between marital status and child health (Buckles & Price, 2013; Kane, 2015;
Manderbacka et. al., 1992). Single parenthood was already recognized to be inferior to
traditional family setup since dual parenthood had advantages in economies of scale,
division of work, and risk-sharing. It was found that co-residency and union status were
related to infant health (Kim & Lee, 2017). Hence, it was not surprising that parents' union
status had an impact on a child’s health and immunization. Children of single or formerly
married mothers had fewer odds of being fully immunized compared to children of married
mothers in Kazakhstan (Akmatov et. al., 2007) and Nigeria (Oleribe et. al., 2017). In
Ghana, children of divorced mothers also had fewer chances to be completely immunized

than children of cohabiting, married, or widowed mothers (Anokye et. al., 2018).

In Uganda, children of unmarried mothers were more likely to have delayed vaccination
(Babirye et. al., 2012). In Kenya, children in households with non-cohabiting parents were
also less likely to be fully vaccinated (Calhoun et. al., 2014).

The working status of parents was another factor influencing a child’s health and
immunization (Abbi et. al., 1991). It was discovered that 84.6% of unemployed mothers
did not vaccinate their infants (Ahmed et. al., 2013), although it was also found that
children of mothers who work outside the house (Mayerova & Abbas, 2021) and who work
part-time (Anokye et. al., 2018) were less likely to have been fully immunized. Delayed
vaccination was also associated with working mothers in China (Hu et. al., 2013) and India
(Barman et. al., 2015). Another research from Ethiopia revealed that children with working
fathers were twice as likely to be fully vaccinated compared to children with unemployed
fathers (Kinfe et. al., 2019). This has matched a systematic review showing that infants of
unemployed fathers were more likely to be incompletely vaccinated than those with
employed fathers (Desalew et. al., 2020). Children whose parents were employed were also
less likely to have timely vaccination (Suarez-Castaneda et. al., 2014).

Although rarely examined, parental smoking and alcohol drinking were also
linked to childhood immunization. Children from households where mothers smoked or
chewed tobacco were less likely to be fully vaccinated than children from non-smoking
households. Likewise, children from households where members drink alcohol were less

likely to be fully vaccinated compared to non-drinking households (Bonu et. al., 2004).


The mentioned association might be due to the indirect effects of tobacco and alcohol
expenditures on reduced household income and child health services utilization. (Bonu et.
al., 2014). This finding was consistent with those of other studies that examined the
relationship of tobacco and alcohol consumption with child health (Ahmad et. al., 2021;

Efroymson et. al., 2001; Emster et. al., 2000; Lawder et. al., 2019; O’Leary et. al., 2010).

Child characteristics

The child’s birth order and living arrangement were also associated with
vaccination status. Among infants, the proportion of fully immunized firstborn children
was significantly higher than that of fully immunized second-bom children (Schaffer,
1995). It was discovered that birth order had an inverse relationship with the likelihood of
being fully vaccinated in Israel (Gavrielov-Yusim et. al., 2012), Pakistan (Madad et. al.,
2015), and the Philippines (Bondy et. al., 2009). In relation to this, firstborn children were
more likely than their second-born children to have received immunizations on time, and
late immunization of firstborn kids was observed to increase the likelihood of a second-
bom sibling receiving immunizations late as well (Schaffer, 1995). Increasing birth order
was also revealed to be associated with delayed vaccinations in Congo (Zivich et. al.,
2017), Gambia (Odutola et. al., 2015), and Iran (Mokhtari et. al., 2015; Rejali et. al., 2015).
Moreover, a child who was living apart from his or her mother had a higher likelihood of
being underimmunized than a child who was living with the mother (Rossi et. al., 2015).
In China, children who were not living with their parents were also significantly more
likely to have delayed vaccination than children who were living with their parents (Tang

et. al., 2016).

1s

Household characteristics

Family wealth figured as a factor associated with full immunization. A
comparative study of 45 developing countries revealed that only 49% of children were fully
immunized worldwide, and the disparity in vaccination rates between the poorest and
richest nations was more than 20% (Houweling et. al., 2007). Children of mothers from the
richest quintile had significantly higher odds of being fully vaccinated than those from the
poorest quintile based on studies conducted in Afghanistan (Aalemi et. al., 2020), Congo
(Acharya et. al., 2019), Colombia (Narvéez et. al., 2017), India (Devasenapathy et. al.,
2016), Myanmar (Nozaki et. al., 2019) and Philippines (Bondy et. al., 2009). Untimely
vaccination was also associated with low household income in China (Hu et. al., 2017),
Ghana (Gram et. al., 2014), India (Barman et. al., 2015), Kenya (Mutua et. al., 2016),
Senegal (Mbengue et. al., 2017), Uganda (Babirye et. al., 2012) and Tanzania (Le Polain
de Waroux et. al., 2013).

Another factor that influenced complete immunization was family size. Family size
had an inverse relationship with the likelihood of being fully vaccinated among children in
Afghanistan (Aalemi et. al., 2020), Colombia (Narvaez et. al., 2017), Kenya (Calhoun et.
al., 2014), Malaysia (Krishna et. al., 2019), and Zimbabwe (Rossi, 2015). This inverse
relationship was also reflected in the odds of having timely immunization in countries such
as China (Hu et. al., 2013; 2017), Guatemala (D’Ardenne et. al., 2016), Nepal (Hughes et.
al., 2016), Peru (D’Ardenne et. al., 2016), Senegal (Mbengue et. al., 2017), Uganda

(Babirye et. al., 2012), and United States (Luman et. al., 2005).


The type of residing place, whether rural or urban, would be another factor
influencing vaccination. Children living in rural areas were less likely to be fully
vaccinated compared to their urban-residing counterparts in El Salvador (Suarez-
Castaneda et. al., 2014), Indonesia (Herliana &Douiri, 2017), India (Phukan et. al.,
2008). Pakistan (Naeem et. al, 2011), and South Korea (Kim & Lee, 201 1). Children living
in rural areas were also more likely to have delayed vaccinations as observed in the Gambia
(Miyahara et. al., 2016), Ghana (Gram et. al., 2014), Iran (Jadidi et. al., 2015; Mokhtari et.
al., 2015), and Senegal (Mbengue et. al., 2017). Low literacy rates, high poverty levels,
and inadequate health care services in rural areas have contributed to this rural-urban gap
(Aalemi et. al., 2020).

The household’s insurance membership was also significantly associated with
the odds of children being completely vaccinated, as well as children having access to
medical, dental, and other healthcare (Newacheck et. al., 1998). The household not having
insurance was associated with a lower likelihood of being fully immunized in Colombia
((Narvéez et. al., 2017) and a higher likelihood of delayed immunizations in the United
States (Dombkowski et. al., 2004). Children with private insurance also had higher odds of
getting full and timely vaccination compared to uninsured children and children with other

insurance types (Hill et. al., 2021; Santoli et. al., 2004).

v7

Domestic violence

In a multi-country study, it was discovered that domestic violence affected
childhood vaccination. Children of abused mothers were less likely to be completely
immunized in many countries such as Cambodia, Colombia, Dominican Republic, Egypt,
India, Nicaragua, and Peru (Kishor & Johnson, 2004). Domestic violence inflicted by the
husband or partner has also been significantly reducing the autonomy of mothers
(Friedman, 2003; Tenkorang, 2021). In relation to this, domestic abuse was found to be
associated with low healthcare utilization. In developing and middle-income countries,
women experiencing domestic violence were less likely to use maternity health services
(Leight & Wilson, 2021). Mothers experiencing emotional violence were also less likely
to have institutional delivery and they tend to have less than four antenatal visits (Hassan

et. al., 2020).

Maternal autonomy

Full vaccination was more frequent among mothers who can make decisions
about their medical care, household expenditures, and family events (Aalemi et. al.,
2020). The odds of being fully vaccinated was almost twice among children of mothers
with autonomy compared to those without (Desalew et. al., 2020). Matemal autonomy was
also revealed to be an important factor in pregnancy-related healthcare utilization, which
then impacts prospects of vaccination, as discussed in the next section. In Ethiopia and
Nepal, mothers who were involved in household decisions were more likely to use maternal
health services in Ethiopia (Tiruneh et. al.,2017) and Nepal (Adhikari, 2016) compared to
mothers without autonomy. Indian women with high autonomy were also more likely to

avail healthcare services than those whose low autonomy (Mondal et. al., 2020).

Problems in healthcare utilization
Accessibility and affordability of medical services have been identified as major
challenges in healthcare utilization (National Academy of Sciences, 2018). Clearly, these
issues also affect a child’s status of being completely immunized (Caingles & Lobo, 2011).
A study conducted in Papua New Guinea reported that 21% of mothers did not immunize
their children due to distance and cost of transportation to local health centers (Toikilik
et. al. 2010). Distance to vaccination centers was also reported to be one of the major
causes of underimmunization in Haiti (Rainey et. al., 2012). Children living farther away
from immunization clinics were also more likely to have delayed vaccinations in China
(Huet. al., 2014), Gambia (Miyahara et. al., 2016), and Malawi (Mvula et. al., 2016). In
addition, children who needed to travel using public transport were more likely to have
delayed immunizations in El Salvador (Sudrez-Castaneda et. al., 2014) and Gambia
(Odutola et. al., 2015). However, another study in China contradicted the previous
associations and reported that children who experienced shorter travel time to vaccination
clinics were more likely to have delayed vaccination (Lin et. al., 2014). The free-vaccine
policy has been proven to significantly improve the completion and timeliness of childhood
vaccination (Wu et. al., 2015). In fact, about 95% of vaccinated Filipino children got their

vaccines from public medical facilities (Ulen & Uy, 2019).


Maternal and neonatal health

Antenatal care (ANC) and postnatal care (PNC) utilization have contributed to the
likelihood of a child’s full immunization. The majority of the mothers got their vaccine
information from antenatal clinics, and maternal health care usage was found to be related
to full child vaccination (Meleko et. al., 2017). Mothers who were visiting health centers
more often were more likely to vaccinate their children on time (Poorolajal et. al., 2012).

Children whose mothers made antenatal visits had higher odds of being fully
vaccinated compared to children whose mothers were without antenatal visits in China (Hu
et. al., 2013) and Nigeria (Anichukwu & Asamoah, 2019). A study of 29 African countries
found that mothers who made four or more antenatal visits had a higher chance of fully
vaccinating their infants (Budu et. al.,2021). This result was consistent with studies that
mothers who had at least four antenatal visits were more likely to timely immunize their
child in Congo (Zivich et. al., 2017) and to fully immunize their child in the Philippines
(Bondy et. al., 2009). A mother’s history of antenatal care was also revealed to be positively
associated with a child’s timely immunization in Bangladesh (Vasudevan et. al., 2014) and
sub-Saharan African community (Olusanya, 2010).

Mother’s intake of tetanus vaccine was also revealed to be associated with
childhood vaccination (Desalew et. al.,2020). Maternal tetanus immunization improved the
odds of her child being fully vaccinated by two to four times in India (Sissoko et. al., 2014),
Myanmar (Nozaki et. al., 2019), and Zimbabwe (Rossi, 2015). Receipt of tetanus vaccine
of mothers was also associated with timely vaccination of infants in Bangladesh

(Vasudevan et. al., 2014) and Pakistan (Zaidi et. al., 2014).


In addition, the child’s birthplace and birth attendant were proven to alter the
immunization status. Children who were delivered in a health facility had a higher chance
of getting recommended vaccines, as well as being fully vaccinated (Moyer et. al., 2016).
This was supported by other studies conducted in Congo (Acharya et. al., 2019), Ethiopia
(Meleko et. al., 2017), and India (Devasenapathy et. al., 2016) where the odds of a child
being vaccinated were higher with institutional delivery than with home or traditional birth
attendant delivery. In addition, women who were accompanied by a midwife or nurse were
more likely to vaccinate their infants (Abebe et. al., 2012). Delays in vaccination were also
associated with non-health facility birth in China (Hu et. al., 2017; Zhou et. al., 2009),
Gambia (Odutola et. al., 2015), India (Barman & Dutta, 2014), Malawi (Mvula et. al.,
2016), and Uganda (Fadnes et. al., 2011).

Health care personnel frequently have provided parents with documentation of
every vaccine given for them to track their child's immunization progress. Hence, it was
no surprise that a vaccination document influenced a child’s vaccination status. The
presence of a child vaccination document was determined to have a strong association with
complete vaccination status (Oleribe et. al., 2017). Children with vaccination cards were
more likely to be fully immunized than children without cards (Kinfe et. al., 2019). The
availability of a child vaccination card also prevented immunizations from being missed
(Usman et. al., 2009). In the Philippines, a qualitative study showed that mothers who
misplaced their children vaccine cards were reluctant to go back to the healthcare facility
as they were embarrassed to not remember their child’s vaccine information (ICI Asia,

2017).


Lastly, postnatal care visit, like antenatal visit, was found to be positively
associated with full immunization. Mothers who had postnatal visits had a higher
likelihood of their child being completely vaccinated than those who did not have any visits
(Budu et. al., 2021). Receiving more than three postnatal visits was also found to increase
vaccination among their children (Desalew et. al., 2020). According to a study conducted
in Hoilo, children whose mothers had two or fewer postnatal visits were less likely to be
completely vaccinated compared to children whose mothers had at least three postnatal
visits (Malecosio et. al, 2020). On the other hand, having no postnatal visit was found to

be associated with untimely vaccination in Nairobi, Kenya (Matua et. al., 2016).


2.2. Conceptual Framework

‘SOCIODEMOGRAPHIC CHARACTERISTICS
arena ehaceten
ober ege 1
Fabe’s og ‘ones voce
Mae’ edatin etsmet Can ues
Faber edxatial tne ote vince
Motes wks Pays voknoe
Fears wok tte Sonal wens
Matera seking
Meters ested king
Faters atl canny HEACTHCARE RELATED FACTORS L_
‘Uso tte arenes a Dany
edo |-———, swconion
Child harcterses Moses Wate and neontat here
‘hss ihrer Heath and wees pogroms oc lth dey
chad tg arangert ‘Aaentl are (AN) Beh tend
trance etal ae NO) its
oureholdchoractrsica ‘ "tans core
Woot ndox Fraoas abate vation | | Mata! otal ae PNG) st
Fant se taco to meal acy Newt pont ear (PNG ik
Utanay Caste tenspean end mei F
“Psmentersip pees
Preah nentertip
ber nsane (655, S88, 8)

Figure 2.1 Conceptual Framework
This conceptual framework resembles the health belief model where several
variables are investigated to explain the delay in getting all the EPI-recommended vaccines.
This health belief model suggests that people’s beliefs about health issues, perceived
advantages and disadvantages, and self-efficacy explain their health-related behaviors
(Janz & Becker, 1984), Even though the survey was unable to collect information about
the mother’s perceived susceptibility to and severity of vaccine-preventable diseases, as
well as the mother’s self-efficacy in vaccinating her child, the following theoretical
constructs in the health belief model were measured: modifying variables, perceived
benefits and barriers, and cues to action.
The sociodemographic characteristics, domestic violence experience, and maternal
autonomy were considered as modifying variables. Sociodemographic factors such as
parental, childhood, and household characteristics were examined. Parent characteristics

include age, educational attainment, current work status, union status, smoking, and


alcohol drinking, while child characteristics consist of a child’s birth order and living
arrangement. Wealth index, family size, and urbanity were examined under household
characteristics. Memberships in the Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program (4Ps) and
Philippine Health Insurance (PhilHealth) were also accounted for in the model. The 4Ps
aims to reduce poverty among extremely poor households by improving the education,
nutrition, and health of members (GOVPH, 2021). Meanwhile, PhilHealth aims to ensure
that Filipinos will have access to quality health services (MB Lifestyle, 2022).

Moreover, awareness of free health programs and perceived challenges in healthcare
utilization were added to the model. The mentioned variables were the perceived benefits
and barriers to getting fully vaccinated. Matemal and neonatal healthcare variables such as
place of health delivery, birth attendant, antenatal care (ANC), and postnatal care (PNC)
were also taken into account. The mother’s healthcare utilization could be considered
external cues to action, as healthcare providers naturally encourage parents to vaccinate
their children (Meleko et. al., 2017).

Determinants related to domestic violence, maternal autonomy, and healthcare
utilization were adjusted in the model in consideration of different sociodemographic
variables, as demographic characteristics were shown to be factors in both medical
utilization and domestic violence (Aslam et. al., 2020; Badu et. al., 2018; Cao et. al., 2013;

Donta et. al., 2015; Kabir et. al., 2019; Loef et. al., 2021; Zhou et. al., 2020).


2.3 Operational Definition of Terms

Vaccine timeliness

Refers to whether the child received each EP]-recommended vaccine based on the

suggested age of administration. The categories are as follows:

© Timely vaccination

Receiving each vaccine timely based on the EPI-recommended age of

administration:

Target age
0 (at birth)
At 6 weeks (1.5 months)
At 10 weeks (2.5 months)
At 14 weeks (3.5 months)
At 9 months (9 months)
At 12 months (12 months)

* Delayed vaccination

Routine vaccines
BCG
OPVI, Pentavalent! (Hep B 1, DTP 1, Hib 1)
OPV2, Pentavalent2 (Hep B 2, DTP 2, Hib 2)
OPV3, Pentavalent3 (Hep B 3, DTP 3, Hib 3)
MCV 1
Mcv2

Receiving each vaccine 31 days (one month) or more beyond the EPI-

recommended age of administration.

Full-vaccination delay

Refers to the number of days that a child has been delayed in getting all the EPI-

recommended vaccines (i.e., vaccine delay days after 12 months of age)


immunization status

Refers to whether the child received the EPI-recommended vaccines in terms of

completion (i.e., received all or not) by 12 months of age. There are three categories as
follows:
© Fully Immunized Child (FIC)
A child who has received all the EPI-recommended vaccines by 12 months of
age, i.e., BCG at birth, OPV and Pentavalent (DTP- HepB-Hib) doses at 6,10 and
14 weeks of age, and MCV doses at 9 and 12 months of age.
© Completely Immunized Child (CIC)
A child who has received all the EPI-recommended vaccines by 13 to 23 months
of age.
© Underimmunized Child (UIC)
A child (1) who did not receive all of the EPI-recommended vaccines at any
point before 35 months of age or (2) who received all of the EPI-recommended
vaccines but only by 24 to 35 months of age.
Mother’s age
Age in years of the child’s mother
Father’s age
Age in years of the child’s father
Mother’s educational attainment
Highest educational attainment of the child’s mother with categories as follows:

no education, primary level, secondary level, and higher level.


Highest educational attainment of the child’s father with categories as follows: no
education, primary level, secondary level, and higher level.
Mother’s work status

Whether the child’s mother is currently working or not
Father’s work status

Whether the child’s father is currently working or not
Union status

Parent’s living situation; categorized as never in union, currently in union, or
formerly in union
Maternal smoking

Frequency of the child’s mother smoking cigarettes; categorized as not at all,
somedays, and often
Mother's alcohol drinking

Frequency of the child’s mother drinking alcohol; categorized as not at all,
sometimes, and often
Father’s alcohol drinking

Frequency of the child’s father drinking alcohol; categorized as not at all,
sometimes, and often
Child’s birth order

Order in which the child was born in his/her family (e.g., first-born, second-born,
etc.)

Child’s living arrangement

Whether a child is currently living with his/her mother or not

Family’s wealth index

Measure of a family’s cumulative living standard based on the wealth index
quintiles: categorized as poorest, poorer, middle, richer, and richest
Family size

Total number of children ever born in the family
Urbanity

Whether the child’s family is living in a rural barangay or in an urban barangay
APs membership

Whether the family is a recipient of the Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program
(4Ps) Conditional Cash Transfer (CCT) or not
PhilHealth membership

Whether the parents are registered in the Philippine Health Insurance (PhilHealth)
or not
Other insurance membership

Whether the parents are registered in other insurance (GSIS, SSS, etc.) or not
Control issues

Whether the child’s mother has experienced any of the following control issues
from her partner for the past 12 months: (i) partner jealous if she talks with other men, (ii)
partner accuses her of unfaithfulness, (iii) partner does not permit her to meet female
friends, (iv) partner tries to limit her contact with family, and (v) partner always insists on
knowing where she is. This variable is categorized as: (0) No, the child’s mother did not
experience any control issues, and (1) Yes, the child’s mother experienced one or more of

the stated control issues.


Emotional violence

Whether the child’s mother has experienced any of the following emotional
violence from her partner for the past 12 months: (i) humiliated by partner, (ii) partner
threatened her with harm, (iii) partner insulted or made her fee! bad, (iv) partner did not
allow her to engage in any legitimate work nor practice profession, (v) partner controlled
her money or property or forced her to work, (vi) partner destroyed personal properties,
pets, or belongings, and (vii) partner have other intimate relationship. This variable is
categorized as: (0) No, the child’s mother did not experience any emotional violence, and
(1) Yes, the child’s mother experienced one or more of the emotional violence statements.
Physical violence

Whether the child’s mother has experienced any of the following physical violence
from her partner for the past 12 months: (i) humiliated by partner, (ji) partner pushed, shook
or had something thrown at her, (iii) partner slapped her, (iv) partner punched her with fist

or hit with something harmful, (v) partner kicked or dragged her, (vi) partner strangled or

burned her, (vii) partner threatened her with knife/gun or other weapons, and (viii) partner
twisted her arm or pulled her hair. This variable is categorized as: (0) No, the child’s mother
did not experience any physical violence, and (1) Yes, the child’s mother experienced one

or more of the physical violence statement/s.


Sexual violence

Whether the child’s mother has experienced any of the following sexual violence
from her partner for the past 12 months: (i) partner physically forced her into unwanted
sex, (ii) partner physically forced her to perform other sexual acts, and (iii) partner
physically forced her to perform sexual acts which she did not want to do. This variable is
categorized as: (0) No, the child’s mother did not experience any sexual violence, and (1)
Yes, the child’s mother experienced one or more of the sexual violence statement/s.

Maternal autonomy in healthcare utilization

Whether the mother can independently decide on her own healthcare or not

Maternal autonomy in household purchases

Whether the mother can independently decide on large household purchases or not

Maternal autonomy in visiting family and friends

Whether the mother can independently decide on visiting family and friends or not
Maternal autonomy in family earnings

Whether the mother can independently decide on how to spend husband’s earnings
or not
Aware of free medical consultations

Whether the mother is aware of free medical consultations offered by the local
government units (LGUs) or not
Aware of free medicines

‘Whether the mother is aware of free medicines offered by the local government

units (LGUs) or not


Aware of free health and wellness programs

Whether the mother is aware of free health and wellness programs offered by the
local government units (LGUs) or not
Aware of free antenatal care (ANC.

Whether the mother is aware of free antenatal care (ANC) offered by the local
government units (LGUs) or not
Aware of free immunization/vaccines

Whether the mother is aware of free immunization/vaccines offered by the local
government units (LGUs) or not
Distance problem in medical utilization

Whether the mother perceive distance as a big problem in medical utilization or not
Cost problem in medical utilization

Whether the mother perceive distance as a big problem in medical utilization or not
Health/vaccination card

Whether the baby has a vaccination card or not
Antenatal visits

Total number of antenatal visits

Total number of tetanus injections taken by the mother before child’s birth
Maternal postnatal care

Whether the mother has been checked after birth delivery; categorized as not
checked, checked within a day, checked within a week, checked within a month, and

checked after a month


Newborn postnatal care
‘Whether the baby has been checked after birth; categorized as not checked, checked

within a day, checked within a week, checked within a month, and checked after a month


3. METHODOLOGY
3.1 Study Design
This study employed an analytic cross-sectional design using secondary data from

the 2017 National Demographic and Health Survey (NDHS).

3.2 Data Source

The datasets used in this study are from the latest round of NDHS conducted from
August 14 to October 27, 2017. This survey is conducted every five years to provide current
estimates of the key demographic and health indicators.

NDHS 2017 utilized a two-stage stratified sampling which provides data
Tepresentative for the country, for urban and rural areas, and for each administrative region.
The master sampling frame in this survey was constructed based on the 2010 and 2015
population censuses. The first stage entailed selecting primary sampling units (PSUs)
where a unit is defined as a barangay, a section of a large barangay, or group of neighboring
small barangays. Additionally, the PSUs were distributed by province or highly urbanized
cities (HUCs). The second stage involves systematically sampling of 20 or 26 housing units
from each sampled PSU. Women aged 15-49 years old who were regular members of the
selected households were eligible for the survey. For the domestic violence questions, only
one woman in each selected household was interviewed (PSA, 2020).

The authorization certificate for the use of NDHS 2017 was requested from the
Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS) program’s Data Archivist. The approval to

download the data for this research’s purposes is presented in Appendix 8.5.


3.3. Study Population and Sample Size

Children aged 0 to 35 months old, whose mothers or primary caregivers consented
to be interviewed for the NDHS 2017, were included in this study. In addition, children
who have missing vaccine cards and have been reported deceased were excluded from this
study.

In the recent round of NDHS, there were 25, 074 women interviewed with a total of
10,551 children aged less than five years old. Among these children, a total 3,825 alive
children aged 0 to 35 months with vaccine cards were included in the analysis. Subsets of
this population were also considered in calculating the age-appropriate probabilities of
vaccination.

In estimating the probability of Filipino children getting EPI-recommended vaccines
on-time, subsets of the study population were considered. For the BCG estimates, children
aged 0 to 35 months old were included. For the three doses of OPV and Pentavalent vaccine
series, the following subsets were considered: (1*' dose) children aged 1.5 to 35 months,
(2 dose) children aged 2.5 to 35 months, and (3 dose) children aged 3.5 to 35 months.
Children aged 9 to 35 months will be included in the estimation of MCVI. In addition,
children aged 24 to 35 months were included for the estimates of MCV2 and estimates of
getting all the EPI-recommended vaccines, since the MCV2 administration is only
documented the said subgroup. The total number of children for each analysis subset can

be seen in Figure 3.1.


NDHS 2017

25,074 women
aged 15-49 years old

10,551 under-ive children

254 underive children | [10,297 undersive
reported dead children stl alive
9,825 under-ve children
with vaccine cards
FerBocapeappropise [3,826 children aged
eosoites 10-35 months old
ForOPVt &Perat
3,710 children aged
pebsbites | _1.5-35 months old
ForOPv28Perat
Seeeteas | 3,622 children aged

prebabiies |_2.5-95 months old

FerOPVBPerat
onvasrert | 3,488 children aged
esis | 35-35 months old
Formcvisgesppepite [2,775 children aged

Ptsbises | 9-35 months old

Fermcvzen ubroccsson [7,053 children aged
eaeepprpiee pmbabiies | 24-35 months old

Figure 3.1 Sampling Framework

3.4 Data Collection and Processing

NDHS 2017 datasets were requested online through the Demographic and Health
Surveys (DHS) Program website. Two datasets, namely children’s file (KR) and women’s
file (IR), were downloaded as Stata files. Each child’s data entry was merged with their
mother’s data entry. Since the two datasets do not contain any personal information such
as names or specific addresses, household numbers and unique identification numbers were

used for merging.


Factors needed in this study were kept, while all other variables were removed. After
all the needed variables were selected, variable names were changed for easier analysis.
Some variables were also recoded or transformed into new ones such as vaccination time,
domestic abuse, maternal antenatal care, vaccination card, etc. SAS Studio and Stata 17

were used for all statistical analyses.

3.5 Statistical Analysis

Descriptive and inferential statistics were performed in this study. Survey weights
were applied throughout the analysis to ensure that findings are representative of the
population under study.

Frequencies and percentages were presented to examine the characteristics of the
study population. Mean and median administration times were estimated for each of the
EPI-recommended vaccines, and it was compared to the recommended age of vaccination.
The standard deviation (s.d.), 95% confidence interval (CI), |* quartile (Ql), and 3

quartile (Q3) for administration time of each vaccine were also calculated.

3.5.1 Survival Analysis and Estimation of Timely Vaccination

Survival analysis methods were used in assessing the timeliness of EPI-
recommended vaccines using administration days. Survival analysis is mainly concerned
with examining the times to event, usually time until death or time until failure. In this
study, the survival-time was defined as age (in days) until vaccination. An observation

would be censored if the exact time of vaccination is unknown.


There are different types of censoring which might occur in survival-time data given
a random time interval (t,, t,] . Right-censoring happens when the time of vaccination is
unknown, but it occurred after ¢;. Left-censoring happens when the time of vaccination is
unknown, but it occurred before t,. In addition, interval-censoring occurs when the time
of vaccination is unknown, but it occurred within (t,,t,] time interval.

Unvaccinated children with vaccine cards were right-censored using the age (in days)
at the time of the interview. Right-censoring indicates that the children could still be
vaccinated after the interview date. Children who had vaccine cards and received
vaccination were uncensored. This censoring procedure was visually presented in Figure

3.2.

Child 1D number

0 ‘Time of interview s
Adminstration ime in months
2 vocited (cece) CNetvacatd (Cen)

Figure 3.2 Censoring Illustration
To estimate the probability of Filipino children getting EPI-recommended vaccines
on time, the cumulative probabilities were computed using the Turnbull estimation method.
It is a nonparametric estimation procedure used when data are incomplete due to grouping,
censoring, or truncation. It can also accommodate combinations of exact, left-censored,

right-censored, and interval-censored data (Turnbull, 1976).

The Turnbull method is actually an example of the expectation-maximization (EM)
algorithm where the nonparametric maximum likelihood estimation (NPMLE) is
performed to calculate the cumulative distribution function (SAS Institute Inc., 2013).
Since the usual maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) requires that the data is complete
to fit a probability distribution, the EM algorithm is often used in the presence of missing
data or latent variables. In the EM algorithm, the expected value for the missing data (or
for each latent variable) would be estimated first, then the model parameters would be
optimized to capture the best density fit for the data (Bishop, 2006). Considering the
mentioned advantages above, the Turnbull estimator was chosen over the commonly-used
Kaplan-Meier (KM) estimator. The age-appropriate vaccination probabilities were
calculated in SAS Studio using the LIFEREG procedure.

Different subsets of the target population were utilized in computing the cumulative
probabilities to provide better estimates since each vaccine is recommended to be taken at
a specific age. For example, children aged three months are not recommended to take the
first dose of measles-containing vaccine (i.e.., MCV1 should be taken at 9 months old);
hence, they should not be included when computing the cumulative probabilities of MCV1

vaccination.


3.5.2 Survival Models for Full-Vaccination Delay

The delay (in days) in getting all the EPI-recommended vaccines was also generated
for right-censoring. Semiparametric and parametric survival models were implemented to
determine the possible predictors of full-vaccination delay such as sociodemographic
characteristics, domestic abuse, maternal autonomy, and healthcare utilization. This next

part discusses the semiparametric and parametric survival models.

Semiparametric survival model

The Cox proportional hazards (PH) model is a semiparametric survival model that
relaxes the assumption about the event-time distribution. This model specifies that the
hazard function of the event time conditional on p-vector time-independent covariates is
given as

h(t; x) = ho(t) exp (Bix + + Bpxp)

where fy, ..., Bp are regression coefficients and ho(t) is the baseline hazard function.
The method for estimating 8 is based on a partial likelihood where the hg(¢) is cancelled
out or left unparametrized. Since hg(t) is not directly estimated, the proportional hazards
(PH) assumption allows for the estimation of the covariate’s effect on the hazard function,
h(t; x). The relative effects of the covariates are parametrized as exp(Ayx1 +--+ BpXp),
and exp(f) is called the hazard ratio (HR). To appropriately use the Cox model, the PH
assumption should not be violated. This assumption also means that the survival curves for
different strata must have hazard functions that are proportional over the time ¢ (i.e., the
hazard ratio is constant over time) (Cantor, 2013). Methods in testing the validity of the

PH assumption are discussed in the next section (Chapter 3.5.3)


Parametric survival models
Some methods in survival analysis do not make any assumptions about the
underlying distribution of the survival data and are said to be nonparametric. An example
of a nonparametric procedure is the Turnbull estimation discussed in the previous section.
The Cox model discussed above is considered as semiparametric since certain
assumptions were made with the baseline hazard function, ho(t), left unspecified. A
survival function which assumes a certain distributional form is considered parametric. The
multiplicative or proportional hazards (PH) model and the accelerated failure-time (AFT)
model are used in the parameterization of the survival data.
In the PH models, the x; covariates have a multiplicative effect on the hazard
function. The hazard function is given as
A(s)

where /ig(t) is the baseline hazard function and g(xj) is a non-negative function of the

ho(t) g(x)

covariates. The ho(t) can be left unspecified (i.e, Cox model) or can take different
distributional forms such as exponential, Weibull, and Gompertz.

The exponential distribution (hg(t) = 1) is suitable for data with constant hazards.
On the other hand, the Weibull distribution (ho(t) = pt?~? with shape parameter, p) and
the Gompertz distribution (ho(t) = exp (yt) with ancillary parameter, y) are appropriate

for modeling data with monotone hazard rates that increase or decrease exponentially with

time. The Weibul] model reduces to the exponential model when p =


The AFT model resembles that of the linear regression model with the dependent
variable, y , replaced by survival time, t. Since the survival time cannot be negative, the
natural logarithm of the survival time, log ¢, is instead used as the dependent variable.
The log t is expressed as a linear function of covariates given as

log (tj) = 4B +z
where x; are the covariates, B is a regression coefficients vector, and z; is the error with
density f(-). The f(-) in the AFT model can take different distributional forms such as
lognormal, loglogistic, and generalized gamma. The exponential and Weibull models are
also parameterized as AFT models (Cantor, 2013; Cleves et. al., 2016).

The lognormal model (log (t;)~N(u = x;8, 07) with ancillary parameter, o) and
loglogistic model (log (t;)~Logistic( A; = exp (-xj8),y) with ancillary parameter, y)
tend to produce similar results and are appropriate for data with nonmonotonic hazards
rates, specifically increasing at the start and then decreasing over time. Meanwhile, the
generalized gamma distribution offers the most flexibility among all the models. The
generalized gamma is implemented by parameterizing 4j=x;8 with x and o as ancillary
parameters. Special cases of the generalized gamma distribution include the Weibull
distribution when x = 1, exponential distribution when x = 1 and o = 1, and lognormal
distribution when x = 0.

Figure 3.3 shows the plotted example of hazard functions for different distributional
forms lifted from the Stata manual. The generalized gamma was not plotted since it can
take many shapes, and the exponential hazard was plotted in Weibull distribution when

p = 1 (Stata Corp, 2021)


Gompertz Weibull

Lee aoe a 7 25
‘gemma =2 ‘gamma =0 ——p=s
gemma =-2 pez
lognormal toglogistic

na
Yas
on

Ws 2 25

s

é z 7 Cael z 7 $
ona=05 wgra=t gemme=t ‘gemma = 05
H——— sigma = 1.25 gamma =025,

Figure 3.3. Hazard Function Plots for Different Distributions

3.5.3 Model Fitting and Diagnostic Tests

For the model fitting, the initial models were first examined without interaction
terms. In assessing possible interaction terms to be included in the model, pairwise
combinations of predictors with their interaction terms were modeled against the survival
data. This pre-selection step was done since many interaction terms could be explored from
the variables in this study. A relaxed p-value criterion of 0.20 was used to reconcile the
recommended p-values of 0.15 and 0.25 (Bendel & Afifi, 1977). If the interaction term in
the pre-selection step showed a p-value of less than or equal to 0.20, then that would be
considered for the model. The same p-value criterion was used for the inclusion of each
covariate (i.e., non-interaction terms) in the model. Only significant factors (p-values less
than or equal to 0.05) would be retained in the final model.


Moreover, Akaike’s and Schwarz’s Bayesian information criteria (AIC, BIC) were
used to compare the following: (1) model without interaction terms, (2) model with
interaction terms before diagnostic tests, and (3) model with interaction terms after
diagnostic tests. Both AIC and BIC were used in the stepwise selection of variables while
trying to achieve good model fitting. It is expected that the model with interaction terms
adjusted after performing the diagnostic tests would be the best model (i.e., lowest AIC
and BIC) (Agresti, 2007).

The survival models for the right-censored data were implemented using the stcox
and streg commands in Stata 17 (Stata Corp, 2021). Diagnostic tests were also employed
after creating the semiparametric and parametric models with significant interaction terms.

The validity of the PH assumption in the Cox-PH model was assessed using the
Schoenfeld residuals. This validity test is based on the principle that, for a given covariate,
the PH assumption restricts f (t;) = # + E(s}) V ty, where B is the estimated coefficient
from the Cox model and sj is the scaled Schoenfeld residual at failure time ¢;. This also
means that the plot of B(t;) against time will have a slope of zero (Grambsch & Therneau,
1994). The graphical inspection for the PH assumption was presented in Chapter 4.4.

For all the survival models, martingale residuals were used to assess the inclusion of

covariates, model accuracy, and identification of outliers.


Plotting the smoothed martingale residuals against the linear predictor shows if there
is a need for a transformation of the covariate’s functional form. If the covariate should be
included in the model, then the trend of the smooth should be linear. These plots were
produced using the Jowess command which smooths the martingale residuals against the
covariate of interest (i.e., locally weighted regression of martingale residuals on the
covariate) (Stata Corp, 2021). The generated plots are presented in Appendix 8.3.
Examining outlier values by martingale residuals plot alone can be tricky since these
residuals are usually skewed. The rescaling of martingale residuals about zero, also known
as deviance residuals, is then preferred in evaluating the presence of outlier and model
accuracy. The deviance residuals plotted against the linear predictor should clump near
zero if the fit was adequate. The deviance residuals plots are presented in Appendix 8.2.
Lastly, the Cox-Snell residuals were used to assess the overall model fit of all the
semiparametric and parametric survival models. The said residuals consider the
distribution and estimated parameters from the survival model. If the model fits the data
well, then the Cox-Snell residuals plotted against themselves should be close to the 45°
reference line (Stata Corp, 2021). The plots of Cox-Snell residuals, AIC, and BIC were
used to select the best model in explaining the delay of getting all the EPI-recommended

vaccines among Filipino children.


A summarized data analysis plan for each research objective is shown below, and

the model fitting process is described in Figure 3.4

Research objective

To estimate the mean and median
administration time of the EPI-
recommended vaccines among Filipino
children

To estimate the probability of Filipino
children getting EPI-recommended vaccines
on time

To determine the predictors of delay in
getting all the EPI-recommended vaccines

al Model wibot

let
(ort 29)

Statistical method

Mean and median vaccination time
(in months)

Cumulative probabilities using Turnbull
estimation for each of the EPI-recommended
vaccine: BCG, OPV1, Pental, OPV2, Penta2,
OPV3, Penta3, MCV1 and MCV2

Models to be used in analysis survival data: Cox
model, Exponential model, Weibull model,
Gompertz model, Lognormal model,
Loglogistic model and Generalized Gamma
model

(Ceckng poste
ilretn ems

(sco 5)

Toscuenwetsabancre02
Td Mal with esac Toms
(const 2283.)

Toda Wad i neracon ts
(seg 12x20. 0)

aman U
iat a ee
‘cern

Wel Ajo made wihtracton forms
(cag 12x23. 0).
= =

CaxPimod

Exponent
sual mel

Genuad gna

—
suid model sun mde!

‘Goodness off Cox Snell residuals AC, BIC

Final survvalmadelsforfullvaccation delay

Figure 3.4 Model Fitting Process


3.6 Ethical Considerations
Conflict of interest

The primary researcher and adviser declare no financial, familial, or propriety
conflict of interests.
Privacy and confidentiality

The datasets obtained from the DHS program site do not allow respondents,
households, or sampled communities to be identifiable in any manner. Data entry for each
child is tagged with a unique identifier as well as their household number. The datasets
utilized were kept on a password-protected computer that was only accessible to the
researcher. The datasets will be stored for two years after the completion of the research
paper, then the files will be completely erased from the researcher’s computer. The datasets
were used solely for research purposes.
Vulnerability of research participants

Since this study used secondary data, there was no direct involvement with any
vulnerable populations.
Recruitment

This study did not involve interaction with human participants.
Informed consent process

An authorization certificate for the usage of NDHS survey datasets was requested
from the DHS program’s Data Archivist. The primary researcher was granted permission
to download data for statistical reporting and analysis solely for this research’s purposes.
Furthermore, the DHS program handled the informed consent process for those who
participated in the NDHS surveys. The respondent was read an informed consent statement

before the interview, which she could accept or deny. The purpose, duration, and methods

of the interview, potential risks, and benefits to the respondent, and contact personnel who
could provide the respondent with more information were all included in the informed
consent statements. Respondents could also refuse to answer any question or stop
participating anytime. It was also emphasized that the identity and information of
respondents would strictly be confidential. Interview for each respondent was assigned
random identification numbers to maintain anonymity.
Risks

Data confidentiality risks might be a problem. However, it was ensured that datasets
do not contain any personal information, such as names or addresses. Data redistribution
in any form was likewise strictly prohibited. Datasets were on a password-protected
computer that was only accessible to the researcher for two years after the completion of
the research paper. Datasets will then be permanently deleted from the researcher’s
computer.
Benefits

There was no direct benefit for the population in this study.
Community considerations
The findings of this study are crucial in knowing whether Filipino children are

receiving immunizations on time, and to what extent the delay is in getting fully vaccinated.
Nevertheless, estimations for vaccination timeliness should be carefully interpreted, and
the results of this study should always be presented with its research limitations in mind.
Dissemination of results

The identity of respondents will remain anonymous upon presentation of this
research in conferences and peer-reviewed journals. In addition, electronic reports and

publications of this study will be submitted to the DHS program.

4. RESULTS

4.1 Characteristics of the Study Population

The study included a total of 3,825 children aged 0 to 35 months who had

immunization cards. Since the administration of the second dose of measles-containing

vaccine (MCV2) was only documented for children aged 24 to 35 months, the said

subgroup was used to estimate the percentage for each immunization status. Among

children aged 24 to 35 months old with vaccine cards (n=1,053), 29.72% were fully

immunized children (FIC), 25.91% were completely immunized children (CIC), and

45.46% were underimmunized children (UIC).

Table 4.1 shows the characteristics of the population included in the analysis of this

study.

Table 4.1. Characteristics of Study Population (N=3,825)

Variable Frequency Percentage (%)
Parental variables
Mother's age (in years) (mean=28.78, s.d.=6.60)
15-24 1,151 30.09
25-34 1,831 4787
35-44 813 21.25
45 and above 30 0.78
Father’s age (in years) (mean=33.70, 5.4
15-24 565 14.77
25-34 1,788 46.15
35-44 1,008 26.35
45 and above 464 12.13
Mother’s highest educational attainment
No education 29 00.76
Primary level 656 17.15
Secondary level 1,930 50.46
Higher level 1.210 31.63,
Father's highest educational attainment
No education 294 7.69
Primary level 957 25.02
Secondary level 1,630 42.61
Higher level 944 24.68


Table 4.1. (Cont.) Characteristics of Study Population (N=3,825)

Variable Frequency Percentage (%)
Mother's current work experience
Not currently working 2,590 67.71
Currently working _ 1,235 32.29
Father’s current work experience
Not currently working 19 2.07
Currently working 3,746 97.93
Union status
Never in union 160 4.18
Currently in unionliving with a man 3,569 93.31
Formerly in union/living with aman 96 2.51
Mother’s smoking (frequency)
Does not smoke 3,715 97.12
Sometimes 16 1.99
Often 34 0.89
Mother drinking alcohol (frequency)
Does not drink 854 22.3
Sometimes 2,905 16.21
Often 66 1.73
Father’s drinking alcohol (frequency)
Does not drink 1,106 35.98
Sometimes 1,772 57.64
Often 196 6.38
Child variables
Child’s birth order (mean=2.67, s.
13 2,906 78.97
46 744 19.45
19 151 3.95
10 and above 24 0.63
Child’s living arrangement
Living with mother 3,804 99.45
Not living with mother 21 0.55
‘Household variables
Family size (mean=2.76, s.4.
13 2,864 74.88
4-6 719 20.37
19 155 4.05
10 and above 27 071
Family’s wealth index
Poorest 1,224 32.00
Poorer 968 25.31
Middle 25 18.95
Richer 549 1435
Richest 359 9.39
Urbanity
Urban 1,238 32.37
Rural 2,587 67.63


Table 4.1. (Cont.) Characteristics of Study Population (N=3,825)

Variable Frequency Percentage (%)
Ps membership
No 2,822 73.78
Yes 1,003 26,22
PhilHealth membership
No 1,354 37.10
Yes 2,292 62.90
Other insurance (GSIS, SSS, etc.) membership
No 3,323 91.04
Yes 327 8.96
Domestic violence
Control issues
No 1,919 50.17
Yes 1,906 49.83
Emotional violence
No 2,578 67.40
Yes 1,247 32.60
Physical violence
No 2,891 75.58
Yes 934 24.42
‘Sexual violence
No 2,995 78.30
Yes 830 21.70
‘Maternal autonomy
Healthcare utilization
No 455 11.90
Yes 3,370 88.10
Large household purchases.
No 744 19.45
Yes 3,081 80.55
Visiting family and friends
No $70 14.90
Yes 3,255 85.10
Family earnings
No 682 17.83
Yes 3,143 82.17
‘Awareness of free health programs
Medical consultation
No 1,645 43.01
Yes 2,005 56.99
Medicines
No 1,182 30.90
Yes 2,643 69.10
Health and wellness programs
No 3,257 85.15
Yes 568 14.85

so

Table 4.1. (Cont.) Characteristics of Study Population (N=3,825)

Variable Frequency Percentage (%)
‘Antenatal care (ANC)
No 3,575 93.46
Yes 250 6.54
Immunizations/Vaccines
No 1,307 34.17
Yes 2,518 65.83
Problems in healthcare utilization
Distance to medical facility
Not a big problem 2,774 72.52
Big problem 1,051 27.48
Cost of medical expenses
Not a big problem 1,950 50.98
Big problem 1,875 49.02
‘Maternal and Neonatal Healthcare
Place of birth delivery
Home delivery 555 1451
Facility-based delivery 3,270 85.49
Birth attendant
Health personnel 3,355 87.71
Traditional birth attendant 399 10.43
Others u 1.86
‘Number of antenatal care (ANC) visits
(mean=6.73, s.d.=3.06)
0-5 1,134 29.65
6-10 2,047 53.52
u-15 252 6.59
16-20 48 1.25
Number of tetanus injections
(mean=1.7, s.d.=1.09)
0 734 19.19
1 1,164 30.43
2 1,298 33.93
3 461 12.05
4 and above 168 4.39
Mother’s health first checked afier delivery
Not checked 348 10.25
Within a day 2,585 76.12
Within a week 435 12.81
Within a month 23 0.68
After than a month 5 0.15
Baby’s health first checked afier birth
Not checked 175 5.15
Within a day 2,634 71.56
Within a week 454 13.37
Within a month 97 2.86
After than a month 36 1.06

s1

4.2 Timeliness of EPI-recommended Vaccines

To estimate the mean and median administration time of each EPI-recommended

vaccine, subsets of children aged 0 to 35 months were considered. The following subsets

were utilized in estimating the timeliness of vaccines: 3,825 for BCG vaccine; 3,710 for

OPVI and Pental; 3,622 for OPV2 and Penta2; 3,488 for OPV3 and Pentat3; 2,775 for

MCVI; and 1,053 for MCV2. The same subsets of the population were used to estimate

the probability of Filipino children getting EPI-recommended vaccines on time. Table 4.2

shows the administration time for each of the EPI-recommended vaccine.

Table 4.2 Mean and Median Administration Time of EP]-recommended Vaccines

Timeliness Administration time (in months)?
Vaccine range
(in months) | Mean —S.D. 95% CI Median Q1-Q3
BCG o-1 0.81 3.25 0.71 - 1.05 0.16 — 0.00-0.95
OPVI 15-25 2.43 231 2.35 -2.50 1.94 1.58 - 2.56
Pental 15-25 2.75 3.53 2.64 -2.86 2.01 1.61 -2.83
OPv2 25-35 3.96 3.85 3.83 - 4.08 3.220 2.73 -4.24
Penta2 25-35 4.25 4.50 4.11-4.40 332 2.73 -4.67
OPVv3 3.5-4.5 5.72 4.89 5.56 - 5.88 470 391-618
Penta3 35-45 5.76 5.01 5.59 - 5.93 473 3.91-6.38
MCVI 9-10 10.01 6.65 9.76-10.26 9.53. 9.11 - 10.82
Mcv2 12-13 13.42 5.16 13.05-13.71 12.82 12.26 - 13.84
action 12-13 13.51 7.66 13.05-13.97 12.85 12.26- 13.94

= Administration time in months = (adr

‘Sample size:
2,775 (MCV1

+ Standard deviation;

istration time in days x 30.417)

325 (BCG); 3,710 (OPVI, Pental ), 3622 (OPV2, Penta2); 3,488 (OPV3, Penta3);

1,053 (MCV2,full)
Fi

irst quartile; Q3: Third quantile


For the BCG, the median administration time was five (5) days (mean=25 days, 95%
Cl:[22-32 days]). In other words, half of the children aged 0 to 35 months received their
BCG vaccine by the age of five (5) days. It was also revealed that 75% of the children aged
0 to 35 months old got their BCG vaccine within a month.

For the three vaccine doses against polio (OPV1, OPV2, OPV3), the median
administration times were 1.94 months (mean=2.43 mos., 95%CI:[2.34 — 2.50] mos.), 3.22
months (mean=3.96 mos., 95%CI:[3.83 — 4.08] mos.), and 4.70 months (mean=5.72 mos.,
95%CI:[5.56 — 5.88] mos.), respectively. Meanwhile, the median administration times for
the three doses of the Pentavalent vaccine were 2.01 months (mean=2.75 mos.,
95%CI:[2.64 — 2.86] mos.), 3.32 months (mean=4.25 mos., 95%CI:[4.11 — 4.40] mos.),
and 4.73 months (mean=5.76 mos., 95%CI:[5.59 — 5.93] mos.), respectively. Based on the
median administration time, the first doses of OPV and Pentavalent vaccine were delayed
by two to three weeks from the target administration age, as well as the second and third
doses of OPV and Pentavalent vaccines by one (1) to 1.5 months.

The first dose of the measles-containing vaccine (MCV) had a median administration
time of 9.53 months (mean=10.01 mos., 95%CI:[9.76 — 10.26] mos.). For the second dose
of MCV, the median administration time was 12.82 months (mean=13.42 mos.,
95%CI:[13.05 — 13.71] mos.). Based on the computed median age, the delay for MCV 1
was around two weeks from the target vaccination age, while the delay for MCV 2 was
around four weeks. In addition, the median administration time for being fully vaccinated,
12.85 months (mean=13.51 mos., 95%CI:[13.05 - 13.97] mos.), was close to the estimates
for MCV2. Furthermore, all of the vaccines, except for BCG, OPVI, and MCVI, had
significant delays when the 95% confidence intervals were examined against the upper

limits of the timeliness ranges.

4.3 Probability of Timely Vaccination among Filipino Children

Turmbull estimation was performed in estimating the probability of Filipino children

getting EPI-recommended vaccines on time. Timely vaccination was defined as receiving

the antigen within a month after the target administration age. Table 4.3.1 presents the

age-specific probability of Filipino children getting each of the EPI-recommended vaccine.

The cumulative coverage (probability of vaccination) for each vaccine is visually presented

in Figure 4.3.1.

Table 4.3.1 Age-specific Probability of Vaccination among Filipino Children
ict) BCG OPVI ental OPV2 Penta? OPV3 Penta’ MCVI MCv2 _ Full
(in mos.) vaccination
00,0000
0.03 0.1031
0.25 0:3816
05 0.5095
10.6732 0.0000 0.0000
150.7906 0.1575 0.1513
20.8600 0.5075 0.4648 0,000 0.0000
250.8954 0.6917 0.6395 0.1104 0.0984
30,9245 0.7763 0.7131 0.3662 _ 0.3323 0.0000 0.0000
350.9367 0.8321 0.7632 0.5397 05040 0.0603 0.0572
‘40.9463 0.8661 0.7983 0.6535 0.6045 0.2538 0.2495
450.9574 0.8953 0.8250 0.7301 0.6650 0.3979 0.3869
5 0.9609 0.9116 0.8403 0.7687 _0.7136 0.4967 0.4798
350.9616 0.9251 0.8541 0.8014 0.7420 0.5821 0.5521
6 0.9637 0.9312 0.8646 0.8329 0.7688 0.6396 0.6120
70.9656 0.9424 0.8861 0.8665 0.8027 0.7225 0.6888
0.9692 0.9481 0.9029 0.9018 0.8386 0.7721 0.7339 00739.
90.9712 0.9512 0.9131 0.9117 0.8663 0.8080 0.7696 0.1464
10 0.9751 _0,9529 0.9213 0.9215 _0,8855 0.8355 _ 0.7983 0.5872
110.9762 __0,9544 0.9256 0.9282 0,8991 0.8580 0.8313 0.6931 00383 0.0180
120.9771 0.9575 0.9329 0.9325 0.9071 0.8717 0.8555 0.7408 0.0608 0.0276
130.9813 0.9575 0.9355 _0.9378 0.9152 0.8808 0.8695 0.8422 0.3564 0.3112
140.9828 0.9594 0.9364 0.9396 0.9198 0.8874 0.8797 0.8821 0.4967 0.4332
150.9835 0.9620 0.9396 0.9411 0.9213 0.8914 0.8828 0.9031 0.5575 0.4894
180.9842 0.9635 0.9405 0.9484 0.9258 0.9047 0.8928 0.9193 0.6224 0.5599
210.9847 0.9642 0.9426 0.9488 0.9270 0.9138 0.8955 0.9294 0.6442 0.5747,
240.9859 0.9644 0.9437 0.9496 0.9296 0.9194 0.8963 0.9319 0.6549 0.5857
270.9888 0.9691 0.9443 0.9578 09314 0.9223 0.8995 0.9432 0.6658 0.5955
300.9892 0.9715 0.9519 0.9605 0.9379 0.9315 0.9059 0.9543 0.6742 0.6078
330.9892 0.9715 0.9526 0.9615 0.9387 0.9419 0.9106 0.9589 0.6813 0.6117
350.9901 0.9715 0.9536 0.9615 0.9396 0.9526 0.9114 0.9702 0.7051 0.6243
Highlighted values are probabilities one month after the target administration age

Sample size: 3,825 (BCG), 3,710 (OPV1, Pental); 3,622 (OPV2, Penta2); 3,488 (OPV3, Penta3), 2,775 (MCV1); 1,053 (MCV2,ull)


Only 10.31% of Filipino children were getting the BCG vaccine within a day, but the
coverage increased to 50.95% after two weeks. After a month from birth, however, this
probability would rise to 67.32%.

Around 15.75% of Filipino children were receiving OPVI by the target
administration age of 1.5 months, while 15.13% of Filipino children were receiving Pental
by the same age. The chances of obtaining OPV1 and Pental increased to 69.17% and

63.95%, respectively, by 2.5 months old.

BCG Vaccine ral Polio Vaccine (OPV)
pia PEPTererer [PPRUECTUESTEITIT ET
pate thro bret “adnan teva amon)

(beet == Dose? soo Bowed]

‘Measles-containing vaccine (MCV)

A2a458759

24 0 © 10 ja 14 10 10m mm me me
. “adenine (net)

~ Dose Dow

Figure 4.3.1. Cumulative Coverage (Probability of Administration) by Age
for EPI-recommended Vaccines


The computed estimates for the second doses of OPV and Pentavalent vaccine, which
should be taken by 2.5 months, were 11.04% and 9.84%, respectively. After a month, these
odds improved to 53.97% and 50.40%, respectively. In other words, around 53.97% of
Filipino children were getting OPV2 and 50.40% of Filipino children were receiving
Penta2 by the age of 3.5 months.

For the third doses of OPV and Pentavalent vaccine, the computed probabilities of
getting vaccinated by the age of 3.5 months old were only 6.03% and 5.72%, respectively.
These probabilities increased to 39.79% for OPV3 and 38.69% for Penta3 by 4.5 months
old. The probabilities for OPV3 and Penta3 would only reach 50% after five months of
age.

The probability of Filipino children getting the first dose of MCV by the age of nine
(9) months was 14.64%, while the probability of them getting the second dose of MCV by
12 months old was only 6.05%. Considering a month after the target age of vaccination,
the probability of children getting MCVI by 10 months old increased to 58.72%, and the

probability of children getting MCV2 by 13 months old increased to 35.62%.

Full vaccination

2) aa sree sais)

E46 8 10,12 14 10 19 20 22 24 2 Be 50 a2 OH SS
‘ ‘Administration time (In months)

Figure 4.3.2. Cumulative Coverage (Probability of Administration) by Age
for Being Fully Vaccinated


The probability of full vaccination was examined and visually presented in Figure
4.3.2. The probability of children being fully vaccinated was only 2.76% by 12 months of
age. However, after a month, the probability improved to 31.12%. The chance of being
fully vaccinated would only reach 50% after the age of 15 months.

The percentages of children with timely intake, vaccine delay, and non-vaccination
were also estimated. The median age for each group per vaccine was calculated and
presented in Table 4.3.2. It could be noticed that for all of the EPI-recommended vaccines,
the percentage of non-vaccinated children was always lower than the percentage of
children who received the vaccine.

Table 4.3.2 Median Age and Estimate for Timely Intake, Vaccine Delay, and Non-
Vaccination*

Within the timeliness range Delayed Non-vaccinated
Timeliness
Vaccine range, mon oe
(inmonths) | percentage vaccination | Percentage vaccination | Percentage
age (Q1,03) age (Q1,03)

0.03 Tar 51

BCG 0-1 7348% rons | 39% sz r66) | 15% 079" 2259)
1.84 2.86 3:79

opvi 15-25 | 55.80% 64 ora | 377% aa sem) | 4% — aro t6.11)
184 3.02 937

Penta) 15-25 | 508% oar) | 401% rap—asoy | 89% 342-1966)
a 2.96 4.08 628

opv2 25-35 | 40.21% 9759.1) | 495% eas 550) | 0% ig ts.any
2.96 " 434 7 934

Pemta2 25-35 | 37.92% o73-3.19) | 4°80% ass 628) | 128%  (5.42-20.88)
3.95 FXG] 391

opvs 35-45 | 30-71% g.75— 421 | 538% — (ggo-7.43) | 155% (4.54 16.80)
3.95 5.82 373

Penta 35-45 | 3040% gr ais) | 521% a3 7.99) | 174% (4.93 22.26)
934 1088 11:90

Mcvl 9-10 44.70% 9.14~9.63) |_43-"% (p94 12.59) | 122%  10.06— 19,30)
1239 13.74 2193

Mcva 12-13 | 285% (19.20712.66) | 332% 13.1215.09) | 3% _ s.25—28.59)
1239 13.84 22.22

Fall 12-13 | 25.76% — (19.20°12.66) | 261% (a3.15-15.42) | 4" 15.75-28.83)

Vaccination delay is defined as receiving dose afer the upper limit age in the timeliness range
Sample si (BCG); 3.710 (OPVI, Penta): 3,622 (OPV2, Penta2); 3.488 (OPV3, Penta3); 2.775 (MCV; 1,053 (MCV2.full)



The percentage of children with timely intake was more than the combined
percentage of delayed and non-vaccinated for BCG, OPV1 and Pental. However, the
combined percentage of delayed and non-vaccinated children was more than the percentage
of timely intake for the remaining vaccines (OPV2, Penta2, OPV3, Penta3, MCV1, and
MCV2).

The percentage of children with vaccine delay was highest for the third doses of OPV
and Pentavalent vaccine. In addition, the non-vaccination rates were highest for MCV2, as
well as for being fully vaccinated.

The median age of children who never got the vaccine dose was interesting to
examine. Half of the children who were not immunized were 8.91 months old for BCG;
5.79 months old for OPV1; 6.28 months old for OPV2; 8.91 months old for OPV3; 9.37
months old for Penta! ; 9.34 for Penta2; 9.73 for Penta3; 11.9 months for MCV1; and 21.93
months old for MCV2. These median ages were significantly later than the recommended
ages of vaccine administration.

The two tables above mainly discussed the estimations for the age-specific
probability of vaccination, timely intake, vaccine delay, and non-vaccination for each EPI-
recommended vaccine. The next section discusses the number of doses received and
subsequent delays for the vaccine series (OPV, Penta, and MCV).

Table 4.3.3 shows the distribution of children based on doses received for each
vaccine series. It was observed that 4.39% of Filipino children aged 3.5 -35 months did not
receive any dose of OPV. Around 7.24% of children in the same age group were also not
able to receive any dose of the Pentavalent vaccine. Meanwhile, around 4.12% of Filipino

children aged 24 to 35 months did not receive any vaccine dose against measles.


Table 4.3.3 Distribution of Children Based on Doses Received for Each Vaccine Series

Percentage of children by doses received
Vaccine series Did not
receiveany First dose only Two doses Three doses
dose
opv 4.39% 3.28% 181% 84.46%
Penta 1.24% 2.83% 7.46% 82.47%
MCV 4.12% 30.71% 65.17% _

‘Sample size: 3,488 (OPV, Penta); 1,053 (MCV)
~-+ MCV series only requires two doses by age of 12 months

When compared to children who received either one dose of OPV (3.28%) or two
doses of OPV (7.87%), the percentage of children who received three doses for OPV was
high at 84.46%. The same could be said for the percentage of children who completed the
three-dose Pentavalent vaccine at 82.47%. For the measles vaccine, around 30.71% of
children had their MCV1, while 65.17% of children received both MCV1 and MCV2.

To account time between vaccine doses, children who finished the vaccine series
were assessed in the next section. The estimated percentages of children with timely and
delayed administration per vaccine dose until completion were presented in Table 4.3.4.
For OPV and Pentavalent vaccine series, a minimum time of four (4) weeks must lapse
between vaccine doses. In this case, timely vaccination for the 2 dose of OPV and Penta
was defined as obtaining the 2" dose a month after the receipt of 1* dose. The same
definition was applied for the 3" dose of OPV and Pentavalent vaccine. Meanwhile, for
the MCY, timely vaccination was defined as receiving the MCV2 three months after the

administration of MCV1.


Table 4.3.4 Percentage of Children Accounting for Delays in Subsequent Doses

Timely OPV1 (60.97%) Timely Pental (56.93%)
Timely MCV1
Timely OPV2" | Delayed OPV2 | Timely Penta2* | Delayed Penta2 | (58.67%)
| (41.82%) (58.18%) (42.48%) (57.52%)

Timely | Delayed | Timely | Delayed | Timely | Delayed | Timely | Delayed | Timely | Delayed
OPv3> | OPV3 | OPV3* | OPV3 | Penta3’ | Penta3 | Penta3* | Penta3 | MCV2 | MCV2

39.50% | 60.50% | 36.46% | 63.54% | 40.98% | 59.02% | 39.78% | 60.22% | 98.80% | 1.20%

TIMELY FIRST DOSES _

Delayed OPV1 (39.03%) Delayed Pental (43.07%)
Delayed MCV1
Timely OPV2° Delayed OPV2 | Timely Penta2* | Delayed Penta2 (41.33%)
(39.57%) (60.43%) (39.17%) (60.82%)

Timely | Delayed | Timely | Delayed | Timely | Delayed | Timely | Delayed | Timely | Delayed
opv3® | OPV3 | Penta3® | Penta3 | Penta3® | Penta3 | Penta3® | Penta3 | McV2" | MCV2

35.89% | 64.11% | 36.09% | 63.91% | 39.16% | 60.84% | 37.27% | 62.73% | 88.72% | 11.28%

DELAYED FIRST DOSES

Sample size, 2,946 children vaccinated with three doses of OPV; 2,877 children vaccinated with three doses of Pentavalent vaccine,

*Timely vacci
Timely vaccination is defined as re

The percentage of children who had delay in OP V2 was 58.18% among those who
had timely OPV] intake while the percentage was a bit higher at 64.11% among those who
had delay in OPV1. Meanwhile, the percentages of children who had delayed Penta2
intake were 57.52% and 60.82% among children who got their Penta] on time and late,
respectively. The trend in the second-dose delays was the same with the delays in the third
doses of OPV and Pentavalent vaccine.

On the other hand, the percentages of children who had delayed MCV2 were low
for children who had timely and late intake of MCV1. It could also be noted that 98.8% of

children who had timely MCV received their MCV2 on time.


4.4 Factors Associated with Delay in Full Vaccination

The delay (in days) of getting all the EPI-recommended vaccines was used for the
survival models. The estimated survival and cumulative hazard functions for full-

vaccination delay were shown in Figures 4.4.1 and 4.4.2.

Kaplan-Meier Survival Function

025 «0807s,

0.00

0 400 600 800
Full-vaccination delay (in days)

Figure 4.4.1 Kaplan-Meier Survival Function for Full-Vaccination Delay

The graph above shows the survival curve for full vaccination past the recommended
age of 12 months. The survival rate of children who were not fully vaccinated is 75% at 25
days (i.e., 12.82 months old). Meanwhile, half of the children were able to receive all the
EPI-recommended vaccines by 15.91 months old or 119 days after the target age of
completion. The survival curve also showed a steep fall until 120 days, after which it would
gradually decrease. Moreover, the survival rate did not reach 0.25 which would tell that at
least 25% of Filipino children remained not fully vaccinated before reaching the age of

three years.


Nelson-Aalen Cumulative Hazard Function


1.00

0.80

0.00

° 200 800

Fut-vaccinaton clay (rays) °°
Figure 4.4.2 Nelson-Aalen Cumulative Hazard Function for Full-Vaccination Delay

The cumulative hazard plot above gives an idea of possible distributions of the
survival models for the delay in full vaccination. The shape of the plot resembled that of a
logarithmic distribution than an exponential distribution.

The next section discusses the survival models performed in this study. Initial models
without interaction terms were first performed, and only a few factors were found to be
significant as shown in Appendix 8.1. The factors examined in the survival models were
sociodemographic characteristics, domestic abuse, maternal autonomy, and healthcare
utilization. Semiparametric survival model (Cox-PH) and parametric survival models
(Weibull, Exponential, Gompertz, Lognormal, Loglogistic, and Generalized Gamma) were

finalized after adding interaction terms and performing diagnostic tests.


Table 4.4.1 Model Fit Statistics for Final Survival Models

FINAL MODELS AIC BIC Log-likelihood
‘Semi-parametric (PH)
Cox model 9318.41 9408.08 -4642.21
Parametric (PH)
Weibull model 4240.11 4598.78 -2052.06
Exponential model 4738.40 5081.24 -2304.20
Gompertz model 3623.61 3781.84 1781.80
Parametric (AFT)
Weibull model 4240.11 4598.78 -2052.06
Exponential model 4738.40 5081.24 -2304.20
Lognormal model 3980.40 4175.55 -1953.20
Loglogistic model 3813.85 4067.03, -1858.93
Generalized Gamma model 3788.50 4051.09 1825.70

Model fit statistics were calculated and compared for every parametric model in
proportional hazards (PH) and accelerated failure-time (AFT) forms as shown above. The
model with the lowest AIC, lowest BIC, and highest log-likelihood value, was deemed the
best model. The Gompertz model was found to be the best model among the parametric
PH models. Meanwhile, the generalized gamma model was the best model among the
parametric AFT models.

Furthermore, the lognormal and loglogistic models produced better model fit
statistics compared to the Weibull and Exponential models, which was consistent with the
assumed distribution of the cumulative hazard plot. This means that examining
fall-vaccination delay is better with survival time in natural logarithm form or when using
AFT models. The results of the model fit statistics were also in agreement upon inspecting

the Cox-Snell residuals of the survival models as seen in Figure 4.4.3.


SEMIPARAMETRIC PARAMETRIC MODELS Be
MODEL Proportional Hazards (PH) Accelerated failure-time (AFT)

(acon (©) Exponential mode! (0) Lognonmal

(6) Weibull : {f) Logiogistic

(0 Gomperte () Gonaratzes gamma

Figure 4.4.3. Cox-Snell Residuals for the Survival Models

For the parametric models in PH form, the Gompertz model demonstrated the best
fit (Cox-Snell residuals plotted against themselves are close to the 45° reference line),
despite the large deviations on the latter end. It is in fact common for survival data to exhibit
the latter characteristic. Meanwhile, the generalized gamma model showed the best fit
among parametric models in AFT form. The residuals of the Cox model similarly followed
the 45° reference line, indicating a good fit.

The three models which showed the best fitting per category, the Cox model (semi-
parametric PH), Gompertz model (parametric PH), and Generalized Gamma model

(parametric AFT), were examined in the next section.



Semiparametric model
The Cox-PH model, being the most commonly used survival model, was examined
in this study. The Cox-Snell residuals of the Cox-PH model also showed good fit as seen

in Figure 4.4.4. To test the validity of the PH assumption in the model, plots of the scaled

Schoenfeld residuals were produced below.

Figure 4.4.4. Scaled Schoenfeld Residuals for Testing PH Assumption

The slope of the residuals must be equal to zero to satisfy the PH assumption.
Graphical inspection of the residuals plot for each variable in the model showed the validity
of the PH assumption. The interpretation of the coefficients in the Cox-PH model is

discussed in the next section.


Table 4.4.2. Final Cox-PH Model for Full-Vaccination Delay

j Hazard | 95% CI
Variable Coefficient | Here | ee | P-value
Mother's age (in years) (mom_age) 0.031 1.03 | 1.01-1.06 | 0.006"
Father's age (in years) (dad_age) -0.023 | 098 | 096-099 | o.011+
Child’s birth order (birth_order) -0.106 | 0.90 | 084-097 | 0.004%
‘Autonomy in healthcare utilization (ma_healtheare)
Yes -1.686 | 0.19 | 0.04-0.89 | 0.063
Baby's health first checked after birth (pne_baby)
Within a day 0.205, 1.23 | 075-202 | 0.420
Within a week -0.015 | 098 | 054-181 | 0.960
Within a month 0.69 | 030-158 | 0.375
After a month 038_| 010-149 | 0.164
™ma_healthcare*pne_baby
‘Yes*Within a day 2.102 818 | 1.69-39.64 | 0.009"
Yes*Within a week 1.651 521 | 0.91-29.98 | 0.064
Yes*Within a month 1.709 352_| 067-45.72 |_0.113
Other insurance membership (Insurance_others)
Yes 0.474 161_| 111-233 | 0.036*
‘(utonomy in visiting family and friends (ma_visit)
Yes 0.669 204 | 111-343 | 0.020*
‘Aware of free immunization (aware_immunization)
Yes 0.335 142__| 1.09-1.80 | 0.009"
ma_visit®aware_immunization
Yes*Yes -0.822 | 044 | 024-081 | 0.008*

*Significant at a = 0.05
For survival models in PH form, the hazard ratio (HR) is interpreted as how often a

particular event happens in one group compared to another group over time. The event in

this study is defined as full vaccination past the recommended age of 12 months old (i.e.,
full-vaccination delay). In this case, an HR value of greater than one (1) means that a certain
group was more likely to be fully vaccinated after the age of one year.

Parental age, child’s birth order, maternal autonomy in healthcare utilization and
visiting family/friends, awareness of the free immunization program, baby’s postnatal care,

and membership into other insurance (GSIS, SSS, etc.) were included in the final Cox-PH

model as seen in Table 4.4.2.


The final Cox-PH model for the hazard of full vaccination after the recommended
age of 12 months is given by:
h(t) = ho(t) x exp [0.031 (mom_age) ~ 0.023(dad_age) ~ 0.106(birth_order)
+0.474(insurance_othersyes)- 1.686(ma_healthcareyss) +0.205(pnc_babywrtun aay)
+2.102(ma_healthcareves* pnc_babywrrumn pay) + 0.669(ma_visityes)

+ 0.335 (aware_immunizationyes) ~ 0.822(ma_visitves" aware_immunizationyes)]
Holding all other factors constant, a year increase in the mother’s age would increase
the risk of a child’s full vaccination after the age of 12 months by 3% [exp(0.031)=1.03,
p-value=0.006], while a year increase in the father’s age would decrease said risk by 2%
[exp(-0.023)=0.98, p-value=0.0111}. As an example, the relative risk of full vaccination for
a mother aged 35 years compared to a mother aged 25 years was equal to
exp{(35-25)*0.031) = 1.36. Meanwhile, the relative risk of full vaccination for a father
aged 35 years old compared to a father aged 25 years old was exp[(35-25)*-0.023)] = 0.79.

In addition, a unit increase in the child’s birth order would decrease the child’s full

vaccination risk by 10% at any fixed point in time (p-value=0.004). In other words, a
second-bom child was 10% less likely to be fully vaccinated compared to a firstborn child.

The interaction of maternal autonomy in healthcare utilization with the baby’s first
postnatal check-up was found to be significant (p-value=0.009). The risk of full vaccination
for a mother with autonomy in healthcare utilization and whose baby got checked within a
day after birth was exp[(-1.686+0.205+2.102)] = 1.86, holding all other variables constant.
A mother with autonomy in healthcare utilization and whose baby got checked within a
day after birth had a significantly higher risk of full vaccination, by 86%, compared to a

mother without autonomy in healthcare utilization and whose baby never had a postnatal

check-up.


Moreover, at any fixed point in time, parents being a member of other insurance
(GSIS, SSS, etc.) increased the risk of full vaccination by 61% compared to not members
(p-value=0.036).

At any point in time, the risk of being fully vaccinated for children whose mothers
had autonomy in visiting family/friends was twice that of children whose mothers did not
have such autonomy (p-value=0.020). Meanwhile, children whose mothers were aware of
the free immunization program in their area had a significantly higher risk of being fully
vaccinated, 42% higher to be exact, than those who were not aware of the free vaccination
program, holding all other predictors constant (p-value=0.009).

The last interaction found to be significant in the Cox-PH model was the pairwise
combination of maternal autonomy in visiting family/friends and awareness of the free
immunization program of the local government units (LGU) (p-value=0.008). Holding all
other factors constant, children whose mothers were aware of the free immunization
program and who had autonomy in visiting family/friends had a significantly higher risk,
by 20%, of getting fully vaccinated than children whose mothers were not aware of the free

immunization program and who did not have autonomy in visiting family/friends.


Parametric model in Proportional Hazards (PH) form

The Gompertz model showed the lowest AIC and BIC values among all the examined

parametric models,. It showed the best fit among parametric models in PH form, but its

Cox-Snell residuals plot was close to that of the lognormal and loglogistic models.

The discussion of Gompertz model was mainly to assess its similarities with the

PH-assumed Cox survival model.

Table 4.4.3 Final Gompertz Model for Full-Vaccination Delay

Variable Coctticient | Hazard | 95% Cl | value

Mother's age (in years) (mom_age) 0.029 1.03 | 101-105 | oon
Father’s age (in years) (dad_age) 0.020 0.98 0.96-0.99 | 0.020*
Chilé’s bith order (birth_order) -0089 | ost | 08-099] 0028
Family’s wealth index (wealth_index)

Poorer 0.17 | 112 | 062-203] 0.700

Middle 0.244 1.27 0.71 - 2.30 0.418

Richer 0.264 1.30 0.70 - 2.43 0.406,

Richest 0.478 161 0.94 - 2.77 0.085
Urban (urban)

Rural o.169 | 1s | 073-192 | 0.495
wealth_index*urban_

Poorer*Rural -0.256 0.77 0.41-1.47 0.434

Middle*Rural 0.358 0.70 0.35-1.41 0.316

Richer*Rural 087 | 042-181] o711

Richest*Rural =1.101 0.33 0.15 - 0.74 0.007*
‘Autonomy in household purchases(ma_hhpurchase)

Yes -0.277 0.76. 0.46 - 1.24 0.266
‘wealth_index*ma_hhpurchase

Poorer*Yes 0.903 247 1.28 -4.75 0.007*

Middle*Yes 0.165 118 0.51 - 2.73 0.701

Richer*Yes 0.281 132 | 034-327] 0542

Richest*Yes 0.944 2.57 1.10 - 5.98 0.028*
Other insurance membership (insurance_others)

Yes 0.470 1.60 1.06 - 2.42 | 0.027"
“Aware of fee immunization (aware_jmmunizalion)

Yes 0.257 1.29 1.02 - 1.64 0.035*

*Significant at a= 0.05


Factors included in the final Gompertz model were parental age, child’s birth order,
family’s wealth index, urbanity, matemal autonomy in large household purchases,
awareness of the free immunization program, and membership into other insurance (GSIS,
SSS, etc.). It should also be noted that HR > 1 indicates a higher likelihood of full
vaccination after a year.

The final Gompertz model for the hazard of full vaccination after the recommended
age of 12 months is given by:

h(t) = ho(t) x exp [0.029(mom_age) - 0.020(dad_age) - 0.089(birth_order)
+0.470(insurance_othersves) + 0.257(aware_immunizationyes)
+ 0.117(wealth.indexroonen) + 0.478 (wealth. indexricuest)
+ 0.169(urbanauna.) ~ 1.101 (wealth_indexncnesr * urbannunaL)
~ 0.277(ma_hhpurchasevss) +0.903 (ma_hhpurchaseves * wealth_indexrooren)
+0.944 (ma_hhpurchaseves * wealth indexnicuest)]

Similar to the Cox-PH model, the mother’s age (HR=exp(0.029)=1.03,
p-value=0.011), father’s age (HR=0.98, p-value=0.020), child’s birth order (HR=0.91, p-
value=0.028), membership in other insurance (HR=1.60, p-value=0.027), and awareness
of free immunization programs (HR=1.29, p-value=0.035) were found to be significant in
explaining the risk of a child being fully vaccinated after the first year.

Furthermore, children from families who belonged to the richest quintile and were
living in rural areas had a lower full-vaccination risk, at exp[(0.478 + 0.169 -1.101)] = 0.64,
than the control group, i.e., children from the poorest household living in an urban area (p-
value=0.007). A common pattern in the model was that families living in rural areas,

regardless of their socioeconomic status, had lower risks of being fully vaccinated

compared to families living in urban areas.


The interaction of wealth index and maternal autonomy on large household purchases
was also found to be significant. Children whose mothers had autonomy in large household
purchases and belonged to the second wealth quintile had a risk of being fully vaccinated
equal to 2.10 times that of children whose mothers did not have autonomy and belonged to
the poorest wealth quintile (p-value=0.007). In addition, children whose mothers had
autonomy in large household purchases and belonged to the richest wealth quintile had a
risk amounting to 3.14 times that of children whose mothers had no autonomy in large
household purchases belonging to the poorest quintile (p-value=0.035). The computed
risks of full vaccination for mothers with autonomy in large household purchases were also
higher by 98% and 153% when compared to mothers without autonomy and belonging to

second and richest wealth quintiles, respectively.

Parametric model in Accelerated Failure-Time (AFT) form

‘Among all the parametric survival models, the generalized gamma distribution
provides the most flexibility in estimating survival data. It was not surprising that it had
the best fit among parametric in AFT models. The generalized gamma model had ancillary
parameter values of « = —1.98 and o = 2.16.

In the AFT models, time ratios describe the median survival time of a group
compared to another group. In this case, a time ratio greater than one (1) means a longer
time of delay in getting all the EPI-recommended vaccines or a longer delay in not being

fully vaccinated


Table 4.4.4. Final Generalized Gamma Model for Full-Vaccination Delay

Variable Coefficient en es nas for | p-value
Child's birth order (birth_order) 0.120 | 1.2 | 104-122 | 0.004
Father's highest educational attainment (dad_edue)
Primary level 0699 | 050 | 030-101 | 0.029*
Secondary level 0.669 | 051 | 028-101 | 0.042"
College level or higher 0785 | 046 | 026-097 | 0024+
Mother drinking alcohol (mom_aleohol)
Often 2.089 | 808 | 347-1884 | o.001*
Sometimes -0021_| o98_| 072-134 | 0.895
Emotional abuse
No -04ss_| 0.62 | 0.43-0.89 | 0.009"
PhilHealth membership (insurance_ph)
Yes -0342_| 07 | 051-099 | 0.006"
Oiher insurance membership (insurance others)
Yes -1301_| 027 | 007-094 | 0.039
‘Mother's health first checked after delivery
(pne_mom) -1350 | 027 | 008-098 | 0.046
Within a day 0059 | 114 | 026-511 | 0.860
Within a week oat | 052 | 013-205 | 0348
Within a month
insurance_others*pne_mom
Yes*Within a day 1451 | 4.10 | 1.05~15.99 | 0.033*
Yes*Within a week 012 | 1.13 | 022-568 | 0.860
Yes*Within a month 1.705__| 5.50 | 153-2159 |_0220

*Significant at a = 0.05

The model estimates for the generalized gamma model are shown in Table 4.4.4.
Factors included in the final generalized gamma model were the child’s birth order, the
father’s highest educational attainment, mother drinking alcohol, mother experiencing
emotional abuse, membership in PhilHealth and other insurance, and the time (since
delivery) of the mother’s first postnatal check-up.

A unit increase in the child’s birth order would increase the full-vaccination delay by

13% [exp(0.120)=1.13] at any given point in time (p-value=0.004). This result was

consistent with the Cox-PH model and Gompertz model.


Holding all other predictors constant, children whose fathers had no education were
generally twice more likely to be delayed in getting all the EPI-recommended vaccines
than children whose fathers had primary education (p-value=0.029), secondary level
education (p-value=0.042), or at least college-level education (p-value=0.024)

In addition, the risk of full-vaccination delay among children whose mothers were
drinking often was 8.08 times more compared to children whose mothers were non-
drinkers.

Meanwhile, the risk of delay in full vaccination was lower for children whose
mothers did not experience emotional abuse (TR=0.62, p-value=0.009), and whose family
was covered by PhilHealth (TR=0.71, p-value=0.006) and other insurance (GSIS, SSS, etc.)
(TR=0.27, p-value=0.039).

The interaction of timing of the mother’s postnatal care check-up with membership
in other insurance was also found to be significant (p-value=0.033). Relative to children
whose mothers have no other insurance and never had postnatal check-up, the risk of full-
vaccination delay for children whose mothers had other insurance and who had themselves
checked within a day after delivery was lower at exp[(1.451-1.350-1.301] = 0.30, while the
risk of full-vaccination delay for children whose mothers did not have other insurance but
was checked within a day after delivery is 0.27. This also meant that children whose
mother’s health was checked within a day after delivery were less likely to be delayed in

getting the EPI-recommended vaccines, regardless of their membership in other insurance.


5. DISCUSSION
The administration of EPI-recommended vaccines is usually monitored at 12 or 24
months, especially in countries with low immunization coverage (Raguindin et. al., 2021).
In the Philippines, a child is considered fully immunized (FIC) if he or she has received all
of the EPI-recommended vaccines by the age of 12 months, including BCG at birth, OPV
and Pentavalent (DTP- HepB-Hib) doses at 6, 10, and 14 weeks of age, and MCV doses at
9 and 12 months of age. Meanwhile, a child can still be considered as completely
immunized (CIC) if he or she has received all the EPI-recommended vaccines within 13 to
23 months old. Among children aged 24 to 35 months with vaccine cards, only 29.72%
were able to obtain all EPJ-recommended immunizations within their first year of life,
while 25.91% were able to receive all vaccines between the ages of 13 and 23 months.
These figures vary from the national estimates in FHSIS 2017, which show that 67.47%
are FIC and 8.11% are CIC. The difference in the estimates was due to the numerator and
denominator used in calculating the national estimates in FHSIS. The denominator used
for both measures is 2.056% of the estimated total population in the country. Meanwhile,
the group of children aged 12 months is used as numerator in calculating the FIC rate, and
the group of children aged 13-23 old is used for the CIC rate (DOH, 2018). Despite the fact
that half of the children (55.63%) received all the EPl-recommended vaccines, it is still
alarming that the 45.46% of children aged 24 to 35 months old remain underimmunized.
Vaccination coverage is a widely used success indicator of different immunization
programs around the world. However, the timeliness of vaccine administration is
frequently neglected and unmeasured. The median vaccine delay from the target
administration times was 5 days for BCG; 2.4 weeks for OPV1; 2.7 weeks for Pental; 4.0

weeks for OPV2; 4.4 weeks for Penta2; 6.4 weeks for OPV3; 6.6 weeks for Penta3; 2.3

weeks for MCV1; and 3.6 weeks for MCV2. It can be noticed that the third doses for OPV
and Pentavalent vaccine had the longest delay at 6 weeks. In a similar study conducted in
the Philippines, the median delay from the recommended vaccination age was 2.7 weeks
for BCG; 3.1 weeks for OPV1; 4.1 weeks for Pental; 4.7 weeks for OPV2; 5.8 weeks for
Penta2; 6.7 weeks for OPV3; and 7.7 weeks for Penta3 (Raguindin et. al., 2021). These
estimates are higher, especially for BCG, compared to the estimated median delays in this
study. The vaccination delays were also observed in other middle-income and low-income
countries (Akmatov et. al., 2011; Babirye et. al., 2012; Clark & Sanderson, 2009; Hu et.
al., 2017).

The percentage of children who received complete doses was 84.46% for OPV,
82.47% for Pentavalent vaccine, and 65.17% for MCV. Meanwhile, the median age of
children who never got each vaccine dose was also examined. Half of the children who
were not immunized were 8.9 months old for BCG; 5.79 months old for OPV1; 6.28
months old for Pental; 8.9 months old for OPV2; 9.37 months old for Penta2; 9.34 for
OPV3; 9.73 for Penta3; 11.9 months for MCV1; and 22.22 months old for MCV2.

The estimated median ages of children for vaccination and non-vaccination provided
a quick overview of the country’s immunization delays. To further understand the timely
and delayed administration of each EPl-recommended vaccine, the probability of
vaccination at a specific age was examined

The cumulative coverage (probability of vaccination) was 67.32% for BCG at one
month; 69.17% for OPVI at 2.5 months; 63.95% for Pental at 2.5 months; 53.97% for
OPV2 at 3.5 months; 50.40% for Penta2 at 3.5 months; 39.79% for OPV3 at 4.5 months,
38.69% for Penta3 at 4.5 months; 58.72% for MCV at 10 months; and 35.64% for MCV2

at 13 months. Delays in subsequent doses were assessed in this study. It should also be

noted that the percentage of children who had delayed vaccination for OPV2 and Penta2
were a bit higher for children who had delayed first doses compared to children who had
timely first doses. This observation in the second-dose delays was similar to the delays in
the third-dose delays of OPV and Pentavalent vaccine. Meanwhile, the percentages of
children who had delayed MCV2 were low regardless of the timeliness of their MCV1
intake. In fact, around 98.8% of children who had timely MCVI received their MCV2 on
time, while the timely receipt of MCV2 was 88.72% among children who had delayed
MCVI intake.

Factors associated with the delay in full vaccination were assessed from the lens of
survival analysis. Cox-PH model (semiparametric), Gompertz model (parametric in PH
form), and generalized gamma model (parametric in AFT form) showed the best fitting
among the other survival models.

The child’s birth order and membership in other insurance were found to be
significant in all three models. A unit increase in the child’s birth order would increase the
tisk of full-vaccination delay by around 9% - 12% at any fixed point in time. This was
consistent with the studies conducted in Congo (Zivich et. al., 2017), Gambia (Odutola et.
al., 2015), and Iran (Mokhtari et. al., 2015; Rejali et. al., 2015). In a separate study, delayed

and incomplete vaccinations were more prominent among Filipino mothers who had more

than one child and were not receiving assistance in childcare and household chores (ICI
Asia, 2017). On the other hand, parents being a member of other insurance such as GSIS,
SSS, etc. would decrease full-vaccination delay by around 60% ~ 73% compared to non-
members. The household’s insurance membership was already found to be a significant
factor for full and timely immunizations, as well as access to other healthcare services

(Dombkowski et. al., 2004; Narvaez et. al., 2017; Newacheck et. al., 1998).

Mother’s age, father’s age, membership in other insurance, and awareness of free
immunization programs were also found to be significant for models in proportional
hazards (PH) form. A year increase in the mother’s age would increase the risk of a child’s
full vaccination after the age of 12 months by 3%, while a year increase in the father’s age
would decrease the said risk by 2%. This was in contrast to the studies in Eastern China
(Hu et. al., 2014), Colombia (Narvaez et. al., 2017), Guatemala (D’Ardenne et. al., 2016),
and Kenya (Gibson et. al., 2015) where advanced maternal age was shown to be a
significant factor for delayed vaccination.

Although rarely examined, awareness of the free immunization program offered by
the local government unit (LGU) was also found to be a significant factor for full-
vaccinated after one year. Children whose mothers were aware of the free immunization
program in their area were 29% - 42% less likely to be delayed in getting all the EPI-
recommended vaccines than those who are not aware of the free vaccination program. In
addition, only 65.83% of mothers were aware of the free vaccination programs offered by
their LGUs.

Maternal autonomy in visiting family and friends and its interaction with awareness
of free immunization were found to be significant factors in the Cox-PH model. The
interaction of maternal autonomy on health care utilization with the timing of baby’s first
postnatal check-up was also found significant in this model. Meanwhile, for the Gompertz
model, another significant factor revealed was the interaction of wealth index with urbanity

and with maternal autonomy on large household purchases.


The generalized gamma model showed a different set of significant factors when
compared to the Cox model and Gompertz model. Father’s highest educational attainment,
mother drinking alcohol, mother experiencing emotional abuse, and membership to
PhilHealth were found to be significant in this model. The interaction of the mother’s first
postnatal care check-up with membership in other insurance was also found to be
significant.

Children whose fathers have no education are generally twice more likely to be
delayed in getting all the EPI-recommended vaccines after the age of 12 months than
children whose fathers had higher levels of education. This result is supported by studies
conducted in Greece (Danis et. al., 2010), India (Barman et. al., 2015), Iran (Mokhtari et.
al., 2015), and Nigeria (Oleribe et. al., 2017). This might be due to that fact that the father’s
knowledge and beliefs about childhood vaccines influence the mother’s vaccination
behavior. It was recommended that fathers and partners should undergo “Responsible
Fatherhood” seminars (ICI Asia, 2017). It was also found that the risk of full-vaccination
delay among children whose mothers are drinking often is 8.08 times more compared to
children whose mothers are non-drinkers. On the other hand, the risk of full-vaccination
delay is lower for children whose mothers were not experiencing emotional abuse and

whose family is covered by PhilHealth.


This study is not without limitations. Causality could not be established since this
study implemented a cross-sectional study design.

Children with vaccination cards were more likely to be fully and timely immunized
compared to children without cards (Kinfe et. al., 2019; Usman et. al., 2009). Since
vaccine timeliness was mainly computed from the dates in the vaccination cards (i.e.,
administration date minus the date of birth), there was a risk of overestimation in vaccine
timeliness.

The second dose of MCV is only recorded for children aged 24 to 35 months old.
The missing data might introduce bias when the full-vaccination rates differ between those
who were included in the survival model (i.e., children aged 24 to 35 months old) compared
to those who are not included (i.e., children aged 12 to 23 months old). The full-vaccination
rate might be higher or lower than the actual rate (i.e., rate from all children aged 12 to 35
months old).

Furthermore, interaction between explanatory variables in the model were examined,

but only at two-factors interaction effect.


6. CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS

The delayed administration of the EPI-recommended vaccines goes hand in hand
with the low vaccination coverage in the country. The last doses of OPV, Pentavalent
vaccine, and MCV, which should give maximum protection against targeted VPDs, were
revealed to have low vaccination coverage and considerable delays. These delays put
Filipino children at risk of certain VPDs for a longer period, which also has a negative
impact on herd immunity (Akmatov et. al., 2008).

The cumulative probability of vaccination did not reach 50% a month after the target
age of administration for the OPV, Pentavalent vaccine, and MCV. The low cumulative
probabilities for OPV3 and Penta3 were mainly affected by cumulative delays experienced
in the first and second doses. Meanwhile, the low cumulative probability for MCV2 was
mainly due to the delay in MCV1. In fact, most of the children were receiving their second
dose of MCV three months after MCV], regardless of the timeliness of MCV] intake. It
may be beneficial to propose interventions aimed at boosting immunization rates during
the first four (4) months of life, and by 9 to 10 months old.

Among the survival models explored in this study, the Cox-PH survival model was
considered to be the final model in explaining full-vaccination delay among Filipino
children. Compared to the other two models, significant variables in the Cox-PH model
provide more useful information in developing health programs that promotes timely
immunization and boost immunization rates.

The child’s birth order was found to be a significant factor for the full-vaccination
delay. The integration of family planning (FP) and immunization, which was proven to be
beneficial for both mothers and infants, can be implemented by the local government units

(Herrin et. al., 2012). A manual for implementing such an integration process, called

FP/ANC-EPI integration strategy, is available for use by LGUs and can be downloaded
from the official DOH site (DOH, 2012). Domestic violence screening can also be
incorporated into this integration as intimate partner violence was found to be associated
with vaccine timeliness, as well as with using contraception and visiting family planning
clinics (Tsai et. al., 2016). Health facilities, especially rural health units (RHU) and
barangay health centers (BHC), can serve as a neutral venue for service providers to reach
out to women experiencing domestic abuse.

Non-membership in insurance was also found to be associated with delay in full
vaccination. In relation to this, parents can be urged to enroll in PhilHealth or other
insurance programs. Filipino citizens are automatically eligible for the National Health
Insurance Program (NHIP) by PhilHealth under the Universal Health Care (UHC) Law.
However, registration is needed to avail benefit packages of the insurance program. One
benefit package is called Newborn Care Package (NCP) which provides essential health
services for infants. NCP health services include newbom screening and vaccines for BCG
and hepatitis B (PhilHealth, 2019).

The local government units (LGUs) can also intensify information dissemination
about the availability and schedule of free immunization, as well as the importance of
timely vaccination. Communication campaigns can emphasize that EPI-recommended
vaccines be administered at recommended ages and completed within the first year of life
to attain maximum protection against preventable diseases. This can also be done
highlighting personal and social benefits of vaccination such as the prospect of protecting
families and holding family gatherings (The World Bank, 2021). Aside from publication
materials conveying messages about the benefits of vaccinations, the availability of free

vaccines in public health facilities can be stressed.

Moreover, a child’s vaccine information may be inputted into a software or computer
application where the vaccine schedule can be automatically generated after dose
administration (Bordley et. al., 2001; Kairys, et. al., 2006; Margolis et. al., 2001;
Zimmerman et. al., 2014). Digitalizing vaccine information is useful for healthcare
providers to conveniently monitor the vaccination status of children in their areas, as well
as a data backup in the event that vaccine cards are misplaced or missing.

Reminders about a child’s vaccination schedule can also be looked into. An addition
to the verbal reminders, computer-assisted appointment reminders, and telephone
reminders can be used. Text messages with short, specific text content can also be effective
to remind mothers about their child’s next vaccination schedule (Ahlers-Schmidt et. al.,
2011; Garcia-Dia, et. al., 2017). The use of bracelets and pendants (i.e., Khushi baby
pendant) were already explored in reminding mothers, systematically updating health
information, and monitoring children who are considered high-risk (i.e., children who are
already delayed from the recommended vaccine administration time) (Nagar et. al, 2020;
Siddiqi et. al., 2020).

Researchers who want to examine the timeliness of vaccination can consider using
the Turnbull estimation method as an alternative to the Kaplan-Meier (KM) method. The
Turnbull method is advantageous over the KM method since it uses an expectation-
maximization (EM) algorithm and can accommodate combinations of exact, left-censored,
right-censored, and interval-censored data. To give a complete overview of the timeliness
in the EPl-recommended immunization, the delays in the subsequent doses for OPV,
Pentavalent vaccine, and MCV should be examined and interpreted with the Turnbull

estimated probabilities of vaccination.


Before performing any parametric survival model for vaccination timeliness, the
hazard function plot can be examined first. This plot can give an idea about the distribution
suited for the survival data. If the plot shows monotone hazard rates that are exponentially
increasing or decreasing, the generalized gamma model and the Gompertz model are
recommended to be examined. If the plot illustrates nonmonotonic hazard rates which
initially increases and then decreases, the generalized gamma model and loglogistic model
can be explored. This process can save time since the generalized gamma model is flexible
and have special cases for the other distributional forms. The parametric model produced
by doing this procedure can also be compared to the semiparametric Cox model.

When exploring possible interaction terms given a large number of factors,
a pre-selection procedure is recommended. This can be done by examining the interaction
terms modeled with its pairwise predictors using a relaxed p-value criterion of 0.15, 0.20
or 0.25. If the interaction term in this pre-selection step shows a p-value of less than or
equal to the specified p-value, then that term can be considered in the model.

Information criteria should be checked, and diagnostics tests should always be

performed to assess the model fit of the final survival model.


7. REFERENCES

Aalemi, A. K., Shahpar, K., & Mubarak, M. Y. (2020). Factors influencing vaccination
coverage among children aged 12-23 months in Afghanistan: Analysis of the 2015
Demographic and Health Survey. PLOS ONE, 15(8).
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0236955

Abbi, R., Christian, P., Gujral, S., & Gopaldas, T. (1991). The impact of matemal work
status on the nutrition and health status of children. Food and Nutrition Bulletin,
13(1), 1-6. https://doi.org/10.1177/156482659101300128

Abebe, D. S., Nielsen, V. O., & Finnvold, J. E. (2012). Regional inequality and vaccine
uptake: a multilevel analysis of the 2007 Welfare Monitoring Survey in Malawi.
BMC Public Health, 12(1). doi:10.1186/1471-2458-12-1075

Acharya, P., Kismul, H., Mapatano, M. A., & Hatlay, A. (2019). Correction: Individual-
and community-level determinants of CHILD immunization in the Democratic
Republic of Congo: A Multilevel analysis. PLOS ONE, 14(1).
https://doi.org/10.1371 journal.pone.0211299

Adetifa, I. M. O., Karia, B., Mutuku, A., Bwanaali, T., Makumi, A., Wafula, J., Chome,
M., Mwatsuma, P., Bauni, E., Hammitt, L. L., Mataza, C., Tabu, C., Kamau, T.,
Williams, T. N., & Scott, J. A. (2018). Coverage and timeliness of vaccination and
the validity of routine estimates: Insights from a vaccine registry in Kenya.
Vaccine, 36(52), 7965-7974. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.vaccine.2018.11.005

Adhikari, R. (2016). Effect of women’s autonomy on Maternal Health Service Utilization
in Nepal: A Cross Sectional Study. BMC Women's Health, 16(1).

https://doi.org/10.1186/s12905-016-0305-7


Agresti, A. (2007). An Introduction to Categorical Data Analysis. John Wiley & Sons,
Inc.

Ablers-Schmidt, C. R., Hart, T., Chesser, A., Williams, K. S., Yaghmai, B., Shah-Haque,
S., &amp; Wittler, R. R. (2011). Using human factors techniques to design text
message reminders for childhood immunization. Health Education &amp;
Behavior, 39(5), 538-543. https://doi.org/10.1177/10901981 1 1420866

Ahmad, K., Kabir, E., Keramat, S. A., & Khanam, R. (2021). Matemal health and health-
related behaviours and their associations with child health: Evidence from an
Australian birth cohort. PLOS ONE, 16(9).
https://doi.org/10.137 journal. pone.0257188

Ahmed, S.M., Abd-El Rahmed, T.A., & Masoed, E.S. (2013). Mother’s awareness and
knowledge of under five years children regarding immunization in Minia city
Egypt. Life Science Journal. 10(4), 1224-1225.

Akmatov, M. K., & Mikolajezyk, R. T. (2011). Timeliness of childhood vaccinations in
31 low and middle-income countries. Journal of Epidemiology and Community
Health, 66(7). https://doi.org/10.1136/jech.2010.124651

Akmatov, M. K., Kretzschmar, M., Kramer, A., & Mikolajezyk, R. T. (2008). Timeliness
of vaccination and its effects on fraction of vaccinated population. Vaccine, 26(31),
3805-381 1. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.vaccine.2008.05.031

‘Akmatov, M. K., Kretzschmar, M., Kramer, A., & Mikolajezyk, R. T. (2007).
Determinants of childhood vaccination coverage in Kazakhstan in a period of
societal change: Implications for vaccination policies. Vaccine, 25(10), 1756-1763.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.vaccine.2006.11.030


Akoth, C. (2020). Time to Childhood Immunization Uptake in Kenya: A Survival
Analysis. (thesis).

Anichukwu, O. I., & Asamoah, B. O. (2019). The impact of maternal health care
utilisation on routine immunisation coverage of children in Nigeria: a cross-
sectional study. BMJ Open, 9(6), €026324. doi:10.1136/mjopen-2018-026324

Anokye, R., Acheampong, E., Budu-Ainooson, A., Edusei, A.

Okyere, P., Dogbe, J.,
& Nadutey, A. (2018). Socio-demographic determinants of childhood
immunization incompletion in Koforidua, Ghana. BMC Research Notes, \1(1).
https://doi.org/10.1186/s13104-018-3767-x

Aslam, M., Sadiq, M., & Mehmood, T. (2020). Assessment of maternal health services
utilization in Pakistan: the role of socio-demographic characteristics. Asian
Biomedicine, 14(1), 3-1. https://doi.org/10.1515/abm-2020-0002

Babirye, J. N., Engebretsen, I. M., Makumbi, F., Fadnes, L. T., Wamani, H., Tylleskar,
T., & Nuwaha, F. (2012). Timeliness of childhood vaccinations in Kampala
Uganda: A community-based cross-sectional study. PLoS ONE, 7(4).
https://doi.org/10.137 1 Jounal pone.0035432

Badu, E., Agyei-Batfour, P., Ofori Acheampong, I., Preprah Opoku, M., & Addai-
Donkor, K. (2018). Households Sociodemographic Profile as Predictors of Health
Insurance Uptake and Service Utilization: A cross-sectional study in a municipality
of Ghana. Advances in Public Health, 2018, 1-13.
https://doi.org/10.1155/2018/7814206

Barman, D., & Dutta, A. (2014). Access and barriers to immunization in West Bengal,
India: Quality matters. Journal of Health, Population and Nutrition, 31(4).

https://doi.org/10.3329/jhpn.v3 1i4.20050

Barman, M. P., Nath, K., & Hazarika, J. (2015). Factors affecting timeliness of
immunization coverage among children of Assam, India. Journal of Health
Management, 17(3), 274-284. https://doi.org/10.1177/0972063415589243

BBC. (2019, February 7). Measles outbreak declared in Philippines. BBC News.
Retrieved from https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-47153817.

Bendel, R. B., &amp; Afifi, A. A. (1977). Comparison of stopping rules in forward
“stepwise” regression. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 72(357), 46.
https://doi.org/10.2307/2286904

Bishop, C. M. (2006). Pattern recognition and machine learning. Springer.

Bobo, J. K., Gale, J. L., Thapa, P. B., & Wassilak, S. G. (1993). Risk factors for delayed
immunization in a random sample of 1163 children from Oregon and Washington.
Pediatrics, 91(2), 308-314. https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.91.2.308

Bondy, J.N., Thind, A., Koval, J. J., & Speechley, K. N. (2009). Identifying the
determinants of childhood immunization in the Philippines. Vaccine, 27(1), 169-

175. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.vaccine.2008.08.042
Bonu, S., Rani, M., Jha, P., Peters, D. H., & Nguyen, S. N. (2004). Household tobacco
and alcohol use, and child health: an exploratory study from India. Health Policy,
70(1), 67-83. https://doi.org/10.1016/).healthpol.2004.02.003
Bordley, W. C., Margolis, P. A., Stuart, J., Lannon, C., & Keyes, L. (2001). Improving
preventive service delivery through office systems. Pediatrics, 108(3).
https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.108.3.e41

Borras, E., Dominguez, A., Fuentes, M., Batalla, J., Cardefiosa, N., & Plasencia, A.
(2009). Parental knowledge of paediatric vaccination. BMC Public Health, 9(1).

https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2458-9-154

Boshnakova, A. & Kamad, A. (2018). Medicine and vaccine shortages: What is the role
of global regulatory complexity for post approval changes? The Economist
Intelligence Unit.

Boulton, M. L., Carlson, B. F., Wagner, A. L., Porth, J. M., Gebremeskel, B., & Abeje,
Y. (2019). Vaccination timeliness among newborns and infants in Ethiopia. PLOS
ONE, 14(2). https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0212408

Brownson, R. C., Chriqui, J. F., & Stamatakis, K. A. (2009). Understanding evidence-
based public health policy. American Journal of Public Health, 99(9), 1576-1583.
https://doi.org/10.2105/ajph.2008.156224

Buckles, K. S., & Price, J. (2013). Selection and the marriage premium for Infant Health.
Demography, 50(4), 1315-1339. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13524-013-021 1-7

Budu, E., Ahinkorah, B. O., Aboagye, R. G., Armah-Ansah, E. K., Seidu, A.-A., Adu, C.,
Ameyaw, E. K., & Yaya, S. (2021). Maternal healthcare utilisation and complete
childhood vaccination in sub-Saharan AFRICA: A cross-sectional study of 29
nationally representative surveys. BMJ Open, 11(5).
https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjopen-2020-045992

Burki, T. (2019). Vaccine misinformation and social media. The Lancet Digital Health,
1(6). https://doi.org/10.1016/s2589-7500(19)30136-0

Caingles, S., & Lobo, J. (2011). Survey on Knowledge, Attitudes and Practices of Parents
in Barangay 8A, District 1, Davao City Regarding Their Children’s Immunization.

PIDSP Journal, 12.


Calhoun, L. M., van Eijk, A. M., Lindblade, K. A., Hamel, M. J., Wilson, M. L., Slutsker,
L., Odhiambo, F. O., & Winterbauer, E. (2014). Determinants and coverage of
vaccination in children in westem Kenya from a 2003 cross-sectional survey. The
American Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, 90(2), 234-241.
https://doi.org/10.4269/ajtmh. 13-0127

Cantor, A.B. (2003). SAS® Survival Analysis Techniques for Medical Research, Second
Edition. SAS Institute Inc.

Cao, Y. P., Yang, S. C., Wang, G. Q., & Zhang, Y. L. (2013). Sociodemographic
characteristics of domestic violence in China. Journal of Interpersonal Violence,
29(4), 683-706. https://doi.org/10.1177/08862605 13505218

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). (2017, July 12). Smallpox. Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention. Retrieved from
https://www.cde.gov/smallpox/index.html.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). (2020, November 5). Vaccine for
Measles (MMR Shot). Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Retrieved from
https://www.cdc.gov/measles/vaccination.html.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). (2021, September 24). Types of
immunity to a disease. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Retrieved from
https://www.cde.gov/vaccines/vac-gervimmunity-types.htm.

Clark, A., & Sanderson, C. (2009). Timing of children's vaccinations in 45 low-income
and middle-income countries: An Analysis of Survey Data. The Lancet, 373(9674),

1543-1549. https://doi.org/10.1016/s0140-6736(09)603 17-2


Cleveland Clinic. (2021, August 12). Js your newborn baby's immune system strong
enough? Cleveland Clinic. Retrieved from https://health.clevelandclinic.org/is-
your-newbom-babys-immune-system-strong-enough/.

Cleves, M. A., Gould, W. W., & Marchenko, Y. V. (2016). An Introduction to Survival
Analysis Using Stata. Stata Press.

Crisostomo, S. (2019, November 6). DOH confirms Philippine's 4th polio case.
Philstar.com. Retrieved from
https://www.philstar.com/headlines/2019/1 1/07/1966705/doh-confirms-philippines-
4th-polio-case.

D’Ardenne, K. K., Darrow, J., Fumiss, A., Chavez, C., Hernandez, H., Berman, S., &
Asturias, E. J. (2016). Use of rapid needs assessment as a tool to identify
vaccination delays in Guatemala and Peru. Vaccine, 34(14), 1719-1725.
https://doi.org/10.1016/.vaccine.2016.01.060

Danis, K., Georgakopoulou, T., Stavrou, T., Laggas, D., & Panagiotopoulos, T. (2010).
Socioeconomic factors play a more important role in childhood vaccination
coverage than parental perceptions: a cross-sectional study in Greece. Vaccine,
28(7), 1861-1869. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.vaccine.2009. 11.078

Department of Health (DOH). (2012). FP/ANC-EPI Integration Strategy: Supplemental
Guide for Recording, Reporting, and Utilizing Data. Department of Health.

Department of Health (DOH). (2018). Field Health Services Information System (FHSIS)
Manual of Operations. Department of Health.

Department of Health (DOH). (2021). National Immunization Program Manual of

Operations. Department of Health.


Desalew, A., Semahegn, A., Birhanu, S., & Tesfaye, G. (2020). Incomplete Vaccination
and Its Predictors among Children in Ethiopia: A Systematic Review and Meta-
Analysis. Global Pediatric Health, 7. https://doi.org/10.1177/2333794x20968681
Devasenapathy, N., Ghosh Jerath, S., Sharma, S., Allen, E., Shankar, A. H., & Zodpey, S.
(2016). Determinants of childhood immunisation coverage in urban poor
settlements of Delhi, India: a cross-sectional study. BMJ Open, 6(8).
https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjopen-2016-013015
Dombkowski, K. J., Lantz, P. M., & Freed, G. L. (2004). Risk factors for delay in age-
appropriate vaccination. Public Health Reports, 119(2), 144-155.
https://doi.org/10.1177/00333549041 1900207
Donta, B., Nair, S., Prakasam, C. P., & Begum, S. (2015). Socio-demographic factors
associated with domestic violence in urban slums, Mumbai, Maharashtra, India.
Indian Journal of Medical Research, 141(6), 783. https://doi.org/10.4103/0971-
5916.160701

Downs, J. S., de Bruin, W. B., & Fischhoff, B. (2008). Parents’ vaccination
comprehension and decisions. Vaccine, 26(12), 1595-1607.
https://doi.org/10.1016/.vaccine.2008.01.011

Efroymson, D., Rahman, O., Ahmed, K. U., Sujon, A. 1., Dhar, B., Saha, R., Dey, A. R.,
Alam, S. M., Townsend, J., & Ahmed, S. (2001). Hungry for tobacco: An analysis
of the economic impact of tobacco consumption on the poor in Bangladesh.

Tobacco Control, 10(3), 212~217. https://doi.org/10.1136/te.10.3.212


Elahi, S., Ertelt, J. M., Kinder, J. M., Jiang, T. T., Zhang, X., Xin, L., Chaturvedi, V.,
Strong, B. S., Qualls, J. E., Steinbrecher, K, A., Kalfa, T. A., Shaaban, A. F., &
Way, S. S. (2013), Immunosuppressive CD71+ erythroid cells compromise
neonatal host defence against infection. Nature, 504(7478), 158-162.
https://doi.org/10.1038/nature12675

Emster, V., Kaufman, N., Nichter, M., Samet, J., Yoon, S. (2000). Women and tobacco:
moving from policy to action. World Health Organization Bulletin, 78,891-901

Fadnes, L. T., Jackson, D., Engebretsen, I. M. S., Zembe, W., Sanders, D., Sommerfelt,
H., & Tylleskiir, T. (2011). Vaccination coverage and timeliness in three South
African areas: A prospective study. BMC Public Health, 11(1).
https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2458-11-404

Fadnes, L. T., Nankabirwa, V., Sommerfelt, H., Tylleskar, T., Tumwine, J. K., &
Engebretsen, I. M. S. (2011). Is vaccination coverage a good indicator of age-
appropriate vaccination? A prospective study from Uganda. Vaccine, 29(19), 3564~
3570. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.vaccine.201 1.02.093

Friedman, M. (2003). Domestic violence against women and autonomy. Autonomy,
Gender, Politics, 140-160. https://doi.org/10.1093/0195138503.003.0007

Garcia-Dia, M. J., Fitzpatrick, J. J., Madigan, E. A., &amp; Peabody, J. W. (2017). Using
text reminder to improve childhood immunization adherence in the Philippines.
CIN: Computers, Informatics, Nursing, 35(4), 212-218.

https://doi.org/10.1097/cin.0000000000000307


Garrett, L. (2018, January 16). Inoculate against a global vaccine crisis. Foreign Policy.
Retrieved from https://foreignpolicy.com/2018/01/1 6/the-answers-are-out-there-
natural-disasters-china-north-korea-corruption-economy/#health.

Gavrielov-Yusim, N., Battat, E., Neumann, L., Friger, M., & Balicer, R. D. (2012). Birth
order and private Voluntary Immunization—A study of 110,902 children. Vaccine,
30(2), 442-447. https://doi.org/10.1016/.vaccine.2011.10.060

Gibson, D. G., Ochieng, B., Kagucia, E. W., Obor, D., Odhiambo, F., O’Brien, K. L., &
Feikin, D. R. (2015). Individual level determinants for not receiving immunization,
receiving immunization with delay, and being severely underimmunized among,
rural western Kenyan children. Vaccine, 33(48), 6778-6785.
https://doi.org/10.1016/).vaccine.2015.10.021

Global Alliance for Vaccines and Immunisation (GAVI). (2021, July 21). About our
alliance. Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance. Retrieved from https://www.gavi.org/our-
alliance/about.

GOVPH. (2020). Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino program: GOVPH. Official Gazette of
the Republic of the Philippines. Retrieved from
https://www.officialgazette.gov.ph/programs/conditional-cash-transfer/

Gram, L., Soremekun, S., ten Asbroek, A., Manu, A., O'Leary, M., Hill, Z., Danso, S.,
‘Amenga-Etego, S., Owusu-Agyei, S., & Kirkwood, B. R. (2014). Socio-economic
determinants and inequities in coverage and timeliness of early childhood
immunisation in rural Ghana. Tropical Medicine & International Health, 19(7),
802-811. https://doi.org/10.11 1 1/tmi.12324

Grambsch, P.M. & Themeau, T.M. (1994). Proportional hazards tests and diagnostics

based on weighted residuals. Biometrika, 81, 515-526.

Hassan, S.-un-N., Memon, E., Shahab, M., & Mumtaz, S. (2020). Utilization of maternal
healthcare services in women experiencing spousal violence in Pakistan: A
comparative analysis of 2012-13 and 2017-18 Pakistan Demographic Health
Surveys. PLOS ONE, 15(9). https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0239722

Herliana, P., & Douiri, A. (2017). Determinants of immunisation coverage of children
‘Aged 12-59 months in Indonesia: A cross-sectional study. BMJ Open, 7(12).
https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjopen-2016-015790

Herrin, A.N., Benabaye, R.S., Escalada, L.D.P., Apale, F.G., Micarandayo, R.T. (2012,
November) FP-EPI integration as an approach to reduce unmet need for modem
family planning,

Hill, H. A., Yankey, D., Elam-Evans, L. D., Singleton, J. A., & Sterrett, N. (2021).
Vaccination coverage by age 24 months among children born in 2017 and 2018 —
national immunization survey-child, United States, 2018-2020. MMWR. Morbidity
and Mortality Weekly Report, 70(41), 1435-1440.
hitps://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm7041al

Houweling, T. A. J., Ronsmans, C., Campbell, 0. M. R., & Kunst, A. E. (2007). Huge
poor-rich inequalities in matemity care: An international comparative study of
maternity and childcare in developing countries. Bulletin of the World Health
Organization, 85(10), 745-754. https://doi.org/10.247 | /blt.06.038588

Hu, Y., Chen, Y., Guo, J., Tang, X., & Shen, L. (2014). Completeness and timeliness of
vaccination and determinants for low and late uptake among young children in
eastern China. Human Vaccines & Immunotherapeutics, 10(5), 1408-1415.

https://doi-org/10.4161/hv.28054


Hu, Y., Li, Q., & Chen, Y. (2017). Timeliness of childhood primary immunization and
risk factors related with delays: Evidence from the 2014 Zhejiang Provincial
Vaccination Coverage Survey. International Journal of Environmental Research
and Public Health, 14(9), 1086. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph14091086

Hu, Y., Li, Q., Chen, E., Chen, Y., & Qi, X. (2013). Determinants of Childhood
Immunization Uptake among Socio-Economically Disadvantaged Migrants in East
China. International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 10(7),
2845-2856. doi:10.3390/ijerph 10072845

Hu, Y., Li, Q., Luo, S., Lou, L., Qi, X., & Xie, S. (2013). Timeliness vaccination of
measles containing vaccine and barriers to vaccination among migrant children in
East China. PLoS ONE, 8(8). https://doi.org/10.137 I /journal.pone.0073264

Hughes, M. M., Katz, J., Englund, J. A., Khatry, S. K., Shrestha, L., LeClerg, S. C.,
Steinhoff, M., & Tielsch, J. M. (2016). Infant vaccination timing: Beyond
traditional coverage metrics for maximizing impact of vaccine programs, an
example from southern Nepal. Vaccine, 34(7), 933-941.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.vaccine.2015.12.061

Hussin, H. B., & Marzo, R. R. (2020). A Literature Review of Parental Barriers to Child
Immunization. Journal of Critical Reviews, 7(03).
hitps://doi.org/10.31838/jer.07.03.112

Immunisation Advisory Centre. (2020, January 8). A brief history of vaccination.
Immunisation Advisory Centre. Retrieved from
https://www.immune.org.nz/vaccines/vaccine-development/brief-history-

vaccination.


Institute of Medicine. (2003). The future of the public's health in the 21st Century.
National Academies Press.

Integrative Competitive Intelligence Asia Inc. (ICI Asia). (2017). Qualitative Research on
the Expanded Program for Immunization in Highly Urbanized Areas of Taguig in
Manila.

Jadidi, R., Mohammadbeigi, A., Mohammadsalehi, N., Ansari, H., Ghaderi, E. (2015).
Inequity in timeliness of MMR vaccination in children living in the suburbs of
Iranian cities. Jnt J Biomed Sci, 1 (2), 93-98

Janz, N. K., & Becker, M. H. (1984). The health belief model: A decade later. Health
Education Quarterly, 11(1), 1-47. https://doi.org/10.1177/109019818401 100101

Kabir, R., Haque, M., Mohammadnezhad, M., Samad, N., Mostari, S., Jabin, S.,
Majumder, M. A., & Rabbani, M. G. (2019). Domestic violence and decision-
making power of married women in Myanmar: Analysis of a nationally
representative sample. Annals of Saudi Medicine, 39(6), 395-402.
https://doi.org/10.5144/0256-4947.2019.395

Kairys, S. W., Gubemick, R. S., Millican, A., & Adams, W. G. (2006). Using a registry
to improve immunization delivery. Pediatric Annals, 35(7), 500-506.
https://doi.org/10.3928/0090-4481-20060701-06

Kane, J. B. (2015). Marriage advantages in Perinatal Health: Evidence of marriage
selection or marriage protection? Journal of Marriage and Family, 78(1), 212-229.
https://doi.org/10.111 1jomf.12257

Keja, K., Chan, C., Hayden, G., & Henderson, R. H. (1988). Expanded programme on
immunization. World health statistics quarterly. Rapport trimestriel de statistiques

sanitaires mondiales, 41(2), 59-63.

Kim, E.-Y., & Lee, M.-S. (2011). Related factors of age-appropriate immunization
among urban-rural children aged 24-35 months in a 2005 population-based survey
in Nonsan, Korea. Yonsei Medical Journal, 52(1), 104.
https://doi.org/10.3349/ymj.201 1.52.1.104

Kim, Y.-L, & Lee, J. (2021). Does single pregnancy hurt birth outcomes among young
mothers? Journal of Demographic Economics, 1-33.
https://doi.org/10.1017/dem.2021.15

Kimmel, S. R., Bums, |. T., Wolfe, R. M., & Zimmerman, R. K. (2007). Addressing
immunization barriers, benefits, and risks. The Journal of family practice, 56(2),
61-69.

Kinfe, Y., Gebre, H., & Bekele, A. (2019). Factors associated with full immunization of
children 12-23 months of age in Ethiopia: A multilevel analysis using 2016
Ethiopia Demographic and Health Survey. PLOS ONE, 14(11).
https://doi.org/10.137 I/journal pone.0225639

Kishor, S., & Johnson, K. (2004). Profiling Domestic Violence - A Multi-Country Study.
Measure DHS - ORC Macro. hitps://dhsprogram.com/pubs/pdf/OD31/OD3 1 pdf

Krishna, D., Mohd Zulkefli, N. A., Md Said, S., & Mahmud, A. (2019).
Sociodemographic and health care factors in determining immunization defaulters
among preschool children in Petaling District, Selangor: a cross-sectional study in
Malaysia. BMC Public Health, 19(1). https://doi.org/10.1186/s12889-019-7561-z

Lakew, Y., Bekele, A., & Biadgilign, S. (2015). Factors influencing Full immunization
coverage among 12-23 months of age children in Ethiopia: Evidence from the
national demographic and health survey in 2011. BMC Public Health, 15(1).

https://doi.org/10.1 186/s12889-015-2078-6

Lawder, R., Whyte, B., Wood, R., Fischbacher, C., & Tappin, D. M. (2019). Impact of
maternal smoking on Early Childhood Health: A Retrospective Cohort linked
dataset analysis of 697 003 children bom in Scotland 1997-2009. BM Open, 9(3).
https://doi.org/10.1136/omjopen-2018-023213

Le Polain de Waroux, O., Schellenberg, J. R., Manzi, F., Mrisho, M., Shirima, K.,
Mshinda, H., Alonso, P., Tanner, M., & Schellenberg, D. M. (2013). Timeliness
and completeness of vaccination and risk factors for low and late vaccine uptake in
young children living in rural southern Tanzania. International Health, 5(2), 139-
147. https://doi.org/10.1093/inthealth/iht006

Leight, J., & Wilson, N. (2021). Intimate partner violence and maternal health services
utilization: Evidence from 36 National Household Surveys. BMC Public Health,
21(1), https://doi.org/10.1 186/s12889-021-10447-y

Lin, W., Xiong, Y., Tang, H., Chen, B., & Ni, J. (2014), Factors associated with delayed
measles vaccination among children in Shenzhen, China: A case-control study.
Human Vaccines & Immunotherapeutics, 10(12), 3601-3606.
https://doi.org/10.4161/21645515.2014.979687

Loef, B., Meulman, L., Herber, G.-C. M., Kommer, G. J., Koopmanschap, M. A., Kunst,
A.E., Polder, J. J., Wong, A., & Uiters, E. (2021). Socioeconomic differences in
healthcare expenditure and utilization in The Netherlands. BMC Health Services
Research, 21(1). https://doi.org/10.1186/s12913-021-06694-9

Los Angeles Public Health. (2015, June). What do parents think? Knowledge and attitude
about immunization. Los Angeles Public Health. Retrieved from
http://www.publichealth.acounty.gov/ha/reports/LAHealthBrief201 1

/Ammunization/Immunization_2015Fs.pdf.

Luman, E. T., Barker, L. E., Shaw, K. M., McCauley, M. M., Buehler, J. W., &
Pickering, L. K. (2005). Timeliness of childhood vaccinations in the United States.
YAMA, 293(10), 1204. https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.293.10.1204

Luman, E. T., McCauley, M. M., Stokley, S., Chu, S. Y., & Pickering, L. K. (2002).
Timeliness of childhood immunizations. Pediatrics, | 10(5), 935-939.
https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.110.5.935

Mackenzie, D. (2011, September 21). Vaccines enjoy a healthy return. New Scientist.
Retrieved from https://www.newscientist.com/article/dn20877-vaccines-enjoy-a-
healthy-return/.

Madad, A., Muhammad, N., & Shakir, U. (2015). The role of external factors in
Affecting peace in Kyber Pakhtunkhwa, Pakistan. Applied Science Reports, (2),
44-51. https://doi.org/10.15192/pscp.asr.2015.9.2.4451

Malecosio, S. O., D. Celis, M. J., Delicana, K. B., Deopido, A. M., Bacale, K. M.,
Labasan, V. K., Ladiao, R. M., Militante, K. M., Paguntalan, J. M., & Sabusap, V.
E. (2020). Vaccination coverage and factors associated with incomplete childhood
vaccination among children aged 12-59 months in Miagao, Iloilo, Philippines.
International Journal Of Community Medicine And Public Health, 7(7), 2492.
https://doi.org/10.18203/2394-6040.ijcmph20202971

Mandatory Infants and Children Health Immunization Act 2011. (Phi). Retrieved from
https://doh.gov.ph/sites/defaulv/files/policies_and_laws/ra_10152.pdf

Manderbacka, K., Merilainen, J., Hemminki, E., Rahkonen, O., & Teperi, J. (1992).
Marital status as a predictor of perinatal outcome in Finland. Journal of Marriage

and the Family, 54(3), 508. https://doi.org/10.2307/353237


Margolis, P. A., Stevens, R., Bordley, W. C., Stuart, J., Harlan, C., Keyes-Elstein, L., &
Wisseh, S. (2001). From concept to application: The impact of a community-wide
intervention to improve the delivery of preventive services to children. Pediatrics,
108(3). https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.108.3.¢42

Maurice, J. M., & Davey, S. (2009). State of the world's vaccines and immunization.
World Health Organization.

Mayerova, D., & Abbas, K. (2021). Vaccine confidence and timeliness of childhood
immunisation by health information source, matemal, socioeconomic, and
geographic characteristics in Albania. https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.09.21253180

MB Lifestyle. (2022, February 22). PhilHealth @27: Responding to the ever-changing
needs of ... Retrieved from https://mb.com.ph/2022/02/18/philhealth-27-
responding-to-the-ever-changing-needs-of-the-times/

Mbengue, M. A. S., Mboup, A., Ly, I. D., Faye, A., Niang, F. B., Thiam, M., Ndiaye, B.
P., Dieye, T. N., & Mboup, S. (2017). Vaccination coverage and immunization
timeliness among children aged 12-23 months in Senegal: A Kaplan-Meier and cox
Regression Analysis Approach. Pan African Medical Journal, 27.
https://doi.org/10.11604/pamj.supp.2017.27.3.11534

Meleko, A., Geremew, M., & Birhanu, F. (2017). Assessment of Child Immunization
Coverage and Associated Factors with Full Vaccination among Children Aged 12
23 Months at Mizan Aman Town, Bench Maji Zone, Southwest Ethiopia.
International Journal of Pediatrics, 2017, 1-11.

https://doi.org/10.1155/2017/7976587


Migrifo, Jr., J., Gayados, B., Birol, K. R., De Jesus, L., Lopez, C. W., Mercado, W.C.,
Tolosa, J.-M. C., Torreda, J., & Tulagan, G. (2020). Factors affecting Vaccine
hesitancy among families with children 2 years old and younger in two urban
communities in Manila, Philippines. Western Pacific Surveillance and Response
Journal, 11(2), 20-26. https://doi.org/10.5365/wpsar.2019.10.2.006

Miyahara, R., Jasseh, M., Gomez, P., Shimakawa, Y., Greenwood, B., Keita, K., Ceesay,
S., D’Alessandro, U., & Roca, A. (2016). Barriers to timely administration of birth
dose vaccines in the Gambia, West Aftica. Vaccine, 34(29), 3335-3341.
https://doi.org/10.1016/.vaccine.2016.05.017

Mokhtari, M., Mohammadbeigi, A., Zahraei, S. M., Eshrati, B., & Rejali, M. (2015).
Survival analysis for predictive factors of delay vaccination in Iranian children.
International Journal of Preventive Medicine, 6(1), 119.
https://doi.org/10.4103/2008-7802. 170868

Mokhtari, M., Rezaeimanesh, M., Mohammadbeigi, A., Zahraei, S. M., SeyedMohsen,
N., & Ansari, H. (2015). Risk factors of delay proportional probability in
diphtheria-tetanus-pertussis vaccination of Iranian children; Life Table Approach
Analysis. Journal of Global Infectious Diseases, 7(4), 165.
https://doi.org/10.4103/0974-777x.170503

Mondal, D., Karmakar, S., & Banerjee, A. (2020). Women’s autonomy and utilization of
maternal healthcare in India: Evidence from a recent national survey. PLOS ONE,
15(12). https://doi.org/10.137 1/journal.pone.0243553

Moore, T., & Kotelchuck, M. (2004), Predictors of Urban Fathers’ Involvement in Their
Child's Health Care. PEDIATRICS, 113(3), 574-580.

https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.113.3.574

Moyer, C. A., Benyas, D., & Rominski, S. (2016). The Relationship between Facility-
Based Delivery and Infant Immunization in sub-Saharan Africa. African Journal of
Reproductive Health, 20(2), 27-33. https://doi.org/10.29063/ajrh2016/v20i2.3,

Mutua, M. K., Kimani-Murage, E., Ngomi, N., Ravn, H., Mwaniki, P., & Echoka, E.
(2016). Fully immunized child: Coverage, timing and sequencing of routine
immunization in an urban poor settlement in Nairobi, Kenya. Tropical Medicine
and Health, 44(1). https://doi.org/10.1186/s41182-016-0013-x

Mvula, H., Heinsbroek, E., Chihana, M., Crampin, A. C., Kabuluzi, S., Chirwa, G.,
Mwansambo, C., Costello, A., Cunliffe, N. A., Heyderman, R. S., French, N., &
Bar-Zeev, N. (2016). Predictors of uptake and timeliness of newly introduced
pneumococcal and rotavirus vaccines, and of measles vaccine in rural Malawi: A
population cohort study. PLOS ONE, 11(5).
https://doi.org/10.137 1/journal.pone.0154997

Naeem, M., Khan, M. Z., Adil, M., Abbas, S. H., Khan, M. U., Khan, A., & Naz, S. M.
(2011). Inequity in childhood immunization between urban and rural areas of
Peshawar. Journal of Ayub Medical College, Abbottabad: JAMC, 23(3), 134-137.

Nagar, R., Ambiya, M. S., Singh, P., Abdullah, H., Banshiwal, V., Stone, L., Manjanatha,
D., Venkat, P., Purawat, D., Supatkar, V., Singh, A., &amp; Shahnawaz, M. (2020).
Impacts of a novel mHealth platform to track maternal and child health in Udaipur,
India. https://doi.org/10.23846/tw | 0ie129

Nakatudde, I., Rujumba, J., Namiiro, F., Sam, A., Mugalu, J., & Musoke, P. (2019).
Vaccination timeliness and associated factors among preterm infants at a tertiary
hospital in Uganda. PLOS ONE, 14(9).

https://doi.org/10.137 journal pone.0221902

Narvaez, J., Osorio, M. B., Castafieda-Orjuela, C., Alvis Zakzuk, N., Cediel, N.,
Choconté-Piraquive, L. A., & de La Hoz-Restrepo, F. (2017). Is Colombia reaching
the goals on infant immunization coverage? A quantitative survey from 80
Municipalities. Vaccine, 35(11), 1501-1508.
https://doi.org/10.1016/.vaccine.2017.01.073

National Academy of Sciences. (2018). Health-care utilization as a proxy in disability
determination. The National Academies Press.

Newacheck, P. W., Stoddard, J. J., Hughes, D. C., & Pearl, M. (1998). Health Insurance
and access to primary care for children. New England Journal of Medicine, 338(8),
513-519. https://doi.org/10.1056/nejm199802193380806

NHS. (2019, February 14). Pneumococcal vaccine overview. NHS Choices. Retrieved
from https://www.nhs.uk/conditions/vaccinations/pneumococcal-vaccination/,

Nicholls, A. C. (2018, February 3). Doctors: Parents refusing vaccines due to Dengvaxia
scare. CNN Philippines. https://cnnphilippines.com/news/2018/02/03/doctors-
parents-refusing-vaccines-dengvaxia.html.

Nozaki, I., Hachiya, M., & Kitamura, T. (2019). Factors influencing basic vaccination
coverage in Myanmar: secondary analysis of 2015 Myanmar demographic and
health survey data. BMC Public Health, 19(1). https://doi.org/10.1186/s12889-019-
6548-0

Odutola, A., Afolabi, M. O., Ogundare, E. O., Lowe-Jallow, Y. N., Worwui, A., Okebe,
J., & Ota, M. O. (2015). Risk factors for delay in age-appropriate vaccinations
among Gambian children. BMC Health Services Research, 15(1).

https://doi.org/10.1 186/s12913-015-1015-9


O'Leary, C. M., Nassar, N., Zubrick, S. R., Kurinezuk, J. J., Stanley, F., & Bower, C.
(2010). Evidence of a complex association between dose, pattern and timing of
prenatal alcohol exposure and child behaviour problems. Addiction, 105(1), 74-86.
https://doi.org/10.1111/.1360-0443.2009.02756.x

Oleribe, O., Kumar, V., Awosika-Olumo, A., & Taylor, S. D. (2017). Individual and
socioeconomic factors associated with childhood immunization coverage in
Nigeria. Pan African Medical Journal, 26.
https://doi.org/10.11604/pamj.2017.26.220.11453

Olusanya, B. O. (2010). Pattern and determinants of BCG immunisation delays in a sub-
saharan african community. Health Research Policy and Systems, 8(1).
https://doi.org/10.1186/1478-4505-8-1

Oxford Vaccine Group. (2019, September 9). 5-/n-/ vaccine (also Called Pentavalent
vaccine). 5-in-1 Vaccine (also called Pentavalent Vaccine) | Vaccine Knowledge.
Retrieved from https://vk.ovg.ox.ac.uk/vk/5-1-dtapipvhib-vaccine.

PhilHealth Enhances Benefit for Infants aims for Healthier Babies. PhilHealth. (2019,
January). Retrieved from
https://www.philhealth.gov.ph/news/2019/infant_benefit.php

Philippine Statistical Authority (PSA). (2020, January 3). Vaccination Coverage of
Filipino Children.

Philippine Statistics Authority (PSA) & ICF International. (2014, August). Philippines
National Demographic and Health Survey 2013.

Philippine Statistics Authority (PSA) & ICF International. (2018, October). Philippines

National Demographic and Health Survey 2017.


Phukan, R. K., Barman, M. P., & Mahanta, J. (2008). Factors Associated with
Immunization Coverage of Children in Assam, India: Over the First Year of Life.
Journal of Tropical Pediatrics, 55(4), 249-252.
https://doi.org/10.1093/tropej/fmn025

Poorolajal, J., Khazaei, S., Kousehlou, Z., Bathaei , S.J., Zahiri, A. (2012). Delayed
vaccination and related predictors among infants. Jran J Public Health, 41, 65-71

Population Reference Bureau (PRB). (2001, June 1). Challenges to global immunization
programs. Population Reference Bureau. Retrieved from
https://www.prb.org/resources/challenges-to-global-immunization-programs/.

Raguindin, P. F., Morales-Dizon, M., Aldaba, J., Mangulabnan, L. P., Reyes, R. P.,
Batmunkh, N., Ducusin, M. J., & Lopez, A. L. (2021). Timeliness of childhood
vaccinations in the Philippines. Journal of Public Health Policy, 42(1), 53-70.
https://doi.org/10.1057/s41271-020-00255-w

Rainey, J. J., Lacapére, F., Danovaro-Holliday, M. C., Mung, K., Magloire, R., Kananda,
G., Cadet, J. R., Lee, C. E., Chamouillet, H., & Luman, E. T. (2012). Vaccination
coverage in Haiti: Results from the 2009 national survey. Vaccine, 30(9), 1746-
1751. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.vaccine.2011.12.015

Rejali, M., Mohammadbeigi, A., Mokhtari, M., Zahraei, S.M., Eshrati, B. (2015) Timing
and delay in children vaccination; evaluation of expanded program of
immunization in outskirt of Iranian cities. J Res Health Sci, 15, 54-58.

Roser, M., Ritchie, H., & Dadonaite, B. (2013, May 10). Child and infant mortality. Our
World in Data. Retrieved from https://ourworldindata.org/child-mortality#child-

mortality-around-the-world-since-1800.


Rossi, R. (2015). Do Maternal Living Arrangements Influence the Vaccination Status of
Children Aged 12-23 Months? A Data Analysis of Demographic Health Surveys
2010-11 from Zimbabwe. PLOS ONE, 10(1).
https://doi.org/10.137 1/journal.pone.0132357

Sabella, C. (2021, August 13). Is Your Newborn Baby’s Immune System Strong Enough?
Cleveland Clinic. other, Cleveland Clinic. Retrieved from
https://health.clevelandclinic.org/is-your-newborn-babys-immune-system-strong-
enough’.

Salam, M. A., Mboup, A., Ly, I. D., Faye, A., Niang, F. B., Thiam, M., Ndiaye, B. P.,
Dieye, T.N., & Mboup, S. (2017). Vaccination coverage and immunization
timeliness among children aged 12-23 months in Senegal: A Kaplan-Meier and cox
Regression Analysis Approach. Pan African Medical Journal, 21.
https://doi.org/10.11604/pamj.supp.2017.27.3.11534

Salmon, D. A., Smith, P. J., Pan, W. K. Y., Navar, A. M., Omer, S. B., & Halsey, N. A.
(2009). Disparities in preschool immunization coverage associated with maternal
age. Human Vaccines, 5(8), 557-561. https://doi.org/10.4161/hv.5.8.9009

Santoli, J. M., Huet, N. J., Smith, P. J., Barker, L. E., Rodewald, L. E., Inkelas, M., Olson,
L. M., & Halfon, N. (2004). Insurance status and vaccination coverage among us
preschool children. Pediatrics, +-—-*113(Supplement_5), 1959-1964.
https://doi.org/10.1542/peds. 113.s5.1959

SAS Institute Inc. (2013). SAS/STAT® 13.1 User's Guide.

Schaffer, S. J. (1995). Immunization status and birth order. Archives of Pediatrics &
Adolescent Medicine, 1497), 792.

https://doi.org/10.1001/archpedi.1995.02170200082013

Schoeps, A., Ouédraogo, N., Kagoné, M., Sié, A., Miiller, O., & Becher, H. (2013).
Socio-demographic determinants of timely adherence to BCG, PENTA3, measles,
and complete vaccination schedule in Burkina Faso. Vaccine, 32(1), 96-102.
https://doi.org/10.1016/.vaceine.2013.10.063

Shrivastwa, N., Gillespie, B. W., Lepkowski, J. M., & Boulton, M. L. (2016).
Vaccination timeliness in children under India’s Universal Immunization Program.
Pediatric Infectious Disease Journal, 35(9), 955-960.
https://doi.org/10.1097/inf.0000000000001223

Siddiqi, D. A., Ali, R. F., Munir, M., Shah, M. T., Khan, A. J., &amp; Chandir, S. (2020).
Effect of vaccine reminder and tracker bracelets on routine childhood immunization
coverage and timeliness in urban Pakistan (2017-18): A randomized controlled
trial. BMC Public Health, 20(1). https://doi.org/10.1186/s12889-020-09088-4

Sissoko, D., Trottier, H., Malvy, D., & Johri, M. (2014). The Influence of Compositional
and Contextual Factors on Non-Receipt of Basic Vaccines among Children of 12-
23 Months Old in India: A Multilevel Analysis. PLoS ONE, 9(9).
https://doi.org/10.1371 /journal.pone.0106528

Stata Corp. (2021). Stata Survival Analysis Reference Manual: Release 17. Stata Press.

Suérez-Castaneda, E., Pezzoli, L., Elas, M., Baltrons, R., Crespin-Elias, E. O., Pleitez, O.
A., de Campos, M. I, & Danovaro-Holliday, M. C. (2014). Routine childhood
vaccination programme coverage, El Salvador, 2011—in search of timeliness.

Vaccine, 32(4), 437-444. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.vaccine.2013.11.072


Tang, X., Geater, A., McNeil, E., Zhou, H., Deng, Q., Dong, A., & Li, Q. (2016).
Parental migration and children’s timely measles vaccination in rural China: A
cross-sectional study. Tropical Medicine & International Health, 21(7), 886-894.
https://doi.org/10.111 1/tmi.12719

Tenkorang, E. Y. (2021). Economic abuse and women's sexual autonomy: Evidence from
Ghana. The SAGE Handbook of Domestic Violence, 113-128.
https://doi.org/10.4135/9781529742343.n7

The World Bank. (2021, September). Reducing Vaccine Hesitancy in the Philippines:
Findings from a Survey Experiment. Retrieved from:
https://thedocs. worldbank.org/en/doc/9b206c064482a4feb880ee234608 1d52-
0070062021 /original/Vaccine-Hesitancy-World-Bank-Policy-Note-September-
2021 pdf

Tiruneh, F.N., Chuang, K.-Y., & Chuang, Y.-C. (2017). Women’s autonomy and
maternal healthcare service utilization in Ethiopia. BMC Health Services Research,
17(1). https://doi.org/10.1186/s12913-017-2670-9

Toikilik, S., Tuges, G., Lagani, J., Wafiware, E., Posanai, E., Coghlan, B., Morgan, C.,
Sweeney, R., Miller, N., Abramov, A., Stewart, A., & Clements, C. J. (2010). Are
hard-to-reach populations being reached with immunization services? findings from
the 2005 Papua New Guinea National Immunization Coverage Survey. Vaccine,
28(29), 4673-4679. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.vaccine.2010.04.063

Tsai, L. C., Cappa, C., & Petrowski, N. (2016). The relationship between intimate partner
violence and family planning among girls and Young Women in the Philippines.

Global Journal of Health Science, 8(9), 121. https://doi.org/10.5539/gjhs.v8n9p121


Turnbull, B. W. (1976). The empirical distribution function with arbitrarily grouped,
censored, and truncated data. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B
(Methodological), 38(3), 290-295. https://doi.org/10.1111/).2517-
6161.1976.tb01597.x

Ulep, V. G., & Uy, J. (2019, December). Too Early, Too Late: Timeliness of Child
Vaccination in the Philippines. PIDS Discussion Paper Series, (2).

Ulep, V. G., & Uy, J. (2021, February). An assessment of the Expanded Program on
Immunization (EPI) in the Philippines: Challenges and Ways Forward. PIDS
Discussion Paper Series, (4).

United Nations Intemational Children’s Emergency Fund (UNICEF), & World Health
Organization (WHO). (2020, July 15). Progress and Challenges with Achieving
Universal Immunization Coverage. 2019 WHO/UNICEF Estimates of National
Immunization Coverage.

United Nations International Children’s Emergency Fund (UNICEF). (2019). UNICEF
urges parents to get CHILDREN Immunized; calls for collective actions to fight
‘measles. UNICEF. Retrieved from https://www.unicef.org/philippines/press-
releases/unicef-urges-parents-get-children-immunized-calls-collective-actions-
fight-measles.

United Nations Intemational Children’s Emergency Fund (UNICEF). (2021, July 15).
Immunization. UNICEF. Retrieved from https://www.unicef.org/immunization.

Usman, H. R., Akhtar, S., Habib, F., & Jehan, I. (2009). Redesigned immunization card
‘AND center-based education to reduce childhood immunization dropouts in urban
Pakistan: A randomized controlled trial. Vaccine, 27(3), 467-472.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.vaccine.2008. 10.048

Vanderslott, S., Dadonaite, B., & Roser, M. (2013, May 10). Vaccination. Our World in
Data. Retrieved from https://ourworldindata.org/vaccinationicitation.

Vasudevan, L., Labrique, A. B., Mehra, S., Wu, L., Levine, O., Feikin, D., Klemm, R.,
Christian, P., & West, K. P. (2014). Matemal determinants of timely vaccination
coverage among infants in rural Bangladesh. Vaccine, 32(42), 5514-5519.
https://doi.org/10.1016f.vaccine.2014.06.092

Wagner, A. L., Shenton, L. M., Gillespie, B. W., Mathew, J. L., & Boulton, M. L. (2019).
Assessing the timeliness of vaccine administration in children under five years in
India, 2013. Vaccine, 37(4), 558-564.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.vaccine.2018.12.035

Wagner, A. L., Tefera, Y. A., Gillespie, B. W., Carlson, B. F., & Boulton, M. L. (2021).
Vaccine coverage, timeliness and delay estimated from regional and national cross-
sectional surveys in Ethiopia, 2016. Pan African Medical Journal, 39.
https://doi.org/10.11604/pamj.2021.39.205.22777

Wallace, A. S., Sobel, H., Ryman, T. K., Mantaring III, J. B., Silvestre, M., Thorley, M.,
Ducusin, J., & Nyunt-U, S. (2012). Timing of hepatitis B vaccination and impact of
non-simultaneous vaccination with DTP vaccine following introduction of a
hepatitis B birth dose in the Philippines. Journal of Public Health Policy, 33(3),
368-381. https://doi.org/10.1057/jphp.2012.18

World Health Organization (WHO). (2014, July). Global Immunization Data. World
Health Organization. Retrieved from
https://www.who invimmunization/monitoring_surveillance

/global_immunization_data.pdf


World Health Organization (WHO). (2019). Immunization Coverage. Retrieved from:
https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/immunization-coverage

World Health Organization (WHO). (2019). Ten threats to global health in 2019. World
Health Organization. Retrieved from https:/www.who.intnews-room/spotlight/ten-
threats-to-global-health-in-2019.

World Health Organization (WHO). (2019, July 15). 20 million children miss out on
lifesaving measles, diphtheria, and tetanus vaccines in 2018. World Health

Organization. Retrieved from https://www.who.int/news/item/15-07-2019-20-

million-children-miss-out-on-lifesaving-measles-diphtheria-and-tetanus-vaccines-
in-2018.

World Health Organization (WHO). (2020). Summary of WHO Position Papers -
Recommended Routine Immunizations for Children. Retrieved from
https://www.who.intimmunization/policy/Immunization_routine_table2.pdf

World Health Organization (WHO). (2020, July 15). Jmmunization country profile.
World Health Organization. Retrieved from

https://apps. who .int/immunization_monitoring/globalsummary/countries?countrycr

iteria%5Bcountry%5D%5B%5D=PHL.

Wu, J.N., Wen, X. Z., Zhou, Y., Lin, D., Zhang, S. Y., & Yan, Y. S. (2014). Impact of

the free-vaccine policy on timely initiation and completion of hepatitis B
vaccination in Fujian, China. Journal of Viral Hepatitis, 22(6), 551-560.

https://doi.org/10.1111jvh.12359


Zaidi, S. M., Khowaja, S., Kumar Dharma, V., Khan, A. J., & Chandir, S. (2014).
Coverage, timeliness, and determinants of immunization completion in Pakistan.
Human Vaccines & Immunotherapeutics, 10(6), 1712-1720.
https://doi.org/10.4161/hv.28621

Zhou, D., Zhou, Z., Yang, C., Ji, L., Ghose, B., & Tang, S. (2020). Sociodemographic
characteristics associated with the utilization of maternal health services in
Cambodia. BMC Health Services Research, 20(1). https://doi.org/10.1186/s12913-
020-05652-1

Zhou, Y., Zheng, J., Wang, H., Xia, W., Hipgrave, D. B., & Zhu, X. (2009). Coverage of
and influences on timely administration of hepatitis B vaccine birth dose in remote
rural areas of the People’s Republic of China. The American Journal of Tropical
Medicine and Hygiene, 81(5), 869-874. https://doi.org/10.4269/ajtmh.2009.09-

Zimmerman, R. K., Nowalk, M. P., Lin, C. J., Hannibal, K., Moehling, K. K., Huang, H.-
H., Matambanadzo, A., Troy, J., Allred, N. J., Gallik, G., &amp; Reis, E. C. (2014).
Cluster randomized trial of a toolkit and early vaccine delivery to improve
childhood influenza vaccination rates in primary care. Vaccine, 32(29), 3656-3663.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.vaccine.2014.04.057

Zivich, P.N., Kiketa, L., Kawende, B., Lapika, B., & Yotebieng, M. (2017). Vaccination
coverage and timelines among children 0-6 months in Kinshasa, the Democratic
Republic of Congo: A prospective cohort study. Maternal and Child Health

Journal, 21(5), 1055-1064. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10995-016-2201-z
