Use of a Mobile Application in Weight Management Among Filipino Adults in the University of the Philippines Los Baños, Laguna

CARA MICAH REYES SUMABAT, RND

UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES LOS BAÑOS

Master of Science in Applied Nutrition

MAY 2019

ABSTRACT

In the Philippines, although nutrition mobile applications from other countries are
made available, almost none of which was exactly intended for the Filipino population.
The study focused on the use of a nutrition mobile application that was developed using Filipino standards and nutritional requirements. A quasi-experimental study was administered to a total of 50 participants
recruited through purposive sampling. Participants of the study were asked to use the
mobile application developed for this study for 28 days. Pre and post study measures
were taken to assess the use of mobile application in weight management among the
chosen age group. Aside from anthropometric measurements such as height, weight
and waist circumference, the study measured physical activity, nutrition knowledge,
acceptability towards the use of mobile application, and compliance of the participants to the study intervention. Result of the study shows that there was insignificant weight change of -0.9kg
and waist circumference reduction of -2.85cm. Most of the participants remained
overweight/obese from baseline to end-line. Also, participants of the study agreed the
mobile application generally acceptable, although most of the participants were found to be low compliant to the protocol.

INTRODUCTION

Background of the Study

In the recent years, obesity and other related medical conditions have become a
pressing public health concern globally. Efforts on policy measures in order to prevent
or address obesity have been instated in several countries, with different degrees of
success (Via and Mechanick, 2014). With its multifactorial etiology, obesity is a
complex condition which has become an epidemic that has worsened for the last 50
years (Panuganti and Bhimji, 2019). The World Health Organisation (WHO) defines
obesity and overweight as a state where there is an excessive or abnormal
accumulation of fat that presents a numerous health consequences. Obesity can be
measured through several methods such as Body Mass Index (BMI) and Waist
Circumference. Furthermore, WHO elaborated several factors contributing to the
development of obesity stating that the fundamental cause is an energy imbalance

between the calories consumed versus the calories expended (WHO, 2018).

Globally, WHO reported that prevalence of obesity among adults has nearly
tripled since 1975, wherein more than 1.9 billion were found to be overweight, and 650
million of which are obese (WHO, 2018). Although this problem is more common in
developed countries such as the United States, recent studies show that overweight
and obesity is becoming increasingly prevalent not only among developed countries,
but also in developing countries such as the Philippines. The 8th National Nutrition
Survey conducted by the Food and Nutrition Research Institute (FNRI) data shows that

31.1% or 3 out of 10 among the adult population (20 years and above) are found to be

overweight or obese. Among the overweight or obese population, 27.6% were male

and 34.4% were female (FNRI, 2013).

The increasing prevalence of obesity poses an important impact on health
impairment and reduction in the quality of life. Specifically, obesity has greatly
contributed on the global incidence of cardiovascular diseases (CVD), diabetes melitus
type 2, osteoarthritis, cancer, work disability and even sleep apnea (Seidell and
Halberstadt, 2015). This phenomena has been observed to be brought by increase
intake of energy-dense foods that are mostly high-fat, increase in physical inactivity
due to many forms of work becoming more sedentary by nature, changing modes of
transportation which requires less physical efforts, and increasing urbanization, which
are mostly brought by the technological dependence among individuals (Hruby and Hu,

2015).

In recent years, improvements in information and communication technologies,
alongside with mobile internet, enabling connectivity anytime and anywhere, plays an
important role in modern healthcare solution. Mobile health (m-health) provides
healthcare services, dealing with geographical, temporal, and even organizational
barriers. Furthermore, m-health solutions attend to emerging dilemmas on healthcare
services such as increasing lifestyle-related chronic diseases, costly health services,
self-care empowerment among individuals, and accessibility to healthcare, regardless
of time and place (Silva et al., 2015). More than 40,000 health-related mobile

applications were made available and ready to be dowloaded from the Apple iTunes

alone in 2013 wherein most of the people associate health-related mobile applications
with diet-focused apps and fitness such as Loselt! MapMyFitness, and MyFitnessPal

(Krebs and Duncan, 2015).

A mobile application was developed together with the program developers from
the Alliance of Computer Science Students of the University of the Philippines-Los
Bafios (Sumabat, 2017). The mobile application which was originally named “Himsog”,
which means “healthy” in the Cebuano dialect, is a nutrition application that was
developed with the aim of alleviating malnutrition through self-administered weight
management using technology advancement. It aimed to increase nutrition awareness
and knowledge among Filipinos through an easy-to-use, visually attractive, time and
cost efficient, and Filipino-based software application. Furthermore, Himsog can be
used as a nutrition education too! which can visually represent an individual’s dietary
requirement. In addition to the Filipino standards used in this application, common
Filipino food and dishes are included and used for a more accurate food recording and

nutrient tracking.

Significance of the Study

The results of this study may deem to be beneficial to the following:

Results of the study may increase the respondents’ understanding and
knowledge with regards to nutrition and other nutrition-related factors. That through
this study, Filipinos become more aware of their nutritional stature and its importance

to one's health.

That results of this study may be of help in alleviating obesity in the country
through proper health care interventions and policies. That this study may emphasise

the role of mobile technology in reaching out nutritional care and its importance.

That this study and its results may open possibilities with regards to the use of
technology as a tool for the further improvement of nutrition-related concerns. That
results of this study may also serve as a benchmark for the further development of
nutrition mobile applications that would be specifically fit for a certain population group
for a more accurate and precise nutritional recommendations. Furthermore, the mobile
application used in this study, is the first nutrition mobile application developed

specifically for Filipinos, using updated Philippine dietary requirement and guidelines.

Statement of the Problem

The study aims to assess the use of mobile application in weight management

among adults. Specifically, it sought to answer the following:

1. What are the sociodemographic characteristics of the respondents?

2. What is the nutritional status of the respondents?

3. How is the acceptability of the respondents in using the mobile application?

4. How does the respondents comply with the study intervention?

5. What are the changes brought by the respondents’ use of mobile
application in terms of nutritional status, anthropometric measurements,
food intake, nutrition knowledge and physical activity?

6. What are the associations between the use of mobile application with

nutritional status, food intake and nutrition knowledge?

Objectives

General Objective:

The study primarily aimed to assess Himsog as a Filipino-based nutrition mobile
application for weight management among Filipino adults in UPLB. The following are
the specific objectives of the study:

1. To describe the characteristics of the respondents.

2. To determine the nutritional status of respondents.

3. To describe the acceptability among respondents of the mobile application.

4. To determine the compliance of respondents to the mobile application.

5. To determine changes in nutritional status, anthropometric measurements,
food intake, nutritional knowledge and physical activity of respondents.

6. To determine the association between the compliance to nutrition mobile

application with nutritional status, food intake, and nutrition knowledge.

Scope and Limitation

The scope of this study included Filipino adults, 18-59 years of age who were
currently enrolled in a graduate program of the University of the Philippines-Los Bafios
during the study duration. The study used a mobile application referred to as “Himsog”
which is a mobile application that consists of calorie counting through self-
administered food recording, visual representation of food and fluid intake with the use
of Pinggang Pinoy, and comparison of daily intake through a weekly graphic
representation. Information and data for Himsog uses Philippine standards such as list
of food items from the Food Exchange List for Filipinos (FEL), recommended nutrient
requirements as posted by the newly released Philippine Daily Recommended Intake

(PDRI), and new dietary guidelines represented by the Pinggang Pinoy.

However, this study does not account the intake of dietary supplements, special
or specific dietary needs due to certain medical conditions (e.g. diabetes mellitus,
cardiovascular, kidney, renal diseases, cancer), nutrition information of food items not
mentioned in the FEL, and micronutrient requirements. Also, this study applied
purposive and snowball sampling, thus having a small sample size, results cannot be
used to generalise to other population. Furthermore, the duration for this intervention
used in the study was limited to 28 days, such that measurement outcomes for weight
and waist measurements may be limited and constrained by the short-term duration of

the study.

REVIEW OF RELATED LITERATURE

Obesity and its Consequences

As a result of generally improving incomes, industrialisation, urbanisation and
globalisation, developing countries around the world are in state of rapid economic
transition (Popkin, 2001). This phenomenon led to nutrition transition, wherein there is
change in lifestyle and diets, from high level of physical activity and mostly plant-based
diets, to one with high level of physical inactivity or sedentariness and a diet which
contains more energy density, fat and animal foods and less plant foods. This transition
has caused an increase in obesity and overweight especially among adults, and
accompanying the increase in chronic diseases such as cardiovascular diseases,
hypertension, diabetes mellitus type 2 and other lifestyle-related diseases (Florentino,
2014). Imbalance between daily energy intake and energy expenditure which results to
weight gain is the outcome of obesity. It is caused by multiple factors which can be
cultural, genetic, and societal. Obesity is also caused by reduced physical activity, food
habits, endocrine disorders, energy metabolism and even some medications

(Panuganti and Bhimji, 2019).

Obesity is a common but have been an underestimated condition of clinical and
public health importance among many countries around the world. Many societies
however accepted obesity as a sign of well-being or being a symbolism of high social

class, and the public’s denial about it is a disease in its own right, and have contributed

to its unsuitable determination and management and the lack thereof of effective public
health strategies to act up against its rising epidemic proportions (Ofei, 2005;
Greenway, 2015). The drastic increase in the prevalence of overweight and obesity
globally, has been of great concern. Obesity is estimated to be the cause of more than
3.4 million deaths worldwide, causing 4% of Years Life Lost (YLL) and at least 4% of
Disability-Adjusted life years (DALYs). Health condition among the obese population
are often worse than people with normal weight wherein their life span of an individual
being obese is on average two years shorter than that of people with normal weight

(Djalalinia et al., 2015).

Physical Health Impact

The body mass index (BMI) itself, without even giving consideration to other
anthropometric measures such as waist circumference and waist-to-hip ratio, is
considered to be of a strong predictor for overall mortality. A BMI of more than 25kg/m2
poses a progressive increase in mortality and is mainly in relation to cardiovascular
diseases. BMI range of 30- 35kg/m2, generally, median survival is reduced by 2-4

years, whereas at 40-45kg/m2 it is reduced by 8-10 years (Djalalinia et al., 2015).

Among the co-morbidities in relation to overweight and obesity include cancers
(cancer of breast, endometrial, colorectal, ovarian, kidney, esophageal, prostate,
pancreatic), type 2 diabetes mellitus, hypertension, Coronary Artery Disease (CAD),

stroke, congestive heart failure, osteoarthritis, chronic back pain, asthma, pulmonary


embolism, gallbladder, disease, and also an increased risk of disability (Djalalinia et al.,

2015).

Mental Health Impact

Although direct relationship between obesity and mental health is unclear,
overweight is considered to be a stigma, and society continuously discriminate obesity,
which may lead to some mental disorders. Scientific evidences give emphasis on an
increasing risk of low self-esteem, motivational and mood disorders, problems on
eating patterns, impaired body image, and problems with interpersonal communication
which may directly or indirectly affect the quality of life in general. In addition, being
obese, in both men and women have also increased the risk of poorer sexual health.
Obese individuals tend to attribute their appearance and their weight, and often
experience difficulties with regards to their sexual activities (Russell-Mayhew et al.,

2012).

Impact on Social Aspects

Among the consequences of being obese or overweight includes psychological
impairments and stigmatisation. Obese individuals are often ridiculed by people and
society surrounding them, wherein they may also suffer from discrimination, social
bias, ridicule, rejection and humiliation. Weight-related discrimination itself can be

related to poor health behaviour such that it may cause eating disorders, sedentary


lifestyle and decreased physical activity which results to greater weight gain. This
dreadful cycle does nothing other than strengthening the risk of exposure to weight-

related discrimination (Beck, 2016).

Spiritual Health Aspect

Although there are very limited studies with regards to obesity and its possible
spiritual consequences, exploratory evaluation on the relationship between emotional
eating and spiritual well-being showed that there is a correlation between lower levels
of spiritual well-being with higher levels of emotional eating, most especially among
women (Djalalinia et al., 2015). Some evidence shows that emotional eating is
contributing factor to impaired nutritional behaviours, and that of emphasising the

importance of education which leads to better spiritual perception (Doll, 2012).

Compliance to Health-Related Mobile Applications

Individuals with chronic diseases such as hypertension or chronic kidney diseases
are mostly burdened by high comorbidity and reduced awareness of their health
condition, thus resulting to a challenging environment in which promotion of
compliance to medications and treatment is deemed necessary (Becker et al., 2015).
Obesity, which is also considered as a chronic relapsing disease (Dwyer et al., 2015)
with a multicomponent etiology that includes environment, genetics, lifestyle,

metabolism, and behavioural components, such that its primary pathological agent is


food, particularly foods that are energy dense such as fat, or sugar-sweetened
beverages, instead of a microbe (Bray et al., 2017). Compliance or adherence to
software programs which aids in the improvement of one’s health may be a promising
strategy to support the treatment and interventions of an individual with chronic
conditions (Becker et al., 2015). Promising clinical implications that compliance to
digital and technical tools such as mobile applications can assist individuals with
chronic diseases achieve adherence to treatments and interventions based on the
findings of a study conducted among elderly-population undergoing rehabilitation

treatments (Mertenes et al., 2016).

Several hindrances were sighted that may possibly affect compliance to health
apps such that, hight data entry burden, time consuming, and lack of motivation to use
the mobile apps were found to be affecting an individual’s compliance to mobile app
use (Krebs and Duncan, 2015; Tay et al., 2017). It is also observed that among the
negative aspects of a mobile app that affects the respondent’s use of mobile app, were
the risk of overmedicalization or over-intervention, becoming technology-dependent, or

weakening communication with health care professionals (Mosconi et al., 2019).

Weight Management through Mobile Applications

Weight management is defined as the process of reducing weight or the

prevention of further weight gain. It is a process which aims to improve one’s health

status by attaining an ideal body weight based on one’s age stature. In addition, weight


management is described as strategies that are based on a comprehensive lifestyle
approach with the use of dietary, physical activity and behaviour modification to attain
weight loss goals through approaches that motivates and educates people to maintain

a lifelong practice (Winik & Bonham, 2018).

Mobile applications were usually created by device manufacturers like Nokia and
Motorola back in the 1990’s and have been around for a long period of time now. At
present, mobile applications mostly assists people in their daily life situations, fulfilling
the needs for information, communication, entertainment and even leisure. The
increasing availability of diverse interactive mobile applications is expected to be of
help in different domains of the user’s daily life (Zaragosa et al, 2016). They are
described to be a software or set of program which functions certain tasks for a user
through a mobile device. Mobile applications or apps as they call it, are new and fast
developing segment of the global information and communication technology. Apps
are known for being user-friendly, easy-to-use, inexpensive, downloadable and
compatible with most mobile phones including cheaper entry model phones. Some of
the mobile applications are pre-installed in smartphones while others can be
downloaded and installed from the internet. The increasing number of mobile
application developers, publishers and providers are brought by the large number of
the mobile application market. Technical-wise, different mobile applications are able to
function through several managed platforms such as iPhone, BlackBerry, Android,
Symbian, and Windows; and also some virtual machines like Java/J2ME, BREW, Flash

Light, and Silverlight (Islam et al., 2010).


In 2017, users downloaded 178.1 billion mobile applications to their connected
devices, and projection for 2022 shows that app downloads will continue to increase to
258.2 billion. Among the most downloaded non-gaming applications in the Google Play
Store were Facebook, WhatsApp and Google. Mobile games were also noticeably
increasing and are set to generate a large volume of downloads (Statista, 2010).
Mobile phone applications that focuses on health, fitness, and/or medical care, have
become highly in demand. Categories for fitness and diet-focused mobile apps spans
numerous areas which includes prevention/lifestyle-modification, self-diagnosis,
diagnosis, education, prescription filling, and treatment compliance (Krebs and

Duncan, 2015).

The widespread use of mobile calculation and communication technologies in
public health and healthcare is becoming popular not only among developed countries
but even also with low and middle income countries such as the Philippines. In specific
relevance to nutritionist-dietitians, there is an increase in popularity and availability of
nutrition software application for mobile devices to support weight management which
is being patronised for having many attractive features such as familiarity, cost
efficiency, accessibility, with different types of support (e.g. self-monitoring, behavioural
change, social support), and app-based supports which are made available anytime for
its users through their devices (Leiffers et al, 2017; Rivera et al., 2016; Vuong et al.,
2012). Although some suggests the effectivity of mobile health (mHealth) interventions

and its promising outcomes, studies conducted are mostly pilot-testing or have


limitations in their study designs such as study duration and follow-ups, and sample

size (Wang et al., 2017).

In the Philippines, no studies with regards to nutrition mobile application,
specifically developed for the Filipino people that uses local nutrition standards and
adapts Pinggang Pinoy as the new Filipino nutrition guideline. Instead, foreign studies
mostly coming from developed countries were available. Review of studies related to
the use and effectiveness of a mobile application in weight management was done, the

summary of which is shown in Table 1.

A content analysis was done by Zaidan and Roehrer (2016) which aimed to
investigate the Australian mobile phone app stores, both iTunes and Google Play, in
order to analyse the usability features of the most downloaded, popular wellness apps.
Design of this study consists of identifying the apps, development of weight loss and
diet evaluation framework, and application of the evaluation framework. All stages of
the study design consists of a specific data collection, analysis tools, and techniques.
Results of the study showed that ease of use, reminding, barcode scanning,
motivation, usable for all, and synchronisation, were found to be the most significant
features that should be included diet mobile apps, and ultimately in potential weigh

loss and diet evaluation frameworks (Zaidan and Roehrer, 2016).

Systematic review and meta-analysis was also conducted by Liu et al. (2014) to

evaluate the association of mobile phone intervention with weigh-related measurement


among overweight and/or obese adults. The study included 14 published and
unpublished randomized controlled trials on over 1,300 participants, which has
collectively documented significant decreases in BMI with the association of mobile
phone intervention. Although there was no significant difference on body weight
reduction between short-term and long-term duration of trials, possible larger net
changes proven through statistical analysis were limited. Results of the study
conducted serves as an evidence that intervention through mobile phones is an
effective strategy for weight loss promotion. Also, promising results of this meta
analysis suggests that mobile phone intervention can be of great contribution to body
weight and BMI reductions among overweight and/or obese population (Liu et al.,

2014).

Several studies have also conducted to determine the effectivity of wellness
applications as a weight management tool through behavioural change. In a qualitative
study conducted by Azar et al. (2013), a descriptive, comparative assessment was
conducted among the highest rated free mobile apps in the Health and Fitness
category available in the iOs app store. Considering the selection criteria of the study,
health and fitness apps were evaluated and categorised based on commonality in
function, features and description of its developers. Researchers of the study have
then evaluated the two most popular mobile apps in each category using two
instruments: traditional behavioural theory-based (score range 0-100) and Fogg
Behavioural Model (score range: 0-6). Results of the study shows that all apps included

in the analysis have received low overall scores for inclusion of behavioural theory-


based strategies, which is believed to likely improve the effectivity of a wellness
application. Some of the behavioural strategies emphasised in the applications
included in the study were self-monitoring, realistic goal-setting, stimulus control,
social support, general knowledge, increasing knowledge, time management, and

perceived social norms (Azar et al., 2013).

Another study have been done by Lieffers et al., (2017) to understand the
experiences and perceptions of adults using publicly available mobile apps which
supports nutrition behaviour change for weight management. One-on-one semi-
structured interviews were conducted with adult app-user volunteers reported to be
outside of any other research trials. Interviews with the qualified participants were
audio-recorded, transcribed, and data gathered were coded inductively and organised
into categories of experiences that were found to be most apparent among the
participants. Most common experiences of the participants were food data entry;
accountability, feedback and progress; technical and app-related factors; and personal
factors. Researchers have also noted that most participants were using apps without

support from a professional and/or dietitian.

In regards with weight loss effect of wellness mobile applications, several studies
have been made to measure various weight indices to prove the effectiveness of the
application being tested. Weight measurements such as waist circumference, body

weight, waist-hip ratio, and BMI are some of the commonly used weight indicators to


prove the effectiveness of an application as a tool which aids in the promotion of

weight loss (Lieffers et al., 2017; Flores Mateo et al., 2015).

A one-year effectiveness weight loss by mobile phone study was conducted by
Haapala et al. (2009) to investigate short and long-term duration effectiveness and its
predictors of weight loss in a mobile phone weight-loss among health overweight
adults. Healthy overweight adults were randomized to an experimental group (n=62)
wherein participants were asked to use a mobile phone-based weight loss programme,
Weight Balance which was launched in Finland in 2001 that sends text messages with
regards to the calculated diet of the user; or to a control group (n=63) with no
intervention. Results of the study showed that the experimental group had greater
weight loss and waist circumference reduction both in short and long term duration as
compared to the no intervention group. Strongest predictors of weight loss were
determined to be early weight loss, self-efficacy, contact frequency, attitude towards
the medium, changes in work and family life, and dietary habit changes (Haapala et al.,

2009).

A pilot study conducted by Martin et al., (2015) to test the efficacy of SmartLoss,
a smartphone-based weight loss intervention through a randomized controlled trial.
Adult participants were randomized to either SmartLoss (n=20) wherein participants
have been prescribed to a 1200-1400 kcal diet plan and were provided with a
smartphone, body weight scale, and accelerometer that enables wireless transmission

of body weight and step data to a website; or an attention-matched Health Education


control group (n=20) that receives health tips through a smartphone. Study outcomes
shows that SmartLoss successfully promoted weight loss in comparison to an
attention-matched control group, and suggests that interventions based on

smartphones might be proven useful in intervention dissemination (Martin et al., 2015).

Blaz and Peterson (2016) also conducted a study including 32 participants which
aims to determine the association of weight loss outcomes with the use of Army
Healthy Eating Activity Lifestyle Training Headquarters (Army H.E.A.L.T.H.) weight
management programs among overweight military service members and veterans.
Army H.E.A.L.T.H. is an online-based weight management tool which provides
advanced strategies to its target population to achieve weight loss through a web-
based technology in which participants were asked to use daily wherein they are able
to track their calorie intake, physical fitness and activity, and provide interactive ways
to monitor wellness goals and objectives. it was observed in this study that participants
who used Army H.E.A.L.T.H. did lose weight and have decreased body fat percentage
such that proving its effectiveness as weight management intervention tool producing

modest weight loss (Blaz and Peterson, 2016).

A study was done to assess the efficacy of a 2-year theory-based weight loss
intervention by Godino et al., (2016). This intervention was remotely delivered through
integrated user experiences such as Facebook, mobile apps, messaging (email, sms),
a website and technology-mediated communication with a health coach (the SMART

intervention). The study was a randomised controlled trial which consisted of


overweight or obese students from three universities in San Diego, California, ages 18
to 35 years old. Participants in this study were randomly assigned (1:1) to either
receive the intervention (SMART intervention) or be in the control group which receives
general information about health and wellness. The researchers used computer-based
permuted-block randomisation with block sizes of four, stratified by sex, college and
ethnicity. The primary outcome of the study was the participants’ objectively measured
weight in kilograms (kg) twenty-four months, whereas weights measured during the 6th,
12%, and 18th months was included as a secondary outcome. Linear mixed-effects
regression within an intention-to-treat framework were used to evaluate differences
between groups. Findings in this study showed that a theory-based intervention, such
as the SMART was not associated with significant decreases in weight after two years,
in comparison to general health information provided via email and website. However,
the SMART intervention did stimulate reductions in weight and BMI for at least a year,
which results to an increase in the number of college students who achieved a 5%
bodyweight reduction and a reduced average waist circumference during the first 6
months. Furthermore, the study concluded that mobile and social technologies such as
the intervention presented, failed to facilitate sustained reductions in weight among
young adults, although such approaches may deliver limited short-term weight loss

(Godino et al., 2016).

A study on an 8-week weight loss trial was conducted by Wharton et al. (2014) to
prove that dietary self-monitoring is associated to improved weight loss success. The

study included the use of a popular smartphone app for dietary self-monitoring and


weigh loss in comparison to traditional methods of diet counselling and entry methods.
The study participants were randomly divided into three groups: an app (AP) group
which uses Lose It! mobile application for dietary tracking, memo (ME) group wherein
participants takes note of their dietary intake through the memo feature of their
smartphone, and the paper-and-pencil (PA) group that uses the traditional pen and
paper to record their dietary intake. Results shows that the AP group was more
consistent in recording their dietary data compared to the PA group, bot not with the
ME group. Although all groups lost weight over the course of the study, there was no
difference in weight loss between the three groups. The study therefore concluded that
smartphone apps may represent a feasible dietary monitoring method for individuals

(Wharton et al., 2014).

Ni Mhurchu et al., (2014) conducted a study on feasibility, acceptability and
potential effectiveness of a mobile health (mHealth) weight management programme
for New Zealand adults. The mHealth programmes use the internet and mobile phones
to deliver information on health and behaviour change support among participants.
The study included adults who wanted to lose weight and had a BMI = 25 kg/m2.
Participants received an eight-week mHealth weight loss programme and
anthropometric measurements were collected at base line and 12-weeks. Results of
the study shows that 66% of the participants reported reading “all or most” text
messages sent, 96% have responded to at least one text data collection question,
81% logged in at least once to the study website during the 8-week active intervention

period. On average, study participants had a significant change in body weight from


baseline to 12 weeks in both intention to treat analysis and completers only analysis
wherein 36 out of the original 53 participants were included. Although researchers of
this study believes that the programme could be effective as weight loss support, the
high drop out rate may indicate the need for further improvements with regards to the

programme (Ni Mhurchu et al., 2014).

Table 1. Characteristics and Results of the Studies Reviewed Involving Mobile App
Use on Weight Management

Study Participants Duration _Intervention/s Significant Finding/s
First
Aether, Analyzed Population
Year) Number
Blaz, 2016 32 Adults (18 12 weeks + Participants + Participants who
(20 to 65 years) were completed the program
completers) with BMl= encouraged (n=20) had an average
25kg/m2, a to use the weight loss of 3.25 lbs
military Army (95% Cl -1.09 to 7.59
service H.E.A.L.T.H Ibs.). Average weight
member or application decreased form a mean
veteran daily to track of 187.4 Ibs. at baseline
their nutrition (SD=33.4) to a mean of
and fitness 184.2 Ibs. at 12 weeks,
activity although difference was
ss not statistically significant
+ Initial and (p=.134)
post body
composition
and
demographic
data were
gathered

Ss

Godino, 404 Overweight 24 * Participants + Weight, adjusted for sex,

2016 or obese months were ethnicity and college was
college randomly not significantly different
students assigned (1:1) between groups at 24
(18 to 35 to receive months (-0.79 kg,

years) either the p=0.204).

Study Participants Duration _Intervention/s Significant Finding/s
(First
Author, Analyzed Population
Year) Number
intervention . Weight was significantly
group or less in the intervention
group at 6 months (-1.33
control group
: kg, p=0.011) and 12
who will
. months (-1.33 kg,
receive
p=0.008) but not at 18
general hs (-0.67 k
information mo aa ‘07 Kg,
about health p=0.200)
and wellness.
Haapala, 125 Healthy, 12 + Participants + At12 months,
2009 overweight months were experimental group had
(BMI=26-36 randomised lost significantly more
kg/m2), to an weight than the control
25-44 years experimental group (p=0.006) and had
of age. group (n=62) a greater waist

which uses a
mobile
phone-
operated
weight-loss

programme or

to acontrol
group (n=63)
with no
intervention

+ Assessments
for the
experimental

group were at

0, 3, 6, 9 and
12 months; 0
and 12
months for
the control

group

circumference reduction
(p=0.0001)

Study Participants Duration _Intervention/s Significant Finding/s

(First —————————

Author, Analyzed Population

Year) Number
ee
Lieffers, 24 218years N/A * Qualitative * Nutrition apps were used

2017 of age ; had data analysis by the participants for
used a through one various amount of time
publicly on one and (mean= approx. 14
available face to face months)
nutrition interviews .
mobile app using asemi- * Four categories of
for >1 week structured PAIS
within the interview apparent: food data
previous 3 protocol entry; accountability,
to 4 months feedback, and progress;
for weight technical and app-related
months factors; and personal
during the factors
duration of + Most participants used
the study apps without professional
or dietitian support (n=21)
Martin, 40 (38 Overweight 12 weeks - Participants + Weight loss was
2015 completers) and obese were significantly (p< 0.001)
adults (18 randomised larger in the SmartLoss
to 65 years to SmartLoss group compared with the
of age) (n=20) or an Health Education group
attention-
matched
Health
Education
control group
(n=20)
Ni 53 (36 Adults with 12 weeks + 12- week * Mean change weight was
Mhurchu, — completers) BMI = weight -1.0 kg (SD 3.1) at 12
2014 25kg/m2 management weeks (p=0.024)
programme
( 8-week
active
intervention
and 4-week
maintenance/
follow-up


iY

Fin Participants Duration _ Intervention/s Significant Finding/s
irst
Author, Analyzed Population
Year) Number
Wharton, 57 (47 Health, 8weeks + Semi- + AP group recorded
2014 completers) weight- randomised in dietary data more
stable 3 groups: App consistently compared
adults (18 group (AP) with PA group (p=.042)
to 65 years (n=19), uses .
of age), the diet- * Change in BMI was -0.34

kg/m2 (SD 1.1) (p=0.026)

with BMI of tracking app

25-40kg/m2 “Lose It!” app

and owns a daily; Memo. Completers only
smartphone group (ME) recorded a mean weight

(n=18), tracks change of -1.4 kg (SD
dietary intake 3.6) (p=0.023) and BMI
daily through change was -0.50 kg/m?

eee (SD=1.3) (p=0.025)
memo

function in * All groups lost weight
smartphones, over the course of the
Paper group study (p=.001), but no
(PA) (n=20), difference in weight loss
records was noted between
dietary intake groups

daily using a

traditional

paper-and-

pencil

method.

Himsog: A Nutrition Mobile Application


In a prior study conducted by the researcher, a mobile application have been

developed to address the increasing prevalence of obesity among the Filipino adults.

The mobile application used the nutrient distribution recommendations of the recently

released Philippine Dietary Recommended Intake (PDRI, 2015) as presented

Appendix A. To visually represent the nutrition standard and guidelines, the researcher

in

used Pinggang Pinoy (Figure 1) as a basis for the aesthetics and presentation of the


mobile application. All information and data gathered were then disseminated to the
team of program developers. The mobile application which runs and made accessible
with Android operating system was then developed through the use Android Studio.
The developed mobile application enables its user to input personal data such as
name, gender, birthdate, body measurements such as height and weight. The
application would then process data to identify the user’s current nutritional status
through the computed body mass index (BMI) and daily nutrient requirement, which is
adjusted based on the current nutritional and physiological (pregnant or lactating)
status. It also allows the user to record and track food intake, and also represents
multiple days of food intake through the weekly graph option wherein food intake

through the week is represented and can be reviewed by the user.

PINGGANG PINOY

Healthy food plate for Filipino adults

Figure 1. Pinggang Pinoy (FNRI-DOST, 2016)

After the mobile application has been developed, an acceptability testing was

done to different population groups as segmented in the Pinggang Pinoy guidelines.


Fifty (50) respondents, which equally represents five population groups (Children,
Teens, Adults, Elderly and Pregnant/Lactating) having ten (10) respondents for each.
Respondents were asked to try using the application through inputting necessary
information needed and record a one (1) meal intake. After exploration of the mobile
application, the respondents were asked to accomplish a survey questionnaire
assessing the respondent’s acceptability and perception towards the application. The
used questionnaire includes 17 survey questions, majority were answered through
Likert scaling with options to agree, neither agree or disagree, or disagree to the
corresponding statements to assess acceptability and functionality of the mobile
application. Additional information such as age, gender, educational attainment and

smartphone ownership were also obtained for respondent profiling.

Results of the acceptability test showed that the mobile application generally
gained a positive feedback, significantly among the adult group which is composed of
individuals 19- 59 years of age. Adults represented the most agreeing group, among
the fastest to navigate and use, and also all respondents in this age group owns a
smartphone which is needed for the developed nutrition tool. Although other groups
have also responded positively towards the application, various concerns were noted
such as presence of lifestyle-related diseases among the elderly group and special
diets consumed in the pregnant/lactating group such as vegetarian and exclusive

organic eating habits.

Conceptual Framework

The diagram (Figure 2) shows the factors considered that could affect the

nutritional status among adults.

The study aimed to show how sociodemographic characteristics affect physical
activity, use of mobile application and food intake. Characteristics such as age, gender
and degree sought may pose an association with variables mentioned. The use of
mobile application, which possibly affects nutrition knowledge contributes to the food
intake of an individual, together with physical activity and sociodemographic
characteristics. Furthermore, physical activity and food intake directly affects nutritional

status of an individual.

Results of a previous study have shown the association between socio-
demographic factors, physical activity and health status (Maciel et al., 2018). Low
literacy rate, poverty, large families, food insecurity, food safety, women's education
shows to be one of the most important underlying factors responsible for poor health
status of children coming from low socioeconomic class. Thus, requiring political,
economical and social changes, and also changes for personal advancement mainly
through opportunities for nutrition education to improve the nutritional status of the
children (Babar et al., 2010). Dietary Intake and patterns were associated with
sociodemographic factors. Individuals with higher socioeconomic status were found to
have dietary practices which greatly contributes to excessive weight gain and obesity.

It is important to take into consideration dietary characteristics in different


sociodemographic levels when designing dietary interventions (Garcia-Chavez et al.,

2018; Maciel et al., 2018).

Nutrition apps not only does enhance caloric intake, but may also provide
necessary information with regards to the nutritional content of certain food items, thus
increasing knowledge in general (De Cock et al., 2017). Effectivity of a nutrition
application can either be a cause or effect of an individual's nutrition knowledge,
physical activeness and dietary intake and habits which may be associated with one’s
nutritional status. Findings of several studies show that use of nutrition mobile apps is
associated with change towards diet-related behaviour, hence improving motivation,
desire, attitudes, self-efficacy and knowledge (West et al., 2017). Furthermore, health
outcomes of mobile app users were shown to be better in comparison to non-users.
Health interventions using mobile apps may be an effective strategy for advancing
health and nutritional promotion behaviours among the general population without

diseases (Lee et al., 2017).


Auey91p

“Snjyejs [BUOIZINU S,/eENPIAIPU! Ue O} S}Iqey pUe oye}!

eB6pejmouy uoninu pue sdde uoyjnu Jo esn UseMmjeq UOI}EIOOSSe 9y} JO YIOMaUe, [eN|}deou0yD “Zz eunBi4

e6peajmouy YVORIANN ddy e11qow J0 espn

aye.u| poor

sneis jeuoniann

Ayanoy 1e01sAud

smeis o]}ydeuBoweg 0j90S

Sociodemographic
Factors

Nutritional Status

Metabolic
Complication Risk

Nutrition
Knowledge

Total Physical
Activity MET-
minutes/week
Compliance Level
Acceptability
Easy-to-Use
Educational
Use of Filipino
Standards
Favourable
Marketable

Respondents

Mobile Application

Operational Definition of Terms

refers to age, gender and degree sought.

refers to the nutritional classification based on BMI.

refers to the risk for metabolic disorders such as
diabetes mellitus type 2, cardiovascular diseases,
hypertension. Measured through waist circumference
cut-offs.

refers to the knowledge of the respondents with regards
to nutrition facts that are included in the study
intervention.

refers to the computed physical activity score used by
the WHO to determine whether or not an individual is
physically active.

refers to how often the mobile application was used by
the respondents based on their actual screenshots.

refers to the respondent's overall perception towards
the use of mobile application.

whether the use of app was user-friendly and does not
require much effort in operating the mobile application.

whether nutrition knowledge prior use has improved
due to mobile app use.

standards used in the mobile app were tailored for
Philippine requirement and measurements.

whether the use of app did not hinder or deprive the
respondent's choices, recommend its use to others,
and finds it pleasing to use.

whether the mobile application is worthy of purchase by
a certain amount.

Filipino graduate schoo! students of the University of
the Philippines Los Banos ages 19-59 years.

smartphone software that provides nutrition-related
services.


Hypothesis of the Study

There is no significant relationship between the use of mobile application and
nutritional status and;
a. sociodemographic status (i.e., respondent’s age, gender, degree
sought);
b. nutrition knowledge;
c. physical activity;
d. anthropometric measurements (i.e., weight, waist circumference); and

e. food intake (i.e., energy, carbohydrates, protein, fat, and fluid intake);


METHODOLOGY

Study Design

A quasi-experimental one-group pretest-posttest design was used in the study
which aimed to assess the use of a nutrition mobile application in weight management
among adults and its association to the participant’s nutrition knowledge and dietary

intake.

Study Subjects

A total of fifty (50) participants were recruited through purposive sampling.
Participants in this study are composed of Filipino adults from ages 18-59 years, owns
a smartphone with an Android operating system, and who were currently enrolled in
the Graduate School of the University of the Philippines-Los Bafhos during the research
duration. Figure 3 summarises the actions taken in the study. There were originally 62
participants who expressed their interest in the study. At baseline data collection, 10
participants withdrew their interest, 1 participant switched to an iOS mobile device,
and 1 participant became ineligible during recruitment. Baseline data were collected
among 50 participants, while 32 participants only were able to complete the
intervention at end-line. Among the initial 50 participants, 3 participants withdrew their
consent, 1 switched to an iOS device, and 14 participants were lost to follow-up.
Results of the prior study conducted showed that the most agreeable age group
towards the use of mobile application were adults ages 18-59 years. Graduate

students were chosen to represent the participants in the study such that no data has


yet been established with regards to the nutritional status among the students of the
graduate school in UPLB who may be possibly at risk of malnutrition especially of
obesity. Exclusion criteria for study subject includes diagnosis of diabetes, cancer or
thyroid condition, or other conditions that may affect body weight, appetite, or
metabolism; use of prescription and/or over-the-counter medications that may affect
body weight, appetite, or metabolism (including diuretics and laxatives); hypertension;

current or planned pregnancy; and lactating for females.

Recruitment Period

(n=62)

Baseline Data Collection

@ Consent

@ Personal Information (Age, Gender,
Degree Sought)

@ General Nutrition Knowledge

@ Anthropometric Measurements (Height,
Weight, Waist Circumference)

(n=50)

Study Intervention
(28 Days)

@ Weekly 24-hour Food Recall
@ Global Physical Activity Questionnaire
(GPAQ)

End-line Data Collection

e General Nutrition Knowledge

@ Anthropometric Measurements (Weight,
Waist Circumference)

e@ General Acceptability

e@ Recommendations & Suggestions

(n=32)

Excluded (n=12)

@ Withdrew interest to participate (n=10)
@ Switched to iOS (n=1)
© Ineligible (Pregnant) (n=1)

Excluded (n=18)

@ Withdrew consent to participate (n=3)
@ Switched to iOS (n=1)
@ Lost to Follow-up (n=14)

Figure 3. Flowchart of the Data Collection



Description of the Mobile Application

Himsog is a nutrition mobile application which is made for the Filipino population
such that nutrient requirements, guidelines, food list are entirely based on Filipino
standards set by the Food and Nutrition Research Institute (FNRI). It is a mobile
application that aimed to educate its users about proper nutrition and nutrient-
balanced meals through meeting daily nutrient requirements and improving one’s
nutritional status, enables to track food and fluid intake through food records, and also
determine and identify possible food patterns which may be a habit or behaviour of its

user.

To use the mobile application, a homepage prompts together with the logo, name
of the application, and a “sign up” selection for its new users. The user would then
have to tap “sign up” and fill out the necessary information such as name, birthdate,
gender, height (cm), weight (kg), and indicate also if pregnant (for 2nd/ 3rd trimester) or
lactating during the study period. A user profile appeared wherein the inputted data by
the user is reflected together with the user’s computed BMI value based on the user’s
anthropometric measurements, and also a reference table for the BMI cut-off values

and corresponding nutritional status classification for the Asian criteria (Figure 4).

The homepage displayed a visual representation of the daily calorie,
macronutrient and fluid intake of the user. The respondent’s nutritional requirement for

the day is represented through a plate which is inspired by Pinggang Pinoy- a Filipino


nutritional guideline. The visual plate presented is divided into four sections that is

represented by different food items:

Bread (red-coded section) - represents the total carbohydrate intake of
the respondent.

Apple (purple-coded section) - represents the fruit serving intake of the
respondent; although this section counts the number of fruit servings
eaten by the respondent, the carbohydrate equivalent of the
respondent’s fruit intake is reflected in the bread (red-coded section).
Chicken (brown-coded section) - represents the total protein intake of
the respondent.

Broccoli (green-coded section) - represents the vegetable serving
intake of the respondent; although this section counts the number of
vegetable servings eaten by the respondent, the carbohydrate and
protein equivalent of the respondent’s vegetable intake is reflected in
the bread (red-coded section) and chicken (brown-coded section,

respectively.

In addition, there are also two additional sections outside the main plate that

represents the following:

Water (blue-coded section) - represents the total volume of the
respondent’s fluid intake; macronutrient and serving values of fluids
taken such as fruit juices, milk, etc. is reflected to its respective section

accordingly.


* Butter on bread (yellow-coded section) - represents the total fat intake

of the respondent; includes fat intake from fried food items.

A table consisting of numerical values for the user’s daily requirement and actual

intake is also be shown together with the visual representation mentioned (Figure 5).

In order to record a food item taken, the respondent had to tap the plus sign “+”
button located at the lower right portion of the screen (Figure 5). An “Add Meal” page
would then appear with dropdown options for type of meal (Breakfast, AM Snack,
Lunch, PM Snack or Dinner), list of food items which are extracted from the Food
Exchange List (FEL) for Filipinos, quantity of food taken, and method of cooking if

applicable (Figure 6).

Additional features of the mobile application includes a visual warning that
triggers when a certain food group or macronutrient is taken in excess through a bright
red shading of the food section affected, a weekly graph is also available that
represents the respondent’s daily intake for seven (7) days, whether or not the
respondent meets the daily caloric requirement, or exceeds which is also represented
in a bright red colour. Also through the weekly graph, the user can easily track dietary
intake and patterns, if any, throughout the week as seen in Figure 7. A general

instruction sheet was also given to each respondent which served as a guide in using

the mobile application (Appendix C).


SIGN UP

cara

BMI Table

Nutritional Status “Asian Criteria’ BMI Cutoff

Figure 4. Screenshots of the signing up and user profile of the mobile app

Figure 5. Screenshot of the user’s daily recommended plate based on calculated

daily requirement


Figure 7. Screenshots of the additional features of the mobile app - weekly graph

of the user’s food intake and visual triggers for excess consumption


Data Collection

Participants for this study were recruited through various announcements with
regards to this study through personal invitations by the researcher during class visits
which include graduate students, announcement through social media and snowball
sampling. In addition, a setup was placed in the nutrition clinic during the recruitment
period. Graduate students who were interested to participate in this study was
screened for eligibility. Once the eligibility has been established, participants were
asked to sign a consent letter which they can withdraw at any point of the intervention,
profiled by the researcher, and necessary information was collected including socio-
demographic data, anthropometric measurements, physical activity assessment, and
general nutrition knowledge. The nutrition app was explained and demonstrated to the
participants, transferred and installed in their personal smartphones thru Sharelt-an
application software which enables user to transfer files such as mobile applications
between smartphones, tablets and personal computers. A general instruction sheet
was given to each participant that served as a guide on how to properly use the mobile
application, its limitations, and the “do’s and dont’s” of the study intervention

(Appendix C).

Study participants were asked to use the mobile application on a daily basis for
one (1) month or twenty eight (28) days. Participants were asked record their food
intake through the mobile application and was be asked to take screenshots of their
daily food intake after recording their last meal of the day, which was collected daily by

the researcher through messaging applications between the researcher and participant.


The researcher conducted a weekly face-to-face assessment of physical activity and
24-hour food recall which was administered during three (3) different weekday and one
(1) weekend within the intervention period. Furthermore, daily compliance was

monitored by the researcher.

Ethical Consideration

The researcher of this study did not seek ethical approval for its study protocol,
hence a written consent from the respondents of this study were obtained prior to the
study intervention stating their voluntary participation in the study and that their

consent can be withdrawn at any point without penalty or sanction (Appendix B).

Sociodemographic Profile

Participants are profiled based on their sociodemographic data through a self-
administered form that includes data on the participant’s gender, age and birthdate,
and degree sought. Contact details such as contact number and email address were

also collected for easier communication between the researcher and participant.

Anthropometric Assessment

Study participants’ anthropometric measurements was collected at baseline and
end-line. Weight and height were measured three (3) times to the nearest 0.1 kg and
0.1. cm respectively, using a Seca digital scale and stadiometer, the average

measurement was calculated wherein the participant was measured with minimal


clothing and no footwear. Waist circumference was measured three (3) times to the
nearest 0.1 cm using a tape measure and the average measurement was calculated,
measuring above the top of the participant’s iliac crest, with the participant wearing
minimal clothing. Measurement of waist circumference was used to determine whether
there was an increase in Metabolic Complication Risk. Body mass index (BMI) was
calculated using the collected height and weight measurement of the participant and

interpreted using the Asian Criteria for BMI.

Physical Activity Assessment

The physical activeness of each participant were measured weekly, starting at
baseline. Researcher of this study used the WHO Global Physical Activity
Questionnaire (GPAQ) which is a global standard implemented by WHO (Appendix D).
The questionnaire aims to gauge whether the participant does vigorous, moderate or
sedentary activities from activity from work, recreational work, travelling to and from

places and sedentary behaviours.

General Nutrition Knowledge Test

A general nutrition knowledge test was conducted prior and after intervention.
The test consisted of eleven (11) statements about nutrition which is answerable by
either “true” or “false”, and are basic nutrition information which were included in the

nutrition mobile app. A correct answer corresponded to one (1) point, with a highest


possible score of 11 points. The following were the statements used in the general

nutrition knowledge test:

* Pinggang Pinoy guidelines are divided into three groups namely -

carbohydrates, protein and fat.

* Water intake is part of an individual’s daily diet.

* Fruits and vegetables can be consumed in liberal amounts.

* Water intake must not be more than two (2) liters per day.

* To maintain a healthy weight, people should eat a high protein diet.

* To maintain a healthy weight, people should cut fat out completely.

* If an individual has a BMI of 25.5 he/she is classified as obese based on Asian
criteria values for BMI.

* If an individual has a BMI of 19.5 he/she is classified as underweight based on
Asian criteria values for BMI.

* Obese and overweight are just the same in terms of BMI classification.

* Daily caloric requirement of overweight or obese individuals are reduced by 800
kcal/day.

* Pinggang Pinoy represents four food groups namely - grains, meat, fruits and
vegetables.

Statements used in the general nutrition knowledge test were adapted from the
revised version of the General Nutrition Knowledge Questionnaire (GNKQ-R) which is a
valid measure of nutrition knowledge that is consistent, reliable and sensitive to change
(Kliemann et al., 2016). The researcher further ensured that all nutrition statements
given to each respondent were adapted in such manner that all necessary information
needed for the nutrition knowledge test can be found and learned through the use of
the mobile application. The actual nutrition knowledge test used in this study was

pretested among Filipino adults before the actual use for the study intervention.


24-hour Food Recall

The researcher administered a face-to-face 24-hour food recall weekly. A total of
four (4) 24-hour food recalls have been collected, which was conducted during three (3)
weekdays and one (1) weekend of different weeks, during the intervention period.
Energy, carbohydrates, protein, fat and fluid intake were computed through the food

recalls gathered from the respondents.

General Acceptability Survey

To gauge the general acceptability of the participants towards the mobile
application, a self-administered survey was given to the participants upon the
conclusion of their one month study intervention through a series of statements which
were responded through a four-point likert scale (strongly agree, agree, disagree,
strongly disagree) and be further coded as 4-strongly agree, 3-agree, 2-disagree, and
1-strongly disagree. Furthermore, survey statements were sub-categorised into five
factors contributing to overall acceptability of the mobile app (Easy-to-Use,
Educational, Use of Filipino Standards, Usable for all, and Marketability). Acceptability
statements were derived from a prior study conducted by the researcher which aimed
to assess the acceptability of different population groups towards the use of the mobile

application.


Table 2. Acceptability Statements based on Sub-Categories

Commands in this mobile application can be easily navigated and
understood.

In general, the mobile app is very easy to use and does not require technical
knowledge to operate.

Easy-to-Use
Using the app does not take too much time to input and process data.

The user interface of the application is very easy to understand and visually
attractive.

This app gives necessary information for my daily diet / food plan.
Using this app results to better understanding on food and nutrition.

Educational Technical computations needed for my diet were made easy and
understandable in this application.

This app can be of great help in weight management and attaining health
goals as an individual.

Filipino standards and Filipino food items are made available in this app,

Use of Filipino thus giving more appropriate computations for its users.
Standards

| don’t feel deprived nor restricted with regards to my diet or food intake
while using this app.

| would definitely download and use this application once launched in the
market.

Usable for all | would recommend the use of this application to others.

| believe that there is a need for this type of mobile app within my age
group.

Overall, using this app is a great experience and suitable for daily use.

Are you willing to purchase this type of mobile application? ( ) Yes ( ) No
If yes, how much are you willing to pay for this mobile app?

Marketable ( ) Less than Php 50.00 ( ) Php 50.00-Php 100.00 ( ) More than Php 100.00



Compliance

To enable the researcher in assessing and evaluating the participant’s
compliance, a monitoring sheet was used to track and score the completeness of the
participant in using the mobile application. Each participant is required to submit
twenty-eight (28) app records through photos/screenshots of their daily dietary intake.
Compliance level was categorised as high (>=15 actual screenshots) and low (< 15

actual screenshots).

After the intervention period, the same anthropometric measurements of the
participant were collected once again, and the same general knowledge test was
conducted. After completing the intervention, the participant were asked to accomplish
a general acceptability survey and recommendation/ suggestion form. In addition, the
participants were asked to delete the mobile application on their smartphone in the

presence of the researcher.


Data Analysis

Anthropometric measurements was used to determine the participant’s baseline
and end-line nutritional status using the Asian criteria BMI chart (Table 3) and metabolic

risk cut-offs (Table 4).

Table 3. Asian Criteria BMI Chart

Nutritional Status BMI Value
Underweight < 18.5
Normal 18.5 - 22.9
Overweight 23 - 24.9
Pre-Obese 25 - 29.9
Obese > 30

Source: WHO,2004

Table 4. Waist Circumference Cut-Offs Metabolic Risk

Gender Substantially Increased Risk
Men >102cm
Women > 88cm

Source: WHO,2008

Physical Activity was assessed through Total Physical Activity MET-minutes/day.
A score of <600 would indicate physical inactiveness based on the WHO physical

activity standards with the equation of:

+ Total physical activity MET-minutes/week ( = the sum of the total MET minutes of

activity computed for each setting)


+ Equation: Total Physical Activity MET-minutes/week = [(P2 * P3 * 8) + (P5 * P6 * 4) +
(P8 * PQ * 4) + (P11 * P12 * 8) + (P14 * P15* 4)]

The nutrition knowledge test which was given before and after using the mobile
app were composed of statements in relation to nutrition wherein the participants
responded as to whether he/she agrees or disagrees to the statement given.
Descriptive analysis was used to present data gathered on the participant’s nutrition
knowledge in comparison to before and after usage of the mobile application.
Furthermore, baseline and end-line scores were assessed whether it has decreased,

increased or no change after the use of mobile app.

Weekly food recalls were be gathered for cross-checking and reliability of data.
Nutrient requirements were computed based on PDRI standards for adults. Adequacy
of dietary intakes were further assessed using the Estimated Average Requirement
(EAR) for Protein and Energy (77% RNI) and Acceptable Macronutrient Distribution
Ranges (AMDR) cut-off values for Carbohydrates and Fat. Also, comparison between
dietary intakes during the first and last week of the study intervention were categorised
whether the last intake is “closer to requirement” or “farther to requirement” in

comparison to the first

A four-point likert scale, i.e strongly agree, agree, disagree, and strongly disagree
were used to assess the participant’s general acceptability towards the use of mobile
application. The statements are sub-categorised to measure five attributes of the

mobile application-Easy-to-Use, Educational, Use of Filipino Standards, Usable for Alll,


and Marketable. With the ordinal type of data gathered, frequency tables and summary

statistics were used to gauge if the mobile application is generally acceptable for the

participants.

Table 5. Objective-based Data Output

+ nti ; Data Collection Data Analysis
Objectives Data Requirements Procedures Procedures
1. Describe the * Socio-demographic =: Self- * Descriptive analysis
characteristics of information (age, administered of the participants’
the respondents. gender, degree questionnaire socio-demographic
sought) profile through
creation of frequency
tables
2. Determine the + Anthropometric + Anthropometric + Classify and describe
nutritional status measurements assessment the nutritional status
of respondents (height, weight and through BMI cut-offs
waist circumference), and % prevalence
Body Mass Index + Multivariate Analysis
(BMI) for paired data,
Hotelling’s T2
3. Describe the + General * Self- * Descriptive analysis
acceptability of Acceptability Survey administered for describing the
respondents survey subject participants’
towards the use acceptability towards
of mobile the use of mobile
application. app; Frequency
tables and

computaions of some
summary statistics

4. Determine the + Daily mobile app + Weekly follow- + Descriptive analysis
compliance of records ups for describing the
respondents subject participants’
towards the study compliance with
intervention using the mobile app;

Frequency tables and
computaions of some
summary statistics

Objectives Data Requirements Data Collection Data Analysis

Procedures Procedures
5. Determine + Anthropometric + Anthropometric + Two-Way Tables to
changes in measurements assessment describe changes
nutritional status, (weight and waist * Interview and between baseline and
anthropometric circumference), Body _Self- end-line data.
measurements, Mass Index (BMI) administered
food intake, + 24-hr Food Recall survey
nutritional * Nutrition Knowledge
knowledge and Scores
physical activity + Physical Activity
of respondents. Results
6. Determine the + Outputs of * Interview and * Two-Way Tables to
association objectives 2 and 4, Self- describe changes
between the use 24-hour Food Recall, administered between baseline and
of nutrition mobile General Nutrition questionnaire end-line data.
application with Knowledge Test and + Fisher’s Exact Test to
nutritional status, Physical Activity determine association
food intake and Assessment Test between variables
nutrition and compliance of

knowledge. mobile app use

el


RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Characteristics of the Population

Among the fifty (50) initial participants that were recruited, only 32 (64%)
participants have completed the study intervention for twenty-eight (28) days. The
other 18 participants withdrew consent (3 participants), switched to iOS (1 participant)
and were lost to follow-up (15 participants). The completing participants of the study
(n=32) were composed of 59.38% are female (n=19) and 40.63% are male (n=13). The
mean age of the respondents is 26.5 years with the youngest at 21 years old while the
oldest is 46 years old as shown in Table 5. Only 18.75% of the respondents who
completed the study were enrolled in a PhD program (n=6), while the rest are pursuing

Masters program (n=26) (Table 6).

Table 6. Sociodemographic Characteristics of Respondents

Variable All (n=50) Non-Completers (n=18) Completers (n=32)
Frequency % Frequency % Frequency %

Gender

Female 33 66.00 14 77.78 19 59.38

Male 17 34.00 4 22.22 13 40.63
Degree Sought

MS/MM 42 84.00 16 88.89 26 81.25

PHD 8 16.00 2 11.11 6 18.75

Anthropometric Measurements

The median height of the completing respondents is 156 cm, while the median

initial weight is 60.7 kg, and initial waist circumference of 81.4 cm. The median BMI at


baseline of the respondents who completed the study is 23.85 kg/m2 which is
classified as overweight using the Asian Criteria for BMI Classification.

After the duration of the study, respondents were measured at end-line. The
median for post measurements for weight and waist circumference are 69.8 kg and
78.55 cm, respectively. The median BMI for end-line measurements is at 23.75 kg/m2,

still generally classifying the completing participants as overweight (Table 7).

In the 2015 Anthropometric Survey of the FNRI, although increasing prevalence
of overnutrition has been observed, data shows that the median BMI for adults > 20
years is 22.81 kg/m? and an average waist circumference of 78.7 cm for males and
77.5 cm for females (FNRI, 2015), which are lower measurements than the median BMI

and waist circumference of the completing respondents.

Table 7. Age and Anthropometric Measurements of Respondents

Variable All (n=50) Non-Completers (n=18) Completers (n=32)
Median Min. Max. Median Min. Max. Median Min. Max.
Age 26 20 46 26.5 20 46 25 21 46
Height 155.8 143 183.8 155.8 143 175 156 145 183.8
Weight
Baseline 56.5 35.8 106.1 54.35 42 102 60.7 35.8 106.1
End-line - - - - - - 59.8 36 109.5
Waist Circumference
Baseline 76.7 60.2 112.2 71.9 63 104 81.4 60.2 112.2
End-line - - - - - - 78.55 59.1 115.2
BMI
Baseline 23.2 17 39.8 22 18.2 39.8 23.85 17 37.8

End-line 2 > = 2 : : 23.75 17.1 38.4



Nutrition Knowledge

General nutrition knowledge test was done before and after the study duration
with a maximum score of eleven (11) points per test. The median score for the initial
test was 8.5, having a highest score of 11 and lowest score of 5, while the post

nutrition knowledge median score is 8 having the lowest score of 4.

Table 8. Nutrition Knowledge Scores of Respondents
All (n=50) Non-Completers (n=18) | Completers (n=32)

Variable
Median Min. Max. Median Min. Max. Median Min. Max.

Nutrition Knowledge
Baseline 8 4 11 7 4 10 8.5 5 11
End-line = = = = = = 8 4 11

Physical Activity

Physical Activity was measured through the Total Physical Met-minutes/ week.
The WHO’s recommendation for the Total Physical Met-minutes/ week score must be
>= 600 to be tagged as physically active. Among the 32 completing participants, 23
(71.88%) have met the WHO recommendation for physical activeness. In the data
presented by the FNRI in 2015, less than half (42.5%) of the adult population were
found to be physically inactive and/or insufficiently physically active adhering to the
WHO's standards (Philippine Nutrition Facts and Figures, 2015), in comparison to the
results of the study wherein only 28.13% (n=9) of the respondents were not physically

active throughout the entire study duration.


Table 9. Weekly Total Physical Activity MET-minutes/ week of Respondents
Total Physical Activity MET-

minutes/ week Mean Min Max
Week 1 3281.25 0 17040
Week 2 3006.25 0 13140
Week 3 2627.5 0 13140
Week 4 2863.125 0 13140

General Acceptability

Table 10 shows the general acceptability of the completing participant towards
the use of mobile applications. Among the subcategories of the mobile app’s
acceptability test, the participants agree that by using the mobile app, it contributes to
one’s nutrition knowledge thus having a higher minimum score 2.5 and maximum score
of 4. However, the ease of using the app and use of Filipino standards had a minimum
score of 1, translating that some of the respondents strongly disagree that the app is
easy-to-use and such Filipino standards were used and evident in the app, which may
also be an indicator that participants might have experienced a hard time using the app
primarily due to high data entry burden, which is also common consumer concern in
relation to mobile app use (Krebs and Duncan, 2015). However, the participants agreed
that the mobile app consists and have utilised Filipino Standards in the app having a
median of 3. In general, the participants agreed that the mobile app is overall
favourable to its user, and would recommend its use among others having a median
score of 3. Furthermore, majority (81.25%) of the completing group are willing to pay
and purchase the mobile app in the future through an app store platform, and 73.08%

of those who has an intent to purchase were willing to pay Php 50.00- Php 100.00 for


the mobile application, in contrast to the study conducted among US mobile phone
owners wherein a large proportion of its respondents indicated their unwillingness to

pay for a health app (Krebs and Duncan, 2015).

Table 10. General Acceptability Scores towards Mobile Application

Criteria n % Median Min. Max.
Easy-to-Use - - 3 1 4
Educational (Nutrition) - - 3 2.5 4
Filipino Standards - - 3 1 4
Favourable - - 3 2 4

Marketability
Willingness to Pay

Yes 26 81.25 - = =
No 6 18.75 - = o
By How Much = - -
< Php 50.00 7 26.92 - = =

Php 50.00- Php 100.00 19 73.08 = - -

Dietary Intake

Table 11 shows the adequacy of the average nutrient intake of the participants
who completed the study based on the four 24-hour food recalls gathered during the
study duration. Most of the participants (n=22) have an adequate energy intake in
comparison to the Estimated Average Requirement (EAR) for their age group which is
77% of their Recommended Dietary Intake (RDI). The adequacy of the average
carbohydrate intake by the completing participants shows that 75% (n=24) of which
have a carbohydrate intake of 55-75%, which is the Acceptable Macronutrient
Distribution Range (AMDR) for their age group of 19-49 years (FNRI, 2015). Only 8

participants (25%) have a CHO intake of less than 55% of their daily dietary


distribution. Average protein intake of the respondents shows that 90.63% (n=29) of
the completing group has an adequate mean protein intake during the study duration
based on the Protein EAR for adults (Male=57g, Female=49g). Only 3 participants had
an inadequate average protein intak. Average fat intake of the majority of the
participants (78.13%) were found to be within the AMDR which is 15-30% for the
population group of 19 to 49 years of age (FNRI, 2015). Among the completing
population, there were 6 participants (18.75%) who has a mean fat intake that is more
than 30% of their daily recommended dietary intake.

Table 11. Adequacy of the Average Nutrient Intake of Respondents

Average Intake Frequency %
Energy (KCAL)*
Inadequate 10 31.25
Adequate 22 68.75
Carbohydrates (CHO)**
Below Range 8 25.00
Within Range 24 75.00
Protein (PRO)*™*
Inadequate 3 9.38
Adequate 29 90.63
Fat"
Below Range 1 3.13
Within Range 25 78.13
Above Range 6 18.75

*KCAL EAR=Recommended Intake x 77% RDI

™AMDR for CHO is 55-75% (Adults 19-49yo)

“*PRO EAR for Adults (19-49 years) is 57g (Male) and 49g (Female)
**** AMDR for FAT is 15-30% (Adults 19-49yo)

Multivariate analysis of mean difference of weekly intake and recommended
intake shows that there is no significant difference among the weekly mean energy

intake in comparison with the participants’ energy requirement. Highest mean


difference between requirement and actual intake was observed during the 2"4 week
(211.39 kcal), while the lowest mean difference of 35.98 kcal was during the 4th week
as shown in Table 12, which may indicate that, although not significant, during the last
week of the study intervention, the participants’ average calorie intake is closer to the
requirement as compared to the earlier weeks upon the beginning of study

intervention.

Table 12. Multivariate Analysis for Paired Data: Difference between Requirement and
Weekly Intake

Mean Difference (Requirement - Actual week)

Pairs

Energy (KCAL CHO (g) PRO (g) FAT (g) Fluid* (ml)
Requirement vs Actual Week 1 207.8031 71.8031 -3.3531 -5.1594 1075.0000
Requirement vs Actual Week 2 211.3906 59.7000 -3.0938 0.5031 845.3125
Requirement vs Actual Week 3 208.8812 63.9625 -6.2750 -0.2563 713.5000
Requirement vs Actual Week 4 35.9750 37.2156 -9.7750 -6.0250 566.6875
Hotelling's T-squared 6.1682 20.9658 2.6884 4.4546 84.9109
F statistic 1.3928 4.7342 0.6071 1.0059 19.1734
p-value 0.2620 0.0048 0.6609 0.4211 <0.0001
Conclusion Not Significant Not Significant Not Significant

*Recommended Water Intake is at 2500m\/day (8 to 10 glasses) (Pinggang Pinoy,2016)

For the carbohydrate intake, results show that there is a significant difference
between the mean difference between the participants’ recommended carbohydrate
intake and their actual weekly intake. The highest mean difference of 71.80 g was
observed during the 1st week of the study intervention, while the lowest mean
difference of 37.22 g, which is indicating that the mean actual intake is closer in

meeting the carbohydrate requirement, during the last week of the study duration.


Multivariate analysis of the mean difference between the recommended protein
intake and the participants weekly actual intake shows that there is no significant
difference among the mean protein intake in comparison with the participants’ energy
requirement. Results of the protein mean difference between requirement and actual
intake shows that the participants’ mean actual intake is higher than the
recommended, wherein the highest mean difference of -9.78 g was observed during
the 4th week, and a lower excess from the requirement during the first two weeks of the
study intervention. Analysis between the recommended and weekly actual fat intake
among participants shows that there is no significant difference among two variables
across all weeks during the study duration. However, it was observed that it was during
the 2.4 and 34 week where the participants’ actual intake is closest to the
recommended fat intake value wherein the mean difference from the recommended
intake was 0.503 g and -0.256 g, respectively. Results of the multivariate analysis for
the fluid intake of the participants shows significant difference between requirement
and actual intake across weeks during the study duration. It was observed that it was
during the 1st week of the study wherein the mean difference is at highest, lacking
1075.00 mi to meet the recommended 2500 ml fluid intake per day. However, upon
reaching the last week of the study duration, mean actual fluid intake was recorded to

be only 566.69ml short to meet the recommended intake as shown in Table 12.

Compliance

Compliance of participants were categorised as high (15 or more actual

screenshots) or low (14 and below) compliance. Only 34.38% (n=11) of the participants


have actual screenshots of 15 and above, while most of the participants were
categorised as low compliance having 65.62% of the total number of completing
participants (n=21). The mean for the actual screenshots by all users is 14.0938, with
the least number of screenshots of 6 and maximum number of 28, which is the total
duration of the study. Comparison between actual food recall by the researcher and
actual screenshots by the user was aimed, but was found to be incompatible with the
actual calculated dietary intake by the researcher, which may be contributed by
underreporting of intakes by the respondents in the actual food recalls (Lee et al.,
2017).

Table 13. Compliance of Completing Participants
Compliance Variable n % Min. Max.

Compliancy Level*

High Compliance™* 11 34.375

Low Compliance*** 21 65.625
Actual Screenshots of App by Users 14.0938 6.7267 6 28
Compatibility of Screenshots and Food _ _ . _
Recall

* Compliancy Level was based on number of actual screenshots by the participantwithin study duration
“High Compliance scores 15 or more actual screenshots
*“*Low Compliance scores 14 and below actual screenshots

Compliance and Nutritional Status

Although there was no significant difference between the baseline and end-line
weight measurements and BMI classification among participants, it was observed that

most of the low compliant participants (71.43%) were classified as overweight or


obese and only 23.81% have normal BMI, as compared to the high compliant group

wherein 45.45% have a normal BMI value of 18.5 kg/m? to 22.9 kg/m? (Table 14).

Table 14. BMI Classification* based on Compliance Level

Compliance Level Underweight Normal SE Tele MT Total
Obese
Low Compliance 1 5 15 21
High Compliance 0 5 6 11
Total 1 10 21 32

*based on BMI Asian Criteria

Risk for metabolic complications based on waistline measurements have shown
no difference between prior and post intervention. Majority of the participants, across
compliance level, both high and low are found to have no increased risk based on
waist circumference measurements. Table 15 shows that only 3 participants (14.29%)
among the low compliant and 1 (9.09%) from the high compliant group have been
observed to have an increased risk for metabolic complications such as abdominal
obesity, impaired glucose tolerance or diabetes mellitus, raised arterial pressure. BMI
and metabolic risk were found to be independent from compliance to the mobile app,

thus showed no association between nutritional status and compliance (Table 16).

Table 15. Metabolic Complications Risk based on Compliance Level

No Increased

Compliance Level Increased Risk* Risk Total
Low Compliance 3 18 21
High Compliance 1 10 11
Total 4 28 32

*Waist Circumference >= 88cm (Female), >=102cm (Male)


Table 16. Association of Compliance with Study Measures*

BMI Metabolic Risk
Table Probability (P) 0.106 0.4068
Two-sided Pr <= P 0.5133 1
Interpretation Independent Independent

“Analysed with Fisher's Exact Test

Results of change in weight, waist circumference, and BMI in the study wherein a
median change weight of -0.9 kg, waist circumference of -2.85 cm, and BMI -0.10 kg/
m2 was observed (Refer to table 7), although insignificant is similar to the results of the
literatures cited with 8 to 12 weeks study duration and mobile app use, comparing
measurements at baseline and end-line (Blaz et al., 2016; Martin et al., 2015; Ni

Mhurchu et al., 2014; Wharton et. al., 2014).

Compliance and Nutrition Knowledge

Table 17 shows the change on nutrition knowledge scores of participants
between their initial and post scores. More than half (61.90%) of the low compliant
participants got a lower post-study nutrition knowledge score in comparison to their
initial score prior the start of the intervention. Greater number of participants with high
compliance level (n=5) have increased scores compared to the low compliant
participants (n=4). Although the low compliant group posed greater number of
respondents who had a lower nutrition knowledge score at end-line, nutrition
knowledge was found to be independent or not associated with the compliance level of

the respondents (Table 18). Furthermore, nutrition knowledge may complement,


support and further boost weight loss strategies such as the use of mobile applications

(Rose et al., 2016).

Table 17. Nutrition Knowledge Score at End-line based on Compliance Level
Compliance Level Decrease Increase No Change Total

Low Compliance 13 4 4 21
High Compliance 3 5 3 11
Total 16 9 7 32

Table 18. Association of Compliance with Nutrition Knowledge*

Nutrition Knowledge

Table Probability (P) 0.0191
Two-sided Pr <= P 0.1632
Interpretation Independent

*Analysed with Fisher's Exact Test

Compliance and Dietary Intake

Tables 19 and 20 depict the adequacy of the participants’ dietary intake based on
their compliance level and how does it differ from the 1st week going to the last week of

the study intervention.

Table 19. Mean Nutrient Intake and Compliance Level

Average Nutrient Intake SMe sle le)

Frequency (n) %

Energy (KCAL)

Inadequate 6 28.57

Adequate 15 71.43
Carbohydrates (CHO)

Below Range 3 14.29

Within Range 18 85.71
Protein (PRO)

Inadequate 2 9.52

Adequate 19 90.48
Fat

Below Range 1 4.76

Within Range 18 85.71

Above Range 2 9.52

“KCAL EAR=Recommended Intake x 77% RDI
“AMOR for CHO is 55-75% (Adults 19-49yo)
“PRO EAR for Adults (19-49 years) is 57g (Male) and 49g (Female)

***"AMDR for FAT is 15-30% (Adults 19-49yo)

High Compliance

Frequency (n)


%

36.36
63.64

45.45
54.55

9.09
90.91

0.00
63.64
36.36

Results of the study show that low compliant participants generally tend to have a

more adequate intake as compared to those who are in the high compliance group

wherein some of the high compliant participants (86.36%) have an inadequate mean

energy intake, and also almost half of the participants of high compliance has a below

range (45.45%) mean carbohydrate intake wherein adequacy of CHO intake and

compliance level was found to be associated with each other (Table 20).


Table 20. Comparison of Week 4 Intake to Week 1 and Compliance Level

Average Nutrient Intake Low Compliance (n=21) High Compliance (n=11)

Frequency (n) % Frequency (n) %

Energy (KCAL)

Closer to Requirement 6 28.57 4 36.36

Farther to Requirement 15 71.43 7 63.64
Carbohydrates (CHO)

Closer to Requirement 3 14.29 5 45.45

Farther to Requirement 18 85.71 6 54.55
Protein (PRO)

Closer to Requirement 2 9.52 1 9.09

Farther to Requirement 19 90.48 10 90.91
Fat

Closer to Requirement 1 4.76 0 0.00

Farther to Requirement 2 9.52 4 36.36
Fluid

Closer to Requirement 17 80.95 8 72.73

Farther to Requirement 4 19.05 3 27.27

Furthermore, majority of the participants both from the high and low compliance
group were observed to have a CHO intake that is closer to their recommended CHO
intake during the last week of the study duration as compared to their intake during
week 1. Although there is no association found between compliance level and actual
intakes of protein and fat among participants (Table 21 and 22), 90.63% of the
respondents have recorded an adequate PRO intake and 78.13% have an intake that is
within the acceptable range for fat distribution of their daily dietary intake. Fluid intake
of the participants, regardless of the level of their compliance, have improved during
the 4th week and was closer to the recommended intake of 2500ml/ day as compared

to their intake during the 1st week of the study duration (Refer to table 20).


Table 21. Association of Compliance with Average Nutrient Intake Adequacy*
Mean KCAL Mean CHO Mean PRO Mean FAT

Adequacy Adequacy Adequacy Adequacy

Table Probability (P) 0.2776 0.0584 0.4657 0.0559
Two-sided Pr <= P 0.7026 0.0877 1 0.1476
Compliance
Interpretati and CHO
rpretation Independent adequacy are Independent Independent
associated

*Analysed with Fisher's Exact Test

Table 22. Association of Compliance with Week 1 vs Week 4 Nutrient_and Fluid
Wk1 vs Wk4 Wk1 vs Wk4 Wk1 vs Wk4 We1 vs ka “Kt vs W 4

KCAL Intake CHO Intake PRO Intake FAT Intake Hive
Table Probability (P) 0.1614 0.1457 0.0559 0.288 0.2934
Two-sided Pr <= P 0.4578 0.2515 0.1351 1 0.6675
Interpretation Independent Independent Independent Independent Independent

*Analysed with Fisher's Exact Test

The overall compliance of the participants were closer to their respective
requirements. However, only CHO intake has a significant change during the study
duration and association based on compliance (Table 21). Although insignificant, these
values may indicate possible changes in the dietary habit of the participants based on

the information given be the changes on macronutrient intake as well as the energy.

High compliant participants, who are supposedly more aware and cautious with
their dietary intake such that they are more often in using the mobile app, may have an

overall lower intake of carbohydrates possibly with the perception that carbohydrate


intake is associated to weight loss and weight management. In an experimental study
led by Dr. Labiner-Wolfe under the Food and Drug Administration, which aims to
investigate consumers’ understanding with regards to carbohydrate claims on food
packages and their ability to make appropriate judgements for healthy dietary
practices. Results of their analysis show that respondents of the study associate
claims of “Low-Carb”, “CarbConscious” or “1g Net Carb” product to be lower in
carbohydrates thus being more helpful for weight management than those products

that does not indicate “low carbohydrate” claim (FDA, 2009).

Meanwhile, low compliant participants who have lesser dietary intervention from
the mobile application, have more adequate carbohydrate intake compared to those
who are highly compliant. Such observations may be attributed to the results
presented by the 8th National Nutrition Survey conducted by the FNRI in 2013, wherein
usual dietary practices states that rice becomes a staple food among the older
population and the most commonly consumed food item across all population groups,
adding to the fact that cereal and cereal products contributes the biggest bulk in the

dietary intake across all population groups, including adults (FNRI, 2015).

Participant Suggestions and Recommendations

Most of the participants have recommended the further improvement of the
mobile application’s features, particularly the mobile application’s user interface (Ul),
which is core component of a mobile app for weight and health management (Rivera et

al., 2018). Participants further noted that scrolling thru food items for entering data was


burdensome for them, and may have contributed to them being less compliant with the

study intervention (Krebs and Duncan, 2015).

Another recommendation was the availability of options for portion sizes, which
have made it difficult for the participants to estimate their daily food intake more
accurately. Also, participants suggested a more stable app, since, most of the
participants, although addressed by the researcher, have encountered bug issues
during the study intervention. In addition, participants recommend to have a “reminder”

alarm to avoid skipping food recording on a daily basis.

On the other hand, participants generally have described their experience to be
interesting and served as a learning experience. Participants stated that the study
made them more “conscious” and “aware” of what and how much they are actually

eating.

Most of the participants have not suggested an alternative name for the mobile
app. Among those that was suggested were, “My Pinggan App”, “Food Diary” ,
“NutriCalc”, “Pinoy Diet”, “My Pinggang Pinoy”, “Nutrition Watch”, “Food Watch”,

“Nutri Points”, while some have verbally expressed that the “Himsog” name for the

mobile app is acceptable.


Summary and Conclusion

Because proper weight management serves as an important role in the
prevalence of malnutrition, especially obesity, various weight management approaches
have been recommended to successfully treating obesity, among those were dietetic
advice and individualised eating plans and web-based treatment programs and
resources, such as a nutrition mobile application, where in this study focused on a
nutrition mobile app being used among Filipino adults, specifically graduate students

from the University of the Philippines Los Bafios, Laguna.

Although weight control or management is essential in treating obesity, other
factors such as nutrition knowledge and education, physical activity, behavioural
change and dietary intake were proven to play a vital role in addressing concerns
towards improvement of nutritional status of a population group. The study aimed to
assess the usability of a developed nutrition mobile app which adheres to other
essential components of weight management as stated before. Not only mobile app
technology was used in this study, it also aimed to promote nutrition education, dietary
and lifestyle behaviour change, compliancy, and use of Filipino standards, among the

chosen study population.

Result of the study shows that although initial instructions for the use of mobile
app should be a daily activity, majority of the completing population, or 65.63% of
which have low compliance in using the mobile application, having less than 15 days of

app use during the prescribed study duration.


Nutritional Status of Graduate School Students of the University of the
Philippines Los Banos. Both the baseline and end-line results of the study shows that
more than half of the participating group were found to be overweight or obese, mostly
coming from those who were found to be less compliant in using the mobile app.
Although majority of the population were classified to be overweight or obese, waist
circumference measurements, both initial and post, have not indicated an increase risk
in metabolic complications such as diabetes mellitus, abdominal obesity,

hypercholesterolemia, or hypertension.

Acceptability and Compliance of the Mobile Application. General acceptability
towards the use of mobile app was deemed to be generally accepted, although the
ease of use have been observed to be a concern of the app using participants.
Compliancy towards the app was measured through actual screenshots and were

found to be of low compliance.

Changes in Nutritional Status, Anthropometric Measurements, Food Intake,
Nutritional Knowledge and Physical Activity of Respondents. Results of the study
shows although insignificant differences in study measurements, study outcome poses
a potential with regards to mobile app use. Notably, although insignificant, BMI and
Weight measurements at end-line have minimally reduced in comparison to baseline
data. Food intake, however, showed a significant difference with regards to

carbohydrates and fluid intake weekly mean difference analysis. Physical activeness


among the respondents were consistent even from the first week of the study
intervention down to the last. Changes in the following study measures may not be as
evident since the study duration was for only a short 28 days limiting the potential

effect of the study.

Association between Compliance of Mobile Application with Nutritional
Status, Nutrition Knowledge and Food Intake. Despite the fact that analysis of the
study shows that nutritional status, nutrition knowledge and dietary intake, except for
carbohydrates, were independent with mobile app use and compliancy, it was
observed that there were changes, although insignificant, with regards to nutrition

knowledge, and dietary intake.


RECOMMENDATIONS

It is recommended that mobile application be adopted to facilitate not only weight
management, but also nutrition education, and dietary modification, as it was able to
conduct nutrition promotion with minimal supervision among adults. However, results
of the study were found to be generally insignificant and limited since the intervention
was only for 28 days with a relatively small participating population. Therefore it is
suggested that a larger study population, and longer study intervention and follow-up
may be conducted, to attain more credible results which may directly associate the use
of such technology to weight management goals.

Furthermore, it is highly recommended that this mobile application be available
across all operation system platforms such that the study may not be limited among
Android users only. Also, stability of the mobile app technology is deemed necessary
since the software is found to be vulnerable to technical difficulties such as bugs, and
malfunctioning issues. In addition, further improvement of user interface must be
prioritised to be able to ensure ease in using the mobile application, such as predictive
typing of food items, enable user to edit and review encoded food items, and addition
of users that can access in a single smartphone.

Incorporation of the updated food exchange list will also be recommended to
make sure that standards used in the mobile application are up to date and suitable for
every Filipino. Also, inclusion of commercially available food items such as pre-packed
foods and fast food items may be necessary for food recording to enable a more
accurate calorie and nutrient tracking. Household measurements is suggested to be

made available for all food items for easy estimation of actual intake.


LITERATURE CITED

Azar K.M.J., Lesser L., Laing B., Stephens J., Aurora M., Burke L., Palaniappan L.
(2013). Mobile Applications for Weight Management: Theory-Based Content
Analysis. American Journal of Preventive Medicine 2013; Volume 45, Issue 5,

pp. 583-589

Babar N.F., Muzaffar R., Khan M.A., Imdad S. (2010). Impact of Socioeconomic Factors
on Nutritional Status in Primary School Children. J Ayub Med Coll

Abbottabad. 2010 Oct-Dec; 22(4): 15-18.

Beck, A.R. (2016). Psychosocial Aspects of Obesity. NASN School Nurse, 31(1), 23-27.

https://doi.org/10.1177/1942602X 15619756

Becker S., Brandl C., Meister S., Nagel E., Miron-Shatz T., Mitchell A., Kribben A.,
Albrecht U.V., Mertens A. (2015). Demographic and Health Related Data of
Users of a Mobile Application to Support Drug Adherence is Associated with
Usage Duration and Intensity. PLOS 2015. https://doi.org/10.1371/

journal.pone.0116980

Blaz D., Peterson J. (2016). Weight Loss Outcomes Associated With the Use of the
Army H.E.A.L.T.H. Weight Management Program in Overweight Military
Service Members and Veterans. The Journal for Nurse Practitioners Volume

22, Issue 8.

Bray G.A., Kim K.K., Wilding J.P.H., on behalf of the World Obesity Federation. (2017).

Obesity: A Chronic Relapsing Progressive Disease Process. A Position


Statement of the World Obesity Foundation. Obesity Reviews 2017. Vol. 18,

Issue 7, pp 715-723.

De Cock N., Vangeel J., et al. (2017). Use of Fitness and Nutrition Apps: Associations
with Body Mass Index, Snacking, and Drinking Habits in Adolescents. JMIR

Mhealth and Uhealth Volume 5, Issue 4. http://mhealth.jmir.org/2017/4/e58/

Djalalinia S., Qorbani M., Peykari N., et al. (2015). Health Impacts of Obesity. Pak J

Med Sci. 2015;31:239-242

Doll H. A., Petersen S. EK.,Stewart-Brown S. L. (2012). Obesity and Physical and
Emotional Well-Being: Associations between Body Mass Index, Chronic
Illness, and the Physical and Mental Components of the SF-36

Questionnaire. Obesity Research. https://doi.org/10.1038/oby.2000.17

Dwyer J.T., Melanson K.J., Sriprachy-anunt U, et al. Dietary Treatment of Obesity.
[Updated 2015 Feb 28]. In: Feingold KR, Anawalt B, Boyce A, et al., editors.
Endotext [Internet]. South Dartmouth (MA): MDText.com, Inc.; 2000-.

Available from: https://www.ncbi.nim.nih.gov/books/NBK278991/

Fahmida U., Dillon D. (2011). Nutritional Assessment Second Edition. Jakarta: SEAMEO

RECFON UI

Florentino, R. (2014). The Double Burden of Malnutrition in Asia: A Phenomenon Not to
be Dismissed. Journal of the ASEAN Federation of Endocrine Societies,
26(2), 133. Retrieved from http:/www.asean-endocrinejournal.org/index.php/

JAFES/article/view/83/383Food and Nutrition Research Institute. Current


Nutritional Status Among Filipino Adults. Retrieved from http://

www. fnri.dost.gov.ph/images/sources/anthrop_adults-revised.pdf

Flores Mateo G., Granado-Font E., Ferré-Grau C., Montafia-Carreras X. (2015). Mobile
Phone Apps to Promote Weight Loss and Increase Physical Activity: A
Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. J Med Internet Res 2015;17(11):e253

DOI: 10.2196 /jmir.4836

Food and Drug Administration. (2009). Experimental Study of Carbohydrate Claims on
Food Packages Analysis Report. Retrieved from https://jwww.fda.gov/food/
cfsan-consumer-behavior-research/experimental-study-carbohydrate-claims-

food-packages-analysis-report

Food and Nutrition Research Institute. Food Exchange List for Meal Planning. Retrieved

from http://www. fnri.dost.gov.ph/index.php/publications/nutritional-handbooks

Food and Nutrition Research Institute. 8th National Nutrition Survey Overview.
Retrieved from http://enutrition.fnri.dost.gov.ph/assets/uploads/publications/

Overview_8thNNS_050416.pdf

Food and Nutrition Research Institute. Philippine Nutrition Facts and Figures 2015.
Retrieved from http://enutrition.fnri.dost.gov.ph/site/uploads/

2015_ANTHROPOMETRIC_SURVEY.pdf

Food and Nutrition Research Institute. Philippine Dietary Reference Intake. Retrieved
from http:/Awww.fnri.dost.gov.ph/index.php/tools-and-standard/philippine-

dietary-reference-intakes-pdri


Food and Nutrition Research Institute. Pinggang Pinoy. Retrieved from https://

www. fnri.dost.gov.ph/index.php/tools-and-standard/pinggang-pinoy

Garcia-Chavez, C.G., Rodriguez-Ramirez, S., Rivera, J.A., Monterrubio-Flores, E., &
Tucker, K.L. (2017). Sociodemographic factors are associated with dietary
patterns in Mexican schoolchildren. Public health nutrition, 21(4), 702-710.

doi:10.1017/S1368980017003299

Godino J.G., Merchant G., Norman G.J., Donohue M.C., Marshall S.J., Fowler, J.H.,
Calfas K.J., Huang J.S., Rock C.L., Griswold W.G., Gupta A., Raab F., Fogg,
B.J., Robinson T.N., Patrick K. (2016). Using Social and Mobile Tools for
Weigh Loss in Overweight and Obese Young Adults (Project SMART): A 2-
Year, Parallel-Group, Randomised, Controll Trial. The Lancet Diabetes and
Endocrinology 2016; Volume 4, Issue 9, pp. 747-755 https://doi.org/10.1016/

$2213-8587(16)30105-X

Greenway F.L. (2015). Physiological Adaptations to Weight Loss and Factors Favouring

Weight Regain. International Journal of Obesity. Vol. 39 Pages 1188-1196

Haapala |., Barengo N., Biggs S., Surakka L., Manninen P. (2009). Weight Loss by
Mobile Phone: A 1-year Effectiveness Study. Public Health Nutrition. doi:

10.1017/S1368980009005230

Hruby, A., & Hu, F.B. (2015). The Epidemiology of Obesity: A Big Picture.

PharmacoEconomics, 33(7), 673-689. doi:10.1007/s40273-014-0243-x


Institute of Medicine (US) Subcommittee on Military Weight Management. Weight
Management: State of the Science and Opportunities for Military Programs.
Washington (DC): National Academies Press (US); 2004. Available from:

https://Awww.ncbi.nim.nih.gov/books/NBK221831/ doi: 10.17226/10783

International Telecommunications Union. Mobile Application Definition. Retrieved from

https://www. itu.int/dms_pub/itu-t/oth/23/01/T230100000C0004PDFE.pdf

Islam Md. R., Islam Md. R., Mazumder T.A. (2010). Mobile Application and Its Impact.
International Journal of Engineering and Technology IJET-IJENS Vol. 10, No.

6.

Kliemann N., Wardle J., Johnson F., Croker H. (2016). Reliability and Validity of a
Revised Version of the General Nutrition Knowledge Questionnaire.

European Journal of Clinical Nutrition 2016. Vol. 70, pp. 1174-1180

Krebs P., Duncan D.T. (2015). Health App Use Among US Mobile Phone Owners: A
National Survey. JMIR Mhealth Uhealth. 3(4):e101. https://mhealth.jmir.org/

2015/4/e101

Lee, Ji-Eun; Song, Sihan; Ahn, Jeong S.; Kim, Yoonhee; Lee, Jung E. (2017). Use of a
Mobile Application for Self-Monitoring Dietary Intake: Feasibility Test and an

Intervention Study. Nutrients 9, no. 7: 748.

Lieffers J., Arocha J., Grindrod K., Hanning R. (2017). Experiences and Perception of

Adults Accessing Publicly Available Nutrition Behavior-Change Mobile Apps


for Weight Management. Journal of the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics.

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jand.2017.04.015

Liu F., Kong X., Cao J., Chen S., Li C., Huang J., Gu D., Kelly T. (2015). Mobile Phone
Intervention and Weight Loss Among Overweight and Obese Adults: A Meta-
Analysis of Randomized Controlled Trials. American Journal of Epidemiology

Volume 181 No. 5. doi:10.1093/aje/kwu260

Maciel, N. M., De Conti, M., Simeao, S., Genebra, C., Corrente, J. E., & De Vitta, A.
(2018). Sociodemographic factors, level of physical activity and health-
related quality of life in adults from the north-east of Sao Paulo, Brazil: a
cross-sectional population study. BMJ open, 8(1), e017804. doi:10.1136/

bmjopen-2017-017804

Mahan, L.K. & Escott-Stump, S. (2004). Krause’s Food, Nutrition and Diet Therapy, 11th

edition. Singapore: Elsevier PTE LTD. pp. 565 — 567

Martin C., Miller A., Thomas D., Chamagne C., Han H.,Church T. (2015). Efficacy of
SmartLoss, a Smartphone-Based Weight Loss Intervention: Results from a

Randomized Controlled Trial. Obesity Journal. doi:10.1002/oby.21063

Mertens A., Brandl C., Miron-Shatz T., Schlick C., Neumann T.,Kribben A., Meister S.,
Diamantidis C.J., Albrecht, U.V., Horn P., Becker S. (2016). A Mobile
Application Improves Therapy-Adherence Rates in Elderly Patients
Undergoing Rehabilitation. Medicine (Baltimore) 2016; 95(36):e4446 DOI:

10.1097/MD.0000000000004446


Mosconi P., Radrezza S., Lettieri E., Santoro E. (2019). Use of Health Apps and
Wearable Devices: Survey Among Italian Associations for Patient Advocacy.

JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2019;7(1):e10242 DOI: 10.2196/10242

Ni Mhurchu C., Whittaker R., McRobbie H., Ball K., Crawford D., Michie J., Jiang Y.,
Maddison R., Waterlander W., Myers K. (2014). Feasibility, Acceptability and
Potential Effectiveness of a Mobile Health (mHealth) Weight Management
Programme for New Zealand Adults. BMC Obesity 2014, 1:10. http://

www.biomedcentral.com/2052-9538/1/10
Ofei F. (2005). Obesity-A Preventable Disease. Ghana Med J. 2005;39(3):98-101

Popkin B. (2001). The Nutrition Transition and Obesity in the Developing World. The

Journal of Nutrition 2001. Volume 131, Issue 3, pp.8715-8735

Panuganti K.K., Bhimji S.S. Obesity. (2019). In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island
(FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2019 Jan-. Available from: https://

www.ncbi.nim.nih.gov/books/NBK459357/

Rivera J., McPherson A., Hamilton J., Birken C., Coons M., lyer S., Agarwal A., Lalloo
C., Stinson J. (2016), Mobile Apps for Weight Management: A Scoping
Review. JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2016;4(3):e87. https://mhealth.jmir.org/

2016/3/e87 DOI: 10.2196/mhealth.5115

Rose S., Pretto J., Brooke C.P., Hensley E.M., Henskens F. (2016). Relationships
between Nutritional Knowledge, Obesity, and Sleep Disorder Severity.

Journal of Sleep Research 2016. Vol. 25, Issue 3, pp. 350-355


Russell-Mayhew S., McVey G., Bardick A., Ireland A. (2012). Mental Health, Wellness,
and Childhood Overweight/ Obesity. Journal of Obesity 2012; doi:

10.1155/2012/281801

Seidell J.C., Halberstadt J. (2015). The Global Burden of Obesity and the Challenges of

Prevention. Ann Nutr Metab; 66 (suppl 2):7-12. doi: 10.1159/000375143

Silva, B.M., Rodrigues, J.J., Diez, 1.D., L6pez-Coronado, M., & Saleem, K. (2015).
Mobile-health: A review of current state in 2015. Journal of Biomedical

Informatics, 56, 265-272. doi:10.1016/,.jbi.2015.06.003

Statista. Annual number of global mobile app downloads 2017-2022. Retrieved from
https://www.statista.com/statistics/27 1644/worldwide-free-and-paid-mobile-

app-store-downloads/

Sumabat, CM. (2017). (Unpublished). HIMSOG: Filipino Nutrition Mobile Application for

Weight Management

Tay |, Garland S, Gorelik A, Wark J.D. (2017). Development and Testing of a Mobile
Phone App for Self-Monitoring of Calcium Intake in Young Women JMIR

Mhealth Uhealth 2017;5(3):e27 DOI: 10.2196/mhealth.5717

Via, M.A. & Mechanick, J.I. (2014). Obesity as a Disease. Curr Obes Rep. 3: 291.

https://doi.org/10.1007/s13679-014-0108-9

Vuong, A.M., Huber, J.C., Jr, Bolin, J.N., Ory, M.G., Moudouni, D.M., Helduser, J., ...
Forjuoh, S. N. (2012). Factors affecting acceptability and usability of

technological approaches to diabetes self-management: a case study.


Diabetes technology & therapeutics, 14(12), 1178-1182. doi:10.1089/dia.

2012.0139

Wang Y., Xue H., Huang Y., Huang L., Zhang D. (2017). A Systematic Review of
Application and Effectiveness of mHealth Interventions for Obesity and
Diabetes Treatment and Self-Management, Advances in Nutrition, Volume 8,

Issue 3, May 2017, Pages 449-462, https://doi.org/10.3945/an.116.014100

West J.H., Belvedere L.M., Andreasen R., Frandsen C., Hall P.C., Crookston B.T.
(2017). Controlling Your “App”etite: How Diet and Nutrition-Related Mobile
Apps Lead to Behavior Change. JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2017;5(7):e95 DOI:

10.2196/mhealth.7410

Wharton C., Johnston C., Cunningham B., Sterner D. (2014). Dietary Self-Monitoring ,
But Not Dietary Quality, Improves With Use of Smartphone App Technology
in an 8-Week Weight Loss Trial. Journal of Nutrition Education and Behavior.

Volume 46, No. 5. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/.jneb.2014.04.291

Winik C., Bonham C.E. (2018). Weight Management: A Concept Analysis. Nursing

Forum 2018. Volume 53 Issue 1, pp. 93-99

World Health Organization. Obesity and Overweight. Retrieved from http:/Avww.who.int/

mediacentre/factsheets/fs311/en/

World Health Organization. Waist Circumference and Waist-Hip Ratio Report of a WHO
Expert Consultation. Retrieved fromhttps://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/

10665/44583/978924 1501491_eng.pdf?sequence=1


Zaidan S., Roehrer E. (2016). Popular Mobile Phone Apps for Diet and Weight Loss: A
Content Analysis. JMIR Mhealth and Uhealth. Volume 4, Issue 3. doi:

10.2196/mhealth.5406

Zaragosa M.G., Kim H.K., Han D.S. (2016). Mobile Application Development,
Approaches, Advancement and Process. International Journal of Software
Engineering and Its Application Vol. 10, No. 10, pp. 79-88. http://dx.doi.org/

10.14257/ijseia.2016.10.10.09
