Communicating Pinggang Pinoy and Intentions of Nutrition and Health Workers to Educate Mothers in Selected Metro Manila Cities and Laguna

SALVADOR R. SERRANO

UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES LOS BAÑOS

Master of Science in Development Communication

June 2023

ABSTRACT

The lack of use of simple nutrition tools to guide nutrition and health workers in educating
mothers on proper nutrition is one cause of malnutrition or undernutrition. Pinggang Pinoy is a
simple and easy-to-understand nutrition tool developed by the Department of Science and
Technology’s Food and Nutrition Research Institute to guide nutrition and health workers in
educating mothers on the right kinds and amounts of Go, Grow, and Glow foods on a per meal
basis. However, there are areas that are still experiencing the persistent prevalence of the co-
existence of undernutrition and overnutrition known as “double burden”. Guided by the Theory
of Planned Behavior, the study attempted to determine behavioral intentions of nutrition and
health workers to educate mothers after viewing Pinggang Pinoy videos. Through a one-group
posttest-only research design, 82 Barangay Nutrition Scholars (BNSs), Barangay Health Workers
(BHWs), Daycare teachers and workers, and nutritionists in the cities of Taguig, Pasig, and
Makati of Metro Manila and Laguna were surveyed. While sampling depended on permission
granted by LGUs and nutrition officers and voluntary participation of BNSs and BHWs,
G*Power App software version 3.1. was used and obtained the minimum sample size of 67 with
a Statistical Power of 0.86 or 86 percent. Cross-tabulations of background factors with awareness
on Pinggang Pinoy, attitude, behavior, control, and intentions yielded positive responses.
Spearman’s Rho Correlation showed respondents’ educational attainment was positively and
significantly correlated with behavioral intention, and that awareness on Pinggang Pinoy and
determinants of behavioral intentions were positively and significantly correlated to intentions.
While all respondents except one, had prior knowledge on Pinggang Pinoy, most expressed need
for more nutrition education support.

Keywords: Theory of Planned Behavior, behavioral intentions, Pinggang Pinoy, nutrition and health
workers, nutrition education, nutrition communication

CHAPTER I

INTRODUCTION

Background and Rationale of the Study

One of the leading causes of undernutrition and malnutrition is poverty (World
Bank, 2021). The same report revealed that 42.4 percent of poor households are stunted
further compounded by the COVID-19 pandemic. It was likewise found that hunger
Tose exponentially only after the first seven months of community quarantine with 31
percent of families going hungry and 9 percent experiencing severe hunger. These are
the highest levels recorded after 20 years by far. While poor families buy only the food
that they can afford regardless of quality and nutritional value, the same could be said
of those who have money or have little knowledge about proper nutrition and healthy

consumption.

The Department of Science and Technology’s Food and Nutrition Research
Institute (DOST-FNRI), mandated to address undernutrition and malnutrition in the
country, developed a simple and easy-to-understand nutrition communication tool
dubbed as Pinggang Pinoy. It aims to convey the messages of eating the right kinds and
amounts of Go, Grow, and Glow foods per meal graphically represented in a standard
dinner plate. Aside from promoting the consumption of a variety of foods, Pinggang

Pinoy also advocates sufficient hydration and a healthy lifestyle. Promoting the right

amounts of food per meal also implies the environmental messages of judicious food

purchase, preparation, consumption, and limiting food waste.

The Pinggang Pinoy food guide emphasizes three food groups: “Go” (rice and
alternatives), “Grow” (fish and alternatives), and “Glow” (vegetables and fruits),
reflecting the usual Filipino diet. Half of the plate is occupied by vegetables and fruits,
while the rice and protein groups make up 1/3 and 1/6 of the plate, respectively. An
identifying color and single graphic icons of locally known food items represented each

food group. A glass of water was incorporated to highlight the importance of hydration,

while the icon of a couple jogging represents a physically active lifestyle.

FINGSANS EINQY”

Figure 1. Pinggang Pinoy placemat

The Pinggang Pinoy brochure was one of the collaterals developed. It featured
a sample one-day meal plan and nutrition messages based on the 2012 Nutritional

Guidelines for Filipinos, and equivalent portion sizes to assist users in adopting

Pinggang Pinoy. The developed two-week cycle menus met 100-105 percent of the
energy requirement, 100 percent or more of the protein recommendation, and at least

70 percent of the other micronutrient requirements.

Disseminating the information lies heavily on Barangay Nutrition Scholars
(BNSs) and Barangay Health Workers (BHWs) and other health workers like
nutritionist-dietitians and daycare teachers and workers as the frontline multipliers of
nutrition education at the grassroots and even cities, with mothers as primary
stakeholders. Nutrition and health workers are expected to educate mothers especially
on the assumption that they are responsible for determining what food their children
should eat. However, the country is still experiencing high rates of undernutrition and
malnutrition. Therefore, it would be fitting to find out whether nutrition and health
workers intended or had the intention to educate the mothers in their respective areas
of jurisdiction. Under the devolved set-up, nutrition, health, and social workers are
employees of the Local Government Units from the province down to the barangays,
but still receive some support and supervision from the regional offices of their mother
agencies like the National Nutrition Council of the Department of Health (NNC-DOH)

and the Department of Social Welfare and Development (DSWD).

The cities of Taguig, Pasig, and Makati in Metro Manila, as well as Laguna,
have an improving nutritional status over the years. However, these areas still
experiencing the persistent prevalence of the co-existence of undernutrition and

overnutrition known as the “double burden” of malnutrition. The behavioral intentions

of nutrition and health workers could be significant indicators of behavior change

towards educating mothers on basic Pinggang Pinoy messages.

Statement of the Problem

There are voluminous related studies on behavioral intention and behavior
change conducted based on Azjen and Fishbein’s Theories of Reasoned Action and
Planned Behavior, behavioral and learning theories and behavior change
communication models throughout the decades. However, there seems to be a need to
further enrich the nutrition communication field in the Philippines, particularly on the
use of a practical nutrition education tool, like the Pinggang Pinoy, in determining the

behavioral intentions of nutrition and health workers to impart its basic messages.

Behavioral intention and change towards balanced and proper meal preparation
go beyond eating the right kinds and amounts of food to be healthy. Balanced and
proper meal preparation reiterate the importance of eating a variety of food on a per-
meal basis complemented with a healthy lifestyle. It also requires judicious food
selection or buying and consumption. In turn, judicious food selection and consumption
help minimize food wastage. Minimizing food wastage leads to lesser pressure on the
agriculture and food industry sectors to over-produce. Managed production means

lesser carbon “foodprint” and a more sustainable environment.

This study attempted to apply the Theory of Planned Behavior in explaining that

given a practical nutrition tool like the Pinggang Pinoy as guide, the behavioral

intentions of imparting Pinggang Pinoy messages to mothers could be determined. In
particular, it aimed to determine attitude toward behavior, subjective norms, and
perceived behavioral control, as behavioral intention determinants, after watching the
Pinggang Pinoy videos. Likewise, it was an effort to seek out complementary
communication strategies in delivering the Pinggang Pinoy messages and draw out
insights on the potential implications of balanced meal preparation towards judicious

food consumption and minimizing food wastage.

In general, the study attempted to answer the question: How can viewing the
Pinggang Pinoy videos affect the behavioral intentions of nutrition and health workers

to educate mothers in selected Metro Manila cities and Laguna?

Specifically, the study sought to answer the following questions:

1. How do background factors of nutrition and health workers in selected Metro
Manila cities and Laguna influence the behavioral intention to educate mothers on
Pinggang Pinoy messages?

2. How does awareness of nutrition and health workers on Pinggang Pinoy messages
before watching the Pinggang Pinoy videos explain their behavioral intentions to
educate mothers?

3. To what extent do subjective norms such as the influence of significant others
influence the intention of health workers to educate mothers?

4. How do perceived behavioral control factors affect their intention to educate

mothers on Pinggang Pinoy?

5. How do attitudes, subjective norms, and perceived behavioral control collectively
predict nutrition workers’ intention to educate mothers on Pinggang Pinoy

messages?

Objectives of the Study

In general, the study aimed to determine the effects of viewing the Pinggang

Pinoy videos on the behavioral intentions of nutrition and health workers to educate

mothers in selected Metro Manila cities and Laguna.

Specifically, the study attempted to:

1. Describe the background factors of nutrition and health workers in selected Metro
Manila cities and Laguna that would influence the behavioral intention to educate
mothers on Pinggang Pinoy messages;

2. Find out how awareness level of nutrition and health workers on Pinggang Pinoy
messages before watching the Pinggang Pinoy videos can explain their behavioral
intentions to educate mothers;

3. Assess to what extent do subjective norms such as the influence of significant others
influence the intention of health workers to educate mothers;

4. Examine the perceived behavioral control factors that would affect their intention
to educate mothers on Pinggang Pinoy; and

5. Analyze how attitudes, subjective norms, and perceived behavioral control can
collectively predict nutrition workers’ intention to educate mothers on Pinggang

Pinoy messages.

Significance of the Study

This study attempted to contribute further to the growing body of knowledge
and applications of the Theory of Planned Behavior in nutrition communication,
education, and promotion by using a practical communication tool like the Pinggang
Pinoy in determining the behavioral intention of nutrition and health workers to educate
mothers at the grassroots and cities level on balanced meal preparation and other

implied messages on food consumption and wastage.

Results of this study may provide valuable inputs to development
communication research, development programs, projects, and services, particularly in
determining behavioral intentions of frontline nutrition and health workers. The
methodology and results of this study may be used as reference by students, researchers,
teachers, government and private organizations, funding agencies, policymakers, and

other stakeholders of nutrition, health, and development communication.

The Department of Science and Technology (DOST), particularly the Food and
Nutrition Research Institute (FNRI), Philippine Council for Health Research and
Development (PCHRD), and the Science and Technology Information Institute (STII)
may draw relevant information from this study as reference and model for planning,

implementing, monitoring and evaluating communication programs of the Department.

Scope and Limitations of the Study

The study covered the behavioral intention levels of Barangay Nutrition
Scholars (BNSs), Barangay Health Workers (BHWs), Daycare workers and
nutritionists in the cities of Taguig, Pasig, and Makati of Metro Manila and Laguna to
educate mothers on Pinggang Pinoy messages. These messages included eating a
variety of food, sufficient hydration, and healthy lifestyle. It only covered some of the
following significant factors influencing behavioral intention, such as selected
background factors, attitude toward behavior, subjective norms, and perceived
behavioral control, as posited by Azjen and Fishbein. To a certain extent, the main

messages implied judicious food consumption and minimizing wastage.

In terms of respondents and locale, the study was limited only to BNSs and
BHWs, nutritionists and social workers of the Cities of Taguig, Pasig, and Makati, and
the province of Laguna who volunteered to be part of the study. Sampling of areas
depended on the permission granted by the LGU and voluntary participation of their

nutrition and health workers as respondents.

Links to the Pinggang Pinoy videos and questionnaire were sent online. The
online document included the Data Privacy Statement and Informed Consent forms.
Respondents answered the questionnaire after reading and agreeing to the Data Privacy

Statement and Informed Consent forms, and after viewing the Pinggang Pinoy AVPs.

A major limitation in the location and recruitment of respondents was the strict
observance of health protocols during the COVID-19 pandemic surges when the study
was conducted. Face-to-face gatherings and interactions, especially for large groups of
people were prohibited. Many LGUs from which the researcher asked permission to
collect data had several requirements and stated that their BNSs and BHWs were very
busy with the pandemic response, vaccination, and relief operations. Thus, only the
LGUs who gave permission and their nutrition and health workers who volunteered to

participate were included in the study.

Another major limitation was the online data collection using links to the
Google questionnaire and videos that limited the number of qualified respondents and
the number of submitted questionnaires. Many nutrition and health workers did not
have suitable gadgets, no constantly stable Internet, especially at home, and were not
familiar with online questionnaires and applications for viewing videos. Moreover, the
posttest-only method did not provide a comparison for the difference in strength or
weakness of behavior before and after watching the videos, except for the responses on

statements regarding prior awareness on Pinggang Pinoy and the background factors.

The study did not include how the Pinggang Pinoy messages were crafted or

how the design of the nutrition tool was decided upon.


CHAPTER II

REVIEW OF RELATED LITERATURE

Nutrition education is assumed to address malnutrition, undernutrition or
overnutrition through various channels. There have also been many strategies to do this
but there is no one recommended format or through what means. Knowing the different
methods can help establish what strategy works best but little is known about how these
are used for education. Information Education and Communication materials (IECs) are
always created to address behavioral change. However, there is very little if not no
study yet has been conducted to determine whether communicators indeed intend to
educate their audiences especially in promoting Pinggang Pinoy. Information

dissemination is different from intending to educate.

Nutrition Education

Advances in nutritional science have underscored the need to review the FNRI
food pyramid with more appropriate representations and develop a new Filipino food
guide for nutrition education. While the FNRI food pyramid enjoyed widespread
recognition, consumers viewed it as a general guideline and expressed difficulty in
understanding its specific nutrition messages. Thus, a formative research was
conducted to generate science-based evidence for the development of a new guide and

determine perceptions on the old guide (pyramid).


Key informant interviews (KII) were conducted among 153 experts (nutrition
educators) and 27 focus group discussions (FGDs) among users (mothers) in urban and
tural communities in Luzon. Each FGD was composed of six participants, a moderator,
and recorder. Quantitative analysis of data involved frequencies and percentages, while

qualitative analysis of KII and FGD proceedings was done through textual analysis.

Majority of the key informants and mothers were aware of and have used the
pyramid. They offered a number of different locations where they had seen it like
through advertisements, health centers, schools, offices, and bookstores. Though aware,
key informants cited serving portion and content as the most common barriers in using
it. Mothers cited “no money” to follow recommendations, unavailability of copies
especially in rural communities and unclear copies as the barriers to its usage. Most of
the key informants (KIs) and mothers said the existing guide (pyramid) was enough but
a supplement guide will be helpful to make it more relevant to today’s lifestyle and
food choices. KIs and mothers both affirmed that the supplement guide should indicate

a “per meal” eating recommendation rather than “per day”.

The Pinggang Pinoy Concept

If one was asked what makes a meal healthy but could not respond, then he or
she might be one of the many adults with diet and lifestyle-related diseases in the
Philippines. In response to the growing concern, FNRI developed a new food guide to
promote healthy eating habits among Filipinos. Pinggang Pinoy, literally translated as

Filipino Plate, is a visual representation of what a person should consume on a per meal


basis. It is a plate-based food guide that features the right proportion of food that

contains the right nutrients needed by the body of an average Filipino.

The DOST-FNRI’s National Nutrition Survey (NNS) results from 1993 to the
latest showed that despite a decrease in the number of Chronic Energy Deficient (CED)
adults aged 20 years old and above, this still does not go below 10 percent

(READ: From numbers to actions, thanks to National Nutrition Survey).

A person with CED is someone who has low energy storage due to lack of intake
of the proper nutrients. In 2013, the survey results showed that one in every 10 Filipino
adults has CED. Women tended to be more energy deficient than men, according to the
World Food Programme’s Micronutrient Initiative Annual Report in 2011-2012.
(Read: Nutrition facts: Hidden hunger). Meanwhile, the prevalence of obesity increased
among Filipino adults in 2013 with 3 in every 10 people considered obese. Seen as a
health risk, an abnormal accumulation of fat mainly due to the wrong type of food intake

leads to obesity.

According to DOST-FNRI Science Research Specialist Ma. Jovina Sandoval,
this is what the new food guide wants to correct. “The most important message we want
to give to Filipinos is that they need to take the right proportions,” she explained. The
FNRI recommends that each healthy meal should be composed of 33 percent rice, 33

percent vegetables, 17 percent meat, and 17 percent fruit.


The Pinggang Pinoy aims to complement and not replace the existing Daily
Nutritional Guide (DNG) Pyramid. It is an effort to translate the recommended portions
to household measures. Through this, the Pinggang Pinoy becomes a familiar food
plate model that is simple and understandable. It also emphasizes the need for variety

in the diet of an individual.

The Pinggang Pinoy team pre-tested the visual guide in several rural and urban
areas. Results from the test showed that the respondents preferred and followed the said
format than a written one. The methods used in the Pinggang Pinoy for adults
introduced in 2013 were adopted in developing the food guides for the specific
population and physiological groups. This involved establishment of nutritional goals,
selection of nutritionally adequate menus, computation, and translation of food weights
to household measures, assessment of nutrient adequacy, visualization of Pinggang
Pinoy food guide, technical consultations with the experts, and pretesting of collaterals

among the intended users.

Based on the computed adequacy of the sample two-week menu developed and
the translation of food weights into household measures, the proportion of the food
groups in every meal for each group was established and illustrated using a food plate
model. Pinggang Pinoy conveys the same proportion of the different food groups but
with different amounts or portion sizes on the plate depending on the age or physiologic

group.


One highlight of this study was that the previous Pinggang Pinoy
recommendation for adults (19 years old and above) was divided into two age groups:
the adults and elderly. The Pinggang Pinoy food guide developed has distinct icons for
the different population groups, wherein each group can be identified by the color of
the placemat (a collateral), which conveys special meanings such as energy,

dependability, power, courage, and life.

Nutrition messages and the portion on “How to Fill Up Your Plate” were also
included to assist users in adopting the food guide. Importance of hydration in the body
was also highlighted in the brochures. Actual photos of nutritionally adequate meals
and photos of persons representing each group were also part of the brochures. These
materials were reviewed and examined by nutrition and communication experts. The
materials were pre-tested among intended users through FGDs and KIIs. Overall, the
intended users found the brochures useful nutrition education materials. The material
conveyed the concept of eating a variety of foods in the right proportion to meet the

body’s energy and nutrient needs in a simple and understandable way.

In a related study, an FGD among 10 participants from the FNRI was initially
conducted to determine perception, taste, and food preferences during pregnancy and
lactation. Participants were 7 females who were either currently pregnant or lactating
or had experienced pregnancies, while the 3 males were fathers. Based on the results, a
two-level recipe development process (n=11, N=50) was conducted considering the

Pinggang Pinoy recommendations for pregnant and lactating women.


Subsequently, a sensory evaluation using a 9-point hedonic rating scale was
conducted to assess acceptability of the recipes. Energy and nutrient content of the
recipes were estimated using the updated FCT + Menu Eval Software. Photo-
documentation and formulation of 4-week cycle menus were also done. The calendar
underwent 2-stage pre-testing and received very satisfactory ratings from the
respondents who included nutritionists, BNSs, BHWs, and pregnant and lactating
mothers. The MGC 2017 highlights 19 photo-documented recipes incorporated in the
4-week cycle menus and health and nutrition tips for pregnant and lactating women.

The wall calendar was printed in full colors.

The calendar illustrated how healthy eating can be sustained during pregnancy
and lactation by emphasizing the Pinggang Pinoy recommendations. It provided easy-
to-understand concepts on food groups, portion size, and healthy cooking to maintain
nutritional well-being of both the mother and infant during pregnancy and lactation.
The calendar can serve as an easy daily reference material for homemakers and nutrition
educators in homes and in the community. However, there should be an assurance that

raw materials are available and sustainable.

Food Sustainability

Food sustainability can be considered the sum of two components: sustainable
consumption and sustainable diet. The latter is nicely condensed in the definition of
Burlingame and Dernini (2010): those diets with low environmental impact that

contribute to food security and nutrition and a healthy life for the present and future


generations. Sustainable diets are protective and respectful of biodiversity and
ecosystems, culturally acceptable, affordable, and convenient; nutritionally adequate,

safe and healthy; involving the optimization of natural and human resources.

In terms of food supplies, recording new occurrences of poverty and famine
even in unexpected areas are recorded, as testified by the growing incidence of subjects
who are malnourished or at risk of protein-energy malnutrition, which often coexists
with diseases classically determined by hyper-consumption — obesity. These are two
faces of the same coin; namely, a risk stratification on the basis of socio-economic
factors, where not only the amount, but also the variety of healthy foods tends to
decrease and — in contrast — the energy-dense, low-cost foods become the first option

for poor people.

Rice, Food Consumption and Wastage

Considered a food staple, there is no denying that Filipinos love rice. Most have
it at least 3 times a day. A plate with no mound of steaming rice in sight is considered
incomplete. If the Americans have their mashed potato with their roasted meat, Filipino

households have rice for their adobo, sinigang or simply tuyo.

This 2014 online article was based on related data from the Southeast Asian
Regional Center for Graduate Study and Research (SEARCA), International Rice
Research Institute (IRRI), Philippine Rice Research Institute (PhilRice) and the DOST-

FNRI Food Consumption Survey. (Read: How much rice do Filipinos consume?)


The country’s rice "addiction" is seen as an opportunity in the business sector
as more restaurants have been offering the unlimited rice option in their menu. From
big restaurants in malls to small neighborhood carinderias (eateries), the option has
been a good marketing ploy for customers. However, despite the full stomach a person
gets after getting the most out of the usually P99-unlimited rice meal, one’s health might

be put at risk.

Dr. Cecilia Acuin, formerly of DOST-FNRI, advised against unlimited rice as
it does not promote a healthy lifestyle. “Unlimited rice is not healthy,” she said at the
launch of the 8th National Nutrition Survey results. “You can already tell that when

you're getting most from one food group, you do not have a good diet.”

Any food that belongs to the same food group also has the same nutritional
value. This means that your body might miss out on more important nutrients if you eat
the same thing every meal. “It's not the quantity that matters, but also the quality and
diversity,” she said. “/sa sa mga indicators ng magandang diet at pagiging healthy ay
ang diverse diet,” she explained. (One indicator of a great and healthy diet is having a

diverse one.)

A diverse diet, according to Acuin, is consuming food from different groups,
not having the same type of meal in a time period or over-consuming. As each food
group boasts of a unique micronutrient, consequences due to lack of vitamins and
minerals can be prevented. This is called hidden hunger and it affects close to 2 billion

people worldwide, according to the Global Hunger Index 2014 report of the


International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI). (Read: Nutrition facts: Hidden

hunger)

The Philippine Rice Research Institute of the Department of
Agriculture suggests that rice should take up only one-fourth of a regular-sized plate.
Filipinos tend to overeat rice by consuming half a regular-sized plate. Due to this,

carbohydrates in the body reach dangerous levels that may result to diseases.

Meanwhile, in a 2014 interview, then FNRI Director Dr. Mario V. Capanzana
said that the institute is looking into the possible correlation between the rise of diabetes
cases in the country and the unlimited rice trend. Capanzana advice Filipinos against
cooking too much rice per meal as it leads to food wastage. Household and individual
food consumption and wastage are measured by the DOST-FNRI Food Consumption

Survey. (READ: PH food wastage: Think twice before wasting your meal).

In the Philippines, a person wastes an average of 3.29 kilograms of rice a year
or almost 9 grams a day. “Sa bahay pa lang, malaki na ang nasasayang kaya dapat
itong iwasan (At home, we already waste a lot so it’s best to avoid this),” he said. The
price of uncooked rice shot up in recent years. Despite the agricultural nature of the
country, rice is imported, according to Hazel Tanchuling, Secretariat Coordinator of
the Rice Watch and Action Network in a 2014 interview. (Read: PH road to rice self-
sufficiency). Low-income communities are considered the driving force behind the

high consumption of rice in the country.

Long lines can be seen in any place selling NFA rice, a cheaper alternative for

those belonging to poor communities to get their meal staple. It even led to the phrase


"Parang pila ng NFA rice (It's like a line for NFA rice)" to describe long queues. This
2012 online article is a related story based on the 2009-2010 study by the SEARCA and
PhilRice, which also cited rice consumption data from the DOST-FNRI nutrition

survey. (READ: Filipinos’ high rice consumption fueled by the poor)

The USDA Center for Nutrition Policy and Promotion (CNPP) has developed a
new infographic — Let’s Talk Trash (1-page infographic, 2-page infographic) — to
inform American consumers about food loss and waste. CNPP is raising awareness
about how individuals and families can reduce food loss and waste, in support of larger
USDA efforts. This latest addition to ChooseMyPlate.gov includes consumer-friendly

resources to help audiences think about the amount of food wasted at home.

There is a growing concern about food loss and waste throughout the United
States. Consider that about 90 billion pounds of edible food goes uneaten each
year. This costs most people about $370 each year. As the world population continues
to grow, there is a greater need to set goals and develop initiatives to reduce the amount
of food wasted. Less food loss and waste can help save money, improve food access,

and protect natural resources. The impacts of food loss and waste include:

¢ Food waste is the single largest component going into municipal landfills.

« Wholesome food is sent to landfills instead of feeding people in need.

¢ Producing, processing, transporting, preparing, storing, and disposing of
discarded food uses inputs such as land, water, labor, and energy that could be

available for other purposes.


When it comes to matters involving food -- shopping for, eating and disposing
of it, just to name a few — it is surprising how lack of awareness factors into each area.
Once again, this appears to be a recurring theme given the tepid news coverage of
World Food Day coupled with a recent survey of Americans about food consumption
and overall food waste. According to figures from the Department of Agriculture "food
waste is estimated at between 30-40 percent of the food supply. This estimate, based
on estimates from USDA's Economic Research Service of 31 percent food loss at the

retail and consumer levels, corresponded to approximately 133 billion pounds."

While the majority of those surveyed, according to IFIC, said "they're taking
steps to reduce food waste -- taking leftovers home from restaurants (58 percent), using
leftovers from cooking (53 percent), planning their meals (51 percent), and making
shopping lists (51 percent), while 47 percent said they used or froze leftovers in a timely
manner" — that was welcome news. Clearly, Americans should try to make a better

effort of matching their food purchases to their appetites.

More, of course, is not always better. If one is prone to ordering more food than
needed, with the idea that the leftovers will eventually be eaten, one might want to
rethink that notion since the kitchen garbage cans and ever-growing landfills are telling

differently.

Behavioral Intention as Behavior Change Predictor

Behavioral Intention (BI) is defined as a person's perceived likelihood or

"subjective probability that he or she will engage in a given behavior" (Committee on


Communication for Behavior Change in the 21st Century, 2002, p. 31). BI is behavior-
specific and operationalized by direct questions such as "I intend to [behavior]," with
Likert scale response choices to measure relative strength of intention. Intention has
been represented in measurement by other synonyms (e.g., "I plan to [behavior]") and
is distinct from similar concepts such as desire and self-prediction (Armitage & Conner,
2001). Ajzen (1991) argued that BI reflects how hard a person is willing to try, and how

motivated he or she is, to perform the behavior.

In theory in which it is included, BI is the most proximate predictor of behavior
(Ajzen, 1991), and behavior is ultimately the variable that most health communication
interventions aim to influence. Individual behaviors are in pursuit of a larger goal, such
as better health or quitting smoking. BI has been found to have high predictive validity
in relation to behavior (Committee on Communication for Behavior Change in the 21st
Century: Improving the Health of Diverse Populations, 2002), indicating that
respondents in general accurately rated their intention to perform the behavior in
question. Meta-analyses reviewed, which included health behaviors, found from 19 to
38 percent variance in behavior was explained by BI (Armitage & Conner, 2001;

Sheeran & Orbell, 1998; Sheppard, Jon, & Warshaw, 1988; Van den Putte, 1991).

Intention has been shown to be the most important variable in predicting
behavior change, suggesting that behaviors are often linked with one’s personal
motivation. This suggests that it may be important to present information to help shape
Positive attitudes towards the behavior and stress subjective norms or opinions that

support the behavior.


Three models of behavioral intention, Ajzen and Fishbein's (1980) theory of
reasoned action (TORA), Ajzen's (1985) theory of planned behavior (TOPB), and the
Miniard and Cohen (1983) model (MCM) were compared in terms of predictive ability
and their ability to effectively separate normative from personal influence. For
predicting gift giving intention, TOPB performed better than did TORA and MCM. The
results also suggested that MCM exhibited greater ability to separate its components
than did TORA or TOPB. For predicting gift giving behavior, results indicate that
intention represents the direct antecedent to behavior over that of the perceived

behavioral control component of TOPB.

The theory of reasoned action (Ajzen & Fishbein, 1980) has been widely used
across the social sciences. Though results supported the model's predictive ability
(Farley, Lehman, & Ryan, 1981 and Sheppard, Hartwick, & Warshaw, 1988 for meta-
analytic reviews), questions remained regarding one of its boundary conditions,
behavioral control, and its' ability to reflect the separate effects of attitudinal versus
normative influence for explaining intentions. Recently, alternatives to the theory of

reasoned action (TORA) have emerged.

The Theory of Planned Behavior (TOPB) is an extension of TORA that includes
perceived behavioral control as a variable for predicting intentions and behavior (Ajzen,
1985), and the Miniard and Cohen (1983) model (MCM) assessed the separate
contribution of personal and normative influence for the prediction and explanation of

intentions. Though these two models show promise, TOPB has yet to be examined


across a wide domain of behavior, and few published tests of MCM exist (e.g., Bearden
& Rose, 1990; Miniard & Cohen, 1983). Furthermore, the three models (TORA, TOPB,

and MCM) have yet to be compared across the same behavioral domain.

The Theory of Planned Behavior (TPB) is an extension of the theory of reasoned
action or TRA (Ajzen & Fishbein, 1980; Fishbein & Ajzen, 1975). It was expanded to
address the TRA’s limitations in dealing with behaviors over which people have

incomplete volitional control.

Focus in both the theories of reasoned action and planned behavior is the
individual’s intention to perform a behavior. Intentions are assumed to capture the
motivations that influence behavior. They can indicate how hard people are willing to

try, or how much effort they are planning to exert, to perform the behavior.

Generally, the stronger the intention to engage in a behavior, the more likely
should be its performance. However, behavioral intention can find expression in
behavior only if the behavior in question is under volitional control. That is if the person

can decide at will to perform or not perform the behavior.

Although some behaviors met this requirement, performance depends at least to
some degree on non-motivational factors such as availability of requisite opportunities
and resources (e.g., time, money, skills, cooperation of others; see Ajzen, 1985, for a

discussion). Collectively, these factors represent people’s actual control over the


behavior. To the extent that a person has the required opportunities and resources, and

intends to perform the behavior, he or she should succeed in doing so.

Studies on the Use of TPB/TRA

The Theory of Planned Behavior has been applied successfully to study
intentions and behavior in a great variety of domains, including food consumption
(Fishbein and Ajzen, 2010). Many studies on food consumption stop at the prediction
of intentions, but others also collected behavioral data. It can be seen that the theory of
planned behavior afforded good prediction of various food-related intentions, including
desire to consume soft drinks, fish, and dairy products. In most cases, a person’s
personal attitude or preference was the strongest predictor of intentions, but an
interesting exception occurred in relation to eating a healthy diet (Conner, Norman, and
Bell, 2002). A healthy diet refers to eating low-fat, high-fiber products, as well as fruits

and vegetables.

Inspection of the regression coefficients showed that perceived behavioral
control made the strongest contribution to the prediction of intentions to eat a healthy
diet. This indicated that anticipating difficulty in maintaining a healthy diet reduced
people’s intentions to engage in this behavior. Many participants indeed seemed to have
expected such difficulties, as shown by a relatively low level of perceived behavioral
control (M = 1.11 ona 7-point scale scored from -3 to +3, compared with M = 2.04 and

M = 1.56 for attitude and subjective norm, respectively).


Low perceived control may well reflect a low level of actual control, suggested
by the finding that intentions accounted for only 9 percent of the variance in behavior.
The other two studies that assessed behavior were much more successful, accounting
for 42 percent of the variance in fish consumption and 39 percent of the variance in the

consumption of dairy products.

The Theory of Planned Behavior suggests that behavior is dependent on one’s
intention to perform the behavior. Intention is an individual’s attitude (beliefs and
values about the outcome of the behavior) and subjective norms (beliefs about what
other people think the person should do or general social pressure). Behavior is also
determined by perceived behavioral control, defined as perceptions of ability or feelings
of self-efficacy to perform behavior. This relationship is typically dependent on the type

of relationship and the nature of the situation.

For perceived behavioral control to influence behavior change, much like with
self-efficacy, a person must perceive that they could perform the behavior. Therefore,
as Grizzel (2007) suggested, perceived control over opportunities, resources, and skills

needed is an important part of the change process.

On the other hand, according to the Theory of Reasoned Action (Fishbein and
Ajzen, 1975; Ajzen and Fishbein, 1980), performance of a given behavior change is
determined primarily by the strength of a person’s intention to perform that behavior.
The intention to perform a given behavior is, in turn, viewed as a function of two

factors, namely, the person’s attitude toward performing the behavior (i.¢., one’s overall


positive or negative feeling about personally performing the behavior) and/or the
person’s subjective norm concerning the behavior (i.¢., the person’s perception that his

or her important others think he or she should or should not perform the behavior).

Attitudes are a function of behavioral beliefs (i.e., beliefs that performing the
behavior will lead to certain outcomes) and their evaluative aspects (i.¢., the evaluation
of these outcomes); subjective norms are viewed as a function of normative beliefs (i.e.,
beliefs that a specific individual or population thinks one should or should not perform
the behavior in question) and motivations to comply (i.e., the degree to which, in

general, one wants to do what the referent thinks one should do).

Social and Behavior Change Communication

Behavior change is often a goal for staff working directly with constituents,
organizations, governments, or communities. Individuals charged with this task can be
thought of as “interventionists” whose goal it is to design and implement programs or
interventions that produce the desired behavioral changes (Glanz, Lewis, & Rimers,
1990, p. 17). As Glanz, Lewis, and Rimmers suggest, designing interventions to yield
behavior is best done with an understanding of behavior change theories and an ability
to use them in practice (1990, p. 19). The goal of this Gravitas, therefore, is to introduce
three major theories of behavior change, describe the key variables of behavior change

models, and to explore the link between behavior change and attitude.


Before exploring behavior change models in depth, it is important to understand

the variables that are essential to the models. A select list of the variables common to

many behavior change models as well as ways to maximize on these variables when

attempting to evoke a behavior change are the following:

Key Element Definition Strategies

1.

Threat - A danger or a harmful event of which people may or may not be aware
of. Raise awareness that the threat exists, focusing on severity and

susceptibility.

. Fear - Emotional arousal caused by perceiving a significant and personally

relevant threat. Fear can powerfully influence behavior and, if it is channeled in
the appropriate way, can motivate people to seek information, but it can also
cause people to deny they are at-risk.

Response - Efficacy Perception that a recommended response will prevent the
threat from happening. Provide evidence of examples that the recommended
response will avert the threat.

Self-Efficacy - An individual’s perception of or confidence in their ability to
perform a recommended response. Raise individuals’ confidence that they can
perform response and help ensure they can avert the threat.

Barriers - Something that would prevent an individual from carrying out a
recommended response. Be aware of physical or cultural barriers that might
exist, attempt to remove barriers.

Benefits - Positive consequences of performing recommended response.

Communicate the benefits of performing the recommended response.


7. Subjective Norms - What an individual thinks other people think they should
do. Understand with whom individuals are likely to comply.

8. Attitudes - An individual’s evaluation or beliefs about a recommended
response. Measure existing attitudes before attempting to change them.

9. Intentions - An individual’s plans to carry out the recommended response.
Determine if intentions are genuine or proxies for actual behavior.

10. Cues to Action - External or internal factors that help individuals make
decisions about a response. Provide communication that might trigger
individuals to make decisions.

11. Reactance - When an individual reacts against a recommended response. Ensure
individuals do not feel they have been manipulated or are unable to avert the

threat.

Looking at the research, most efforts to improve health provider behavior have
focused on the first three areas — influencing structural factors, providing clear
expectations and definitions of quality, and enhancing skills and knowledge. Fewer
efforts have been devoted to influencing providers’ internal motivations, including
personal attitudes and beliefs, social norms, status, perceived importance of work,

recognition, connectedness, social cohesion and rewards.

Social and behavior change communication (SBCC) is perfectly placed to
address those internal motivating factors. By placing health providers as
the audience for SBCC efforts, programs can influence the norms, values, attitudes,

beliefs, and motivations responsible for provider behavior. While SBCC has frequently


been used to improve provider skills, knowledge and interactions, it has been used less
often to change underlying provider motivations, attitudes and norms. So, less guidance

was available for applying SBCC to provider behavior change.

To meet this need, the CCP-led Health Communication Capacity Collaborative
(HC3) has developed two Implementation Kits (I-Kits) on Provider Behavior Change
Communication: one that places Community Health Workers as the primary audience
for SBCC and another that places Facility-Based Providers as the primary audience.
Both I-Kits included an Assessment Tool that helps users identify, understand and
prioritize provider-related barriers to quality service provision; an Intervention Design
Tool that provides step-by-step guidance on designing an SBCC intervention to address
the identified barriers; and a collection of Resources that showcase effective provider
behavior change interventions. With these resources in hand, HC3 hopes that program
managers will be better equipped to use SBCC to change provider behavior and

ultimately, improve the quality of services offered.

Over a four-year period, new research suggests, a program led by the Johns
Hopkins Center for Communication Programs in six large Nigerian cities was
associated with a 10 percentage-point increase in the use of modern contraceptive

methods and a similar increase in the desire of women to have fewer children.

In clinics, on television programs, in brochures, the message of the CCP
program was the same: Know, Talk, Go. Know the facts. Talk to your partner. Go for

services. The successes come in a nation where low use of family planning has long


been a seemingly intractable problem. Higher rates of maternal and infant deaths were
linked to lower use of modern contraception in space or limiting the births of children.

Nigeria has some of the highest rates of maternal and infant mortality in the world.

For the study, published online in the journal Studies in Family Planning,
researchers from the Carolina Population Center at the University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill evaluated CCP’s Nigerian Urban Reproductive Health Initiative (NURHIJ),
a six-city program that ran from 2010 until 2014. “This study demonstrates that even in
a context like urban Nigeria, with high maternal mortality and low contraceptive use,
targeted programs can lead to important changes in modern [contraceptive] method use
and fertility desires in a short period of time,” wrote the researchers, led by Ilene S.

Speizer, PhD, a professor at the UNC Gillings School of Public Health.

NURHI’s success, its leaders say, comes not solely from improving
contraceptive access at health clinics in Nigeria’s cities, but from creating a coordinated
campaign to create the demand for those services. Much of CCP’s family planning work
was based on using communication tools to help people understand the benefits of
family planning and empower them to make healthy decisions. On this project, CCP

also targeted health providers as audiences in need of behavior change.

MyPlate, the icon and multimodal communication plan developed for the 2010
Dietary Guidelines for Americans (DGA), provides an opportunity to consider new
approaches to evaluating the effectiveness of communication initiatives. A review of
indicators used in assessments for previous DGA communication initiatives foud gaps

in accounting for important intermediate and long-term outcomes. This evaluation


framework for the MyPlate Communications Initiative builds on well-known and
underused models and theories to propose a wide breadth of observations, outputs, and

outcomes that can contribute to a fuller assessment of effectiveness.

Two areas were suggested to focus evaluation efforts to advance understanding
of the effectiveness of the MyPlate Communications Initiative: understanding the
extent to which messages and products from the initiative are associated with positive
changes in social norms toward the desired behaviors, and strategies to increase the

effectiveness of communications about DGA in vulnerable populations.

Many health and development programs use behavior change communication
(BCC) to improve people’s health and wellbeing, including family planning and
reproductive health, maternal and child health, and prevention of infectious diseases.
BCC is a process that motivates people to adopt and sustain healthy behaviors and
lifestyles. Sustaining healthy behavior usually requires a continuing investment in BCC

as part of an overall health program.

To help the creative team to develop effective messages and materials, the
program team should tell a story about typical audience members. To do this, they
create a profile that embodies the characteristics of the audience. The program and
creative teams can imagine the audience as a specific person rather than as a collection
of statistics. The BCC program can collect information about the audience from existing
data such as Ministry of Health statistics or health and population surveys. The

program’s formative research can provide detail. Characteristics to consider include


age, sex, marital status, place of residence, occupation, income level, years of
schooling, religion, ethnicity, number of children, family structure, health beliefs, and
degree of readiness to change behavior. Then, in the story, the program team should
describe the person’s important behaviors and some key attitudes about the health

behavior that the program needs to address.

Theoretical Framework

The study is anchored on the Theory of Planned Behavior (TPB) by Azjen,
(1985, 1991). TPB is an extension of the Theory of Reasoned Action (TRA) (Azjen and
Fishbein, 1980). Intent plays a critical role in TRA, and it is considered as the greatest
predictor of a specific behavior. For TRA, individual’s attitude toward the behavior and
the pressures of perceived subjective norms are major determinants of intention (Ajzen
and Fishbein, 1977). Ajzen and Fishbein (1980) stated that in general, individuals will
intend to perform a behavior when they evaluate it positively and when others believe

that they should perform it.

However, attitudes and subjective norms vary according to the intent, and also
vary from person to another (Ajzen and Fishbein, 1980). TRA has been criticized for
not considering some factors, which are frequently used by social scientists, to explain
behavior such as personality characteristics and demographic variables (e.g., age,
gender). Moreover, this theory has excluded factors such as social status. Ajzen and
Fishbein (1980) considered these factors as external variables, and they also recognized

their importance. However, TRA does not account for perceived behavioral control.


This deficiency has led Ajzen’s (1988) to come up with TPB. The major
components of TPB (Attitude toward the Behavior, Subjective Norms, and Perceived

Behavioral Control) and background factors are presented in Figure 1.

Background Factors
Personal

General attitude,
Personality taints,
Values, Emotions,
Intelligence

Attitude
toward the
behavior

Behavioral
belief
Normative
belief

Social
Age, General, Race,
Ethnicity, Education,

Subjective
Norms

{ti

Religion

Information Perceived
Experience, Control Behavior
Knowledge, belief Control
Media Exposure

Figure 2. Theory of Planned Behavior (Ajzen, 2005, p. 135)

TPB, which started as TRA in 1980 aimed to predict an individual's intention to
engage in a behavior at a specific time and place. The theory was intended to explain
all behaviors over which people have the ability to exert self-control. The key
component to this model is behavioral intent; behavioral intentions are influenced by
the attitude about the likelihood that the behavior will have the expected outcome and

the subjective evaluation of the risks and benefits of that outcome.

TPB has been used successfully to predict and explain a wide range of health
behaviors and intentions including smoking, drinking, health services utilization,

breastfeeding, and substance use, among others. TPB states that behavioral


achievement depends on both motivation (intention) and ability (behavioral control). It
distinguishes between three types of beliefs - behavioral, normative, and control. TPB
is comprised of six constructs that collectively represent a person's actual control over

the behavior:

1. Attitudes - This refers to the degree to which a person has a favorable or unfavorable
evaluation of the behavior of interest. It entails a consideration of the outcomes of
performing the behavior.

2. Behavioral intention - This refers to the motivational factors that influence a given
behavior where the stronger the intention to perform the behavior, the more likely
the behavior will be performed.

3. Subjective norms - This refers to the belief about whether most people approve or
disapprove of the behavior. It relates to a person's beliefs about whether peers and
people of importance to the person thinks he or she should engage in the behavior.

4. Social norms - This refers to the customary codes of behavior in a group or people
or larger cultural context. Social norms are considered normative, or standard, in a
group of people.

5. Perceived power - This refers to the perceived presence of factors that may facilitate
or impede performance of a behavior. Perceived power contributes to a person's
perceived behavioral control over each of those factors.

6. Perceived behavioral control - This refers to a person's perception of the ease or
difficulty of performing the behavior of interest. Perceived behavioral control varies
across situations and actions, which results in a person having varying perceptions

of behavioral control depending on the situation. This construct of the theory was


added later and created the shift from the Theory of Reasoned Action to the Theory

of Planned Behavior.

sits
Behavioral Attitude Toward | Normative
Beliefs the Behavior Beliefs

Subjective

Control |} Perceived |!
Beliefs "J]*8ehavioral Control ||
a

Behavioral
Control

Figure 3. The Theory of Planned Behavior after shifting from Theory of Reasoned
Action

However, there are several limitations of TPB such as the following:

1. It assumes the person has acquired the opportunities and resources to be successful
in performing the desired behavior, regardless of the intention;

2. It does not account for other variables that factor into behavioral intention and
motivation, such as fear, threat, mood, or past experience;

3. While it does consider normative influences, it still does not consider environmental
or economic factors that may influence a person's intention to perform a behavior;

4. It assumes that behavior is the result of a linear decision-making process and does
not consider that it can change over time;

5. While the added construct of perceived behavioral control was an important
addition to the theory, it does not say anything about actual control over behavior;

and


6. The time frame between "intent" and "behavioral action" is not addressed by the

theory.

Despite the limitations, TPB has shown more utility in public health than the Health
Belief Model, but it is still limiting in its inability to consider environmental and
economic influences. Over the past several years, researchers have used some
constructs of the TPB and added other components from behavioral theory to make it a
more integrated model. This has been in response to some of the limitations of the TPB

in addressing public health problems.

Conceptual Framework

This variable was measured through five statements where respondents were
asked to rate their level of agreement on a scale between 1-5, with 1 as the lowest and

5 as the highest. Knowledge level had the following statements:

It is important for me to listen to those people who have an educational background of
the topic (i.e., has a bachelor’s degree related to

The Theory of Planned Behavior (Ajzen 2006, 1985) guided the conceptual
framework of this study. Communicating Pinggang Pinoy messages to barangay
nutrition and health workers is the context of the study. Viewing of Pinggang Pinoy
videos was used as a tool to determine the behavioral intentions of nutrition and health

workers.


As TPB posits, behavioral intention is the closest antecedent to actual behavior.
Determining the behavioral intentions of nutrition and health workers to educate

mothers on Pinggang Pinoy is the expected result after viewing the videos.

Behavioral Intentionis an indication of the nutrition and health workers’
confidence, readiness, willingness, self-efficacy or inclination to educate mothers on
Pinggang Pinoy. It is assumed to be an immediate antecedent of the actual behavior to
educate. It is based on attitude toward the behavior, subjective norm, and perceived
behavioral control, with each predictor weighted for its importance in relation to the
behavior and population of interest. This was measured by their readiness or willingness
to educate mothers on Pinggang Pinoy through statements on Pinggang Pinoy
messages, attitude towards behavior, norms, behavioral control and behavioral
intentions based on level of agreement such as “‘strongly agree,” “agree,”, “disagree,”
or “strongly disagree.” The last two questions were open-ended that asked for their
experiences in teaching mothers on Pinggang Pinoy, proper nutrition or healthy
lifestyle, as well as suggestions on improving strategies on educating mothers on

Pinggang Pinoy messages.

According to TPB, behavioral intention is determined by attitude toward

behavior, subjective norms, and perceived behavioral control.

Attitude towards behavior refers to the approval of nutrition and health
workers in educating mothers on Pinggang Pinoy, or the favorable evaluation of this

behavior. It entails considering the outcomes of educating mothers. In this case, the


approval of nutrition and health workers that educating mothers on Pinggang Pinoy is
their duty and the right thing to do. This variable was measured through statements
where respondents were asked to rate their level of agreement using four levels from

“strongly agree,” “agree,” “disagree,” and “strongly disagree.

Subjective norms include perceptions of nutrition and health workers on others’
expectations on or approval of educating mothers on Pinggang Pinoy. This involved
perceived pressure from supervisors, fellow workers, family members and mothers
and caregivers. In this study, it included perception of nutrition and health workers that
educating mothers on Pinggang Pinoy may be considered as intervening in their
decisions on food. This was measured by answering statements in the TPB
questionnaire on perceived expectation of others on educating mothers on Pinggang

Pinoy.

Perceived Behavioral Control is the nutrition and health workers’ perceived ease
or difficulty of educating mothers on Pinggang Pinoy or efficiency, including
opportunities, resources, skills and abilities. This involves time, manpower, budget,
educational materials, training and skills. It is assumed that perceived behavioral
control is determined by the total set of accessible control beliefs. This was measured
by answering statements in the TPB questionnaire on behavioral control on educating

mothers on Pinggang Pinoy.

This study also attempted to determine the ease or difficulty or self-efficacy of

nutrition and health workers in educating mothers on Pinggang Pinoy. It included the


extent to which opportunities, resources, skills and abilities are present and how these
may have implications on behavioral intentions. The TPB questionnaire includes
background factors (Figure 3) that provide information that can help determine attitude,

norms, behavioral control that will determine behavioral intention.

The TBP also underscores the importance of control beliefs, like conviction,
confidence, trust and certainty of nutrition and workers in educating mothers as these
contribute in determining perceived behavioral control. In addition, selected
background information, like general attitude, age, sex, marital status, education, work
experience and training, years in service, sources of nutrition and health information

and frequency of use were assumed to control beliefs.

In this study, it is assumed further that the respondents, as full-pledged nutrition
and health workers, have established positive evaluation of self-performance or attitude
toward nutrition education, as it is their sworn duty. Also, assumed in this study that
there are given subjective norms inherent in their work, such as the expectations of
mothers and caregivers as the major stakeholders. However, the study only covered the
behavioral intentions of nutrition and health workers in educating mothers on Pinggang
Pinoy as actual and observable behavior of nutrition and health workers was difficult

to observe in the field.


It can be surmised then that behavioral intention is expressed as:

BI =f (AB+SN+BO

Where: BI represents behavioral intention

AB ~ attitude towards the behavior

SN- subjective norms

BC -behavioral control

The summation of these factors then determines behavioral intention to educate

intended audiences to address the issue on nutritional requirements.

Figure 4 presents the conceptual framework of the study.

Background Factors
Personal

General attitude
Social

Age, sex, marital
status

Information
Work Experience
Training

Years in service

Sources of
information and

frequency of use

belief

Behavioral

Normative
+) belief

—_—

Control
belief

Attitude
toward the
behavior
-belief
-duty
bound

Subjective
norms
-Other’s
expectations
- perceived
intervention
to mothers’

decision

Perceived
Behavior
Control
-capability
to educate
- difficulty/
Ease of
educating
-Support/
resources

Intention

-degree
-readiness

-integrating
other
messages

waa

Behavior

Figure 4. Determinants of Behavioral Intentions to Educate Mothers on Pinggang Pinoy

Operational Definition of Terms

Attitude towards behavior

Subjective norms

Perceived Behavioral Control

a1

the approval of nutrition and health workers in
educating mothers on Pinggang Pinoy, or the
favorable evaluation of this behavior. It entails
considering the outcomes of educating mothers.
In this case, the approval of nutrition and health
workers that educating mothers on Pinggang
Pinoy is their duty and the right thing to do. This
variable was measured through statements
where respondents were asked to rate their level
of agreement using four levels from “strongly
agree,” “agree,” “disagree,” and “strongly
disagree.”

include perceptions of nutrition and health
workers on others’ expectations on or approval
of educating mothers on Pinggang Pinoy. This
involved perceived pressure from supervisors,
fellow workers, family members and mothers
and caregivers. In this study, it included
perception of nutrition and health workers that
educating mothers on Pinggang Pinoy may be
considered as intervening in their decisions on
food. This was measured by answering
statements in the TPB questionnaire on
perceived expectation of others on educating
mothers on Pinggang Pinoy.

is the nutrition and health workers’ perceived
ease or difficulty of educating mothers on
Pinggang Pinoy or efficiency, including
opportunities, resources, skills and
abilities. This involves time, manpower, budget,
educational materials, training and skills. It is
assumed that perceived behavioral control is
determined by the total set of accessible control
beliefs. This was measured by answering
statements in the TPB questionnaire on
behavioral control on educating mothers on
Pinggang Pinoy.

Behavioral Intention

Background Factors


is an indication of the nutrition and health
workers’ confidence, readiness, willingness,
self-efficacy or inclination to educate mothers
on Pinggang Pinoy. It is assumed to be an
immediate antecedent of the actual behavior to
educate. It is based on attitude toward the
behavior, subjective norm, and perceived
behavioral control, with each predictor weighted
for its importance in relation to the behavior and
population of interest. This was measured by
answering statements in the TPB questionnaire
on behavioral intention on educating mothers on
Pinggang Pinoy.

include information on general attitude, age, sex,
marital status, work experience, training, years in
service and sources of information and frequency
of use that have implications on behavioral
intentions.


CHAPTER III

METHODOLOGY
Research Design

A one-group posttest-only research design was employed. This is a type of quasi-
experiment where the outcome is measured only once after exposing respondents to a
certain treatment, in this case Pinggang Pinoy videos. The very busy schedule of
nutrition and health workers and strict health protocols during the height of the COVID-
19 pandemic and series of calamities left them with limited spare time to participate in

studies involving longer data collection procedures.

Locale of the Study

The cities of Taguig, Pasig, and Makati and the province of Laguna were chosen
as areas of the study since they gave permission to collect the data and that some of
their BNSs, BHWs, nutritionists and social workers willingly volunteered as
respondents. Incidentally, these locations also belong to priority areas of the DOST-
FNRI and the DOST in terms of science, technology and innovation projects, especially
nutrition and livelihood improvement. It is the commitment of the DOST to serve

communities in its immediate vicinity.

Like most Metro Manila cities and urbanizing provinces surrounding it, Taguig,
Pasig and Taguig, as well as Laguna are facing many environmental challenges with
continuous accelerating urban growth rate. According to a 2010 census, the impact of

urban growth of Metro Manila to its urban environment relating on demography, solid

wastes problem and problems in water bodies as well as air pollution and greenhouse

gas emission is emphasized.

The flood-prone areas within the Metro Manila are about 31 percent, most of
the risk areas located along creeks, river banks or coastal areas. Metro Manila produces
a total garbage equivalent to 25 percent of the national waste generation, in which about
17 percent is paper wastes and about 16 percent is plastics. In terms of water quality
classification, the upper reaches of the Marikina River are of Class A, but all remaining
river systems are of Class C. Accordingly, the classification of Manila Bay is of Class

SB.

Similarly, the quality of ambient air of the Metro Manila is also poor. Using
2010 as base year, the major contributor to greenhouse gas is from vehicular emissions
followed by the stationary sources. An urgent need is felt to incorporate environmental
issues into planning its urban area to reduce the risks of further environmental
degradation. This is according to a 2017 study of Ram Krishna Regmi, Environment
and Resource Management Consultant of Kathmandu, on Urbanization and Related
Environmental Issues of Metro Manila in the Journal of Advanced College of

Engineering and Management.

Laguna, on the other hand, is host to Laguna Lake (also referred to as Laguna
de Bay), the largest lake in the Philippines bordering metropolitan Manila, the nation's
capital and the industrial hub of the country. The lake is of prime importance for its

fisheries, as a transport route and as a water source for the cooling of industrial plants


and for irrigation. The lake is also envisaged to supply the domestic water needs of the
basin in the year 2000. With rapid urbanization, industrial development and
deforestation of its watershed, Laguna de Bay has been stressed with sedimentation,

overexploitation of its fisheries and pollution.

Various management strategies have been adopted by government to address
such human impacts, like the installation of a hydraulic control structure,
implementation of a zoning and management plan and the formulation of a master plan.
There is need for an integrated approach for the management of the Laguna de Bay
basin for its sustainable development. This is according to a study by Guerrero
published in the GeoJournal in 1996 on the Human Impacts on Laguna de Bay,

Philippines and management strategies for their mitigation.

The study showed that Laguna de Bay is faced with declining agriculture and
fisheries productivity, increasing domestic wastes and health issues, pollution and

environmental degradation, and household food insecurity and health risks.

These environmental conditions pose challenges to both nutrition and health
workers and mothers in terms of promoting a balanced diet for the family. There may
not be enough and conducive spaces to plant fruits and vegetables even in containers,
as well as raise animals for protein sources, especially in Metro Manila. It may also be
that many nutrition and health workers and families lack the innovative know how on

household or community food production.


An increasing number of mothers from the provinces are working in Metro
Manila or abroad as OF Ws to augment family income, and this minimizes or eliminates
their time and effort in preparing home-cooked nutritious meals. This being the
increasing dominant trend, compounded by skyrocketing prices of food, families often
opt to buy convenience or cheaper food that are mostly lacking in recommended

nutrients.

While these areas have marked improvement in nutritional status, adoption of
technologies and availing of scientific and technological services, there are still pockets
of co-existence of undernutrition and overnutrition especially among the vulnerable

young children, pregnant women, and lactating mothers.

Despite these conditions, there is a need to determine the behavioral intentions
of nutrition and health workers on educating mothers on basic nutrition messages using
tools, like the Pinggang Pinoy, to help achieve a more positive behavior towards

nutrition education.

Respondents

All Barangay Nutrition Scholars (BNS), Barangay Health Workers (BHWs) and
related frontline workers in said areas were invited to voluntarily participate in the
online survey. These workers are at the frontline of providing nutrition and health
services, like educating mothers on preparing nutritious meals and monitoring the
family’s health by encouraging regular visits to health centers. They were very busy

during the COVID-19 pandemic surges and during calamities. Eligible respondents


were those who have access to computers, laptops, cellular phones or tablets, and
Internet connection, are familiar with viewing videos and answering a questionnaire
online. Data Privacy and Informed Consent forms were sent for their perusal,
submission (if agreeable to voluntarily participate) and protection before viewing the

Pinggang Pinoy videos and answering the questionnaire.

Sampling Procedures

This study employed convenience sampling based on the voluntary
participation of qualified respondents. Respondents included BNSs, BHWs, and other
related frontline development workers, like social workers and nutritionists. These
frontline workers in the barangay are the multipliers of health and nutrition information,
especially among mothers and caregivers. All BNSs and BHWs in the covered areas
with access to computers, laptops, tablets or mobile phones, the Internet, and are
familiar with viewing videos and answering a questionnaire online were invited to
participate. Prospective respondents should also have valid email addresses and mobile

numbers. All those who voluntarily participated were included in the survey.

A total of 82 respondents viewed the Pinggang Pinoy videos and submitted
accomplished questionnaires. The breakdown of respondents from covered areas is as
follows: Laguna-49, Pasig-18, Makati-10, and Taguig-5. The list of qualified BNSs and
BHWs and their contact details were secured with permission from their mayors and

nutrition action officers through formal letters of request.

To determine the sample size required for the statistical treatment of the study,

G*Power App software version 3.1 was used.


For the statistical test Correlation: Bivariate normal model, the following

parameters were used:

Correlation p H1 0.30 (moderate treatment effect)
Significance Level (Alpha | 0.05

Value)

Power (1-beta err prob) -80 (80%)

Total sample size (minimum) 67

It was determined that the minimum sample size for correlation was 67. The
total number of respondents whose data were included in this study was 82. This

number of respondents achieved a Statistical Power of 0.86 or 86 percent.

Data Gathering
Links to the Pinggang Pinoy videos were sent to the respondents’ email addresses.
The three Pinggang Pinoy videos contained the same basic messages that include:
- the global and local nutrition situation as rationale for developing the tool;
- the correct proportions and examples of Go, Grow, and Glow foods on one’s plate
for each meal;
- the complementary function and simple version vis-a-vis other nutrition standards
and guides from where it was based;
- versions for all age groups and sexes, from children to the older persons; and

- regular physical activity, healthy lifestyle, and sufficient hydration.

The English video was purely an AVP and has a duration of five minutes and
11 seconds (5:11). The Filipino version was a lecture format with a “teacher”

discussing with visual inserts with a duration of five minutes and 33 seconds (5:33).


The Taglish video was a webinar with a facilitator, speaker with visual inserts, and
included a question and answer portion with a duration of 28 minutes and 40

seconds (28:40). Total viewing time for all three videos was around 40 minutes.

A questionnaire in English with Filipino translation was also sent online. The
questionnaire had 20 questions, the last two of which were open-ended. Except for
the last two questions, they were answerable by multiple choice based on four levels
of agreement ranging from “Strongly Agree,” “Agree”, “Disagree” or “Strongly
Disagree” on statements presented. The first part asked for the background
information of the respondents, where they chose from sets of answers, as

appropriate. The questionnaire included:

I. Introduction

Background information on the researcher

Background information on the study and its objectives

Data Privacy and Informed Consent Statements with Conforme’
Contact details of researcher

II. Background Information on the Respondents

Full Name (Optional)

Mobile Number and Network provider (for sending mobile load incentive)
Age

Sex

Marital Status

Ages of Children if any


Highest Educational Attainment

Designation at Work

Number of Years in Service

Training Experience on Nutrition and Health

Use of Mass and Social Media as Sources of Nutrition and Health Information and
Frequency of Use

Other Sources of Nutrition and Health information and Frequency of Attendance or
Use

III. Questions on Pinggang Pinoy

. Awareness on Pinggang Pinoy before watching AVPs and answering questionnaire
. If answer in Question 1 “Disagree” or “Strongly Disagree”: Other references used
to educate mothers on balanced diet (respondent stops answering succeeding
questions)

. Ifanswer in Question | is “Agree” or “Strongly Agree”: Understanding of Pinggang
Pinoy messages (respondent proceeds to answering succeeding questions)

. Pinggang Pinoy as an easy-to-follow nutrition tool to guide us on the correct
proportions of Go, Grow and Glow foods on a per meal basis

. Importance of sufficient hydration to proper nutrition and health

Healthy lifestyle as complement to proper diet for overall well-being

. Applying the Pinggang Pinoy messages and helping the environment

IV. Attitude, Norms, Behavioral Control

. Belief on educating mothers on Pinggang Pinoy

13.

$1

Approval of educating mothers on Pinggang Pinoy and self -perception that

mothers expect this as the nutrition and health workers’ duty

. Sufficient capability of teaching mothers on Pinggang Pinoy
. Belief on the difficulty of teaching mothers on Pinggang Pinoy

. Non-approval of duty to educate mothers on Pinggang Pinoy and self-perception

that mothers do not expect that it is the nutrition and health workers’ duty

Insufficient capability to educate mothers on Pinggang Pinoy

V. Behavioral Intentions

14.

15.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

Intention to educate mothers as soon as possible on Pinggang Pinoy
Intention to immediately educate mothers on Pinggang Pinoy as sworm duty and

due to expectations of others

. Intention to educate mothers on Pinggang Pinoy and additional knowledge gained

and access to information materials

Intention to educate mothers on Pinggang Pinoy and self-perception that mothers
may consider it as intervening in decisions regarding food

Intention to integrate sufficient hydration and healthy lifestyle messages

Intention to integrate the implied environmental messages of minimizing food
waste through proper meal planning, judicious purchasing, preparation and
consumption, storage, recycling and disposal

Sharing of experiences in teaching mothers on Pinggang Pinoy or proper nutrition
and healthy lifestyle (open-ended, multiple responses)

Suggestions on how to improve strategies in educating mothers on Pinggang Pinoy

(open-ended, multiple responses)


The following link to the Pinggang Pinoy videos and questionnaire was sent to the

respondents: https://bit.ly/SRS_PPSurveyF

Permission to collect data from Local Government Units and nutrition officials for
volunteer respondents through formal letters were secured. The links to the Pinggang
Pinoy videos and questionnaire were sent to all nutrition and health workers who had
access to computers, tablets or mobile phones, have valid email addresses, mobile
phone numbers, Internet connection, and familiarity with viewing videos and answering

questionnaires online.

The Google questionnaire automatically tallied all responses and generated graphs
showing the responses for each question after the deadline of submission of responses
lapsed. Then, the summary tables of responses, frequencies and percentages were

generated for interpretation.

Data Analysis

Data were analyzed using central tendency measures such as frequency counts
and percentages. Cross-tabulations of background information or socio-demographic
data with awareness on Pinggang Pinoy, attitude, norms, control, and behavioral
intentions were done to examine if these factors contributed to the behavioral intention
of educating mothers. Spearman’s Rho Correlation between respondents’ personal

factors, awareness, determinants of behavioral intentions, and behavioral intention was


used to establish which background factors were positively and significantly correlated
with awareness, determinants of behavioral intentions, or behavioral intentions. The
same test was used to determine correlation between awareness, determinants of

behavioral intentions, and behavioral intentions.

Responses, however, to the open-ended questions on sharing experiences in
teaching mothers on Pinggang Pinoy or proper nutrition and healthy lifestyle are
expected to yield valuable insights, as these are based on their experiences that can
indicate actual intentions or identified factors that can determine behavioral intentions

to educate mothers.


Ethical Considerations

The research proposal underwent initial ethical review by the DOST-FNRI Ethics
Board. All those who agreed to the Data Privacy Statement and Informed Consent Form
were invited to view the Pinggang Pinoy videos to answer the questionnaire. The
respondents were constantly reminded that participation was purely voluntary and non-
participation or withdrawal at any point will not be sanctioned. Their responses and
identity were treated with utmost confidentiality and specific responses were not
directly attributed to their identities. Respondents who submitted accomplished
questionnaires were provided with mobile phone load as incentive to somehow
compensate for the time and effort spent in viewing the videos and answering the

questionnaire.


CHAPTER IV

RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS

Background Factors

Background factors in this study included personal (general attitude), social
(age, sex, marital status, information (work experience, training, years in service, source

of information and frequency of use).

Social Factors

In terms of social factors, respondents’ age showed that 69 out of the 82 (83%)
of respondents belonged to the 30-59 years old age bracket. This implies that most of
the respondents have been serving as nutrition and health workers for some years
already, as shown in the Respondents’ Number of Years in Service that 47 of the 82

have 1-10 years of work experience, while 15 of the 82 have 11-20 years of experience.

Interestingly, there were 4 who started younger at 20-29 years old, while 9 still
chose to work at a retirement age of 60-69 years. Age is one of the background factors
that contributed to behavioral intentions, assuming that as one ages in this line of work,
the attitude, norms and behavioral control are expected to be more positive. This implies
that in terms of behavioral intentions to educate mothers on Pinggang Pinoy, different
messaging should be crafted for each age segment who may have different levels of

knowledge and skills.


Of the 82, 80 (97.57%) were females, which implies that health and nutrition
workers were women dominated (Table 1). As a social factor, it connotes that nutrition
work can best be delivered by women because of the commonality and familiarity with
the tasks of cooking, marketing, feeding children or preparing a menu. These two social

factors of age and sex can be predictors of behavioral intention.

This poses the question of whether females are better or more suited for frontline
nutrition and health work, or that they are more preferred by the government or more
females apply for this work than males. It could also be that more female students take
nutrition and health related courses than males. It can also be traditional or customary

for nutrition and health work to be assigned to females.

Sex is one of the background factors that can help explain the attitude, norms
and behavioral control regarding this work being regarded more for females. There may
be the attitude that this work is really meant for females, females are expected by the
family and society to take charge of the nutrition and health concerns of the family, and
that it may be subject to the control of employers. This could be an interesting gender-

related study.

Looking at the respondents’ marital status, more than half (49 out of 82) of the
respondents were married. Being married and engaged in nutrition and health work can
have a positive outcome on behavioral intentions, since educating the family on
nutrition and health should start at home. Civil status is one of the background factors

that can be considered in enhancing behavioral intentions. Married individuals are


assumed to have more experience in educating and taking care of family members and
this can help support a favorable attitude towards educating other mothers with similar

concerns.

As in other background factors, unique messaging should be delivered to
workers with different marital status. Workers with less or no experience in taking care
of family members can learn from those with experience, while those with experience
should share this with others. Support from peers at work can reinforce favorable

attitude and strengthen behavioral control, knowing that help is provided.

ESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS

Ase | ondents' Social Factors

Mate 2 (2%)

25 (30%)

Marital Status

25 (30%)

rsa li
al

Highest Educational Attainment

Widowed» se oarated y from
Z* +t ETD

Figure 5. Respondents’ age, sex, marital status, and educational attainment


Educational attainment as a social factor has a potential value to influence the
capability of educators to impart knowledge. Results showed that all except one
finished at least high school, while three even had master’s degrees. Basic nutrition and
health theories, principles, and concepts are taken-up in school, starting at the
elementary level. Finishing with a higher level of education, especially if related to
nutrition and health, can provide a foundation for educating others due to the knowledge

and skills learned in school.

This educational foundation can boost positive attitude, affirm norms, and
strengthen behavioral control. With these, nutrition and health workers can be more
confident, capable, supported and willing to perform their nutrition education task.
Nutrition and health workers with higher educational attainment can mentor those with
lesser educational foundation. This mentoring support is one of the behavioral controls

that can help enhance behavior intentions.

Information

Information as a background factor consists of work experience, training, years
in service and sources of information and frequency of use. Of the 82 respondents, 65
were Barangay Nutrition Scholars (BNS), 7 nutritionist-dietitians, another 7 were

Daycare teachers or workers, while 3 were Barangay Health Workers or BHWs.

In the devolved set-up of the local government, all these frontline workers are
under the local officials, with the supervision and some logistical support from their

regional offices, like the National Nutrition Council (NNC-DOH) and the Department


of Health (DOH) for the BNS, BHWs, and nutritionist-dietitians, and the Department

of Social Welfare and Development (DSWD) for the Daycare teachers and workers.

They often helped each other when needed, especially in major activities,
calamities, and pandemic response. With this structure, nutrition education support is
expected to come from nutritionist-dietitians and Daycare teachers because they have
stronger educational foundation. This support is needed to strengthen the nutrition
education capability and confidence of the BNSs and BHWs to educate mothers.
Support from local government units and regional offices of their mother departments,
like security of tenure, training, equipment, budget and recognition, is beyond their
control but is equally important in building the proper attitude and motivation,
performing tasks according to expectations, and improving their self-efficacy to

educate mothers.

In terms of the number of years in service, 47 of the 82 respondents had 1-10
years in service, 15 with 11-20 years, and 9 with 21-30 years. Despite the low salary,
lack of security of tenure, long work hours, and wanting in support and recognition,
some frontline nutrition and health workers still continued to serve for decades. This
may be due to lack of other better job opportunities or that they are really dedicated to

serve.

It is a known fact that these frontline workers served under the pleasure of local
government officials. In some instances, they were only replaced by new ones when

new local officials were elected. If local elections were repeatedly postponed, they


tended to stay in their positions longer unless they resigned or retired. Setting aside this
political situation, it is expected that the longer their tenure, the more chances they have
to improve on their nutrition education duties. As in other background factors, those
with longer years in service, and assumingly with more experience, can guide those
who are new or have less experience. Peer support is important in encouraging positive

behavioral intentions.

Almost two-thirds or one out of 3 (73) of respondents had moderate to many
experience in terms of training, while 9 had few. This can validate the decades in service
when many received series of trainings in the course of their work. Training as a
background factor can very well provide the knowledge, skills, and confidence in
performing nutrition education work. Workers with more training experience can echo
what they have learned in these capability-building activities to workers with less
training to enable them to catch-up so that they will not be left behind. Mothers, as their
clients, expect the same quality of service regardless of the workers’ training
experience.

RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS

BRespondents’ information Factors

[raturecr work |
Bow Sean
Pee Nas 1100
es pes

Figure 6. Respondents’ nature of work, years I service, and training experience


As far as frequency of use of mass media and social media as sources of
nutrition and health information, one can see that the top-most information sources used
daily were social media, Internet, and TV. Many of the respondents seldom use or even
do not use radio and print as information sources. Communication efforts intended to
improve the nutrition education knowledge and skills of nutrition and health workers
can make use of more of the top sources to maximize engagement and reach. It could
also be worthy to use radio and print to complement the top information sources. These
have their own advantages like reach, immediacy, portability and affordability for
radio, while “permanence”, flexibility (independent of internet and electricity), and

visual appeal are characteristics of print.

BRespondents’ Information Factors

Use of Mass Media and Soci ledia as Source

of Nutrition and Health Info:

EVERYDAY
40 (49%)

EVERYDAY

35 (43%)
NOT USING
25 (30%)
Lane week 2e(an)
23 (28%) SELDOM
25 (30%) NOT USING
23 (28%)
i‘ . wSeldom aN

Figure 7. Use of mass and social media as source of nutrition and health information

One implication of the frequent use of social media and the Internet is that

nutrition and health workers need more communication support like Internet access,


mobile devices, and training on the proper and efficient use of these. However, there is
still no substitute for the power of interpersonal, face-to-face communication when
educating both frontline workers and mothers. These mediated information sources are
just complementary channels to interpersonal communication. They can be very useful
when face-to-face engagement is limited or restricted, like during pandemic or when

distance communication is involved, such as in webinars or online meetings and events.

When asked about frequency of use of other sources of nutrition and health
information, 23 of the respondents relied on their peers for other sources of information
daily, while some still depended on traditional materials like posters and charts,
brochures and pamphlets, and modules and manuals as daily references. While a few
answered not using seminar, training, workshop, and modules or manuals, many
indicated seldom use, while others reported various frequencies of use, many of which

at least once a month. Still, it is important to note that these are regularly conducted.

These answers could verify their responses where all except 9 of the respondents
reported having moderate to much training experience. It is also clear that nutrition and
health workers have to catch up on using applications that can facilitate nutrition
education, like PowerPoint presentations. Knowledge and skills in maximizing all these
other sources of nutrition and health information can be the key in enhancing their
nutrition education capabilities. Compared to mediated and filtered sources of
information, like the mass and social media, these other sources of information involve
interpersonal communication and interactions, and that information from these mostly

come from trustworthy primary and secondary sources.


BRespondents’ Information Factors

Use of Other Sources of Nutrition and Health Information

SELDOM
48 (59%) 9} se_Dom SELDOM
46 (56%) 46 (56%)

SELDOM
SELDOM 31 (38%)|

31 (38%) encer EVERYDAY
23 (28%) ae ee
. . . .

Figure 8. Use of other sources of nutrition and health information

All sources of nutrition and health information, whether from mass and social
media or from other sources like capability-building activities and IEC materials, are
background factors that can support positive behavioral intentions towards educating

mothers on Pinggang Pinoy and other nutrition and health concerns (Table 2).

Awareness Level on Pinggang Pinoy

Since it was a quasi-experimental research design, it was necessary to establish
the respondents’ awareness about the media collaterals such as Pinggang Pinoy videos.
In determining awareness, respondents were asked to rate several statements about
Pinggang Pinoy using a four-level of agreement. The first statement to be rated was: “J

am aware of Pinggang Pinoy before watching the presentation and before answering


this questionnaire.” Results showed that all either strongly agreed or agreed that they

had prior awareness on Pinggang Pinoy except for one respondent.

This can be due to the ongoing communication campaign on promoting
Pinggang Pinoy, especially among nutrition and health workers who are the intended
primary users. This can also be due to the series of training programs that they have
participated in that included Pinggang Pinoy as one of the topics. It is interesting to
note that even if just one did not have awareness on Pinggang Pinoy before viewing
the videos and answering the questionnaire, it is possible that if more respondents
participated, there could have been more nutrition and health workers who were not yet

aware of Pinggang Pinoy.

Based on the positive responses, it could be assumed that they may have used
Pinggang Pinoy to educate mothers and possibly had some form of information
material provided to them prior to the study. This prior awareness can also explain the
positive responses gathered in the succeeding questions. It can be surmised that

respondents had a high level of awareness about Pinggang Pinoy.

The second statement asked was: “J understand the messages that Pinggang
Pinoy aims to promote.” Responses showed some form of affirmation with the
responses in statement 1, which confirmed that aside from prior awareness on Pinggang
Pinoy, all respondents except one, also understood the nutrition tool’s messages.
Understanding the messages of Pinggang Pinoy can make nutrition and health workers

more confident in educating mothers. Again, it could not discount the one respondent


who strongly disagreed with this question because there could have been more negative

responses had there been more participants.

For statement 3: “‘Pinggang Pinoy is an easy-to-follow nutrition tool that aims
to guide us on the correct proportions of Go, Grow and Glow foods on a per meal
basis”, it was agreed by all except one of the respondents that Pinggang Pinoy was
easy-to-follow. These positive responses reflected the behavioral control or self-
efficacy of workers in easily following the tool that can also handily guide them in

educating mothers on its specific messages.

The fourth statement: “Sufficient hydration is important to proper nutrition and
good health” was strongly agreed and agreed except one to the specific message on the
importance of sufficient hydration to proper nutrition and good health. Here, the
respondents affirmed the importance of a specific message in relation to the expected
outcomes. Recognizing the relation between a specific message and its expected
outcomes reinforces their approval and positive evaluation of educating mothers on this

particular message.

Statement 5, “Proper nutrition should always be complemented with healthy
lifestyle to achieve overall well-being”, was strongly agreed or agreed on except one
respondent. The positive responses represent a higher degree of approval to the specific
message. Notice that “should always be” may be understood as “constantly necessary
or needed” or a “constant requirement” to achieve the outcome of overall well-being.

By agreeing to this statement, the respondents manifested a deeper understanding of

the specific message that proper nutrition and healthy lifestyle should always go
together to achieve well-being. The understanding of prerequisites to an outcome

encourages positive attitude towards educating mothers on this particular message.

The final statement for awareness level factors: “Applying the messages of
Pinggang Pinoy on proper meal planning and preparation, judicious consumption,
appropriate storage, recycling and proper disposal of left-over food help the
environment”, was consistently strongly agreed or agreed by all respondents except
one. This statement is not actually a direct message found in Pinggang Pinoy. The
specific message on “proper meal planning and preparation, judicious consumption,
appropriate storage, recycling and proper disposal of left-over food help the
environment” can just be implied as results from following the basic messages of
Pinggang Pinoy. Agreeing to this statement meant that some form of analysis was made
before approving it, which can be another example of a clearer understanding of the
outcomes of performing a behavior (Table 3).

Awareness on Pinggang Pinoy

z STRONGLY AGREE (67%) AGREE (32%)

STRONGLY AGREE (77%) payor

Aprch ‘co's BPREN SRG Gat) aoe
Se a
c Aa

STRONGLY AGREE (75%)

(23%),

Figure 9. Awareness on Pinggang Pinoy


When awareness on Pinggang Pinoy was cross-tabulated with social factors, as
shown in Table 4, more respondents from the 30-59 years old group strongly agreed
that they were aware of Pinggang Pinoy. This age group are presumably those with
longer active experience and more training. Focus should be on improving the
awareness of the 2 respondents belonging to older age groups who disagreed. Their
interest and dedication to nutrition education should be sustained even if they are at a
retirement age because their wisdom and experience can be handed down to the younger

generation.

As for sex, all male and female respondents strongly agreed or agreed to being
aware of Pinggang Pinoy except for 1 female who disagreed. Attention should be given
to this lone respondent who disagreed because most nutrition and health workers are

females.

Most of the respondents who strongly agreed or agreed to being aware of
Pinggang Pinoy were married. This is advantageous to nutrition education since
married individuals, especially women who dominate this work, are assumed to be
more experienced in terms of preparing food and taking care of the health of their
families. Here, educating mothers also comes with empathy, especially if the workers
are mothers themselves. Married nutrition and health workers should mentor the single
ones who may not have enough experience, while the single ones should openly seek

the assistance of married peers. The lone respondent who disagreed to being aware on


Pinggang Pinoy is a widow who may need encouragement and support. Being a widow

in this line of work can be very challenging.

Regarding educational attainment, most of the respondent who strongly agreed
and agreed to being aware of Pinggang Pinoy finished high school, undergraduate
college, and college. The minimum educational requirement for barangay nutrition and
health workers is high school, but a higher level of education will be helpful in teaching
mothers. Again, the lone respondent who disagreed and who is even a college graduate
needs special attention since finishing college and having this line of work provide all
the opportunities to learn about basic nutrition principles that even elementary children

are taught.

Respondents with 1-10 years of work experience who represented almost half
of all respondents strongly agreed to being aware of Pinggang Pinoy. The enthusiasm
and absorptive capacity to learn can be at its height during the first decade of working.
This is also the period when they receive series of trainings and the time when they
need to perform as expected to prove their worth and retain their jobs. It is remarkable
to note that the lone respondent who disagreed has been in the service for 11-20 years

already but has yet to be familiar with Pinggang Pinoy.

As expected, those who strongly agreed to being aware of Pinggang Pinoy were

respondents who had moderate to many trainings. Trainings as a form of continuing


education that build-up on the basic knowledge and skills in nutrition and health,

particularly on the use of nutrition tools like the Pinggang Pinoy.

Attitudes Towards behavior

Attitude towards Pinggang Pinoy was determined by a four-level of agreement.
For the statement “J believe I can educate mothers on Pinggang Pinoy,” 49 strongly
agreed and 31 agreed. While only one respondent disagreed, it can be noted that the
number of respondents who strongly agreed decreased, while the number of those who
agreed increased when compared to the number of positive responses in the previous
statements on Pinggang Pinoy. This means that agreeing to messages on Pinggang
Pinoy may not exactly correspond to the positive belief in educating mothers. The one
respondent who disagreed needs special attention because not believing in educating
mothers is unacceptable in this line of work. This number may increase exponentially

if more respondents have participated.

The number of respondents who strongly agreed further decreased, while those
who agreed further increased in the statement “J am sufficiently capable of teaching
mothers on Pinggang Pinoy.” While all positive, the approval was lessened when the
mothers’ expectation came into the picture compared to previous responses. Subjective

norms, like expectations of mothers as clients, exert some pressure on self-approval.

When it came to the statement “J am sufficiently capable of teaching mothers

on Pinggang Pinoy”, there were now more respondents who agreed than those who


strongly agreed, while one disagreed. Behavioral control, like sufficient capability to
teach, can be improved through regular nutrition education trainings especially among

those who believe that they still need more knowledge and skills.

With regard to statement “J believe it will be difficult to teach mothers on
Pinggang Pinoy”, 6 strongly agreed and 11 agreed. When it came to self-efficacy in
teaching mothers, some workers perceived difficulty. This can be due to experiences in
teaching mothers or that they believe they need more support to improve their
knowledge and skills in teaching. It can also be that if nutrition and health workers are
mothers themselves, they also have difficulty applying the Pinggang Pinoy messages
at home. This perceived or actual difficulty weakens behavioral control and intentions

to educate mothers, especially if based on experience.

The statement “J do not approve that it is my duty to educate mothers on
Pinggang Pinoy and they do not also expect me to do it” was strongly disagreed or
disagreed. Perhaps, not agreeing to the statement because they acted otherwise. They
believed that it is their duty to educate mothers, although there were 11 who either
strongly agreed or agreed which should cause alarm because it is their mandate to do
so. This can mean that educating mothers on Pinggang Pinoy may not be compulsory
for workers, or that they used other nutrition tools or references prescribed by the office.
However, if the same disapproval and expectation are also applied to other nutrition

education tools and services, urgent intervention is warranted.


The statement “I do not have sufficient capability to educate mothers on
Pinggang Pinoy” was made to validate the previous statement of capability. Results

showed 72 strongly disagreed or disagreed with this assumption.

Attitude Towards Behavior

STRONGLY AGREE (60%) AGREE (38%)

STRONGLY AGREE (54%) AGREE (46%)
Wi] STRONGLY AGREE AGREE
(46%) (53%)

SA AGREE | |
7% (14%)

Figure 10. Attitude towards behavior

The mostly positive responses of nutrition and health workers to statements on
attitude, norms and behavioral control favorably contributed to the behavioral
intentions of educating mothers on Pinggang Pinoy. While there were few responses
that imply weak behavioral intentions, these can be examined further for validation and
corresponding nutrition education support. These need proper and urgent attention

because there can be more of them if more respondents have participated (Table 5).


Background factors were cross tabulated with determinants of behavior
intentions like attitude, norms, and control, as shown in Table 6. As to age, those who
were 30-59 years old who agreed to having a positive attitude in educating mothers on
Pinggang Pinoy increased compared to those who strongly agreed from the same age
group. In Table 4 (Awareness on Pinggang Pinoy by respondents’ social factors), there
were more from this age group who strongly agreed to being aware of Pinggang Pinoy.
This means that awareness on Pinggang Pinoy based on age does not exactly translate
to the same positive attitude towards educating mothers on Pinggang Pinoy for those

of the same age.

Although it is given that except for 2, the rest of the respondents were females,
most of the females (72) just agreed to having a positive attitude towards educating
mothers on Pinggang Pinoy, while only 7 strongly agreed. Even the 2 male respondents
just agreed. This was a complete reversal to the responses in Table 4 (Awareness on
Pinggang Pinoy by respondents’ social factors) where 72 females and 2 males strongly
agreed to being aware of Pinggang Pinoy. Awareness on Pinggang Pinoy based on sex
is not also exactly translatable to similar positive attitude to educate mothers on

Pinggang Pinoy for those of the same sex.

For marital status, there were far more separated respondents (72) who agreed
to having a positive attitude towards educating mothers on Pinggang Pinoy, while the
number of married respondents who strongly agreed decreased. Recall that in Table 4

(awareness on Pinggang Pinoy), more married and single respondents strongly agreed


to being aware. Again, this means that awareness on Pinggang Pinoy based on marital
status does not exactly lead to the same positive behavior in educating mothers for those

with the same marital status.

Most of the respondents who finished college, high school and undergraduate
college agreed to having a positive behavior on educating mothers on Pinggang Pinoy.
Compared to their responses on awareness on Pinggang Pinoy, most of them strongly
agreed to having awareness on Pinggang Pinoy. Based on educational attainment, it
cannot be said that the same awareness on Pinggang Pinoy can lead to an exact
correspondence on positive attitude in educating mothers for those with the same

educational attainment.

The number of respondents with 1-20 years in service who strongly agreed to
having awareness on Pinggang Pinoy exhibited a decline in the number of respondents
who strongly agreed when it came to positive attitude towards educating mothers on
Pinggang Pinoy. Awareness on Pinggang Pinoy in terms of number of years in service
is not commensurate to the same positive attitude of respondents on educating mothers

with the same number of years in service.

Lastly for the determinants of behavioral intentions, the same trend was
observed in the increase in the number of respondents with moderate to many training

experience who just agreed to having a positive behavior towards educating mothers on


Pinggang Pinoy. Compared to Table 4 (awareness on Pinggang Pinoy), more
respondents with moderate to many training experience strongly agreed that they were
aware of Pinggang Pinoy. Thus, having moderate to many training experience of
respondents does not necessarily mean the same positive attitude towards educating

mothers on Pinggang Pinoy.

Barriers to Behavioral Intention to Educate

There were six statements to probe behavioral intentions. The first statement,
“T have a strong intention to educate mothers as soon as possible on Pinggang Pinoy”,
was either strongly agreed or agreed to by the respondents except one. The immediacy
or urgency (“as soon as possible”) of the intention to educate mothers added to the

intention.

The second statement, “J intend to immediately educate mothers on Pinggang
Pinoy because it is my duty and it is what is expected of me”, also was either strongly
agreed or agreed to by the respondents except one when everyone should have agreed.
Having the intention to immediately educate mothers, added self-approval of the duty
and recognition of others’ expectations added to behavioral intentions. The immediacy,
self-approval, and adherence to expectation all helped determine the behavioral
intention to educate mothers. This was an indication of a stronger behavioral intention

than the responses of agreement indicated early on.


The third statement, “My intention to educate mothers on Pingang Pinoy can
become stronger if I gain additional knowledge, attend more trainings and have
sufficient information materials”, was consistently strongly agreed or agreed upon.
Intention to educate mothers on Pinggang Pinoy if they gained additional knowledge,
attended more trainings and were supported with information materials is positive.
Notice that there was an increase in the number of respondents who strongly agreed to
this statement. This indicated that if provided with added knowledge and capability-
building activities, plus information materials as support, nutrition and health workers’
intention to educate mothers can be enhanced. This also indicated the current state that

some workers need more nutrition education support to better perform their duties.

The statement, “My intention to educate mothers on Pinggang Pinoy weakens
when I think that they may consider it as intervening with their decision regarding
food”, was rated as either strongly disagreed or disagreed by most respondent, with
some strongly agreeing or agreeing. Some mothers perceived that mothers can consider

this as intervening with decisions regarding food.

While many workers strongly disagreed and disagreed to this statement, the 19
respondents who perceived that their intentions are weakened by thinking that mothers
considered educating them on Pinggang Pinoy as an intervention to decision-making
on food would need further examination to validate this perception, especially among
mothers. This means that as a mentor, they also felt as if their mentees looked at the
intervention as a burden instead of a solution. Psychologically, any teacher or educator

could be challenged to approach the learner, but as the role mandates, they have to find


other ways to encourage the learner to proceed. Taking on the responsibility should of

course be supported by the LGUs.

Similar with other answers when the statement is in the negative or reversed
form, where respondents may be confused with the statement construction or not, the
responses who strongly agreed and agreed were more than one compared to those who
disagreed and strongly disagreed. If the responses were taken as they were, there could
be a struggle among workers to integrate the supporting messages of Pinggang Pinoy.
Communication materials on Pinggang Pinoy should make these supporting messages

also prominent to command attention and understanding among workers and mothers.

The final statement, “My intention to integrate the implied environmental
message of Pinggang Pinoy on minimizing food waste into proper meal planning,
judicious purchasing, preparation and consumption, and appropriate storage,
recycling and disposal is weak”, was strongly agreed and agreed to. This implies
environmental concerns were weak among respondents. This means that as basic and
simple as it is, the Pinggang Pinoy as a nutrition tool needs enhancement in its implied
messages. Messages on meal planning and environmental concerns can be clearly stated
for better guidance. Sometimes, there is a need to be redundant if message have to be

understood clearly (Table 7).


Barriers to Behavioral Intention to Educate

STRONGLY AGREE

ek AGREE (54%)
‘STRONGLY
AGREE (38%) Nee)

STRONGLY AGREE (65%) ESAT.
ca DISAGREE (62%) we)

DISAGREE sb
(42%) (10%)

DISAGREE sD
(35%) (9%)

Figure 11. Barriers to behavioral intention to educate

Cross-tabulation of the respondents’ background factors and behavioral
intentions, as shown in Table 8, showed that all responses from all age groups showed
positive behavioral intentions. These were consistent with their positive responses to
determinants of behavioral intentions, like attitude, norms and control in Table 6. Thus,

age as a background factor, can help indicate behavioral intentions.

Regarding sex, all respondents had positive behavioral intentions. These
responses were similar to the positive responses to determinants of behavioral
intentions, like attitude, norms and control in Table 6. Therefore, sex as a background

factor, can help determine behavioral intentions.


As for marital status, all responses indicated positive behavioral intentions for
all statuses. These positive responses were similar to the responses to determinants of
behavioral intentions, like attitude, norms and control in Table 6. Marital status, as a

background factor, can help predict behavior intentions.

For educational attainment, all levels showed positive behavioral intentions.
The same positive responses were similar to the responses to determinants of behavioral
intentions, like attitude, norms and control in Table 6. As a background factor,

educational attainment can help determine behavioral intentions.

In terms of number of years in service, all responses except for the 2 with no
answers, indicated positive behavioral intentions. Similar positive responses were noted
in the responses to determinants of behavioral intentions, like attitude, norms and
control in Table 6. Number of years, as a background factor can help determine

behavioral intentions.

For the training experience, all responses revealed positive behavioral
intentions. These positive responses were similar to the responses to determinants of
behavioral intentions, like attitude, norms and control in Table 6. As a background

factor, training experience can help predict behavioral intentions.


There was consistency in the positive responses on the determinants of
behavioral intentions (attitude, norms, and control) when cross-tabulated with
background factors with the positive responses to behavioral intentions when cross-
tabulated with the same background factors. This confirms TPB’s assumption that the
sum of background factors, attitude, norms and control all contribute to behavioral
intention. In this study, background factors and the positive attitude, norms and control
of nutrition and health workers all contributed to their positive behavioral intentions to

educate mothers on Pinggang Pinoy.

Spearman’s Rho Correlation showed that the respondents’ educational
attainment was positively and significantly correlated with the determinants of
behavioral intentions (Table 9). This correlation validates that educational attainment
as a background factor contributes positively to the awareness of nutrition and health
workers on Pinggang Pinoy and to their determinants of behavioral intentions like

attitude, norms, and control.

Spearman’s Rho Correlation test also showed that respondents’ awareness on
Pinggang Pinoy and the determinants of behavioral intentions (attitude, norms, and
control) are positively and significantly correlated with their behavioral intentions to
educate mothers on Pinggang Pinoy (Table 10). This reflects the findings of various
studies (Spronk et al, 2014, Alaunyte et al., 2015, Parmenter & Waller, 2000), which
showed that positive awareness and attitude on nutrition are positively linked with

behavioral intentions.


Willingness to share experiences in teaching mothers

Respondents were asked if they were willing to share their experiences in
teaching mothers on Pinggang Pinoy or proper nutrition and healthy lifestyle.
Responses, though open-ended, were categorized to capture the essence of the
responses. In this open-ended question that generated multiple responses, the
participants attested with their own words that mothers were attentive listeners, that
Pinggang Pinoy was easy to teach, that visuals were helpful, and that support from local
officials helped, in this order. These responses validated the majority of their responses
to the questionnaire statements. These responses imply that even if mothers were
attentive listeners and that Pinggang Pinoy was easy to teach, the behavioral intentions
of workers also depended on the support provided in terms of visually engaging

educational materials and assistance from local officials in doing their work (Table 11).

Suggestions on how to improve strategies in educating mothers on Pinggang Pinoy

When asked to suggest on how to improve strategies in educating mothers on
Pinggang Pinoy or proper nutrition in general, respondents enumerated re-training of
BNSs and BHWs, more dissemination of IEC materials, resumption of mothers’
classes, resources for teaching community gardening, and accessible complementary

foods, in this order (Table 12).

Responses to previous statements again validated the need for more updated

training for nutrition and health workers. It can also be implied that more information


materials are needed, especially in conducting face-to-face mothers’ classes when the

health condition allows.

As to the resources needed for community gardening, this was seen by workers
as a direct solution that can help provide the recommended amounts and kinds of food,
especially fruits and vegetables, per individual on a per meal basis, as the Pinggang

Pinoy and other basic nutrition guides recommend.

It has been demonstrated that community and home gardens can help achieve
food security for families and communities and can even provide additional income.
Home and community gardens, if done on a wider scale, can help lessen the demand
for commercial farm produce that degrades the environment. As seen in some of the
responses, the implications of following the Pinggang Pinoy messages on the
environment, such as judicious purchasing, meal planning, preparation, consumption,
recycling and storage, and disposal, have inconsistencies. This, however, can be
addressed by re-examining the Pinggang Pinoy’s messages and complement these with

interpersonal communication and engaging strategies.

Access to nutritionally-adequate complementary food is a major concern,
especially for malnourished children and even for healthy children at-risk of being
malnourished if not fed properly. Complementary foods could be sourced from home
and community gardens. Root crops, legumes, fruits, and vegetables can be prepared
into nutritious complementary foods. Both nutrition and health workers and mothers

just need more training in gardening and preparing affordable yet nutritious


complementary foods for young children. The LGUs and NGOs can help in providing

planting materials and training.


CHAPTER V

SUMMARY, CONCLUSIONS, AND RECOMMENDATIONS

Summary

Guided by the Theory of Planned Behavior the study aimed to determine the
effects of viewing the Pinggang Pinoy videos on the behavioral intentions of nutrition
and health workers to educate mothers in selected Metro Manila cities and Laguna.
Specifically, the study attempted to: describe the background factors of nutrition and
health workers in selected Metro Manila cities and Laguna that would influence the
behavioral intention to educate mothers on Pinggang Pinoy messages; find out how
awareness level of nutrition and health workers on Pinggang Pinoy messages before
watching the Pinggang Pinoy videos can explain their behavioral intentions to educate
mothers; assess to what extent do subjective norms such as the influence of significant
others influence the intention of health workers to educate mothers; examine the
perceived behavioral control factors that would affect their intention to educate mothers
on Pinggang Pinoy; and analyze attitudes, subjective norms, and perceived behavioral
control can collectively predict nutrition workers’ intention to educate mothers on

Pinggang Pinoy messages.

In summary, most of the respondents had prior awareness and knowledge on
Pinggang Pinoy and its basic messages. This can be attributed to their background

information that most had several years in frontline nutrition and health service, formal

education, satisfactory training experience, relatively regular access to various nutrition
and health information, were mostly women and married presumably with children,
middle-aged, and were working as BNSs, BHWs, Daycare teachers and workers and

nutritionists.

Majority of their responses, except for a few, indicated positive attitude, norms,
and behavioral control toward educating mothers on Pinggang Pinoy. However, when
it came to responses on specific and implied messages of Pinggang Pinoy, like on meal
planning and on the environment, the number of positive responses decreased. This was
apparent on responses to confirmatory statements that were in the negative or reverse
form. Whether there was confusion or misunderstanding on these statements, it is
worthy to note these inconsistencies. If indeed these were understood and if more

respondents participated, it is possible that there could be more of them.

Spearman’s Rho Correlation showed that the respondents’ educational
attainment was positively and significantly correlated with the determinants of
behavioral intentions. This correlation validates that educational attainment as a
background factor contributes positively to the awareness of nutrition and health
workers on Pinggang Pinoy and to their determinants of behavioral intentions like

attitude, norms, and control.


Similarly, Spearman’s Rho Correlation test also showed that respondents’
awareness on Pinggang Pinoy and the determinants of behavioral intentions (attitude,
norms, and control) are positively and significantly correlated with their behavioral
intentions to educate mothers on Pinggang Pinoy. This reflects the findings of various
studies (Spronk et al, 2014, Alaunyte et al., 2015, Parmenter & Waller, 2000), which
showed that positive awareness and attitude on nutrition are positively linked with

behavioral intentions.

As for the responses to the open-ended questions, the participants stated that
mothers are attentive listeners and Pinggang Pinoy is easy to teach due to its visual
appeal. The respondents also recognized that support from the local government helps
their nutrition education work. They also expressed the need for follow-up training,
more IEC materials and resumption of face-to-face activities, like mothers’ classes,
resources for community and provision of complementary foods. These responses were
the nutrition and health workers’ own words that reflect the status of nutrition education

work at their level.

Conclusions

Based on the majority of positive responses from the survey participants, their
attitude, norms, behavioral control and intentions were determined with the help of

viewing the Pinggang Pinoy videos. While all respondents except for one, had prior


knowledge on Pinggang Pinoy and other basic nutrition concepts due to their nutrition

and health work, most of them expressed the need for more nutrition education support.

The combination of auditory and visual stimuli in the Pinggang Pinoy videos
reinforced their positive attitude toward educating mothers and added to or refreshed
their existing knowledge on basic nutrition. The messages in the videos affirmed self-
expectation and the expectation of others on their role as nutrition educators. Also,
knowing that a simple and easy-to-understand nutrition tool exists guided them in
determining their level of behavioral control and intentions. If more nutrition education
support can be provided, nutrition and health workers may even use these AVPs to

catch the attention and interest of mothers when conducting house visits and seminars.

The Pinggang Pinoy as a symbol representing basic nutrition messages may
need communication support, like a nutrition or health worker explaining the icons,
providing examples, and putting forward implications to meal planning and the
environment. The videos did not cover all these implications, but are nevertheless a
more engaging nutrition education material than what nutrition and health workers
traditionally use.

Nutrition and health workers just need more resources, support, training,
security of tenure, and due recognition to translate their positive behavioral intentions
into more efficient performance of nutrition education duties. During the COVID-19
pandemic surges, their nutrition education services were largely affected as mobility
and physical contact were very restricted. Further or follow-up studies may be

conducted with more respondents using the originally-intended method of two-group,


pre-test, intervention, post-test design involving a control group and a treatment group,
supplemented with interactive activities, focus group discussion (FGD), and key
informant interviews (KII) to come up with higher order data, gather more in-depth
responses, and draw-out more conclusive generalizations. Another study can be on the

behavioral intentions of mothers to follow the Pinggang Pinoy messages.

In this study, the Theory of Planned behavior proved effective in determining
the behavior intentions of nutrition and health workers in educating mothers on
Pinggang Pinoy messages with the aid of watching Pinggang Pinoy videos and the TPB

questionnaire.

Recommendations

The study forwards the following recommendations:

1. A follow-up or related study can employ the original design of a two-group,
pretest, intervention (interactive, like educational games), posttest with more
respondents for control and treatment groups supplemented with FGD and KII
to yield higher-order data, more in-depth insights, and more conclusive
generalizations. Additional background and environmental factors, as well as
other extraneous variables can be included to minimize the limitations of the
Theory of Planned Behavior in accounting for these in determining behavioral
intentions. It is recommend to explore Venkatesh’s Unified Theory of

Acceptance and Use of Technology (UTAUT) or Technology Acceptance


Model (TAM) as future research frameworks. Face-to-face data collection is

ideal if the health situation permits.

. A gender-related study can investigate the phenomenon of why most frontline
nutrition and health workers are females. The behavior intentions of mothers to

follow the Pinggang Pinoy messages can also be looked into.

. There may be a need to re-examine the Pinggang Pinoy’s basic messages and
visual elements to clearly integrate the implied messages on proper meal
planning and its contribution to the environment, specifically on sustainable

consumption and minimizing food waste.


LITERATURE CITED

Azjen, I. (1988). Theory of Planned Behavior (TPB). Retrieved, from www.igi-
global.com/chapter/theory-of-planned-behavior-tpb-ajzen-
1988/127135?camid=4v1

Ajzen, I. (1991). The Theory of Planned Behavior. Organizational Behavior and Human
Decision Processes, 50, 179-211. | University of Massachusetts at Amherst.
Academic Press. Retrieved. December 13, 2017, from
http://people.umass.edu/aizen/obhdp.html

Armitage, C. J., & Conner, M. (2001). Efficacy of the Theory of Planned Behaviour: A
meta-analytic review. British Journal of Social Psychology, 40(4), 471.

Retrieved December 13, 2017, from
http://siteresources.worldbank.org/EXTGOVACC/Resources/
BehaviorChangeweb.pdf .

Azjen, I. (2016). Consumer attitudes and behavior: The theory of planned behavior
applied to food consumption decisions. University of Massachusetts, Amherst.
Retrieved December 14, 2017, from
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/295547003_Consumer_
attitudes_and_behavior_The_theory_of_planned_behavior_applied_to_food_co
nsumption _decisions.

Bonaccorsi, G. (2015). Food and human behavior: Consumption, waste, and
sustainability. Journal of Public Health Research; v.4(2):606. Retrieved
December 13, 2017, from https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pmc/articles/PMC456843 1/.

Bumanglag, M.M. et al. (2017). Development of 2017 FNRI Menu Guide Calendar:
Addressing the energy and nutrient needs of pregnant and lactating women
through Pinggang Pinoy®. Seminar Series on Food and Nutrition Researches and
Science and Technology Activities. Book of Abstracts p. 32. Retrieved December
03, 2017, from http://www. fnri.dost.gov.ph/images/
sources/SeminarSeries/43rd/Develoment-of-2017-MGC. pdf.

Committee on Communication for Behavior Change in the 21st Century (2002).
Speaking of Health: Assessing Health Communication Strategies for Diverse
Populations. Washington, DC: National Academies Press. Retrieved December
14, 207, from https://www.nap.edu/read/ 10018/chapter/4


Desmon, S. (2017). CCP program in Nigeria increases modem contraceptive use:
Evaluation of the Nigerian Urban Health Initiative (NURHI) program. Bill &
Melinda Gates Foundation and the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of
Child Health and Human Development (P2C HD050924). Retrieved December
17, 2017, from https://ccp.jhu.edu/20 1 7/08/08/ccp-program-in-nigeria-increases-
modern-contraceptive-use-study-suggests/.

Evangelista, P. (2014, October 16, updated 2014, October 17). Hunger wRap: The
extremes of food consumption in the PH. Rappler.com. Retrieved December 13,
2017, from __https://www.rappler.com/move-ph/issues/hunger/72 1 55-food-
consumption-philippines-world-food-day.

Fishbein, M., & Ajzen, I. (1975). Belief, Attitude, Intention, and Behavior: An
Introduction to Theory and Research. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley. Retrieved
December 9, 2017, from https://chirr.nlm.nih.gov/behavioral-intention.php.

Gavilan, J. (2014, July 08). What a Pinggang Pinoy should look like. Rappler.com.
Retrieved December 13, 2017, from _https://www.rappler.com/move-
ph/issues/hunger/624 19-pinggang-pinoy-filipino-food-guide.

Glanz, K., Lewis, F. M., & Rimers, B. K. (Eds.). (1990). Health behavior and health
education: theory, research, and practice. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Retrieved December 09, 2017, from
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/456261468 164982535/Theories-of-
behavior-change.

Hancock, H. (2016). New Provider Behavior Change I-Kit focuses on motivations,
attitudes and norms. Health Communication Capacity Collaborative (HC3)
project. USAID Social and Behavior Change Communication (SBCC) programs.
Johns Hopkins Center for Communication programs (CCP). Retrieved December
8, 2017, from https://ccp.jhu.edu/2016/08/18/new-provider-behavior-change-kit-
focuses-motivations-attitudes-norms/.

LaMorte, W.W. (2016). The Theory of Planned Behavior. Boston University School of
Public Health. Retrieved December 09, 2017, from
http://sphweb.bumc.bu.edu/otlt/MPH-
Modules/SB/BehavioralChangeTheories/BehavioralChangeTheories3.html.

Leif, Erik. (2016). Our lack of awareness about food consumption and waste. American
Council on Science and Health. Retrieved December 13, 2017, from
https://www.acsh.org/news/ 2016/10/20/our-lack-awareness-about-food-
consumption-waste-10335.

Let’s Talk Trash (2015). Choose MyPlate.gov. Center for Nutrition Policy and
Promotion USDA. Retrieved December 15, 2017, from https://choosemyplate-
prod.azureedge.net/sites/default/ _files/printablematerials/2015-LetsTalkTrash-
2page.pdf.


Levine, E. et al. (2013). Evaluating MyPlate: An expanded framework using traditional
and non-traditional metrics for assessing health communication campaigns.
Journal of Nutrition Education. 44:S2-S12. Retrieved December 15, 2017, from
https://ac.els-cdn.com/ $1499404612004162/1-s2.0-S1499404612004162-
main.pdf

Narciso, Z.V. et al. (2015). From pyramid to plate: A formative research on the
development of a Filipino food guide. Seminar Series on Food and Nutrition
Researches and Science and Technology Activities. Book of Abstracts p. 19.
Retrieved December 03, 2017, from
http://www. fnri.dost.gov.ph/images/sources/SeminarSeries/4 1 st/FROM-
PYRAMID-TO-PLATE. pdf.

Netemeyer, R.G., Andrews, J.C. and Srinivas Durvasula, S. (1993) . A comparison of
three behavioral intention models: The case of Valentine's Day gift-giving, in
NA - Advances in Consumer Research Volume 20, eds. McAlister, L. and
Rothschild, M.L. Provo, UT : Association for Consumer Research, p 135-141.
Retrieved December 11, 2017, from http://www.acrwebsite.org/search/view-
conference-proceedings.aspx?Id=7426.

Salem, R.M., Bernstein, J., and Sullivan, T.M. (2008). Tools for behavior change
communication. INFO Reports, No. 16. Baltimore, INFO Project, Johns Hopkins
Bloomberg School of Public Health. Retrieved, December 13, 2017, from
https://www.k4health.org/sites/ default/ files/ BCCTools.pdf.

Sandoval, M.J.A. et al. (2015). Development of Pinggang Pinoy food guide for Filipino
adults. 2015 Seminar Series on Food and Nutrition Researches and Science and
Technology Activities. Book of Abstracts p. 20. Retrieved December 03, 2017,

from http://www. fnri.dost.gov.ph/
images/sources/SeminarSeries/4 | s/DEVELOPMENT-OF-PINGGANG-
PINOY. pdf.

Sandoval, M.J.A. et al. (2016). Development of Pinggang Pinoy food guide for children
and other population groups. 42nd Seminar Series on Food and Nutrition
Researches and Science and Technology Activities. Book of Abstracts p. 62.

Retrieved December 03, 2017, from
http://www. fnri.dost.gov.ph/images/sources/SeminarSeries/42nd/Development-
of-Pinggang-Pinoy.pdf.

The World Bank. (2021). Undemutrition in the Philippines: Scale, Scope, and
Opportunities for Nutrition Policy and Programming
https://www.worldbank.org/en/country/philippines/publication/ -findings-

undernutrition-in-the-philippines

