Heat Strain Score Index Among Hospital Healthcare Workers in Batangas, Philippines and Its Association with Level of Cognitive Function

Jelyne A. Alcantara — dela Luna

University of the Philippines Manila

Master of Science in Public Health (Environmental Health)

August 2023

ABSTRACT

Most studies focusing on heat strain and cognition were mostly done in high income
countries such as Europe, Japan, Australia, Poland, and the United States. The Philippines, on
the other hand, lacks information on the impact of heat strain on cognition especially among
healthcare workers in hospital settings. With the general objective of determining the
association between heat strain score index and level of cognitive function among HCWs
wearing PPE at work, the study specifically aims to determine the prevalence of different
categories of heat strain score index and cognitive function levels among hospital HCWs in
Batangas. Additionally, the study also aimed to determine if there is significant differences in
the level of heat strain score index and level of cognitive function when HC Ws were aggregated
according to personal factors (age, socioeconomic status, mental status, body mass index,
menopausal status), lifestyle-related factors (exercise status, smoking status, sleep duration),
non-communicable diseases (hypertension status, diabetes mellitus status), and work-related
factors (level of PPE, work schedule, work break duration, and water intake status). This study utilized analytic cross-sectional design to assess the association of heat strain
score index and level of cognitive function. A total of 449 HCWs (n=114 from public hospital
and n=335 from private hospital) recruited through proportionate stratified cluster random
sampling participated in the study. A self-administered questionnaire was distributed by
sending Google form link via email. Heat Strain Score Index was used to evaluate the level of
heat strain experienced by the respondents while a validated constructed questionnaire was
used to determine other factors that affect the association of heat strain and level of cognitive
function. To measure the level of cognitive function, PROMIS Cognitive Function Measure
version 2.0 (Adult Short Form 8A) was used. Multiple logistic regression was used to measure
the relationship between heat strain score index and level of cognitive function while Chi-square test was used to evaluate differences between groups. The findings revealed that only a small percentage of HCWs were categorized under
the alarm (11.6%) and danger levels (2.7%) of heat strain score index. However, the majority
(57.9%) of HCWs were found to have worse cognitive function than the average of the
reference population. Significant differences were observed in the level of heat strain score
index when HCWs were grouped based on diabetes status (χ²= 21.8619, p=0.001),
hysterectomy status (χ²= 17.1504, p=0.0090), and perceived adequacy of workplace
ventilation (χ²= 72.5620, p<0.001). No statistically significant differences were found in
cognitive function level when HCWs were aggregated based on personal factors (age,
socioeconomic status, mental status, body mass index), lifestyle-related factors (exercise status,
smoking status, sleep duration status), non-communicable diseases (hypertension status,
diabetes mellitus status), and work-related factors (level of PPE, work schedule, work break
duration, and water intake status). Lastly, after holding other variables constant, the likelihood
of having worse cognitive function increases by 3.6 times when the heat strain of HCWs was
considered in unsafe level. These findings provide insights into the prevalence of different levels of heat strain
score index and cognitive function levels among hospital HCWs in Batangas. The study
highlights the importance of considering heat strain as a potential contributor to cognitive
function impairment and identifies specific factors that may influence the level of heat strain
experienced by HCWs. However, it is important to note that further research is needed to
explore other potential factors influencing heat strain and cognitive function among HCWs and to validate the study's findings in larger and more diverse populations.

CHAPTER I
INTRODUCTION
Background of the study

The principle of patient safety is to decrease error, harm, and risks to patients during
delivery of health services and to ultimately provide quality health care that is safe, effective,
and person oriented (WHO, 2019). Annually, approximately 134 million adverse health events
occur in hospitals among low- and middle-income countries secondary to provision of unsafe
care which has consequently resulted to 2.6 million deaths (National Academies of Sciences,
Engineering, and Medicine, 2018). In addition, more than half of untoward health
consequences following unsafe patient care were noted among low- and middle-income
countries (Jha and Larizgoitia, 2013). Meanwhile, a study conducted among high-income
countries suggested that one in every 10 patients is harmed while receiving treatment and care
from various hospital institutions (Slawomirski, Auraaen, and Klazinga, 2017). The findings
of a separate study revealed that one of the leading causes of mortality and disability across the
globe is unsafe care causing unfavorable health outcomes (Jha, 2018).

The provision of optimal safety and care during patient handling as a requirement in
reinforcing and improving health care systems is aligned with Sustainable Development Goal
3 (Ensure healthy lives and promote health and well-being for all at all ages) (WHO, 2021).
Therefore, it is critical to evaluate factors which may influence hospital healthcare workers
(HCW) during provision of care to their patients.

One of the multitude of factors which may potentially affect a HCWs provision of
optimal care for patients include heat stress. Heat stress is defined as the total heat load that an
individual experiences from the collective contributions of various environmental factors and
metabolic heat (Jacklitsch et al., 2016). Several risk factors that contribute significantly to heat-

related illnesses include vigorous physical activity, type of clothing that blocks body heat, hot

environmental conditions, and lack of acclimatization (OSHA, n.d.). The heat stress that the
body sustains from combination of these factors consequently leads to the physiological
response such as sweating, elevation in heart rate, and core temperature which are collectively
referred to as heat strain (CCOHS, 2016; Bernard, 2002). If these normal physiological
responses will not be sufficient in preventing further increase in body temperature, several heat-
related medical conditions such as heat exhaustion, heat cramps, heat syncope, heat rash, heat
stroke, and rhabdomyolysis may ensue (OSHA, 2017). Moreover, working in hot conditions
may also result in adverse cognitive outcomes that may subsequently limit optimal
performance (Davey et al.,2020, Qian et al., 2015, Liu et al. 2013, Pilcher, Nadler & Buschta,
2002).

The COVID-19 pandemic brought additional occupational burden to numerous
working groups. Among them, the healthcare workers (HC Ws) are potentially at risk of heat
stress and subsequent heat strain since they are mandated to wear personal protective
equipment (PPE) during duty hours to lessen the possibility of COVID-19 transmission
(Williams & Cichowicz, 2020). Personal protective equipment limit the escape of heat from
the body towards the environment as a consequence of amplified thermal and evaporative
resistance precipitated by the extra layers of clothing (O’Brien et al. 2011; Bernard et al. 2010).
Statement of the Research Problem

Most studies focusing on heat strain and cognition were mostly done in high income
countries such as Europe, Japan, Australia, Poland and the United States. In addition, very
limited studies have been carried out among healthcare workers describing heat strain and
cognition and most of the existing research among HCWs were performed using descriptive
study design. The Philippines, on the other hand, lacks information on the impact of heat strain
on cognition especially among healthcare workers in hospital settings. Measuring the

association of heat strain score index and cognitive function specifically in the attention,

memory, and executive domain is crucial in providing evidence for our policy makers and other

relevant stakeholders such as the hospital management and administration that will guide them

in developing interventions and programs in the healthcare setting to reduce heat strain which

may influence cognitive functions. Lastly, this study will also benefit the hospital HCWs who

will be the recipients of improvements in policies and programs directed towards heat-

mitigation strategies thereby reducing their predisposition to heat strain and decline in various

cognitive function. This study answered the following questions:

Main Research Question: Is there an association between heat strain score index and level of

cognitive function among hospital healthcare workers wearing PPE at work in Batangas.

Specific Research Question

a.

What is the prevalence of the different categories of heat strain score index among
hospital HCWs?

What is the prevalence of worse level of cognitive function among hospital HC Ws?

Is there any difference in the prevalence of varying categories of heat strain score index
among hospital HC Ws in Batangas with respect to:

c.1 personal factors (age, sex, menopausal status, and body mass index)

c.2 lifestyle-related factors (exercise status, smoking status, sleep duration status)

c.3 non-communicable diseases (hypertension status, diabetes mellitus status)

c.4 work-related factors (level of PPE, work schedule, work break duration, water
intake status, and perceived adequacy of ventilation at work)?

Is there any difference in the prevalence of level of cognitive function among hospital
HCWs in Batangas with respect to:

d.l personal factors (age, socioeconomic status, mental status, body mass index,
menopausal status)

d.2 lifestyle-related factors (exercise status, smoking status, sleep duration status)

d.3 non-communicable diseases (hypertension status, diabetes mellitus status),
d.4 work-related factors (level of PPE, work schedule, work break duration, and water
intake status)?
e. Is there a relationship between heat strain score index and level of cognitive function
among hospital healthcare workers wearing PPE at work in Batangas?
Statement of the Research Objectives
With the general objective of determining the association between heat strain score
index and level of cognitive function among HCWs wearing PPE at work, the study specifically
aimed:
1. To determine the prevalence of different categories of heat strain score index among
hospital HCWs in Batangas
2. To determine the prevalence of worse cognitive outcomes among hospital HCWs in
Batangas
3. To determine the difference in the prevalence of varying categories of heat strain score
index among hospital HC Ws in Batangas with respect to:
3.1 personal factors (age, sex, menopausal status, and body mass index)
3.2 lifestyle-related factors (exercise status, smoking status, sleep duration)
3.3 non-communicable diseases (hypertension status, diabetes mellitus status)
3.4 work-related factors (level of PPE, work schedule, work break duration, water
intake status, and perceived adequacy of ventilation at work)
4. To determine the difference in the prevalence of varying level of cognitive functions
among hospital HC Ws in Batangas with respect to:
4.1 personal factors (age, socioeconomic status, mental status, body mass index,
menopausal status)

4.2 lifestyle-related factors (exercise status, smoking status, sleep duration)

4.3 non-communicable diseases (hypertension status, diabetes mellitus status)
4.4 work-related factors (level of PPE, work schedule, work break duration, and water
intake status)
5. To measure the relationship between heat strain score index and level of cognitive
function among HCWs wearing PPE at work in Batangas
Significance of the Study
From the studies mentioned above, the importance of accounting for the detrimental
effects of exposure to a hot working environment must be recognized to develop strategies
focused on the individual and situational factors. The information that will be derived from this
study will be useful in gauging the extent of impact of heat strain in causing decline in cognitive
functions, specifically memory, attention, and executive function among hospital HCWs
battling the pandemic which may subsequently generate more burden in the healthcare system.
Furthermore, the results of the study will provide supplementary evidence as to the adequacy
of heat mitigation strategies that are currently being implemented in the healthcare facilities.
The limited number of quantitative studies showing association of heat strain score index
and cognitive functions among HCWs wearing PPE calls for the conduct of a methodologically
sound and valid study. There is a need for more extensive and thorough research which will
provide empirical evidence on heat stress exposure as manifested by heat strain and its
association to memory, attention, and executive domains of cognition among HCWs. This will
provide valuable evidence for our policy makers and other relevant stakeholders such as the
hospital management and administration that will guide them in developing interventions and
Programs in the healthcare setting to reduce heat strain which may influence cognitive
functions. Lastly, this study will also benefit the hospital HCWs who will be the recipients of
improvements in policies and programs directed towards heat-mitigation strategies thereby

reducing their predisposition to heat strain and decline in various cognitive functions.

Scope and Delimitation of the Study

This research focused on exploring the association of heat strain score index and level
of cognitive function specifically in the attention, memory, and executive domains. The
participants of the study included HCWs who are currently affiliated in a public or private
hospital in the province of Batangas. The study included only 9 hospitals in Batangas during
data collection to lower the risk of exposure to COVID-19 during data collection. In addition,
the study did not employ objective environmental and physiological measurements of heat
strain such as Wet Bulb Globe Temperature, core body temperature, and heart rate. The study
utilized subjective measurement tools for the evaluation of heat strain and cognitive functions

among HCWs because of the feasibility limitation of the study.

CHAPTER II
THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
Review of Related Literature
A. Heat Strain

Low to middle income countries with tropical climates are at higher risk of heat-related
occupational illnesses (Kjellstrom,2009). Occupational heat strain, aside from causing heat
related illnesses, can also impend an individual’s potential for optimal productivity at work. A
recent meta-analysis study conducted over 30 countries such as India, Qatar, Australia, Taiwan,
Canada, Italy, Singapore, South Africa, and Brazil showed that 35% of workers experience
occupational heat strain. Moreover, a 30% prevalence of lost productivity was reported among
workers who endure heat strain during their shift. More specifically, a 2.6% decrease in
productivity was observed for every degree increase beyond 24°C Wet Bulb Globe
Temperature (WBGT) (Flouris et al., 2018).

The human body is modelled to sustain a normal core body temperature of 37°C. During
physical activity, there is a subsequent increase in metabolic heat that needs to be transferred
to the environment to prevent abnormal rise in body temperature. Factors such as metabolic
heat during physical activity, air temperature, radiant temperature, humidity, air movement,
and clothing determine the heat balance in the body (Parsons, 2003). When the body exceeds
its capacity to sufficiently balance the body heat, heat strain and other heat-related illnesses
develops (Ramsey & Bernard,2000).

The Occupational Safety and Health Administration (2017) defines heat strain as the
body’s response to environmental and metabolic heat stress. Literature based on laboratory and
occupational studies demonstrates a direct relationship between heat stress and heat strain.
Hence, as heat stress increases, there is a concurrent elevation in heat strain experienced by the

body. Moreover, the resulting heat strain following heat stress is also largely dependent on the

worker’s level of acclimatization. Generally, a greater level of heat stress can be tolerated by
acclimatized individuals before heat strain develops as compared to non-acclimatized
counterparts. However, even an acclimatized worker may still be subjected to excessive heat
strain that may result in heat-related illnesses because the body’s compensatory mechanism
may no longer be able to maintain the normal core temperature necessary for optimal functions.
In addition, differences in the heat strain experienced by acclimatized and non-acclimatized
individuals become less significant during extreme heat conditions (Jacklitsch et al., 2016).

Multiple incidences of heat-related illnesses in an occupational setting suggests
inadequacy of heat mitigation measures and may also warrant the need for more comprehensive
environmental monitoring programs (Rutstein, 1983). The need to revisit the existing programs
to reduce occupational heat stress is further amplified by the risk of workplace accidents
secondary to poor decision making and decline in work productivity (Spector et al., 2019;
Flouris et al., 2018).

In a thermoneutral environment, the normal blood flow to the skin is between 200 to
500 mL per min but high heat strain can escalate skin blood flow to 7 to 8 L per min. The
increase in skin blood flow combined with vasodilation facilitate movement of warm blood
from the core of the body towards the periphery as a way of dissipating heat towards the
external environment (Taylor, Kondo & Kenney, 2008).

The significant proportion of cardiac output that is directed towards the skin when the
body is experiencing heat strain has subsequent blood flow reduction in the muscles, kidneys,
and other organs in the abdominal cavity such as the liver, spleen, small and large intestine,
and pancreas (Jacklitsch et al., 2016). Taylor, Kondo & Kenney (2008) reported that blood
flow to the muscles is reduced up to 25% during episodes of heat strain, from 2.4 mL-g-Iper
min-| to 2.1 mL*g-1 per min-1 as a consequence of increased blood flow to the skin. They

further added that the cardiovascular system is negatively affected to a greater degree when a

rise in body temperature is coupled with dehydration among working individuals. More
importantly, the redistribution of blood from important organs to the skin creates significant
physiological adjustments which consequently affect physical and cognitive capacity

(McLellan, Daanen & Cheung, 2013).

Several epidemiological studies reviewed the impact of heat strain with various
cognitive functions. A recent cross-sectional study conducted by Davey et al. (2021) among
the National Health Service workforce demonstrated that 65% of healthcare workers reported
difficulty in performing cognitive tasks while 92% reported that the accompanying heat stress

from wearing PPE made their job more challenging.

One narrative review characterized the association between hyperthermia and cognition
to be an inverted U-shaped curve which can still be altered using appropriate control measures.
The study also suggested that increasing the core body temperature to 38.5 °C enhances
cognition but there exists concomitant decline in cognitive performance at temperature of 39

°C and above (Schmidt et al., 2017).

Several clinical trials with cross-over design also analyzed association of thermal stress
and cognitive functions. The result of Malcolm et al. (2018) conducted among healthy male
participants suggested decline in cognitive performance as measured by the Stroop test upon
exposure to a temperature of 39.6 + 0.4°C as compared to moderate temperature of 21.2 +
1.8°C. Meanwhile, a study by Van Den Heuvel and colleagues (2017) found no statistically
significant association between moderate hyperthermia, dehydration, and their combined
impact in reducing cognitive functions particularly in the working memory and visual
perception of healthy, non-smoking male participants. This is similar to the result of the study
by Sun et al. (2012) conducted among male and female participants in China which showed no

significant association between exposure to hot conditions and alerting and orienting functions

of cognition. Nevertheless, the same study suggested a significant association between heat

stress and executive functions.

Another study conducted among workers exposed under heat stress in the Malibel Saipa
Company in Iran revealed statistically significant correlation between WBGT and reaction time
(P=0.047) and WBGT and attention (P= 0.001) which demonstrate cognitive decline during

thermally challenging conditions (Mazloumi et al., 2014).

A study by Stubblefield et al. (2013) concluded a significant decline by 12.22% (t7=
4.675, p=.002) in the number of correct answers as a measure of memory domain among
individuals exposed in a hyperthermic (mean correct= 7.155+1.478) condition when compared
with individuals under normothermic (mean correct= 8.151+.1.60) condition. The same study
also demonstrated that attention, processing speed, and response speed were less vulnerable to

increase in core body temperature among male participants.

An attention network test (ANT) conducted by Liu et al (2013) among Chinese male
participants with mean age of 23.35 years also revealed decline in cognitive function
particularly in the executive function during conflict resolution when participants were exposed

in a passive hyperthermic environment of 50°C.

B. Cognition

The American Psychological Association (2020) defines cognition as “all forms of
knowing and awareness, such as perceiving, conceiving, remembering, reasoning, judging,
imagining, and problem solving”. Cognition could also refer to the processes that an individual

employs to organize different information (Sela & Lavidor, 2014).

Cognitive ability is divided into different domains that are connected to each other.

These cognitive domains include sensation, perception, motor skills, attention and


concentration, memory, executive functioning, processing speed, and language or verbal skills
(Harvey, 2019). The domains exhibit a general hierarchy wherein sensory, and perception are
considered the least complicated processes while executive functioning, which encompasses
reasoning and problem-solving, is considered the more complex domain. (Al-Aidroos, Said,

Turk-Browne,2012).

Executive functioning is responsible for the integration and engagement of other
cognitive domains such as attention, sensory, perception, and other less complicated cognitive
functions to be able to effectively execute problem-solving and reasoning processes (Harvey,
2019; Diamond, 2013). This is accomplished through the combination of three core executive
functions: inhibition (self-control), cognitive flexibility, and working memory (Lehto et al.,
2003). Aside from the coordination of the different cognitive processes, Chan et al. (2008) also
describes executive function as a broader umbrella involving sequencing, planning,
multitasking, and resistance to interference. This is also the higher cognitive domain that is
utilized during management of desires, impulses, and behavior (Zelazo, 2004). Several meta-
analyses studies found an association between larger prefrontal cortex and better executive
functions among healthy adults (Yuan & Raz,2014; Alvarez & Emory, 2006). It was also noted
that this domain is less affected by aging as compared to other cognitive processes (Bangen,

Meeks & Jeste,2013).

Attention, as a separate domain of cognition, is generally categorized into two:
sustained attention and selective attention. Selective attention is a process wherein an
individual focuses on relevant tasks and ignores irrelevant information. Dual tasking also falls
under the selective attention, and it enables an individual to process simultaneous information
(Harvey, 2019). On the contrary, sustained attention involves the process of maintaining
continuous effort to finish a task over a prolonged period (Ko et al., 2017). Individuals with
impairment in this domain usually get distracted easily, demonstrate difficulty in performing


tasks when exposed to multiple stimuli, and are incapable of performing mental mathematics
(Peters & Rabins, 2017). In addition, Gitelman (2003) reported that attentional disorders are
the most typical neurocognitive conditions, and it encompasses domain specific attentional
changes, confusional state, and hemispatial neglect that is common in individuals with lesions
on the right hemisphere. Individuals with Attention-Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder also present
with inattention issues such as decreased ability to concentrate and getting easily distracted

(APA, 2013).

The last domain of cognition that will be of interest in this study is memory. According
to Harvey (2019), memory is considered the most elaborate and complex domain of cognition.
It involves several subdomains such as declarative memory, procedural memory, semantic
memory, prospective memory, storage, retrieval, encoding, and working memory. Moreover,
these subdomains operate autonomously of one another (May, Einstein & Freedman, 2013).
Several conditions such as history of brain infection, brain tumor, infarct, and hemorrhage
affect memory. Furthermore, individuals with depression and older adults with dementia and
Alzheimer’s disease also demonstrate decline in this cognitive domain. Conversely, healthy

individuals also undergo decline in memory as part of the normal aging process (NIH, 2018).

Optimal cognitive function is important for performance of daily tasks in the healthcare
industry. HCWs perform critical thinking processes for effective clinical decision-making and
reasoning in addition to psychomotor skills in their daily operation (Higuchi & Donald, 2002).
The multiple patient load requires keen working memory to be able to comply with the
cognitive demands needed (Engle, 2002). Additionally, problems in attention may lead to
medical errors that can compromise patient safety (Botha E, Gwin T, Purpora, 2015). One study
suggested that problems in executive functions among HCWs increase the risk of professional

burnout syndrome (Fernandez-Sanchez et al., 2018) which can potentially reduce professional


efficacy (Maslach & Leiter, 2008). Meanwhile, a separate study that analyzed technical and
non-technical skills of healthcare professionals concluded that a positive correlation exists
between executive function and non-technical skills such as team management and

communication in the healthcare setting (Los, Chmielewski, & Luczynski,2020).

C. PPE

The World Health Organization (2020) recommended the use of PPE among HCWs
which includes medical masks, gloves, gowns, goggles, or face shields during provision of care
to patients to prevent transmission of COVID-19 in the healthcare setting. They also
emphasized strict compliance on the usage of appropriate PPE even when handling patients
who are not suspected with COVID-19 infection.

The University of the Philippines - Philippine General Hospital categorized PPE
depending on the levels of risk involved. HC Ws assigned in low-risk areas such as outpatient
sections may use Level 1 PPE consisting of the standard surgical mask. Level 2 PPE is
recommended for areas with available bathrooms where HC Ws can take a bath after their shift,
while Level 3 PPE is utilized in triage and when handling patients under investigation. On the
contrary, HCWs designated in operating rooms and COVID-19 wards are required to use Level
4 PPE (Tantuco, 2020). Listed below are the categories of PPE provided by the UP-PGH:
Level 1: surgical mask, alcohol hand wash/spray
Level 2: surgical mask, goggles, or face shield
Level 3: N95 mask, goggles or face shield, gloves, surgical cap, scrub suits, gowns (or
coveralls/hazmat suit), shoe covers
Level 4: N95 mask (or Powered Air Purifying Respirator), goggles or face shield, double
gloves, surgical cap, scrub suits, coveralls/hazmat suit, dedicated shoes, shoe covers

Although PPE is necessary in reducing disease transmission, it can add to the physical

and mental burden experienced by the HCWs due to accompanying heat stress imposed on


their bodies (Zhang, 2020). This can be attributed to the reduction in the transfer of vapor
molecules from the body towards the external environment which consequently limits
evaporation and heat exchange thus leading to an increased risk of heat strain (Kuklane et al.,
2015; Potter, Gonzales & Xu, 2015). Aside from the limited heat dissipation, the higher sweat
rate among HCWs using the required PPE for COVID-19 further causes thermal discomfort
and subsequent increase in the level of heat strain (Liu et al., 2020; Kenefick & Sawka,2007).

Potter et al. (2015) suggested a two to ten times increase in evaporative resistance when
wearing high risk PPE that cover the head and neck of HCWs. Even in thermoneutral
conditions, fluid-resistant PPE was still observed to contribute to heat stress (Messeri et al.,
2021; Kaywhite,1991). Furthermore, the added weight and the limitation in movement when
wearing PPE also magnify heat stress which consequently increases heat strain anong HCWs
(Coca et al., 2017).

Recent studies have demonstrated the association of PPE and heat strain. A cross-
sectional study conducted by Lee et al. (2020) suggested that most of the HCWs wearing PPE
have been affected by heat strain. The study also demonstrated that most of the HCWs were
conscious of the adverse physical, mental, and emotional consequences of heat stress and heat
strain and the necessary approaches to reduce them, nonetheless, heat-mitigation practices were
not always adopted at work. The results of Messeri et al. (2021) showed that 78% of HCWs
reported heat strain when wearing PPE even if they are working indoors in a fully-air-
conditioned workstation. In addition, 81% of the respondents reported decline in productivity
due to heat stress. Meanwhile, another study among HCWs suggested moderate heat strain but
no significant elevation in core body temperature and no signs of heat-related illnesses for a
65.7-minute work shift when wearing PPE in a hot environment during the Ebola Outbreak in

2014 (Grélot et al., 2016).


In addition, the duration of PPE also affects a worker’s job performance. A recent study
reported that HCWs who wear face masks for 4 hours or longer perceive a greater reduction in
productivity. Decline in physical health was also reported by HCWs using PPE for more than
four hours. Apart from productivity loss and concomitant adverse health outcomes, the same
study also suggested that HC Ws wearing masks and overlapping gloves for four hours or more
reported abstaining from breaks and hydrating less frequently during their shift as compared to
those wearing PPE on a shorter period (Messeri, 2021).

D. Other Factors Affecting Heat Strain and Cognition
Age and Sex

Glass et al. (2015) suggested that the risk of heat strain increases among the vulnerable
populations such as children and older adults, with females greater than 75 years old being
more predisposed to heat strain. It was also suggested that a male's risk for heat strain does not
significantly increase as quickly with advancing age. A separate study by Mehnert, Bréde &
Griefahn (2002) reported statistically significant differences in the sweat rate between men and
women with the latter having lower maximum sweat rate even after matching body
composition. They added that the differences in sweating can be associated with greater core
temperature in women.

Aging also affects the body’s thermoregulatory functions which leads to insufficient
reactions to thermal fluctuations. Generally, older adults present with lower tolerance to heat
and cold (Székely & Garai,2018). The amount of heat that the body needs to dissipate in the
external environment is not proportional to skin blood flow in older adults. There is also a noted
decrease in the number of sweat glands which correspondingly affects the rate of sweating. In
addition, the level to stimulate sweating is higher in older adults as compared to younger
counterparts which ultimately attenuates their thermoregulation potential (Inoue et al., 2004).

Apart from the reduction of sweating, it was also observed that older adults consume less fluid


as compared to younger individuals which may further affect their thermoregulatory capacity
(Amaud, 1998). This could be possibly attributed to reduced blood flow to their cerebrum in
conjunction with changes in the anterior midcingulate cortex area resulting in water satiation
among older adults (Farrell et al., 2008).

Age does not only influence the independent variable, but it also impacts the study’s
outcome of interest. Advancing age creates functional and structural alterations in the brain
that consequently lower cognitive performance. However, the influence of age on different
domains of cognition is more significant among the older adult population (Maldonado et al.,
2020; Murman, 2015; Lezak et al., 2004). Meanwhile, recent studies show that gender
differences do not significantly affect different functions of cognition which supports the
Gender Similarities Hypothesis as suggested by the findings of a meta-analysis by Hyde
(2016). This is supported by another review by Jancke (2018) which concluded that cognitive
functions, emotion, and brain structures were not significantly altered by gender dimorphism.
Diabetes Mellitus

There are also several noncommunicable diseases (NCDs) that affect an
individual’s predisposition to heat strain and influence cognitive functions such as Diabetes
Mellitus and Hypertension.

Diabetes Mellitus is a chronic metabolic disease that affects the pancreas which
consequently results in impaired glycemic control in the body (IDF, 2020). The WHO (2020)
reported an 8.5% global prevalence of diabetes or an approximately 422 million adults were
affected in 2014 and has been continuously on the rise among low to middle income countries.

The CDC (2017) recognized diabetes as a significant risk factor for heat stress
among individuals in occupational settings. Several studies have demonstrated the association
of diabetes and impairment in thermoregulation which leads to heat strain. In addition, the

concomitant metabolic and neurological impairments observed among individuals with


diabetes also compromise mechanisms for thermoregulatory functions (Kenny et al., 2010).
Individuals with diabetes exhibited decreased sweating and blood flow to the skin therefore
resulting in decline in heat dissipation especially during hot environmental conditions or during
performance of physical activity. This leads to higher levels of heat strain among diabetics as
compared to non-diabetic counterparts (Kenny, Sigal & McGinn, 2016). Moreover, they also
have a higher risk of dehydration and untoward cardiac events during exposure to extreme heat
(Méndez-Lazaro et al., 2018). A study conducted by Schwarts (2005) in Wayne County,
Michigan showed that individuals with Type 1 and Type II Diabetes are at higher risk of death
during hot days (OR=1.17; 95% ClI=1.04-1.32). Moreover, some medications taken by
individuals with Diabetes are considered diuretics which can potentially lead to dehydration
without adequate fluid replacement (CDC, 2020). During instances when diuretics precipitate
dehydrations, there is subsequent hypovolemia and increase in plasma osmolality which further
reduces the body’s heat dissipation mechanisms (Lynn et al., 2012; Kenny & Jay,2011).
Aside from the associated attenuation of thermoregulatory functions, diabetes is
also linked to decline in several domains of cognition. Impairments in executive function,
attention, processing speed, and memory were noted among individuals with Type II Diabetes
(Van den Berg et al.,2010). Another meta-analysis study by Vincent & Hall (2015) revealed
mild to moderate decrease in executive function among individuals with Type II Diabetes as
compared to non-diabetic counterparts. In the same study, an inverse association was noted
between duration of the disease and decline in cognitive function. Similarly, one recent study
conducted among 35 to 74 years old participants from the Brazilian Longitudinal Study of
Adult Health reported statistically significant association between diabetes and decrements in

executive function, language, and memory (Teixeira et al., 2020).


Hypertension

Similar to diabetes, research suggests that hypertension can also contribute to
decrement in cognitive performance and predisposition to heat strain. Globally, hypertension
is regarded as one of the major causes of premature deaths and a significant risk factor for
coronary heart disease and stroke (Lawes, Vander Hoorn & Rodgers, 2008). Based on the 2017
guideline of the American Heart Association, an individual is categorized as hypertensive if
his or her blood pressure is at 130/80 mmHg or higher (CDC, 2020). Smoking, drinking,
sedentary behavior, obesity, and high fat and sodium diet substantially increase the risk of
getting hypertension. Additionally, individuals with diabetes, renal disease, and family medical
history of hypertension are also more predisposed to high blood pressure (WHO, 2019). The
results of the study done by Mills et al. (2016) analyzing the prevalence of hypertension in 90
countries revealed that 75% of hypertensive individuals reside in low to middle income
countries whereas the prevalence of hypertension among developed countries are declining
significantly with increasing awareness and control of the disease. This is similar to the result
of the study conducted by the WHO (2019) which showed that the United States has the lowest
prevalence of hypertension at 18%, meanwhile, Africa has the highest number of cases with a
prevalence rate of 27%. In a recent study conducted by Sison, Divinagracia, & Nailes (2020),

the incidence of hypertension in the Philippines was at 38.6%.

In a study conducted by Kenny et al. (2010) exploring the common NCDs that
contribute to heat stress, hypertensive individuals sustain higher levels of heat strain as
compared to normotensive counterparts. Moreover, the medications taken by hypertensive
individuals which include diuretics, B-blockers, and vasodilators were also noted to contribute
to heat intolerance especially during hyperthermic conditions (Coco et al., 2016; Cheshire &

Fealey, 2008).


Hypertension not only increases the risk for heat strain, but it was also demonstrated to
cause cognitive decline in different age groups. The results of the study by Gasecki and
colleagues (2013) are suggestive that elevated blood pressure causes reduction in optimal
executive functioning, impairments in memory, and decline in processing speed. The
interruption in the normal cerebral blood flow creates structural damage to the white matter
that is relevant for cognitive processes (Iacodela et al., 2016). Moreover, there are also
structural changes in the grey matter due to the physiological mechanisms following
hypertension. Regions of the brain that are particularly vulnerable to abnormal elevation in
blood pressure include the hippocampus, inferior parietal lobe, temporal cortex, and prefrontal
cortex (Raz et al., 2007). The associated brain bleeds and infarcts resulting from high blood
pressure also contribute to the cognitive impairments among individuals with hypertension
(Pantoni, 2010). Another study conducted in the ELSA-Brasil cohort showed that individuals
in the younger and older age group with hypertension similarly demonstrated decline in
cognitive functions. Lower scores in the memory domain were noted among hypertensive
individuals less than 55 years old. Meanwhile hypertensive adults ages 55 years old and above
demonstrated lower scores in the global cognitive and memory assessment tests (de Menezes
et al., 2012). This is similar with the results of a 20-year prospective study by Elias et al. (2004)
which concluded that decline in cognitive functions were also noted among young and old

individuals with hypertension.

Water Intake

The adequacy of water intake also influences cognitive performance and heat strain.
Water is essential for different physiological functions including metabolism, cellular
homeostasis, circulation, and thermoregulatory control (Armstrong & Johnson, 2018). The
total water intake (TWI) changes with an individual’s anthropometric measurement. Generally,

larger persons need more TWI than smaller individuals (Campbell, 2004). However, the


individual variations along with the complex process of water regulation in the body make it
challenging to determine a standard on daily water requirement (Armstrong & Johnson, 2018).
Aside from the inter-individual differences, external influences such as relative humidity, air
movement, type of clothing, and solar load also determine the required water intake of an
individual (Sawka, Cheuvront, & Carter, 2005).

Water in our body is constantly eliminated during urination, defecation, sweating, and
even respiration. When the normal water level in our body is diminished below the average
value during instances where water elimination is higher than water intake, dehydration follows
(Hunt, 2011). During episodes of dehydration, the thirst centers in our brain is activated and it
is predominantly controlled by several factors which include arginine vasopressin
concentration, angiotensin II, blood pressure, and blood volume (Thornton 2010).

Typically, there is a concomitant increase in core body temperature as the level of
dehydration rises (Hunt, 2011). In addition, sweating, one of the body’s heat dissipation
mechanisms, may also lead to dehydration and associated loss of electrolytes in the body. These
are also accompanied by decline in plasma volume which ultimately precipitate an increase in
plasma osmolality. The sweat output declines and becomes inadequate to counter elevation in
core body temperature during periods of increased plasma osmolality and decreased plasma
volume. Thus, for the sweating mechanism to effectively compensate for elevation in body
temperature, the body must receive adequate fluids to combat elevation in plasma osmolality
and decrease in plasma volume caused by dehydration (Popkin, D'Anci & Rosenberg, 2010).
Sawka & Montain (2000) also suggested that even a small-scale decrease in hydration can
threaten thermoregulatory functions of the body.

Several studies have also demonstrated the association of dehydration and cognitive
performance. Different domains of cognition such as concentration, alertness, and short-term

memory were altered by mild dehydration among young adults 18 to 25 years old (D’Anci,


2009) and even adults 60 years old and above (Suhr, 2005). Pross (2017) suggested that
schoolchildren are also predisposed to impairment in executive functions, attention, and
memory following mild dehydration. It was also shown in the same study that the effect of
dehydration is more significant among vulnerable populations such as the children and the
elderly. Separate studies also demonstrated that quantitative aptitude, visuomotor coordination,
and psychomotor abilities were also influenced by mild to moderate dehydration (D’Anci,
2009; Cian et al., 2001).

The CDC (2018) recommended having readily available and accessible drinking water
facilities in the work area so that workers can hydrate adequately. The NIOSH recommended
that individuals should not lose beyond 1.5% body weight during their work shift and to stay
hydrated throughout the day (Coco et al, 2016).

Body Mass Index

The CDC (2021) defines overweight as the weight that is beyond the normal weight
range. It can be easily assessed using body mass index (BMI) which is a measure of body fat
using height and weight values. A BMI of 25-29.9 is considered overweight whereas a BMI of
30 or higher is already categorized under obese. Meanwhile, an individual is characterized as
having a normal weight if the BMI falls between 18.5-24.9 (NIH,n.d).

Workers who are overweight and obese are considered at a higher risk of developing
heat stress and are predisposed to experience elevated impact of heat strain as compared to
individuals who have normal weight (CDC, 2017). One study using the Heat Strain Score Index
revealed that overweight participants demonstrated elevated blood flow restriction and faster
heart rate which amplify heat strain among overweight individuals in hot environmental
conditions. Aside from the elevated physiological response to heat strain, overweight
individuals also showed higher perception of heat strain (Habibi, Momeni & Dehghan, 2016).

This is similar to another study that reported substantial increase in heart rate among


overweight individuals as compared to normal weight counterparts which suggests that their
body is experiencing higher levels of heat strain when exposed to heat stress (Yazdanirad et
al.,2015). Some plausible mechanisms observed that increase susceptibility of obese and
overweight individuals to heat stress include increased heat generation and decreased capacity
of their body to cool down when exposed to thermal challenge (Harvard Health,2019).

Meanwhile, a study by Kakitsuba et al. (2007) suggested wider inter threshold zone for
skin and core temperature among individuals with higher body adiposity which indicates that
those with more fat tissues will demonstrate shivering at lower temperature and sweating at a
relatively higher temperature as compared to leaner individuals, albeit the result was not
statistically significant. This is similar to the findings of Speakman (2018) that indicated
obesity as a significant factor that influences the body’s thermoregulatory function. The study
also suggested that the adipose tissues provide thermal insulation especially among obese
individuals. Hence, when the external environmental temperature is cold, obese individuals
have higher tolerance and their metabolic requirement in response to decrease in temperature
is significantly less as compared to lean individuals. Although the increased adiposity is an
advantage during cold temperature, it makes obese individuals more predisposed to heat stress
due to delay in heat loss from the body to the external environment as attributed to the
insulation property of adipose tissues. The lower surface area to body mass ratio among obese
individuals also contribute to more prolonged metabolic heat transfer from the core to the
periphery since cutaneous heat dissipation is proportional to the surface area of the skin
(Verbraecken et al. 2006).

In addition, it was also found that obese and overweight individuals also showed deficit
in performance of various cognitive functions. Several studies have shown that increased
adiposity is also associated with poorer cognitive performance (Yang et al., 2017; Bocarsly et

al., 2015) and executive function has been predominantly affected among obese and


overweight individuals as compared to their normal weight counterparts (Yang et al., 2017;
Bartholdy et al., 2016; Jansen et al., 2015). One possible mechanism behind the observed
association is the low-grade inflammation induced by activation of innate immunity that is
commonly observed among obese individuals which ultimately yield untoward consequences
in optimal cognitive functioning (D O'Brien at al., 2017). Meanwhile, a study conducted by
Delgado-Rico et al. (2013) suggested no significant association between obesity and cognitive
decline.

Exercise

Alongside several NCDs, adequacy of hydration, overweight and obese status, exercise
also affects an individual’s cognitive performance and predisposition to heat strain. Exercise is
a type of physical activity that is programmed, structured, and directed towards a goal of
improving physical fitness. This includes aerobic and anaerobic exercises with defined

frequency, intensity, and duration (WHO, 2010).

A growing body of research validates the association of exercise and improvement in
cognitive performance across different age groups. One randomized controlled trial (RCT)
conducted by Stern et al. (2019) among individuals 20 to 67 years old demonstrated that
exercise increased executive function but not the other domains of cognition such as language,
memory, and processing speed. The researchers also suggested that the beneficial impact on
executive function following aerobic exercises increases with advancing age. Another RCT
investigated the impact of exercise in improving cognition and found that there was an evident
increase in volume of the hippocampus which signifies favorable impact in memory (Erickson
et al., 2011). Another neuroimaging study observed an increase in brain volume particularly in
the grey and white matter among individuals who exercise. These areas of the brain that
demonstrated improved structural integrity are crucial for performance of cognitive functions
(Colcombe et al., 2006). A meta-analysis study on exercise and cognition also demonstrated


an increase in cognitive functions such as attention, executive function, and intelligence during
and after performance of exercise (Chang et al., 2012). Several studies have also demonstrated
that even short duration of high intensity exercise may also improve executive functions and

attention among healthy individuals (Venckunas et al., 2016; Alves et al., 2014).

The potential of exercise to induce cognitive benefits can be justified by its capacity to
influence synaptic plasticity that supports cognitive function. Therefore, exercise may offset
neurodegenerative changes that come with aging (Gomez-Pinilla & Hillman, 2013). Apart from
the cognitive benefits, several studies demonstrated that exercise is also associated with
physical, emotional, and psychological advantages to the general population (Mandolesi et al.,

2018; Bernstein & McNally,2018; Edwards & Loprinzi, 2018).

Aside from cognitive benefits, exercise also contributes to heat stress adaptation and
consequent attenuation of the impact of heat strain. Heat acclimatization from exercise
augments the body’s thermoregulation capacity as demonstrated by improvement in sweating
and fluid homeostasis, lower core body temperature, enhanced blood flow to the skin and
improved cellular function and immunity which consequently reduce the adverse health
outcome following exposure to heat stress and heat strain (Périard, Racinais & Sawka, 2015).
An earlier study also reported that aerobic exercise improves heat dissipation among healthy

individuals (Havenith& van Middendorp, 1990).
Sleep Duration

The duration of sleep is another lifestyle-related factor that can influence cognitive
function and predisposition to heat strain. The recommended sleep duration among adults for
optimal health is 7 hours (Consensus Conference Panel et al., 2015). Insufficient sleep is now
considered a major public health concern because of its adverse health outcomes and its

corresponding economic consequences (Chattu et al., 2018). A study by Luckhaupt, Tal, and


Calvert (2010) among healthcare industries described an increase in the prevalence of health
professionals who reported six hours or less of sleep per day from 28% to 32% during the

periods of 1985-1990 and 2004-2007.

Several epidemiological studies have shown that insufficient sleep negatively affects
cognition. Goel et al. (2009) provided a summary of negative influences on cognition following
sleep deprivation which includes psychomotor retardation, increasing neglect of duties, decline
in learning acquisition, increase in error under time pressure, and decline in short term and
working memory. Previous reviews also suggested adverse impact on daily functioning,
cognition, emotions, health, physiological arousal, and vigilance following sleep deprivation

(Gruber, 2013; Jugovac & Cavallero, 2011; Fisk, Montgomery & Murphy, 2009).

The result of the study by Wilckens et al. (2014) among young and older adults showed
that sleep continuity is associated with better cognitive performance particularly in the
executive function domain. Inhibitory control and working memory were noted to improve
among young adults, while older adults were observed to have enhanced verbal fluency,
memory recall, and inhibitory control. Meanwhile, the same study also suggested that only
young adults showed poorer cognitive performance in the working memory and language
domains after being exposed to either very short or very long total sleep time. In addition, the
adverse impact on cognition due to long-term sleep deprivation may accumulate to an alarming

degree without the recognition of the individual (Goel et al., 2009).

Thomas and colleagues (2000) reported that the prefrontal areas of the brain are
significantly affected by sleep deprivation. This in turn negatively influences several functions
of the prefrontal cortex such as creativity, attention, and executive functions (Alhola & Polo-
Kantola, 2007). Aside from cognition, sleep deprivation also affects workplace productivity

and predisposes workers to accidents and errors. It also increases the risk for motor skills


impairment, cardiovascular diseases, obesity, diabetes, weakened immunity, and several
mental illnesses such as anxiety, depression, and impulsive behavior (Chattu at al., 2018;
Watson & Cherney,2020; Caruso, 2014). The CDC (2017) also reported higher risk of physical

inactivity and smoking among adults who are sleep deprived (less than 7 hours per day).

Several studies have also shown that insufficient sleep negatively affects
thermoregulation. A case series conducted by Rav-Acha and colleagues (2004) among the
Israeli Defense Forces showed that sleep deprivation is one of the most predominant risk

factors for heat strain and heat related illnesses such as heat stroke.

The result of the study by Relf et al. (2018) among active females indicated that
perceived heat-related symptoms were higher among participants who were sleep deprived. On
the contrary, no statistically significant changes were observed in their thermoregulatory
functions as compared to those who were not sleep deprived. These findings were supported
by another study conducted among healthy male participants which revealed that sleep
deprived individuals who underwent heat tolerance tests were significantly affected by heat
strain. In addition, there was also a substantial accumulation of subjective discomfort which

may ultimately compromise optimal physical performance (Muginshtein-Simkovitch, 2015).

The significant influence of sleep deprivation in cognitive performance, heat strain,
productivity, and workplace safety further highlight the importance of assessment of sleep
duration among workers in any occupational setting.

Cigarette Smoking

The last lifestyle factor that will be covered by this study that also affects cognitive
performance and heat strain is cigarette smoking. Globally, more than seven million deaths are
recorded annually due to smoking. In addition, approximately 80% of smokers were reported

to be residing in low to middle income countries (WHO, 2020). In the Philippines, the


prevalence of smoking was found to be at 31% (Sison, Divinagracia & Nailes, (2020).
Currently, it has been regarded as a significant public health problem because it increases the
risk of cardiovascular diseases, cancer, stroke, and respiratory disorders (US Department of
Health and Human Services, 2014). It was also associated with 20-25 years decline in life
expectancy especially among those with significant mental disorders (Holford, 2014). Several
studies have demonstrated association of smoking with low socioeconomic status, educational
attainment, and history of substance abuse (Prochaska, Das, & Young-Wolff, 2017; Jamal et

al., 2016).

Cumulative research has shown that cigarette smoking has an associated impact in
cognition. Verbal skill, processing speed, executive function, memory, and visuospatial skills
were notably reduced among chronic smokers as compared to non-smoker counterparts
(Durazzo, Meyerhoff & Nixon ,2012). A prospective cohort conducted among participants in
the Rotterdam study showed a decline in cognition among current smokers as assessed using
cognitive tests such as Purdue Pegboard, Letter Digit Substitution Task, and 15-Word Learning
Test (g factor difference -0.06; 95% C.I -0.10, -0.01) (Wingbermiihle et al.,2017). In a separate
study, it was observed that non-smokers performed significantly better among several cognitive
tests that measure executive function as compared to active smokers (Heffernan et al., 2014).
The presence of different cytotoxic substances such as nitrosamines, aldehydes, nicotine, and
carbon monoxide in cigarette smoke negatively affect neurons and cell membrane which result
in subsequent atrophy of brain tissue and other concomitant degenerations in several brain
regions including those responsible for memory and attention (Durazzo et al., 2012). Martin-
Rios (2021) suggested a significant inverse association between working memory and duration

of smoking.

In addition, there are also existing studies demonstrating the impact of smoking on heat
tolerance. One study suggested that smokers have reduced tolerance to heat and are more


susceptible to heat-related illnesses as compared to nonsmoker counterparts as evidenced by
higher sweating rate and rise in core body temperature noted after smokers underwent the heat
tolerance test (Druyan et al., 2017). It was also found that smoking causes reduction in
peripheral vasodilation and consequent decline in cutaneous blood flow that is necessary for
thermoregulation (Edvinsson et al., 2008). The result of Rowlinson et al. (2014) also reported
that smokers exhibited decline in thermoregulatory capacity due to the concomitant reduction
in lung ventilation and aerobic capacity, and elevation in blood pressure which predispose
smokers to heat strain and heat-related illness. Meanwhile, a separate study suggested that
smoking reduction and cessation has a positive influence on the attenuation of the effects of

hyperthermic conditions (Zander et al., 2017).

Menopause

Women in the menopausal period may also experience additional thermal challenges
secondary to physiological changes occurring during menopausal transition. Menopause is a
period that takes place 12 months after a woman’s last menstrual cycle. The menopausal
transition, also known as perimenopause, begins several years prior to the last period and
typically commences between 45 to 55 years old. This is characterized by variations in the
levels of estrogen and progesterone, changes in menstrual cycle, occurrence of hot flushes, and
higher likelihood of gaining weight (NIH, 2017). Several studies have shown association of
hysterectomy and earlier onset of menopause, also called surgical menopause (NHS, 2019;
Farquhar et al., 2005).

Fluctuations in the normal thermoregulatory mechanism were observed among women
in the perimenopausal and menopausal stage. The changes in hormone levels result in
sequential alteration in temperature homeostasis that cause peripheral vasodilation, excessive
sweating, skin erythema, and overwhelming sensation of internal body heat. Along with these,

there is an observed simultaneous rise in skin temperature in the face, back, abdomen, and legs


(Freedman, 2014; Deecher, 2009). Moreover, dehydration becomes an additional issue among
menopausal women because of the decrease in thirst sensitivity to fluctuations in the fluid
volume in the body which may subsequently impose increased heat strain among menopausal
women (Stachenfeld, 2014).

Several studies have also demonstrated impact on cognitive performance during the
menopausal period due to short-term effects of hot flushes which hinders optimum capacity to
concentrate and accomplish difficult cognitive tasks (Kingma et al., 2021; Gaoua et al., 2012).
Epperson et al., (2011) also suggested that decline in several cognitive domains such as
attention, working memory, focus, and organization among women in the perimenopausal and
menopausal period. Furthermore, premature menopause, which is characterized by having a
final menstrual period at the age of 40 or younger, was also noted to be associated with a 30%
increased risk of developing cognitive deterioration (Ryan et al., 2014).

Work Schedule

The schedule of workers also influences their predisposition to heat stress and
consequent heat strain. A study conducted in Qatar revealed that night shift workers are less
exposed to heat stress as compared to day shift workers (Flouris et al., 2019). A recent study
that assessed variation in indoor and outdoor environmental temperature during the morning,
afternoon, and evening shift revealed that temperature is lowest during the night shift and
highest in the afternoon shift (Ciuha et al., 2019).

Similarly, another study showed an 18% increase in incident risk in the afternoon shift,
while the evening shift documented a 30% increase in incident risk with reference to the
morning shift (Folkard, Lombardi & Tucker,2005). A separate study conducted by Caruso
(2014) revealed that shift work, work schedule outside of 7 am to 6 pm, resulted in an increase

in workplace accidents and errors that is primarily attributed to sleep deprivation.


Work schedule is also associated with cognition. Several epidemiological studies
examined the effect of night shift and shift work and demonstrated statistically significant
decline in various domains of cognitive performance of workers including response inhibition,
memory, learning, and response speed (Shwetha & Sudhakar, 2012; San Chang et al., 2011;
Rouch et al.,2005). Another study suggested that response speed, commission errors, and
omission errors were substantially higher among workers in the night shift which suggest
probability of attention issues among night shift workers (Kazemi et al., 2016). The results of
Haidarimoghadam et al. (2017) also demonstrated fatigue, decline in cognitive functions, and
subsequent increase in errors among workers designated in the night shift.

Ventilation

Environmental heat largely influences thermal stress in indoor environments which
creates concomitant decline in productivity among workers. Therefore, persistent use of
ventilation systems is necessary to prevent thermal discomfort in indoor environments
(Rajapaksha, 2020). Aside from providing thermal comfort, ventilation is also utilized to
eliminate or dilute air pollutants and minimize fire hazards (CCOHS, 2016).

Workers who are wearing PPE and those working outdoors are at a significantly higher
tisk of extreme heat exposure. Without appropriate and adequate ventilation, especially in
tropical countries, indoor workers are predisposed to heat strain, heat-related illnesses, and
even premature death due to extreme heat (Lundgren et al., 2013). Thermal stress can be
alleviated by altering heat exchange via evaporation, convection, and radiation which can be
facilitated through various engineering controls (Coco et al., 2016) such as general ventilation,
air cooling, and heat conduction blocking to prevent heat-related illnesses secondary to
exposure in a thermally challenging environment OSHA (n.d.).

In a healthcare setting, mechanical ventilation is also utilized wherein a fan either

exhausts air from a room or supplies air into the room (Chartier & Pessoa-Silva,2009). A recent


study by Bhagat and Linden (2020) recommended utilization of displacement ventilation as a
feasible alternative to negative pressure ventilation to prevent the spread of COVID-19 in
healthcare settings. In a displacement type of ventilation, a lower-level inlet brings in fresh air
to the room that gets removed from a higher-level outlet. The researchers also dissuaded the
use of mixing ventilation such as fans and air conditioning units because of its potential to
spread airborne diseases.

Work Break Duration

The International Labour Organization (2015) defines work breaks as breaks during the
shift provided to the employees to enable them to rest, hydrate, eat, or perform other non-work-
related activities. Breaks are required especially if the work duration is more than 6 hours. This
transient disassociation from work duties was observed to deter fatigue accumulation among
workers, decrease mental and physical strain, and lower the risk of injury (Wendsche,
Lohmann-Haislah, and Wegge 2016, Zacher, Brailsford, & Parker, 2014; Lombardi et al.,
2014, Tucker, 2003). The length of break also substantially influences the efficiency of work
break (Lim et al., 2016). The NIOSH recommended that the duration of rest should be
determined by the intensity of work and level of heat stress as measured by Wet Bulb Globe
temperature (Coco et al., 2016).

Meanwhile, duration of work breaks is mandated differently across diverse countries
and industries (Zhu, Kuykendall & Zhang, 2019). In the Philippines, the Department of Labor
and Employment (n.d.) indicates that workers should be provided with at least one hour of meal
break and an additional rest break or coffee break of 5-20 minutes per day for a typical work
duration of 8 hours.

Provision of adequate rest periods is important in reducing the impact of heat strain
during thermally challenging conditions (Brake & Bates, 2002). One study by Vargheses et al.

(2020) reported statistically significant correlation between very limited rest breaks and heat-


related injuries in workers (PR: 1.28; 95% CI: 1.04-1.44). Appropriate work and rest cycle
heightens endurance to sustain work throughout the shift, lowers the heart rate, increases
cutaneous blood flow, and allows dissipation of accumulated heat in the body towards the
environment (Panter-Brick, 2003; OSHA.n.d.).

The CDC (2018) recommends more frequent rest breaks and shorter work periods
during heavy work, when a worker is wearing PPE, or during conditions of elevated humidity,
temperature, and solar load. Moreover, previous studies have shown the benefits of frequent
work breaks on physical and psychological aspects of well-being (Faucet et al, 2007;
Dababneh, Swanson, & Shell, 2001). There was also a reduction in occupational accidents from
taking frequent rest breaks during shifts (Arlinghaus et al., 2012). Additionally, a separate study
conducted by Tucker, Folkard, & Macdonald (2003) reported that the risk of accidents is higher
in the last 30 minutes of work shift in comparison to the initial half hour of work (RR 2.09,
95% CI: 1.73-2.43) and the study concluded that regular work breaks are efficient in improving
work performance and reducing accidents in occupational settings.

A worker’s cognitive performance is also affected by work breaks. Several studies have
demonstrated that any kind of work break has a positive effect on accuracy and concentration
of workers (Scholz et al., 2018; van den Heuval et al., 2003). A separate study by Steinborn
and Huestegge (2016) also suggested a similar beneficial effect of active and passive break on
cognitive performance. They also highlighted that the benefits of rest breaks substantially
increase with more demanding jobs.

Mental Illness affecting Cognitive Functions

Aside from the abovementioned factors, there are also mental conditions that affect

cognitive functions such as depression, obsessive-compulsive disorders (OCD), and attention-

deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD).


Depression is considered as the leading cause of disability with more than 264 million
individuals affected with depression across the globe (James et al., 2018). It can affect any age
group, but it typically commences during adulthood. Certain factors increase an individual’s
risk for depression such as major life changes, illness, stress, traumatic events, and even
medications (NIH, n.d). Some of the common symptoms present among individuals with
depression include lack of energy, difficulty concentrating, disinterest in activities that were
previously enjoyed, change in sleeping pattern, persistent guilt, pessimism, and suicidal
ideation (NAMI, 2017). The WHO (2020) reported that approximately 76% to 85% of
individuals suffering from depression do not receive treatment in low to middle income
countries and this is predominantly influenced by the social stigma associated with mental
disorder, lack of accessible resources and adequately trained professionals, and erroneous

diagnoses.

Several epidemiological studies demonstrated the association of depression and
cognitive decline. One meta-analysis showed statistically significant association between
depression and moderate decline in cognitive functions, particularly attention and executive
functions. Moderate decline in memory was also noted in the same study although the result
was not statistically significant (Rock et al., 2014). One study utilizing neuroimaging to assess
impact of depression on working memory revealed that individuals with depression required
additional effort to accomplish activities involving working memory which might be due to
problematic inhibition of other information that are not pertinent to the task at hand (Gartner

et al., 2018).

A separate study by Gotlib & Joormann (2010) reported that memory impairments,
problems in concentration, and distractibility were commonly observed among individuals
with depression. They further added that the resource-allocation hypothesis may possibly
explain the observed cognitive decline associated with depression. This hypothesis suggests


that there is an abatement of optimal cognitive functioning due to the demanding emotional
processing that takes up most of the cognitive processes among individuals with depression.
Additionally, the decline in cognitive performance is more apparent among challenging tasks

that are cognitively demanding.

Cognitive performance is also affected in ADHD. ADHD is a common
neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by patterns of hyperactivity, impulsivity, and
inattention (CDC, 2021). Although ADHD is generally considered as a childhood disorder,
several studies reported that it lingers into adulthood for approximately 60% of individuals

(Fayyad et al., 2017; Ebejer et al., 2012).

Meanwhile, research shows that individuals with ADHD had significantly lower scores
in executive function, memory, planning and inhibition (Krieger, & Amador-Campos, 2018).
Decline in organizational skills and processing speed were also noted among individuals with

ADHD (Kofler et al., 2018; Mayes & Calhoun. 2006).

Moreover, impairment in the executive functioning domain has been observed in
conditions like schizophrenia, obsessive-compulsive disorders (OCD), autism-spectrum
disorder (ASD), and dementia (Demetriou et al., 2018; Kuelz et al., 2004).

Socioeconomic Factors

A growing body of research has established association of socioeconomic status and its
influence on cognitive development in childhood and early adolescence (Moriguchi &
Shinohara,2019; Burneo-Garcés et al., 2019; Hermida et al., 2019; Eilertsen et al., 2016;
Hackman & Farah, 2009) however only limited epidemiological studies exist describing the
association of socioeconomic status on cognitive functions during adulthood. Chan et al. (2018)
suggested that the impact of socioeconomic factors is more pronounced on younger and older

age groups because the brain at these periods is more vulnerable to environmental insults.


There are also some existing studies focused on socioeconomic status in adulthood and
its association to changes in brain anatomy (Chan et al., 2018; Gianaros et al., 2017; Krishnadas
et al., 2013; Butterworth et al., 2012) but they did not directly imply changes in cognition
among the target population. A cross-sectional study by Zhu et al. (2018) among 20-59-year-
old participants revealed decline in cognitive performance among those categorized under the
lower income bracket. Another study showed that besides socioeconomic status during
childhood, income and educational attainment also contribute to an adult’s cognitive
performance (Turrell et al., 2002). The same study also revealed that improvement in
socioeconomic position from childhood to adulthood positively affects cognitive function
during adulthood.

A separate study conducted among individuals 15 to 60 years old demonstrated that the
level of educational attainment predicted better performance in several cognitive domains
(Guerra-Carrillo, Katovich, & Bunge, 2017). Similarly, the result of Lee et al. (2006) revealed
that as the level of education increases, there was a concomitant increase in mean cognitive
function. Meanwhile, a decrease in the odds of decline in cognitive performance with higher
education was also noted. In addition, income was also found to be a predictor of cognitive
function. Significant increase in mean cognitive performance was noted with increasing

income in the same study.


9€

ysomaumesy jenjydasu0D ]°7 aansig

SN}E}s SSaUl|] [EIUaLY snjeqys oyeqU! JIEM

uonesnp yealq YOM
ajnpayas 0M,
Add $0 [9A87

uonenuap
a2e/dy10/ Jo Asenbapy paaiazieg

(QQuawujeye jeuonesnpy pue

awosuy AjyUOWy pjoyasnoy)
Snje}¢ 21002301905

xas
SMJeIs sNU|aW SeIeqeIa

snjeqs uolsuapiedAY

uoneinp deajs
snjeis Junjouts
snjeqs asios8Xxq

snje1s asnedousyy
“‘xapul ssev) Apog ‘dy

(uonzuny aaiqnsexq
Bg UOnUAaY ‘AloWA\j)
uolpung
@AINUZOZ JO J2A7

M@PU] 2109g UIEJ}S 9H

“KpNYs Oy} 0} JUBAIAI So[qULIA JUAIOIJIP 94] JO UOYORIOWUT OY} Jo UOIEIUESoIdal JeNSIA & SeplAoid Mofaq oMBy oy,

The literature reviewed can be summarized as follows:

Heat strain score index is hypothesized to influence the level of cognitive function among
hospital HCWs particularly in the domains of executive function, attention, and memory which
will be measured in this study using the PROMIS - Cognitive Function tool.

As reflected in Figure 1, the following variables are the identified confounders because they
distort the true relationship between the exposure and the outcome: personal factors (age,
menopausal status, and body mass index), lifestyle-related factors (exercise status, smoking
status, sleep duration), non-communicable diseases (hypertension status, diabetes mellitus status),
work-related factors (level of PPE, work schedule, work break duration, water intake status).

According to the reviewed literature, heat strain score index is further aggravated by sex
and perceived adequacy of ventilation in the workplace. This relationship is reflected using a
broken line since it will not be directly measured during the analysis of the association between
the exposure and outcome of interest. However, the prevalence of these variables will be
determined in the study. Apart from the hypothesized heat strain score index being associated to
the level of cognitive function, several other factors such as socioeconomic status (household
income and educational attainment), and mental illness status (depression, ADHD, OCD, ASD,
schizophrenia) also influence the outcome of interest and they are also denoted by a broken line

in the conceptual framework.


Operational Definition of Terms

Healthcare workers: For the purpose of this study, a healthcare worker is defined as currently
reporting hospital HCW who is wearing PPE in their daily treatment and care activities. HCWs
may include nurses, medical technologists, respiratory therapists, cardiovascular technologists,
physical therapists, occupational therapists, speech pathologists, histopathologists, radiologists or
radiologic technologists, pharmacists, nutritionists or dietitians, and doctors.

EXPOSURE VARIABLE

Heat Strain Score Index: According to The Occupational Safety and Health Administration
(2017), heat strain is defined as the body’s response to environmental and metabolic heat stress.
This will be measured using the Heat Strain Score Index (HSSI) and the result will be interpreted
and coded as follows:

(0) Safe Level: Total score of < 13.5 indicates that the person has no or low heat strain.

(1) Alarm Level: Total score of 13.6 to 18 indicates that there is a potential for heat-related
illnesses to occur. This level also warrants a more comprehensive assessment of heat stress and
heat strain at the workplace.

(2) Danger Level: The total score of > 18 indicates that the onset of heat-induced illnesses are
very likely and appropriate heat-mitigation strategies should be provided as early as possible to
mitigate the adverse impact of heat strain.

OUTCOME VARIABLE

Level of Cognitive Function. Cognitive ability is divided into different domains that are
connected to each other. These cognitive domains include sensation, perception, motor skills,
attention and concentration, memory, executive functioning, processing speed, and language or
verbal skills (Harvey, 2019). For the purpose of this study, only executive function, attention, and
memory domains of cognition will be evaluated using the PROMIS- Cognitive Function Scale.

The result will be interpreted and coded as follows:

(0) worse cognitive function than the average of the reference population: T-score of less than 50
(1) better cognitive function than the average of the reference population: T-score of above 50
POTENTIAL CONFOUNDERS

Age. It is defined as the length of time an individual lived. The result will be interpreted and
coded as follows:

(0)<24

(1) 25 to 34

(2) 35 to 44

(3) 45 to 54

(4) 255

Body Mass Index. The CDC (2020) defines body mass index as the weight of an individual
expressed in kilograms divided by the square of height expressed in meters. The participants
height (meters) and weight (kilograms) will be asked in the questionnaire and the result will be
interpreted and coded as follows:

(0) Underweight: BMI of <18.5

(1) Normal Weight: BMI of 18.5-24.9

(2) Overweight (BMI of 25-29.9) and Obese (BMI of >30)

Menopause Status. The National Institutes of Health (2017) describes menopause as the period
that takes place 12 months after a woman’s last menstrual cycle whereas the menopausal
transition, also known as perimenopause, begins several years prior to the last period and typically
commences between 45 to 55 years old. This variable will be ascertained in the self-administered
questionnaire and the result will be interpreted and coded as follows:

(0) Not menopausal: Women on a regular menstrual cycle


(1) Perimenopausal: Stage commonly observed among women 45-55 years old characterized by
variable cycle length (> 7 days different from the normal cycle), or >2 missed cycles, or > 60
days of absence of menstruation (McNamara, Batur & DeSapri,2015).

(2) Menopausal: State of having no menstrual period for 12 consecutive months

A second question “Have you undergone surgical hysterectomy (removal of the uterus)?” will be
included in the questionnaire to further ascertain menstruation status. The result will be coded as
follows:

(0) No

(1) Yes

(2) Not applicable

Exercise Status. WHO (2010) defines exercise as a type of physical activity that is programmed,
structured, and directed towards a goal of improving physical fitness. This includes aerobic and
anaerobic exercises with defined frequency, intensity, and duration (WHO, 2010). This variable
will be ascertained in the self-administered questionnaire using two questions “How often and
how long do you exercise?” and the result will be interpreted based on the study by Lytle (2004).
(0) No exercise

(1) < 3 times a week, < 30-minute duration: low exercise

(2)> 3 times a week, > 30-minute duration: high exercise

Smoking Status. The WHO (2008) defines smoking as an act of using tobacco products on a daily
or occasional basis. The New Zealand Ministry of Health (2015) provided categories for smoking
status. It will be ascertained in the self-administered questionnaire with the question “What is
your smoking status” and the result will be interpreted and coded as follows:

(0) Never smoker: An individual who has not smoked greater than 100 cigarettes in their lifetime

and does not currently smoke.


(1) Ex-smoker: An individual who has smoked more than 100 cigarettes in their lifetime but has
not smoked in the last 28 days

(2) Current Smoker: An individual who has smoked greater than 100 cigarettes (including hand
rolled cigarettes, cigars, cigarillos etc) in their lifetime and has smoked in the last 28 days.

Sleep duration. The recommended sleep duration among adults for optimal health is 7 hours
(Consensus Conference Panel et al., 2015). According to the reviewed literature, sleep duration
influences an individual's risk of heat strain. This variable will be ascertained in the self-
administered questionnaire with the question “What is the average length of your sleep?” and the
result will be interpreted and coded as follows:

(0) <7 hours of average sleep per day: Sleep deprived

(1) = 7 hours of average sleep per day: Good sleep

Diabetes Status. Diabetes is a chronic metabolic disease that affects the pancreas which
consequently results in impaired glycemic control in the body (IDF, 2020). An individual is
considered diabetic if he/she has been diagnosed by a licensed healthcare professional. This
variable will be ascertained in the self-administered questionnaire with the question “Have you
ever been told by a doctor or other health worker that you have elevated blood sugar or diabetes
mellitus?” and the result will be interpreted and coded as follows:

(0) No

(1) Yes

(2) Not sure

Hypertension Status. Based on the 2017 guideline of the American Heart Association, an
individual is categorized as hypertensive if his or her blood pressure is at 130/80 mmHg or higher
(CDC, 2020). This variable will be ascertained in the self-administered questionnaire with the
question “Have you ever been told by a doctor or other health worker that you have elevated

blood pressure or hypertension?” and the result will be interpreted and coded as follows:

(0) No

(1) Yes

(2) Not sure

Level of Personal Protective Equipment. These are gears utilized for protection against
communicable infections that include face masks, surgical cap, gloves, face shield, goggles,
coverall, scrub suits, shoe covers, and boots (WHO, 2020). The University of the Philippines-
Philippine General Hospital (UP-PGH) has provided different levels of PPE used by HCWs
during the pandemic (Tantuco, 2020). The level of PPE will be ascertained in the self-
administered questionnaire by asking the respondents to select all PPE that apply in his/her work
and the result will be interpreted and coded as follows:

(0) Level 1: surgical mask, alcohol hand wash/spray

(1) Level 2: surgical mask, goggles, or face shield

(2) Level 3: N95 mask, goggles or face shield, gloves, surgical cap, scrub suits, gowns (or
coveralls/hazmat suit), shoe covers

(3) Level 4: N95 mask (or Powered Air Purifying Respirator), goggles or face shield, double
gloves, surgical cap, scrub suits, coveralls/hazmat suit, dedicated shoes, shoe covers

Work Break Duration. The International Labour Organization (2015) defines work breaks as
breaks during the shift provided to the employees to enable them to rest, hydrate, eat, or perform
other non-work-related activities. The Department of Labor and Employment (n.d.) indicates that
workers should be provided with at least one hour of meal break and an additional rest break or
coffee break of 5-20 minutes per day for a typical work duration of 8 hours.

This variable will be ascertained in the self-administered questionnaire with the question “How
much time do you spend on rest breaks in total during your typical work shift?” and the result
will be interpreted and coded as follows:

(0) less than 1 hour and 20 minutes per day

(1) greater than or equal to | hour and 20 minutes per day

Water Intake Status. This variable will be ascertained by asking the participants their average
water intake per day in liters. Their answer will be coded and interpreted as follows:

Average Water Intake (Females) based on the study by Gandy (2015)

(0) <2 liters per day: Inadequate

(1) 22 liters per day: Adequate

Average Water Intake (Males) based on the study by Gandy (2015)

(0) <2.5 liters per day: Inadequate

(1) 22.5 liters per day: Adequate

Work Schedule. It is defined as the time an individual is expected to be on the job. The PBS
(2000) provided operational definitions of different work schedules and this variable will be
collected using the self-administered questionnaire with the question “What is your work
schedule?” and the result will be interpreted and coded as follows:

(0) Day shift: A period of work in which half or more of the hours worked are between 8 a.m.
and 4 p.m.

(1) Evening shift: A period of work in which half or more of the hours worked are between 4 p.m.
and midnight.

(2) Night shift: A period of work in which half or more of the hours worked are between midnight
and 8 a.m

(3) Rotating shift: Work in which the hours from day to day or week to week change regularly,
for example from days to evenings to nights.

(4) Shift Work: Any nonstandard work schedule (including evening or night shifts, rotating shifts,
split shifts, and extended duty hours) in which most of the hours worked are outside the period

between 8 a.m. and 4 p.m.


OTHER VARIABLES OF INTEREST

Sex. According to the World Health Organization, sex refers to the biological and physiological
characteristics that define men and women. It will be collected through the self-administered
questionnaire and the result will be coded as follows:

(0) Male

(1) Female

Educational attainment. This will refer to the highest degree of education achieved by the
individual. This variable will be collected using a self-administered questionnaire with the
question “What is your highest educational attainment?” and the result will be interpreted and
coded as follows:

(0) Bachelor’s Degree

(1) Master’s Degree

(2) Doctoral Degree

(3) Others

Classification of Affiliated Hospital. The participants will be asked about the nature of the
hospital system they are affiliated to. The result will be interpreted and coded as follows:

(0) Private: Funded and managed by an individual or a group of people

(1) Public: Funded and managed by the state or government

Profession. The profession of the HCW who will participate in the study. The result will be
interpreted and coded as follows:

(0) Nurse

(1) Audiometrist

(2) Cardiopulmonary technician/ Respiratory therapist

(3) Nutritionist- Dietitian

(4) Histopathologist/ Medical Technologist/ Laboratory Technician

(5) Nuclear Medicine technician

(6) Pharmacist

(7) Radiologic technologist

(8) Physical therapist/ Occupational therapist/ Speech pathologist

(9) Doctor

(10) Other healthcare professions

Household Monthly Income. In this study, household monthly income is defined as the measure
of the combined monthly income of all people sharing a household or place of residence. The
categories of income distribution will be based on the Philippines Institute for Development
Studies report entitled “Poverty, the Middle Class, and Income Distribution amid COVID-19
(Albert et al, 2020). It will be collected using a self-administered questionnaire with the question
“What is your gross household monthly income?” and the result will be interpreted and coded as
follows:

(0) Poor: less than PhP 10,957 per month

(1) Low income (but not poor): PhP 10,957 to PhP 21,914 per month

(2) Middle income: PhP 21,915 to PhP 131,484 per month

(3) Upper income (but not rich): Php 131,485 to PhP 219,140

(4) Rich: above PhP 219,140

Duration of wearing PPE. This variable will be ascertained in the self-administered
questionnaire and the result will be interpreted and coded as follows:

(0) 1 to 4 hours

(1) 5 to 8 hours

(2) 9 to 11 hours

(3) 212 hours


Frequency of Removing PPE during duty hours. This variable will be ascertained in the self-
administered questionnaire with the question “How many times are you able to don and doff PPE
during duty hours? The result will be interpreted and coded as follows:

(0) 0to1

(1)2to3

(2) 24

Mental IlIness Status. This is defined as any health condition that affects emotions, behavior,
and thought-processes that impact family, work, and other social functions (APA,2018). For this
study, an individual is having a mental illness if he or she was diagnosed by a licensed healthcare
professional. This variable will be ascertained in the self-administered questionnaire with the
question “At present, do you have any clinically diagnosed mental illness such as depression,
ADHD, OCD, autism spectrum disorder?” and the result will be interpreted and coded as follows:
(0) No: absence of any mental illness

(1) Yes: presence of 1 or more mental illness (i.e depression, ASD, ADHD, OCD, schizophrenia)
(2) Not sure

Availability of dedicated rest area. This variable will be ascertained in the self-administered
questionnaire with the question adapted from the study of Messeri et al. (2021) “Is there a
dedicated rest area in your workplace?” and the result will be interpreted and coded as follows:
(0) No

(1) Yes

Perceived Adequacy of Workplace Ventilation. This variable will be assessed by adapting the
question from the Heat Strain Score Index “How do you feel about the ventilation system in your
workplace?” The result will be interpreted and coded as follows:

(0) Inadequate Ventilation

(1) Adequate Ventilation

Chapter III
METHODOLOGY
Study Design

The study utilized an analytic cross-sectional design to assess the association of heat strain
score index and level of cognitive function particularly attention, memory, and executive function
domains among hospital HCWs wearing PPE in Batangas. This type of study design answered
the general and specific objectives of this research.

It was also resource efficient and quick to conduct because it allowed the exposure to be
measured at one point in time and entailed no additional cost since no follow-up was necessary.
In addition, the use of analytic cross-sectional study design allowed the researcher to examine
several outcomes and evaluate a variety of risk factors. The findings of this research using this
study design can be used to establish baseline data for other more comprehensive longitudinal
studies.

Shown below is the schematic diagram of a cross-sectional study design for this research.

STUDY POPULATION

Healthcare workers affiliated among 6 private and 3 public hospitals In Batangas

(+) EXPOSURE (+) EXPOSURE (-) EXPOSURE

(-) EXPOSURE
(-) OUTCOME

(+) OUTCOME (-) OUTCOME

(+) OUTCOME

Healthcare workers who

Healthcare workers who:

Healthcare workers who
‘experience safe level of
heat strain while wearing.
PPE at work with worse

‘cognitive functions than

Healthcare workers who
‘experience safe level of
heat strain while wearing
PPE at work with better
cognitive functions than the
12 population

lence alarm and ‘experience alarm and
danger level heat strain
while wearing
work with bette:
cognitive functions than

the average population

and demonstrated worse
cognitive functions than
the average population

SINGLE OBSERVATION POINT IN TIME

Figure 3.1 Study Design

Study Population and Setting

Batangas, one of the five provinces in Region IV-A (CALABARZON), is composed of 30
municipalities and four component cities (CMCI, 2020). For this study, the researcher randomly
selected nine (9) hospitals (6 private and 3 public) from the 56 (16 public and 40 private) hospitals
listed by the Department of Health. Only three (3) public hospitals were included since based on
the proportionate stratified cluster random sampling, the study only needed 114 HCWs from that
stratum. Meanwhile, six (6) private hospitals were included since the computed sample size of
HCWs for that stratum was 412. The target population will be hospital HCWs utilizing PPE in
daily treatment and care activities. Only 9 hospitals were included to reduce the risk of COVID-
19 transmission since face-to-face interaction was conducted during communication and social
preparation of the researcher with the Human Resource Department of the participating hospitals.
As of 2020, the total number of hospital HCWs in the province of Batangas based on the latest
data released by the Department of Health was 3,393.
Sampling Method

Proportionate stratified cluster random sampling was utilized by the researcher in
selecting its sample. The list of hospitals in Batangas by the Department of Health served as the
first sampling frame of the study. From the list, the researcher stratified the hospitals into public
and private. Simple random sampling was conducted to select three public and six private
hospitals. Proportionate sampling was used so that the sample size of each stratum will be
proportional to the population size of the stratum.

From the selected hospitals, the researcher requested the HRD to prepare a list of all
HCWs from different departments utilizing PPE in their daily treatment and care activities which
served as the final sampling frame. From the list, 526 HCWs were selected through another set
of simple random sampling. Based on proportionate sampling, 114 HCWs from public hospitals

and 412 HCWs from private hospitals were included in the study. This implied that 38 HCWs

from 3 public hospitals and 69 HCWs from 6 private hospitals were randomly selected to
participate in the study. This was done by asking the HRD to prepare a list of HC Ws per hospital,
assigned them a number and used a random number generator to arrive at the required number of
respondents. The HRD sent the emails containing the Google Forms link. Only 9 hospitals were
selected to reduce the risk of COVID-19 transmission on the side of the researcher since the 9
hospitals were all visited during the social preparation. The generalizability of the result of the
study was not compromised since the study utilized proportionate stratified sampling. In addition,
probability sampling was performed to allow equal probability of the members of the population
to be selected as participants in the study. During instances when the selected hospital refused to
participate, another hospital was randomly selected from the remaining hospitals in the list to
complete the 9 hospitals in this study.

After all HCWs were identified, the researcher sought the assistance of the HR department
of the respective selected hospitals to send the prepared Google Forms that ascertained the
exposure, outcome, and other relevant variables via electronic mail. The researcher allocated an

additional twenty percent (20%) respondents to compensate for the nonresponse.

HOSPITALS IN BATANGAS

6 PRIVATE HOSPITALS. ‘3 PUBLIC HOSPITALS

e412

nelle

69 HCW per hospital 38 HCW per hospital

Figure 3.2 Sampling design - proportionate stratified cluster random sampling

Participant Recruitment

The researcher used the official list of HCWs in the selected hospitals in Batangas as the
final sampling frame. In selecting the participants in the study, the following inclusion criteria
was used for the selection: currently reporting HCWs who are wearing PPE in their daily
treatment and care activities. HCWs may include nurses, medical technologists, respiratory
therapists, cardiovascular technologists, physical therapists, occupational therapists, speech
pathologists, histopathologists, radiologists or radiologic technologists, pharmacists, nutritionists
or dietitians, and doctors. In addition, they must have worked for at least 1 month to be included
in the study.

Meanwhile, participants who demonstrated any of the following characteristics listed
below were excluded from the study:

1. Participants with 7 days or more off duty in between shifts

2. Participants who cannot complete the Heat Strain Score Index and PROMIS

Cognitive Function Scale

It was verified prior to sampling if the hospital practiced an alternative work schedule
such as two-week duty followed by one week off. A communication letter was sent to selected
hospitals containing details of the research objectives, duration of the study, and participant
recruitment.

Once the complete list of the participants had been obtained, the researcher employed
probability sampling to arrive at the computed sample size of the study.
Sample Size Calculation

This study utilized OpenEpi to compute the required sample size. Two-sided confidence
level of 95% was used, while the power was set at 80%. An additional 20% was added to the

computed sample size to compensate for any nonresponse.


Table 3.1 Sample size calculation

Objective

Purpose

Assumptions

Objective 1

To determine
the prevalence
of different
categories of
heat strain
score index
among hospital

To estimate a population
proportion

The researcher used a
total population of
hospital healthcare
workers in Batangas
n=3393; 88% of HCWs
reported heat strain based
on the result of Lee et al.

HCWs in

a (2020).

Objective 2

To determine | To estimate a population | The researcher used a

the prevalence | proportion total population of

of worse hospital healthcare

cognitive workers in Batangas

outcomes n=3393, 65% of HCWs

among hospital reported difficulty in

HCWs in performing cognitive

Batangas tasks based on the study
by Davey et al. (2021).

Objective 3

factors:

To determine the prevalence of different levels of heat strain with respect to the following



Table 3.1 (Continued) Sample size calculation

Age

This sample size is for
the test of homogeneity.

The researcher used a
total population of
hospital healthcare
workers in Batangas
n=3393, 29.6% of
workers in the 41-50 age
range experienced heat
strain symptoms based
on the study by Rogerson
et al. (2020).

Sex

Menopause
status

This sample size is for
the test of homogeneity

The researcher used a
total population of
hospital healthcare
workers in Batangas
n=3393, 67% of female
workers demonstrated
heat intolerance as
compared to male
counterparts based on the
study by Druyan et al.
(2012).

This sample size is for
the test of homogeneity

The researcher used a
total population of
hospital healthcare
workers in Batangas
n=3393, 65.9% of
menopausal women
experience heat strain
based on the study by
Yisma et al. (2017).



Table 3.1 (Continued) Sample size calculation

Body
Index

Mass

This sample size is for
the test of homogeneity

The researcher used a
total population of
hospital healthcare
workers in Batangas
n=3393, 45% of the
participants were
overweight on the study
by Habibi, Momeni, &
Dehghan (2016)
analyzing the association
of body weight and heat
strain.


Smoking status

Sleep duration
status

This sample size is for
the test of homogeneity

The researcher used a
total population of
hospital healthcare
workers in Batangas
n=3393, 16.2% of the
participants were
smokers based on the
study by Venugopal et al.
(2020).


This sample size is for
the test of homogeneity

The researcher used a
total population of
hospital healthcare
workers in Batangas
n=3393, 76.9% of
individuals with
adequate sleep
demonstrated no heat
strain based on the study
by Kakamu et al. (2015)



Table 3.1 (Continued) Sample size calculation

Hypertension
status

This sample size is for
the test of homogeneity

7.

The researcher used a
total population of
hospital healthcare
workers in Batangas
n=3393, 66.7% of
individuals with
hypertension
demonstrated heat strain
based on the study by
Yuniarti & Handayani
(2020).



Diabetes
Mellitus status

This sample size is for
the test of homogeneity

The researcher used a
total population of
hospital healthcare
workers in Batangas
n=3393, 20.9% of
individuals who
experienced heat strain
and heat-related illnesses
had diabetes based on the
study by Abdelmoety et
al. (2018).



Level of PPE

This sample size is for
the test of homogeneity

The researcher used a
total population of
hospital healthcare
workers in Batangas
n=3393, 78% of workers
wearing PPE reported
heat strain based on the
study by Messeri et al.
(2021).




Table 3.1 (Continued) Sample size calculation

Work schedule

This sample size is for
the test of homogeneity

The researcher used a

total population of
hospital healthcare
workers in Batangas
n=3393, 13% of

individuals under heat
stress were under the day
shift based on the study
by Flouris et al. (2019).

Work
duration

break

This sample size is for
the test of homogeneity

The researcher used a
total population of
hospital healthcare
workers in Batangas
n=3393, 93.3% of
workers experienced heat
strain among those with
75% work and 25% rest
based on the study by
Derakhshanjazari et al.
(2021).

Water
status

intake

This sample size is for
the test of homogeneity

The researcher used a
total population of
hospital healthcare
workers in Batangas
n=3393, 66% of workers
with inadequate water
intake showed heat strain
symptoms based on a
study by Venugopal et al.
(2020)



Table 3.1 (Continued) Sample size calculation

Perceived
adequacy
workplace
ventilation

Objective 4

of

This sample size is for
the test of homogeneity

This sample size is for
the test of homogeneity

Levelof PPE | This sample size is for

the test of homogeneity

The researcher used a

total population of
hospital healthcare
workers in Batangas

n=3393, 79% of workers
in areas with inadequate
ventilation were found to
experience _heat-related
symptoms based on the
study by Krishnamurthy
et al. (2017).


To determine the prevalence of level of cognitive function with respect to the following factors:

The researcher used a

total population of
hospital healthcare
workers in Batangas
n=3393, 21% of
individuals over the age 238
of 60 demonstrated
decline in cognitive

function based on the
study by Ding, Li & Lian
(2020).

The researcher used a

total population of
hospital healthcare
workers in Batangas

n=3393, 23.6% of HCWs
wearing PPE reported
decline in cognitive
function based on the
study by Rosner (2020).



Table 3.1 (Continued) Sample size calculation

Diabetes
Status

Exercise
Status

This sample size is for
the test of homogeneity

The researcher used a
total population of
hospital healthcare
workers in Batangas
n=3393, 9.65% of
individuals with diabetes
demonstrated cognitive
decline based on the
study by Yuan et al.
(2021).



This sample size is for
the test of homogeneity

The researcher used a
total population of
hospital healthcare
workers in Batangas
n=3393, 27.29% of
individuals with low
level exercise
demonstrated cognitive
decline based on the
study by Yuan et al.
(2021).

Hypertension
Status

This sample size is for
the test of homogeneity

The researcher used a
total population of
hospital healthcare
workers in Batangas
n=3393, 45.26% of
individuals with
hypertension
demonstrated cognitive
decline based on the
study by Yuan et al.
(2021).






Table 3.1 (Continued) Sample size calculation

Smoking
Status

This sample size is for
the test of homogeneity

The researcher used a
total population of
hospital healthcare
workers in Batangas
n=3393, the prevalence
of cognitive decline
among smokers was
17.4% based on the study
by Momtaz et al. (2015).

Water Intake
Status

Sleep duration

This sample size is for
the test of homogeneity

The researcher used a
population of
healthcare
in Batangas
n=3393, 43.5% of
individuals with
inadequate volume of
total water _ intake
demonstrated decline in
cognitive function based
on the study by Shaheen
et al. (2018).

total
hospital
workers

This sample size is for
the test of homogeneity

The researcher used a
total population of
hospital healthcare
workers in Batangas
n=3393, 10.14% of
individuals with less than
7 hours of — sleep
demonstrated cognitive
decline based on the
study by Fu et al. (2020).



Table 3.1 (Continued) Sample size calculation

Body
Index

Mass

This sample size is for
the test of homogeneity

The researcher used a
total population of
hospital healthcare
workers in Batangas
n=3393, 31.28% of
individuals with elevated
BMI demonstrated
cognitive decline based
on the study by Yuan et
al. (2021).



Menopause
status

This sample size is for
the test of homogeneity

The researcher used a
total population of
hospital healthcare
workers in Batangas
n=3393, 73.5% of
menopausal women
reported mental
exhaustion based on the
study by Chuni &
Sreeramareddy (2011)



Educational
Attainment

This sample size is for
the test of homogeneity

The researcher used a
total population of
hospital healthcare
workers in Batangas
n=3393, only 8.2% of
individuals with higher
education demonstrated
cognitive impairment
based on the study by
Rodriguez-Sanchez et al.
(2011).




Table 3.1 (Continued) Sample size calculation

Household
Income

This sample size is for
the test of homogeneity

The researcher used a

total population of
hospital healthcare
workers in Batangas
n=3393, 37.77% of
individuals in the lowest
quartile (poorest)
demonstrated cognitive

decline based on the
study by Yuan et al.
(2021).

Mental Illness
Status

Work
Schedule

+

This sample size is for
the test of homogeneity

The researcher used a

total population of
hospital healthcare
workers in Batangas

=3393, 31.95% of

individuals with worse
and bad mental health
outcomes demonstrated
cognitive decline based
on the study by Yuan et
al. (2021).

This sample size is for
the test of homogeneity

The researcher used a
total population of
hospital healthcare
workers in Batangas
n=3393, 71% of night
shift HCWs scored lower

in the cognitive test based
on the study by
Kaliyaperumal et Al.
(2017)



Table 3.1 (Continued) Sample size calculation

Objective 5

To determine
relationship
between heat
strain score
index and level
of cognitive
function
among hospital
healthcare
workers
wearing PPE at
work in
Batangas

Sample size for multiple
logistic regression

Using data from the study
by O'Neal & Bishop
(2010) describing the
association of heat stress
and cognitive
function.with an odds
ratio of 2.25. In the study,
10% of unexposed
presented with the
outcome. A ratio of 1 of
the unexposed/exposed
was also noted in the
same study.

438 526

—

Based on the OpenEpi output, the researcher used the sample size from objective 5 since

it provided the highest sample size of n=438. To account for the possible nonresponse, another

20% was added making the total sample size of the study n=526.

Proportionate sampling was used so that the sample size of each stratum will be

proportional to the population size of the stratum. It was obtained using the formula: (sample

size/population size) x stratum size. The table below shows the number of HCWs per hospital

classification which will be selected through stratified random sampling.

Table 3.2 Allocation of healthcare worker respondents

Public Hospital Private Hospital

Total Number of Hospitals 16 40
Number of Hospitals to be 3 6
randomly selected
Estimated Number of
Healthcare workers ces aoe
Total number of HCWs to
be included in the study iy ate)
Number of ; study 38 69

| participants per hospital


To summarize, a total of 114 HCWs from public hospitals and 412 HCWs from private
hospitals were included in this study.
Data Collection

The researcher used a self-administered questionnaire in the data collection process to
ascertain heat strain score index and cognitive function among HCWs and to collect
demographics and other identified variables that may affect the association of the exposure and
outcome of interest (https://forms.gle/g]gyHCXEpa6hfmmk8). Google Forms was utilized as a
practical and efficient way to collect primary data during the pandemic. In addition, the
questionnaire was provided in English version since the respondents of this research included
healthcare professionals such as nurses, medical technologists, respiratory therapists,
cardiovascular technologist, physical therapists, occupational therapists, speech pathologists,
histopathologists, radiologist or radiologic technologist, pharmacists, nutritionists or dietitians,
and doctors with basic English proficiency and a minimum qualification of college graduate.

The PROMIS Cognitive Function version 2.0 Adult Short Form was used to assess

cognition performance particularly in the executive function, attention, and memory domains.
Lastly, the Heat Strain Score Index questionnaire was used to ascertain heat strain among HCWs.
These self-administered assessment tools are presented in Appendix A.
Demographics Questionnaire

This is a self-administered assessment tool that determined the category of affiliated
hospital, type of profession, and type and duration of PPE use among HCWs. This also
determined confounders and other effect measure modifiers that influenced the exposure and
outcome such as age, overweight and obesity, work schedule, work break, exercise status, water
intake status, diabetes status, hypertension status, smoking status, socioeconomic status (income
and education), mental illness status, sleep duration, menopausal status, and perceived adequacy

of workplace ventilation.

Heat Strain Score Index (HSSI) questionnaire

This is a validated self-administered assessment tool composed of 18 questions that
evaluated whether the HCWs were experiencing heat strain during their job performance. It was
a relatively easy to understand tool that can be accomplished in 5 minutes that encompassed
sweating intensity, fatigue, heat and humidity sensations, and gross assessment of the working
space (Dehghan et al., 2013; Dehghan et al., 2011). A study conducted by Dehghan et al. (2012)
demonstrated statistically significant correlation between HSSI with Physiological Strain Index
(PSI) which suggested that HSSI could be utilized as a screening tool for heat strain in different
workplace settings. The same study also added that HSSI had a higher correlation to PSI
compared to WBGT Index. The result of another study conducted among male participants
showed statistically significant correlation between HSSI and WBGT (r = 0.995), heart rate (r =
0.978), and oral temperature (r = 0.983) (Habibi et al., 2015). A previous study demonstrated a
Cronbach’s alpha of 0.92 among male workers in the steel and petrochemical industries (Dehghan
etal., 2011). Another study by Dehghan (2013) also revealed an acceptable reliability and validity
among women workers with a Cronbach’s coefficient of 0.68. In addition, a recent study by
Dehghan et al., (2015) where they conducted a validation study of HSSI in screening heat strain
among developing countries showed that the Cronbach’s coefficient of items was 0.91, hence the
authors concluded that the assessment tool was reliable and valid in the preliminary evaluation of
heat strain at work.
General Instruction for use of Heat Strain Score Index
(1) The participant will mark their preferred answer based on their perception on each item.
(2) Upon completion of the HSSI questionnaire, the researcher will multiply the primary score
per item to its designated standard effect coefficient to arrive at the final score for each item

(3) The final scores for each item will be added to arrive at the total score.


Interpretation of the Scores:

Level 1: Green Zone/Safe Level: Total score of < 13.5 indicates that the person has no heat strain.
Level 2: Yellow Zone/Alarm Level: Total score of 13.6 to 18 indicates probability of heat strain
and there is a potential for heat-related illnesses to occur. This level also warrants a more
comprehensive assessment of heat stress and heat strain at the workplace.

Level 3: Red Zone/Danger Level: The total score of > 18 indicates definite heat strain and onset
of heat-induced illnesses are very likely and appropriate heat-mitigation strategies should be
provided as early as possible to mitigate the adverse impact of heat strain.
PATIENT-REPORTED QUTCOMES MEASUREMENT INFORMATION SYSTEM
(PROMIS) COGNITIVE FUNCTION MEASURE v.2.0 (ADULT SHORT FORM-8A)

The United States National Institutes of Health developed this tool to evaluate an
individual's perception of cognitive functions from the previous 7-days (Saffer et al., 2015). It
covered different aspects of cognition such as executive function, verbal fluency, memory,
concentration or attention, mental acuity, and perceived changes in cognitive performance. The
reference population indicated in the interpretation of PROMIS score included the 2000 US
General Census (HealthMeasures, 2023). This assessment tool was not specific to a particular
disease or disability, and it can be utilized by the general population regardless of race, gender,
education, and nature of work. Participants who are 18 years old and above may use the adult
version. In addition, there are also variants of the questionnaire for the pediatric population and
for parents who will serve as a proxy for their children (PROMIS, 2019).

In the short-form, the respondents rated their answers using a scale of 1(very often) to 5
(never) in all 8-items. To compute the total raw score, the researcher added the values of the
participant’s answers in all items. The lowest possible score in this version was 8 while the highest
possible score was 40. The total raw score was transformed into a T-score using the score

conversion table. The standardized score for this tool was represented by a mean score of 50 and

a standard deviation of 10. This implied that an individual with a T-score of more than 50
performed cognitively better than the average of the reference population whereas a T-score of
lower than 50 indicated disability or worse cognitive performance than the average of the
reference population. Respondents with higher scores represented better cognitive performance
(PROMIS, 2019; Fieo et al., 2016).

A study conducted by Cella et al. (2010) reported that PROMIS demonstrated good
reliability and construct validity. A recent study that analyzed the different short forms of
PROMIS v2.0 cognitive function scale revealed a Cronbach’s alpha of .85-.95 for all three short
form versions suggestive of good internal consistency of the tool (Iverson et al., 2021). This is
similar with the results of Yount, Cella, & Blozis (2019) which demonstrated that PROMIS
Cognitive Function was a reliable and valid tool in assessing cognitive symptoms. The researchers
further emphasized that previous epidemiological studies reported that the individual’s subjective
measures of cognitive function were more substantially correlated with negative affect as
compared to objective measures. The good psychometric property of this tool made it relevant to
use in clinical settings and research (Lai et al., 2014).

To summarize, the researcher utilized three tools to ascertain all relevant variables in the
study. All self-administered tools and questionnaires were sent to the participants through Google
Forms. Data collection was conducted last April to June 2023. Assessment did not take more than
15 minutes to administer.

Instrument Validation

Instrument validation was conducted to ensure that the research instrument for this study
was face valid or was measuring what it was intended to measure (Ward et al, 2013; Nunnally
and Bernstein, 1994). This process can be performed not only on research instruments that have
been self-developed but also among other instruments that have been validated by other

researchers (Lai, 2013). In addition, face validity elucidated if the items of a questionnaire or

research instrument were relevant to the research objectives and used appropriate language (Fink,
2010; Nevo, 1985). Moreover, the readability, style and formatting of the questionnaire were also
evaluated under face validity (Taherdoost, 2016). This was accomplished through expert reviews
wherein the expert panel analyzed each item on the questionnaire and determined if the question
was a valid indicator of the concept which was being examined just on the face of it (Jhangiani,
Chiang, & Price, 2015; Sangoseni, Hellman & Hill, 2013). According to Abusafia, (2017), the
target number of experts should not be lower than three (3) when looking at the face validity of
an instrument.

For this study, five (5) experts in the field of environmental and occupational health were
invited to check for the face validity of the research instrument from February to March 2023. A
cover letter explaining the purpose of the study, draft of the research instrument, and the
validation tool to assess face validity that has been adapted from the study of Knowlden (2011)
presented in Appendix F were forwarded to the environmental and occupational health experts
via email and were collected a week after for analysis. Members of the expert review provided
comments and recommendations for improvement of the research instrument. The comments and
recommendations provided by the experts were incorporated to the research instrument

accordingly after final deliberation of the primary investigator and thesis adviser.

Data Processing

The data collected was coded by converting the answers of the participants to numbers,
which were completely described and categorized in the study’s coding manual developed by the
principal investigator. This allowed easier checking and validation of information. Moreover, the
codes were mutually exclusive to prevent overlap in the categories, and exhaustive to include all
possible options. To prevent coding problems such as nonresponse and participants who do not

know the answer to the question, additional codes for these scenarios were included in some of


the variables. Lastly, the data gathered were encoded using Stata ® software for statistical
analysis.
Data Analysis

The data analysis for this study employed the measures of disease frequency and
regression analysis. The first and second objective were analyzed using prevalence estimates.
Meanwhile, to answer the third and fourth objectives, prevalence difference was computed to
determine the difference in prevalence among the different groups.

Lastly, to determine if there was significant association between heat strain score index
and level of cognitive function, Stata ® statistical software was used to compute for multiple
logistic regression. Multiple logistic regression was utilized because the outcome variable was
categorical and to control confounders in the study. Furthermore, backward elimination procedure
was used to eliminate insignificant variables.

At the start of backward elimination, all variables considered in the study were included
in the full model. Subsequently, variables were removed from the full model until only those with
significant contribution to the outcome of interest were retained in the final model (Chowdhury
& Turin, 2020, Bursac et al., 2008). In this study, variables included in the final model were those
with a p value of less than 0.25.

Table 3.3 Data analysis matrix

Research Objectives Method of Data Collection Statistical Analysis

To determine the prevalence Validated Questionnaire Prevalence proportion
of different levels of heat
strain score index among
hospital HCWs in Batangas

To determine the prevalence Validated Questionnaire Prevalence proportion
of worse cognitive outcomes
among hospital HCWs in
Batangas


Table 3.3 (Continued) Data analysis matrix

To determine difference in the
prevalence of varying levels
of heat strain score index
among hospital HCWs in
Batangas with respect to
personal factors (age, sex,
menopausal status, and body
mass index), lifestyle-related
factors (exercise _ status,
smoking status, sleep
duration), non-communicable
diseases (hypertension status,
diabetes mellitus _ status),
work-related factors (level of
PPE, work schedule, work
break duration, water intake

status, and perceived
adequacy of ventilation at
work)

Validated Questionnaire

Difference between two
proportions

To determine difference in the
prevalence of different level
of cognitive function among
hospital HCWs in Batangas
with respect to personal
factors (age, socioeconomic
status, mental status, body

mass index, menopausal
status), lifestyle-related
factors (exercise _ status,
smoking status, sleep

duration), non-communicable
diseases (hypertension status,
diabetes mellitus _ status),
work-related factors (level of
PPE, work schedule, work
break duration, and water
intake status)

Validated Questionnaire

Difference between two
proportions

To measure the relationship
between heat strain score
index and level of cognitive
function among hospital
healthcare workers wearing
PPE at work in Batangas

Validated Questionnaire

Multiple logistic regression



Table 3.4 Flow chart of major activities

Step Activities Persons Involved
1. Preparation of the Google Forms containing the Principal Investigator
tools to ascertain the exposure, outcome, and
other relevant variables in the study
2. Sampling procedures Principal Investigator
3. Sending emails, communication letter, and Principal Investigator
seeking approval from the hospital
administrators through the Human Resource
Department (HRD) of the 9 chosen public and
private hospitals.
4. Coordination with HRD for the list of HCWs Principal Investigator
(final sampling frame). HRD
5. Conduct of another simple random sampling to Principal Investigator
get the final list of participants in the study_
6. Data Collection using web-based tool (Google Principal Investigator
Forms) Healthcare Workers
The following will be included in the Google HRD
Forms:
Tool 1: Self-administered Questionnaire for
relevant variables in the study
Tool 2: Heat Strain Score Index questionnaire
Tool 3:PROMIS Cognitive Function v2.0 Adult-
Short Form
7. Data Encoding Principal Investigator
8. Data Editing Supervising Investigator
9. Data Analysis
10. Writing of Final Paper Principal Investigator
Supervising Investigator

Ethical Considerations

needed special ethical considerations and there was no conflict of interest. Nevertheless, it was
the obligation of the researcher to ensure that the rights and well-being of the study participants

were protected at all times. For this reason, several ethical considerations were incorporated in

the planning and conduct of this study.


The participants of the study were not included in the list of vulnerable populations that


Considerations with respect to the participants and the guidelines set in conducting
research, such as confidentiality and anonymity, were upheld throughout the process. The
respondents’ participation was voluntary, and they were informed that their identities will be kept
confidential, and their answers will be used solely for academic and research purposes. An
information sheet presented in Appendix B describing the nature of the study, risks involved,
benefits from the study, and their rights as participants was included in the Google Forms.
Procedure for Obtaining Informed Consent

Documentation of the process of informed consent was waived by the completion of the
online survey questionnaires which served as the respondent's consent to participate in the study.
This was done since the study presented no more than minimal risk of harm to participants. In
compliance with the National Ethical Guidelines for Health and Health-related Research
(Elements of Research Ethics, Sections 15-17), the cover letter and questionnaire provided
relevant information about the study such as the objectives, risks and benefits, and rights as
participants.

Procedure for Ensuring Confidentiality and Anonymity

The researcher requested the HRD to prepare a list of all HCWs from different
departments utilizing PPE in their daily treatment and care activities. This was indicated in the
communication letter that was sent to the HRD containing details on participant recruitment,
duration of the study, and research objectives. From the list, the HRD assigned the HCWs a
number and a random number generator was utilized to facilitate simple random sampling to
arrive at the required number of respondents. The google form link was emailed by the HRD to
the selected participants to ensure confidentiality and anonymity. The participants’ names were
not asked in the questionnaire, and they were provided with codes during data processing to
protect their identity. The collected data were stored in the researcher’s laptop. The data obtained

were kept confidential and no one else except the research team had access to the information

collected in this study. In addition, the information collected will be safeguarded by the researcher
for two years following the presentation of the result of the study to the thesis panel for possible
future publication or presentation at a research forum.

The knowledge that the researcher acquired from this research was shared with the
participants before it is made available to the public. The hospitals involved in the study received
asummary of the results and recommended control measures to reduce heat stress and consequent
heat strain among HCWs in their facilities. Following their validation of the results, the study
may be published in scientific journals, presented in conferences, or shared with institutions so
that other people may benefit from the research. However, only aggregated, and anonymized data
will be shared to the public.

Risks and Benefits

This study caused minimal distraction from the daily activities of the study participants.
Moreover, significant risks were not expected even if the study was conducted during the
pandemic, however it still caused minimal distress in some sensitive questions and other parts of
the tool during data collection. This was addressed by assuring that the answers provided by the
respondents will be treated with utmost confidentiality. Google Forms was utilized as the study’s
data collection instrument. Using Google Forms and bypassing the traditional hardcopy survey
significantly reduced the risk of COVID-19 transmission between the respondents and the
researcher. Moreover, it was also emphasized that the respondents had the right to skip questions
that may find sensitive or offensive to their judgment.

Research participants were provided with a complete and unprejudiced account of the
risks and benefits. In addition, the risk of invasion of privacy was addressed by coding and
anonymizing to assure that the data collected were always handled with utmost confidentiality.
Only relevant information that was pertinent to the conduct of the study was collected from the

participants. They were also informed of their right to withdraw from the study anytime.

The participants received food tokens as an acknowledgement of their involvement in the
study, facilitated by the HRD. A budget of Php15, 000.00 (approximately Php 30.00 for each
participant) was allocated for the procurement and distribution of 512 sets of food and beverages
to the target participants. HCWs who participated were instructed by the HRD of their respective
institution to collect the food tokens from the office.

The information derived from this study will be useful in gauging the extent of impact of
heat strain in causing decline in cognitive functions, specifically memory, attention, and executive
functioning among HCWs battling the pandemic. The data on increased heat strain and worse
cognitive outcomes were communicated to the Health and Safety Committee or designated Safety
Officer of the hospital. This provided supplementary evidence as to the adequacy of heat
mitigation strategies that are currently being implemented among healthcare facilities. This also
allowed provision of appropriate recommendations or control measures to reduce heat strain in
the healthcare setting. In addition, there was no stigma attached to participants in this research
study.

Conflict of Interest
There was no conflict of interest. The institution did not have any financial or proprietary

gain as to the results of the study.


CHAPTER IV
RESULTS

A total of 449 HCWs (n=114 from public hospital and n=335 from private hospital) out
of the 526 invited participated in the study. This study surpassed the established minimum
participant requirement of 438, as determined by the computed sample size.

The demographic characteristics of hospital HCWs in Batangas are summarized in Table
4.1. As presented in the table, the majority (75.3%) of participants were female HCWs.
Additionally, most (38.1%) of the HCWs who participated in the study belong in the 25 to 34 age
group, however, there were also participants belonging in the age group of 55 and above (5.1%).

The highest percentage (92.2%) of HCWs reported having bachelor’s degree as their
highest educational attainment with only a few obtained master’s degree (4.5%) and doctoral
degree (3.3%). The largest group consisted of nurses, making up 54.1% of the respondents. In
addition to nurses, there were also histopathologist/medical technologists/laboratory technicians
(16.7%) and pharmacists (6.7%). Some healthcare professions were less represented in the study.
Both cardiopulmonary technicians/respiratory therapists and physical therapists/occupational
therapists/speech pathologists accounted for 2.7% of the participants, followed by nuclear

medicine technicians (1.3%), and audiometrists (0.9%).

As for the household monthly income, the largest portion (51.5%) of HCWs fell within
the monthly income bracket of PhP 10,957 to PhP 21,914. The remaining portion was distributed
across the PhP 21,915 to PhP 131,484 bracket (35.4%), less than PhP 10,957 bracket (10.7%),

Php 131,485 to PhP 219,140 bracket (1.3%), and above PhP 219,140 bracket (0.7%).


Table 4.1 Demographic characteristics of hospital healthcare workers in Batangas, 2022

Demographic Characteristics n(%)
Age (in years)
<24 66 (14.7)
25 to 34 171 (38.1)
35 to 44 118 (26.3)
45 to54 71 (15.8)
255 23 (5.1)
Sex
Male 111 (24.7)
Female 338 (75.3)
Highest Educational Attainment
Bachelor’s Degree 414 (92.2)
Master’s Degree 20 (4.5)
Doctoral Degree 15 (3.3)
Profession
Nurse 243 (54.1)
Audiometrist 4(0.9)
Cardiopulmonary Tech/ 12 (2.7)
Respiratory Therapist
Nutritionist-Dietitian 23 (5.1)
Histopathologist/Medical 75 (16.7)
Technologists/Laboratory
Technicians
Nuclear Medicine Technicians 6 (1.3)
Pharmacists 30 (6.7)
Radiologic Technologist 29 (6.5)
Physical Therapist/Occupational 12 (2.7)
Therapist/ Speech Pathologist
Doctors 14 (3.1)
No response 1 (0.2)
Household Monthly Income
Less than PhP 10,957 48 (10.7)
PhP 10,957 to PhP 21,914 230 (51.5)
PhP 21,915 to PhP 131,484 158 (35.4)
Php 131,485 to PhP 219,140 6 (1.3)
Above PhP 219,140 3 (0.7)
No response 2 (0.5)

Among the 338 female HCWs who participated in the study, 60.4% were not menopausal,

while 9.6% and 3.3% were in the menopausal and perimenopausal stage, respectively. In addition,

there were eight (1.8%) female respondents who reported having undergone hysterectomy.
Meanwhile, from the self-reported height and weight of the participants, it was found that more
than a third (38.1%) were classified as overweight, while almost half (46.6%) of HCWs were
categorized as having normal weight. Meanwhile Details are shown in Table 4.2.

Table 4.2 Personal Factors of hospital healthcare workers in Batangas, 2022

Personal factors n(%)
Menopa' use Status
Not menopausal 271 (60.4)
Perimenopausal 15 (3.3)
Menopausal 43 (9.6)
Not applicable 117 (26.1)
Ido not know 1 (0.2)
No response 2 (0.5)
Hysterectomy
No 338 (75.3)
Yes 8 (1.8)
Not applicable 102 (22.7)
No response 10.2)
Body Mass Index
Normal Weight 209 (46.6)
Overweight and Obese 171 (38.1)
No Response 69 (15.4)

As for the noncommunicable diseases measured in the study, only a few reported with
diabetes (11.6%) and hypertension (16.9%). A small proportion (2.2%) of HCWs recounted
having mental illness while 2.9% of the participants were uncertain about whether they had an
existing mental illness. Details are shown in Table 4.3.

Table 4.3 Non-communicable diseases of hospital healthcare workers in Batangas, 2022

Non-communicable Disease n(%)
Diabetes Status
Absent 383 (85.5)
Present 52 (11.6)
Not sure 10 (2.2)
No response 4 (0.9)


Table 4.3 (Continued) Non-communicable diseases of hospital healthcare workers in
Batangas, 2022

“Hypertension Status

Absent 366 (81.5)
Present 76 (16.9)
Not sure 6 (1.3)
No response 1 (0.2)
Mental Illness Status
Absent 424 (94.4)
Present 10 (2.2)
Not sure 13 (2.9)
No response 2 (0.5)

Regarding lifestyle related factors, the majority (88%) of respondents were categorized as
never smokers while only a small percentage of HCWs reported being ex-smokers (7.6%) and
current smokers (3.6%). Meanwhile, only 53 HCWs (11.8%) reported engaging in high levels of
exercise. Conversely, more than half (51.5%) of the participants reported having no exercise. As
for the sleeping status, sleep deprived HC Ws accounted for 75.3% of the respondents while only
24.5% reported having good sleep. Details are shown in Table 4.4.

Table 4.4 Lifestyle-related factors of hospital healthcare workers in Batangas, 2022

Lifestyle-related factors n(%)
Smoking Status
Never Smoker 395 (88)
Ex-Smoker 34 (7.6)
Current Smoker 16 (3.6)
No response 4 (0.8)
Exercise Status
No exercise 231 (51.5)
Low exercise 161 (35.9)
High exercise 53 (11.8)
No response 4(0.9)
Sleeping Status
Sleep deprived 338 (75.3)
Good sleep 110 (24.5)
No response 1 (0.2)


Concerning work-related factors, the majority (53.9%) of the HCWs were utilizing Level
3 PPE (N95 mask, goggles or face shield, gloves, surgical cap, scrub suits, gowns (or
coveralls/hazmat suit), shoe covers) followed by Level 4 PPE (20.7%) with the addition of double
gloves, dedicated shoes, and Powered Air Purifying Respirator. Furthermore, 40.5% reported
using PPE for 5-8 hours and it was also noted that a considerable number (42.1%) of HCWs had
to don and doff their PPE two to three times during their duty hours.

Most of the participants were on a rotating shift (53.5%) and day shift (37.2%) work
schedule. Additionally, 82.4% of HCWs reported having less than one hour and 20 minutes of
work break duration during their duty, while 16.9% had more than or equal to one hour and 20
minutes of work break. Meanwhile, the highest percentage (59%) of HCWs reported the absence
of a dedicated rest area in their workplace while less than half (40.5%) reported having access to
a dedicated rest area at work.

For the water intake status, 48.1% reported having adequate water intake (>2.5 liters per
day for males and >2 liters per day for females) while a small number (7.8%) of participants did
not provide answers for this item in the questionnaire.

Lastly, with regards to the perceived adequacy of ventilation, only a quarter (24.7%)
reported that their ventilation in the workplace was inadequate, while the majority (74.8%) stated
that they had adequate ventilation.

Table 4.5 Work-related factors of hospital healthcare workers in Batangas, 2022

Work-related factors n(%)
Level of PPE
Level 1 82 (18.3)
Level 2 32 (7.1)
Level 3 242 (53.9)
Level 4 93 (20.7)


Table 4.5 (Continued) Work-related factors of hospital healthcare workers in Batangas,

Duration of PPE Use
0-4 hours 176 (39.2)
5-8 hours 182 (40.5)
9-11 hours 28 (6.2)
212 hours 63 (14)
Frequency of doffing PPE during duty hours
Otol
2to3 168 (37.4)
>4 189 (42.1)
No response 89 (19.8)
3 (0.7)
Water Intake Status
Inadequate 198 (44.1)
Adequate 216 (48.1)
No response 34 (7.8)
Work Schedule _ i
Day shift 167 (37.2)
Evening shift 3 (0.7)
Night shift 6 (1.3)
Rotating shift 240 (53.5)
Shift work 31 (6.9)
No response 2 (0.5)
Work Break Duration
<1 hour and 20 mins/day 370 (82.4)
>1 hour and 20 mins/day 76 (16.9)
No response 3 (0.7)
Dedicated Rest Area
Absent 265 (59)
Present 182 (40.5)
No response 2 (0.5)
Perceived Adequacy of Workplace
Ventilation
Inadequate 111 (24.7)
Adequate 336 (74.8)
No response 2 (0.5)


Prevalence of Levels of Heat Strain Score Index among Hospital Healthcare Workers

Table 4.6 presents a summary of the prevalence of different levels of heat strain score
index among hospital HCWs in Batangas. The prevalence of safe level of heat strain score index
across nine hospitals who participated in the study was found to be 85.8% (95% CI: 82.2%;
88.7%), whereas the prevalence of alarm and danger level of heat strain score index were 11.6%
(95% Cl: 8.9%; 14.9%) and 2.7% (95% CI: 1.5%; 4.7%), respectively.

Table 4.6 Prevalence of Levels of Heat Strain Score Index among Hospital Healthcare

_ Workers, 2022
Heat Strain Score Index n(%) 95% CI
Safe level 385 (85.8) 82.2, 88.7
Alarm level 52 (11.6) 8.9, 14.9
Danger level 12 (2.7) 1.5, 4.7

Cognitive Function Status of Hospital Healthcare Workers
Using the PROMIS Cognitive Function — Adult questionnaire to assess the cognitive
function of HCWs, it was found that more than half (57.69%, 95% CI: 53.3%; 62.4%) of HCWs
were categorized as having worse cognitive function than the average of the reference population
while the remaining 42.1% (95% CI: 37.6%; 46.7%) demonstrated better cognitive function than
the average of the reference population. Details are summarized in Table 4.7.
Table 4.7 Cognitive Function Status of Hospital Healthcare Workers as measured by

PROMIS Cognitive Function - Adult, 2022
Cognitive Function Status n(%) 95%CI

Worse cognitive function 260 (57.9) 53.3, 62.4
than the average of the
reference population

Better cognitive function 189 (42.1) 37.6, 46.7
than reference population


Levels of Heat Strain Score Index Aggregated According to Risk Factors

Table 4.8 provides the details of heat strain among HCWs when they were aggregated
according to personal factors. When comparing different levels of heat strain score index across
all age groups, the majority (85.7%) of HCWs were categorized under the safe level of the heat
strain score index. Meanwhile, the highest prevalence of alarm and danger level of heat strain
were observed in the 25 to 34 and 35 to 44 age group, respectively. In addition, most of the

respondents categorized as having alarm (73.1%) and danger level (75%) were female HCWs.

Among the 171 respondents who were classified under the overweight category, 21
HCWs were found to be at the alarm level, and 5 HCWs were at the danger level of heat strain
score index. Conversely, among the HCWs classified under the safe level, the majority (48.3%)

were found to have normal weight.

Among the HCWs who reported their menstruation status, the majority indicated that they
were not in the menopausal stage. Only a small percentage of HCWs under the alarm level (9.6%)
and danger level (8.3%) reported being in the menopausal stage. In addition, among the

participants who had hysterectomy, 25% were categorized as having a danger level of heat strain.

Table 4.8 Personal factors across varying levels of heat strain score index among hospital
healthcare workers in Batangas, 2022

Personal factors Safe Level Alarm Level Danger Level _ p-value
n(%) n(%) n(%)
n=385 n=52 n=12
Age (in years)
<24 62 (16.1) 3 (5.8) 1 (8.3)
25 to 34 148 (38.4) 20 (38.5) 3 (25) 0.2010
35 to 44 95 (24.7) 17 (32.7) 6 (50)
45 to 54 62 (16.1) 7 (13.5) 2 (16.7)
>55 18 (4.7) 5 (9.6) -
Sex
Male 94 (24.4) 14 (26.9) 3 (25) 0.9250
Female 291 (75.6) 38 (73.1) 9 (75)


Table 4.8 (Continued) Personal factors across varying levels of heat strain score index
among hospital healthcare workers in Batangas, 2022

Body Mass Index
Normal 186 (48.3) 18 (34.6) 5 (41.7)
Overweight 145 (37.7) 21 (40.4) 5 (41.7) 0.2270
No response 54 (14) 13 (25) 2 (16.7)
Menstruation Status
Not menopausal 236 (61.3) 27 (51.9) 8 (66.7)
Perimenopausal 11 (2.9) 4(7.7) -
Menopausal 37 (9.6) 5 (9.6) 1 (8.3) 0.8640
Not applicable 98 (25.5) 16 (30.8) 3 (25)
I do not know 1 (0.3) - -
No response_ 2 (0.5) = S
Hysterectomy
No 293 (76.1) 38 (73.1) 7 (58.3)
Yes 6 (1.6) - 2 (16.7) 0.0090
Not Applicable 85 (22.1) 14 (26.9) 3 (25)
_No response 1(0.3) - -

In relation to the NCDs measured in this study, it was observed that 75% of HCWs in the
alarm level and more than half (58.3%) of those in the danger level did not have diabetes mellitus.
Moreover, 82.7% of HCWs in the alarm level did not report having hypertension. However,
among HCWs categorized under the danger level, 50% were found to be hypertensive. Details

are shown in Table 4.9.

Table 4.9 Non-communicable Diseases across varying levels of heat strain score index
among hospital healthcare workers in Batangas, 2022

Non-communicable Safe Level Alarm Level Danger Level _ p-value
Disease n(%) n(%) n(%)
n=385 n=52 n=12
Diabetes Status
Absent 337 (87.5) 39 (75) 7 (58.3)
Present 38 (9.9) 10 (19.2) 4 (33.3) 0.001
Not sure 7 (1.8) 3 (5.8) :
No response 3 (0.8) - 1 (8.3)
Hypertension Status
Absent 317 (82.3) 43 (82.7) 6 (50)
Present 62 (16.1) 8 (15.4) 6 (50) 0.1270
Not sure 5 (1.3) 1(1.9) -
No response ___1(0.3) : :


The cross tabulation of heat strain and lifestyle-related factors revealed that the majority
of HCWs in the alarm (86.5%) and danger level (91.7%) of heat strain reported being sleep
deprived. In addition, the highest number of HCWs in the alarm (48.1%) and danger level (58.3%)
also reported having no exercise. Lastly, only a small percentage of current smokers were
categorized under the alarm (6.3%) and danger level (6.3%) of the heat strain score index. In
contrast, the majority (74.8%) of HCWs who have never smoked were categorized under the safe

level. Details are shown in Table 4.10.

Table 4.10 Lifestyle-related factors across varying levels of heat strain score index among
hospital healthcare workers in Batangas, 2022

Lifestyle-related factors Safe Level Alarm Level Danger Level _ p-value
n(%) n(%) n(%)
n=385 n=52 n=12
Smoking Status a
Never Smoker 336 (87.3) 48 (92.3) 11 (91.7)
Ex-Smoker 33 (8.6) 1 (1.9) - 0.0970
Current Smoker 14 (3.6) 1(1.9) 1 (8.3)
No response 2 (0.5) 2 (3.8) -
Exercise Status
No exercise 199 (51.7) 25 (48.1) 7 (58.3)
Low exercise 133 (34.5) 23 (44.2) 5 (41.7) 0.4450
High exercise 50 (13) 3 (5.8) -
No response 3 (0.8) 1(1.9) -
Sleeping Status
Sleep deprived 282 (73.2) 45 (86.5) 11 (91.7)
Good sleep 102 (26.5) 7 (13.5) 1 (8.3) 0.1870
No response 1(0.3) - -

Table 4.11 provides the details of heat strain among HCWs when they were aggregated
according to work-related factors. More than half (53.9%) of HCWs reported using Level 3 PPE
during their duty hours. The majority of HCWs under the alarm and danger level were using Level

3 (46.2%) and Level 4 PPE (50%), respectively. Moreover, 41.7% of HCWs under the danger


level reported using PPE for 12 hours or more per work duty, whereas almost half (46.2%) of

HCWs under alarm level recounted using PPE for five to eight hours.

Regarding the frequency of doffing PPE during duty hours, most (44.2%) of the HCWs
under the alarm level recalled donning and doffing their PPE two to three times. On the other
hand, the majority (41.7%) of HCWs with danger level reported donning and doffing their PPE

once only.

Among HCWs categorized under the alarm level, more than half (57.7%) of HCWs were
on a rotating shift work schedule whereas HCWs categorized under the danger level have a work
schedule of day shift (33.3%), rotating shift (33.3%), and shift work (33.3%). It was also observed
that a greater percentage of HCWs who experience alarm (94.2%) and danger level (91.7%) of
heat strain reported having a work break duration of less than one hour and 20 minutes per day.
Additionally, the majority of HCWs in the alarm (71.2%) and danger level (66.7%) stated that

they had no dedicated rest area in their workplace.

Approximately half (49.1%) of the HCWs categorized under safe level reported having
adequate water intake at work. Among HCWs in the alarm level, the majority (44.2%) reported
inadequate water intake. On the contrary, among HCWs in the danger level, 41.7% reported

having adequate water intake.

After evaluating the perceived adequacy of workplace ventilation, more than half (59.6%)
of HCWs in the alarm level reported inadequate ventilation in their workplace. Among HCWs
categorized under the danger level, an even higher percentage (91.7%) reported inadequate

ventilation in their workplace.


Table 4.11 Work-related factors across varying levels of heat strain score index among

hospital healthcare workers in Batangas, 2022

Work-related factors Safe Level Alarm Level Danger Level _ p-value
n(%) n(%) n(%)
n=385 n=52 n=12
Level of PPE
Level 1 70 (18.2) 11 (21.2) 1 (8.3)
Level 2 26 (6.8) 5 (9.6) 1 (8.3) 0.2000
Level 3 214 (55.6) 24 (46.2) 4 (33.3)
. Level 4 75 (19.5) 12 (23.1) 6 (50)
Duration of PPE use
0 to 4 hours 156 (40.5) 17 (32.7) 3 (25)
5 to 8 hours 154 (40) 24 (46.2) 4 (33.3)
9 to 11 hours 25 (6.5) 3 (5.8) - 0.1410
212 hours 50 (13) 8 (15.4) 5 (41.7)
Frequency of doffing
PPE during duty hours
Otol 146 (37.9) 17 (32.7) 5 (41.7)
2to3 162 (42.1) 23 (44.2) 4 (33.3) 0.9840
24 74 (19.2) 12 (23.1) 3 (25)
No response 3 (0.8) - _ oe _
Water Intake Status
Inadequate 171 (44.4) 23 (44.2) 4 (33.3)
Adequate 189 (49.1) 22 (42.3) 5 (41.7) 0.0820
No response 25 (6.5) 7 (13.5) 3
Work Schedule
Day shift 147 (38.2) 16 (30.8) 4 (33.3)
Evening shift 3 (0.8) - -
Night shift 4(1) 2 (3.8) - 0.0520
Rotating shift 206 (53.5) 30 (57.7) 4 (33.3)
Shift work 23 (6) 4(7.7) 4 (33.3)
No response 2 (0.5) : :
Work Break Duration
<1 hour and 20mins/day 310 (80.5) 49 (94.2) 11 (91.7)
21 hour and 20mins/day 73 (19) 2 (3.8) 1 (8.3) 0.0530
No response 20.5) 1(1.9) a
Dedicated rest area
Absent 220 (57.1) 37 (71.2) 8 (66.7)
Present 163 (42.3) 15 (28.8) 4 (33.3) 0.3800
____No response 2(0.5) 2 2
Perceived Adequacy of
Workplace Ventilation
Inadequate 69 (17.9) 31 (59.6) 11 (1.7)
Adequate 314 (81.6) 21 (40.4) 1 (8.3) <0.001
No response 2 (0.5) o E


Levels of Cognitive Function Aggregated According to Risk Factors

Comparison of personal factors across different levels of cognitive function revealed that
across all age groups, the prevalence of worse cognitive outcomes among hospital HCWs was
higher as compared to those with better cognitive function than the average of the reference
population. Also, the greatest percentage of HCWs with worse cognitive function was observed

in the 25 to 34 age group (41.2%) followed by 35 to 44 (23.1%).

As for the BMI of the respondents, it was suggested that almost 40% of HCWs having
worse cognitive function were overweight. It can also be noted that more than half of women in
the menopausal stage (53.5%) and perimenopausal stage (60%) were considered as having worse
cognitive function. In addition, seven out of eight respondents who had hysterectomy were noted

to have worse cognitive function.

Regarding socioeconomic status, more than half (50.8%) of the respondents categorized
as having worse cognitive function reported having a household monthly income ranging from
PhP 10,957 to PhP 21,914. On the other hand, among HCWs who reported having a household
monthly income of less than PhP 10,957, 62.5% were assessed to be in the worse cognitive
function level. In comparison, the remaining 37.5% were assessed to be in the better cognitive
function level. Meanwhile, among HCWs categorized as having worse cognitive function, the
majority (93.5%) reported attaining a bachelor’s degree as their highest educational achievement.
Furthermore, a small proportion of HCWs with worse cognitive function reported reaching higher
levels of education. Approximately five percent of HCWs in the worse cognitive function level
attained a master’s degree, while 1.9% achieved a doctoral degree. Details are provided in Table

4.12.


Table 4.12 Personal factors across varying level of cognitive function among hospital
healthcare workers in Batangas, 2022

Personal factors

Worse cognitive

Better cognitive

function function p-value
ee a (%)_ n(%) -
Age (in years)
<24 41 (15.8) 25 (13.2)
25 to 34 107 (41.2) 64 (33.9)
35 to 44 60 (23.1) 58 (30.7) 0.2060
45 to 54 37 (14.2) 34 (18)
255 15 (5.8) 8 (4.2)
Highest Educational Attainment
Bachelor’s Degree 243 (93.5) 171 (90.5)
Master’s Degree 12 (4.6) 8 (4.2) 0.1450
Doctoral Degree 5 (1.9) 10 (5.3)
Household Monthly Income
< PhP 10,957 30 (11.5) 18 (9.5)
PhP 10,957 - PhP 21,914 132 (50.8) 98 (51.9)
PhP 21,915 - PhP 131,484 91 (35) 67 (35.4)
Php 131,485 - PhP 219,140 3 (1.2) 3 (1.6) 0.2900
> PhP 219,140 - 3 (1.6)
____No response ____ 20.8) =
Body Mass Index
Normal Weight 116 (44.6) 93 (49.2)
Overweight 103 (39.6) 68 (36) 0.6250
No response 41 (15.8) 28 (14.8)
Menstruation Status
Not menopausal 159 (61.2) 112 (59.3)
Perimenopausal 9 (3.5) 6 (3.2)
Menopausal 23 (8.8) 20 (10.6) 0.6560
Not applicable 67 (25.8) 50 (26.5)
I do not know - 1 (0.5)
___No response _ 2 (0.8) _ .
Hysterectomy
No 196 (75.4) 142 (75.1)
Yes 7(2.7) 1 (0.5) 0.2190
Not Applicable 57 (20.9) 45 (23.8)
No response - 1 (0.5)

After analyzing lifestyle-related factors, it was found that 75% of HCWs with worse

cognitive function were experiencing sleep deprivation. Furthermore, 55% of HCWs with worse

cognitive function reported having no exercise, while nearly 35% engaged in low exercise.

Among HCWs who were current smokers, 10 out of 16 had worse cognitive function while almost


65% of ex-smokers were categorized as having worse cognitive function. Details are shown in

Table 4.13.

Table 4.13 Lifestyle-related factors across varying level of cognitive function among
hospital healthcare workers in Batangas, 2022

Demographic Characteristic Worse cognitive Better cognitive
function function p-value
n(%) n(%)
Smoking Status
Never Smoker 225 (86.5) 170 (89.9)
Ex-Smoker 22 (8.5) 12 (6.3) 0.7040
Current Smoker 10 (3.8) 6 (3.2)
_ No response 3 (1.2) 1(0.5)
Exercise Status
No exercise 143 (55) 88 (46.6)
Low exercise 89 (34.2) 72 (38.1) 0.7150
High exercise 25 (9.6) 28 (14.8)
No response 31.2) 10.5)
Sleeping Status
Sleep deprived 195 (75) 143 (75.7)
Good sleep 65 (25) 45 (23.8) 0.4850
No response - 10.5)

In relation to NCDs, there is an equal distribution (26) of HCWs with diabetes mellitus
between the two levels of cognitive function. Similarly, when considering hypertension status,
there were 38 respondents in each level of cognitive function who reported having hypertension.
Lastly, concerning the mental illness status, it was found that eight out of 10 HCWs who reported
having a mental illness were categorized under the worse cognitive function level than the average
of the reference population. On the contrary, among those under the worse cognitive function

level, 92.3% reported not currently having a mental illness. Details are shown in Table 4.14.


Table 4.14 Non-communicable diseases across varying level of cognitive function among
hospital healthcare workers in Batangas, 2022

Non-communicable Disease Worse cognitive Better cognitive
function function p-value
a n(%) n (%)
Diabetes Status
Absent 225 (86.5) 158 (83.6)
Present 26 (10) 26 (13.8)
Not sure 6 (2.3) 4 (2.1) 0.5850
No response _ 31.2) 10.5)
Hypertension Status
Absent 218 (83.8) 148 (78.3)
Present 38 (14.6) 38 (20.1) 0.3560
Not sure 3 (1.2) 3 (1.6)
_ No response 1(0.4) 7 - _
Mental Iliness Status
Absent 240 (92.3) 184 (97.4)
Present 8 (3.1) 2(1.1) 0.1280
Not sure 10 (3.8) 3 (1.6)
No response 2 (0.8) -

When examining work-related factors affecting cognitive function of HCWs, it was
observed that the highest proportion of HCWs with worse cognitive function was utilizing Level
3 PPE accounting to 55%. Additionally, almost 20% of HCWs with worse cognitive function

were using Level 4 PPE.

The analysis of the duration of PPE use among HCWs revealed that the greatest number
of HCWs with worse cognitive function reported using PPE for a duration of five to eight hours.
Meanwhile, it was also observed that among those HCWs using PPE for up to four hours only,
54% were noted having worse cognitive function while the remaining 46% had better cognitive

function than the average of the reference population.

In terms of work schedule, the study revealed that the highest proportion of HCWs with
worse cognitive function were those on a rotating shift schedule, accounting for 53.8%. Following

rotating shifts, the next highest proportion of HCWs with worse cognitive function were those on


a day shift work schedule, representing 36.5%. In addition, the proportion of HCWs categorized
as having worse cognitive function was higher among those with a work break duration of less
than one hour and 20 minutes per day (83.8%) compared to HCWs with a work break duration of

greater than or equal to one hour and 20 minutes per day (15.4%).

Among HCWs categorized as having worse cognitive function than the average of the
reference population, almost half (48.1%) reported having adequate water intake per day. On the
other hand, 43.1% of HCWs with worse cognitive function were assessed as having inadequate

water intake. Details are shown in Table 4.15.

Table 4.15. Work-related factors across varying level of cognitive function among hospital
healthcare workers in Batangas, 2022

Work-related factors Worse cognitive Better cognitive
function function p-value
n(%) n(%)
Level of PPE
Level 1 48 (18.5) 34 (18)
Level 2 19 (7.3) 13 (6.9)
Level 3 143 (55) 99 (52.4) 0.8410
Level 4 50 (19.2) 43 (22.8)
Duration of PPE use
0 to 4 hours 95 (36.5) 81 (42.9)
5 to 8 hours 119 (45.8) 63 (33.3) 0.0550
9 to 11 hours 13 (5) 15 (7.9)
212 hours 33 (12.7) 30 (15.9)
Frequency of doffing PPE during
duty hours
Otol 94 74
2to3 117 72 0.506
24 47 41
No response 2 2
Water Intake Status
Inadequate 112 (43.1) 86 (45.5)
Adequate 125 (48.1) 91 (48.1)
No response 23 (8.8) 12 (6.3) 0.3230


Table 4.15. (Continued) Work-related factors across varying level of cognitive function
among hospital healthcare workers in Batangas, 2022

Work Schedul.
Day shift 95 (36.5) 72 (38.1)
Evening shift 1 (0.4) 2(1.1)
Night shift 2 (0.8) 4 (2.1) 0.6080
Rotating shift 140 (53.8) 100 (52.9)
Shift work 21 (8.1) 10 (5.3)
No response _ 10.4) _ 10.5) _
Work Break Duration
<1 hour and 20 mins/ day 218 (83.8) 152 (80.4)
21 hour and 20 mins/ day 40 (15.4) 36 (19) 0.5720
No response 2 (0.8) 1 (0.5)

Association between heat strain score index and level of cognitive function among HCWs

Without controlling the confounding effect of different exposure variables, mental illness
status (OR: 3.07; 95% CI: 1.13; 8.32), availability of rest area (OR: 0.51; 95% CI: 0.35; 0.76),
and perceived adequacy of ventilation in the workplace (OR: 0.52; 95%CI: 0.33; 0.82) were found
to be associated with cognitive function. This suggested that the likelihood of having worse
cognitive function increased by 3.07 times when the respondent was diagnosed with any mental
health condition. Meanwhile, the odds of having worse cognitive function were approximately
reduced to half (51% and 52%, respectively) when healthcare workers had resting area and proper

ventilation, respectively. Details are shown in Table 4.16.

Table 4.16. Association of different exposure variables to worse cognitive function among
healthcare Workers in Batangas, 2022.

Exposure variables Crude OR (95% CI) p-value
Age (in years) 1.23 (0.72; 2.10) 0.4530
Highest Educational 1.50 (0.75; 3.00) 0.2470
Attainment
Household Monthly Income 0.80 (0.43; 1.48) 0.4780
Body Mass Index 0.11 (-0.41; 0.63) 0.6700
Level of PPE 0.97 (0.60; 1.57) 0.8980
Duration of PPE use 1.30 (0.89; 1.91) 0.1760
Frequency of doffing PPE 1.14 (0.77; 1.67) 0.5170
during duty hours
Smoking Status 1.39 (0.77; 2.52) 0.2740
Exercise Status 0.71 (0.49; 1.04) 0.0780


Water Intake Status
Mental Illness Status
Menopause Status
Hysterectomy Status
Diabetes Status
Hypertension Status
Work Schedule

Work break duration
Presence of dedicated rest
area

Sleeping Status
Perceived Adequacy of
Workplace Ventilation

1.10 (0.76; 1.61)
3.07 (1.13; 8.32)
0.92 (0.63; 1.35)
0.99 (0.64; 1.52)

0.82 (048; 1.39)
0.70 (0.43; 1.12)
1.07 (0.73; 1.57)
1.19 (0.75; 1.90)
0.51 (0.35; 0.76)

1.04 (0.67; 1.60)
0.52 (0.33; 0.82)

0.6090
0.0280*
0.6850
0.9510
0.4600
0.1370
0.7360
0.4580
0.0010*

0.8730
0.0050*

The computed odds ratio for the association between level of heat strain score index and

level of cognitive function among hospital HCWs are presented in Table 4.17. Since HCWs who

presented with danger level of heat strain were underrepresented, the researcher combined the

alarm and danger level of heat strain score index resulting in the categorization of these two levels

as unsafe level. Two statisticians were consulted in the process to verify the accuracy of the

procedure. Table 4.18 presents the odds ratio for the association between the level of heat strain

score index (combined alarm and danger level) and level of cognitive function among HCWs.

Table 4.17. Odds Ratio for the association between level of heat strain score index and
level of cognitive function among hospital healthcare workers in Batangas, 2022.

Heat Strain Percent of Crude OR p-value Adjusted OR p-value
Status worse (95% Cl) (95% Cl)
cognitive
function per
level of heat
strain
Safe Level (209/385) 54.3 - -
Alarm Level — (47/52) 90.4 7.92 (3.08; <0.0001 <0.0001
20.34) 6.24 (2.38; 16.38)

Danger Level (4/12) 3.3 0.42 (0.12; 1.42) 0.1640 _0.27 (0.07; 0.99) 0.049


The likelihood of having worse cognitive function among hospital HCWs in Batangas

increases by 230% when they were exposed to danger level of heat strain (OR: 3.30; 95% CI:1.74;

6.27). Meanwhile, after holding other variables constant, the odds of having worse cognitive

function among HCWs in Batangas increased by 3.6 times when they were exposed to unsafe

level of heat strain (aOR: 3.59; 95% CI: 1.82; 7.11). Details are shown in Table 4.18.

Table 4.18. Odds Ratio for the association between heat strain score index and level of
cognitive function (combined alarm and danger level) among hospital healthcare workers

in Batangas, 2022.
Heat Strain No. of worse Crude OR p-value Adjusted p-value
Status cognitive (95% CI) OR
function than (95% CI)
the average of
the reference
population (%)
Safe Level (209/385) 54.3 - - - -
i 3.30 <0.001 3.6 <0.001
Unsafe level (51/64) 79.7 1.74, 6.27 1.8, 7.1


CHAPTER V
DISCUSSION
Prevalence of different levels of heat strain score index among hospital HCWs

To the best of the researcher’s knowledge, this study represents one of the pioneering
investigations into the prevalence of different levels of heat strain score index among HCWs
affiliated with public and private hospitals in the Philippines. In the current study, the findings
indicated that only 11.6% of HCWs were categorized under the alarm level. Additionally, a
smaller proportion (2.7%) of HCWs were classified under the danger level of heat strain. Notably,
the prevalence of heat strain observed in this study was lower than that reported in previous
research conducted by Messeri et al. (2021) and Lee et al. (2020), which documented a prevalence
of heat strain ranging from 78% to 88% among HCWs.

The observed disparity in the prevalence of heat strain between the current study and those
conducted by Messeri et al. (2021) and Lee et al. (2020) could possibly be attributed to several
factors. Firstly, the variation in the instruments employed in the present study compared to theirs
might have contributed to the differences in the reported prevalence. Furthermore, it is important
to consider the timing of previous studies. Messeri et al. (2021) and Lee et al. (2020) conducted
their research during the early period of the pandemic when HCWs were just starting to utilize
high-level PPE extensively.

It is important to acknowledge that during the start of the pandemic, HCWs faced difficult
challenges such as higher workload, longer duty hours, psychological distress, and thermal
discomfort from wearing PPE and working in negative-pressure rooms (Razu et al. 2021; Zhu et
al., 2022; Davey et al., 2020). In addition, the surge in COVID-19 cases resulted in the creation
of outdoor tents or treatment areas within the hospital vicinity or nearby open fields to meet the
demands for critical care (Peterson & Muckey, 2022). This practice was also observed in the

Philippines, where hospital tents were converted into makeshift emergency rooms (DOH, 2021;

Morales, 2021; Hallare, 2021). However, it should be noted that outdoor tents often face
challenges in providing adequate ventilation which could exacerbate heat stress among HCWs
working in these environments (Daanen et al., 2021).

Recently, WHO has declared an end to the COVID-19 pandemic following the significant
reduction in cases and deaths. WHO further added that the pressure on the healthcare system has
decreased with the help of widespread vaccination efforts (United Nations, 2023). With
vaccination, there has been a decline in ICU and non-ICU hospitalizations and deaths secondary
to COVID-19 infection (Havers et al., 2022; Rahman et al., 2022; Moghadas,2020). The
proclamation signifying that COVID 19 is no longer considered as a global health emergency has
led to easing out of pandemic-related protocols and the physical burden carried by the healthcare
system has significantly reduced. These developments, in conjunction with various
recommendations and interventions designed to combat heat stress during the pandemic (Kanda
et al, 2023, Red Cross Red Crescent Climate Centre, 2023; WHO, 2022; OSHA, n.d.), may have
contributed to the observed reduction in heat strain among HCWs in this study. It is also worth
noting that data collection for this study occurred three years after the declaration of the pandemic
in 2020, hence HCWs may have already acclimated to repeated exposure to heat stress. Lastly, it
should be noted that the current study was conducted during the summer of 2023 in the
Philippines. The interplay of seasonal variation alongside with the differences in the levels of
temperature and humidity, and heat tolerance thresholds could also potentially underlie the
disparities observed in comparison to findings of other similar studies.

Prevalence of worse cognitive outcomes among hospital HC Ws

The current study suggested that most of the hospital HCWs presented with worse
cognitive function than the average of the reference population. Optimal cognitive function is
important for effective performance of daily tasks in the healthcare industry where HCWs rely

on critical thinking processes, reasoning, and psychomotor skills in their daily operation (Higuchi

& Donald, 2002). The demanding workload and multiple patient responsibilities require keen
working memory to meet cognitive demands (Engle, 2002). Additionally, problems in attention
may lead to medical errors that can compromise patient safety (Botha, Gwin &, Purpora, 2015).
One study suggested that problems in executive functions among HCWs increase the risk of
professional burnout syndrome (Fernandez-Sanchez et al., 2018) which can potentially reduce
professional efficacy (Maslach & Leiter, 2008). Meanwhile, a separate study that analyzed
technical and non-technical skills of healthcare professionals concluded that a positive correlation
exists between executive function and non-technical skills such as team management and
communication in the healthcare setting (Los, Chmielewski, & Luczynski,2020).

Numerous factors associated with poor cognitive outcomes among hospital HCWs have
been identified in widely available studies. Studies conducted during the pandemic have reported
that PPE, work-related exhaustion, stress, and sleep deprivation, are associated with adverse
cognitive outcome (Davey et al., 2021; Farahat et al., 2021; Ametz et al., 2021, Kaliyaperumal et
al., 2017). Additionally, a high prevalence of mental health problems among HCWs were also
observed during the pandemic (Tong et al., 2023) which could influence optimal cognitive
function (CDC, 2021; Gartner et al., 2018; Krieger, & Amador-Campos, 2018; Demetriou et al.,
2018; Rock et al, 2014). Furthermore, HCWs who have been infected with COVID-19
demonstrated decrease in cognitive function, specifically in attention and memory (Omar et al.,
2022). Higher negative emotionality and neuroticism personality traits have been linked to poor
cognitive function as well (Moussa et al, 2023; Sutin et al., 2019).

The differences in reported prevalence of worse cognitive function between this study and
existing research may be attributed to variations in the tools or assessments used to measure
cognitive function, differences in sample characteristics, timing of the study, regional differences,

methodological differences, and the specific domains of cognitive function being assessed.


Levels of Heat Strain Score Index Aggregated According to Risk Factors
Heat strain and Personal Factors (Age, Sex, Menopausal Status, and Body Mass Index)

In the present study, the highest prevalence of alarm and danger level of heat strain were
observed at the 25 to 34 and 35 to 44 age group, respectively. Generally, older adults present with
lower tolerance to heat (Székely & Garai,2018). Also, the amount of heat that the body needs to
dissipate in the external environment is not proportional to skin blood flow in older adults. There
is also a noted decrease in the number of sweat glands which correspondingly affects the rate of
sweating. In addition, the level to stimulate sweating is higher in older adults as compared to
younger counterparts which ultimately attenuates their thermoregulation potential (Inoue et al.,
2004). The findings of the present study also differ from those reported by Glass et al. (2015)
which suggested that the risk of heat strain increases among the vulnerable populations such as
children and older adults, with females greater than 75 years old being more predisposed to heat
strain. This study did not observe a similar trend, possibly because only a small proportion of the
respondents fell into the age group of 55 and above which could possibly be attributed to the
compulsory retirement age, which is 60 in the private sector and 65 in the public sector (Jadloc,
2017). Additionally, it is also possible that HCWs in the higher age group are taking the
managerial or administrative position. This occupational role often involves less physical exertion
(Quinn et al., 2020) thereby reducing the likelihood of experiencing heat stress and subsequent
heat strain.

It was also found in this study that most of the respondents categorized as having alarm
and danger level of heat strain score index were female HCWs. This could possibly be explained
by the differences in the sweat rate between men and women with the latter having lower
maximum sweat rate even after matching body composition. In addition, the differences in
sweating can be associated with greater core temperature in women (Mehnert, Bréde & Griefahn

(2002).

It is important to note that the absence of a significant difference in heat strain when
HCWs were categorized by age and sex could possibly be attributed to limitations in assessing
other variables that might influence the relationship between age and heat strain. The diversity in
the tasks undertaken and the varying roles fulfilled in the healthcare setting could also potentially
mask the impact of age and sex on heat strain experienced by HC Ws.

It was also observed in the present study that the majority of respondents in the alarm and
danger level were overweight. As described in a study by Habibi, Momeni & Dehghan, (2016),
overweight individuals demonstrated elevated physiological response to heat strain and a higher
perception of heat strain. Moreover, there was also an observed increase in heart rate among
overweight individuals as compared to normal weight counterparts which suggests that their body
is experiencing higher levels of heat strain when exposed to heat stress (Yazdanirad et al.,2015).
Some plausible mechanisms observed that increase susceptibility of obese and overweight
individuals to heat stress include increased heat generation and decreased capacity of their body
to cool down when exposed to thermal challenge (Harvard Health,2019).

In addition, a study by Kakitsuba et al. (2007) suggested wider inter threshold zone for
skin and core temperature among individuals with higher body adiposity which indicates that
those with more fat tissues will demonstrate shivering at lower temperature and sweating at a
relatively higher temperature as compared to leaner individuals, albeit the result was not
statistically significant. This is similar to the findings of Speakman (2018) that indicated
overweight and obesity as a significant factor that influences the body’s thermoregulatory
function. The study also suggested that the adipose tissues provide thermal insulation especially
among obese individuals. Hence, when the external environmental temperature is cold, obese
individuals have higher tolerance and their metabolic requirement in response to decrease in
temperature is significantly less as compared to lean individuals. Although the increased adiposity

is an advantage during cold temperature, it makes obese individuals more predisposed to heat

stress due to delay in heat loss from the body to the external environment as attributed to the
insulation property of adipose tissues. The lower surface area to body mass ratio among
overweight and obese individuals also contribute to more prolonged metabolic heat transfer from
the core to the periphery since cutaneous heat dissipation is proportional to the surface area of the
skin (Verbraecken et al. 2006). It is also important to consider that the observed difference in heat
strain when HCWs were aggregated according to BMI was not significant possibly due to high
proportion of nonresponse for this item in the questionnaire.

As for the menopausal status, it is noteworthy that only a small percentage of HCWs who
reported being in the menopausal stage fell under the alarm and danger level of heat strain,
although the difference between the different level of heat strain when HCWs were grouped
according to menopause status was not statistically significant. However, significant difference
across the level of heat strain was noted when hysterectomy status was considered.

The observed low prevalence of heat strain among menopausal HCWs could possibly be
attributed to the small proportion of HCWs in the menopausal stage within the study population.
Although not elucidated in the present study, menopausal women are more predisposed to heat
strain due to the fluctuations in the normal thermoregulatory mechanism. The changes in hormone
levels result in sequential alteration in temperature homeostasis that cause peripheral vasodilation,
excessive sweating, skin erythema, and overwhelming sensation of internal body heat. Along with
these, there is an observed simultaneous rise in skin temperature in the face, back, abdomen, and
legs (Freedman, 2014; Deecher, 2009). Lastly, dehydration becomes an additional issue among
menopausal women because of the decrease in thirst sensitivity to fluctuations in the fluid volume
in the body which may subsequently impose increased heat strain among menopausal women
(Stachenfeld, 2014).

Regarding the difference in the level of heat strain when considering hysterectomy status,

it is important to note that as of the researcher's knowledge, there are no specific studies that have

directly examined the association between hysterectomy and heat strain. The absence of such
studies indicates that the potential relationship between these two factors has not been extensively
investigated in the available scientific literature.

Heat Strain and Lifestyle-related Factors (Exercise status, Smoking status, and Sleep
duration)

Evaluation of the sleeping status of HCWs showed that almost all respondents in the alarm
and danger level were sleep deprived. Several studies have shown that insufficient sleep
negatively affects thermoregulation. A case series conducted by Rav-Acha and colleagues (2004)
among the Israeli Defense Forces showed that sleep deprivation is one of the most predominant

risk factors for heat strain and heat related illnesses such as heat stroke.

The result of the study by Relf et al. (2018) among active females indicated that perceived
heat-related symptoms were higher among participants who were sleep deprived. On the contrary,
no statistically significant changes were observed in their thermoregulatory functions as
compared to those who were not sleep deprived. These findings were supported by another study
conducted among healthy male participants which revealed that sleep deprived individuals who
underwent heat tolerance tests were significantly affected by heat strain. In addition, there was
also a substantial accumulation of subjective discomfort which may ultimately compromise
optimal physical performance (Muginshtein-Simkovitch, 2015). Sleep deprivation alters thermal
homeostasis a due to decrease in peripheral vasodilation during exposure to heat stress and
impairment in the sweating mechanism (Keramidas & Botonis, 2021; Fujita, 2003). There is a
decrease in body sweat rate during periods of increased body temperature among sleep deprived

individuals secondary to changes in sweat glands and even in the central nervous system (Sawka,

1984).


As for the exercise status, the majority of HCWs in the alarm and danger level reported
no exercise whereas the highest proportion of HCWs who reported to have high exercise were
categorized under the safe level. This is because exercise contributes to heat stress adaptation and
consequent attenuation of the impact of heat strain. Additionally, heat acclimatization from
exercise augments the body’s thermoregulation capacity as demonstrated by improvement in
sweating and fluid homeostasis, lower core body temperature, enhanced blood flow to the skin
and improved cellular function and immunity which consequently reduce the adverse health
outcome following exposure to heat stress and heat strain (Périard, Racinais & Sawka, 2015). An
earlier study also reported that aerobic exercise improves heat dissipation among healthy

individuals (Havenith& van Middendorp, 1990).

The lack of significant difference in the level of heat strain when HCWs were grouped
according to sleeping and exercise status could possibly be attributed to failure to account other
factors that affect the impact of sleeping and exercise on heat strain such as but not limited to the
level of physical fitness, nutrition, medication use, alcohol, and caffeine consumption. In addition,
the element of time (i.e. chronicity of sleep deprived status or duration of being in the no exercise

status) was not considered during the assessment of these variables in the study.

Interestingly, this study showed that most of the respondents in the alarm and danger level
were categorized as never smokers while the majority of HCWs who were current smokers were
classified under the safe level of heat strain. It is important to consider that the
underrepresentation of current smokers in the study may have influenced the observed results and
to the lack of significant difference in heat strain when HCWs were grouped according to smoking,
status. Furthermore, it is crucial to consider the potential influence of social desirability bias on
these findings. In the context of smoking, this bias could lead to underreporting of smoking habits,
particularly anong HCWs who are aware of the health risks associated with smoking.


There are several studies demonstrating the impact of smoking on heat tolerance. One
study suggested that smokers have reduced tolerance to heat and are more susceptible to heat-
related illnesses as compared to nonsmoker counterparts as evidenced by higher sweating rate
and rise in core body temperature noted after smokers underwent the heat tolerance test (Druyan
et al., 2017). It was also found that smoking causes reduction in peripheral vasodilation and
consequent decline in cutaneous blood flow that is necessary for thermoregulation (Edvinsson et
al., 2008). The result of Rowlinson et al. (2014) also reported that smokers exhibited decline in
thermoregulatory capacity due to the concomitant reduction in lung ventilation and aerobic
capacity, and elevation in blood pressure which predispose smokers to heat strain and heat-related

illness.

Heat Strain and Non-Communicable Diseases (Hypertension and Diabetes)

The study also found that half of the HCWs in the danger level of heat strain score index
were hypertensive. In a study conducted by Kenny et al. (2010) exploring common NCDs that
contribute to heat stress, hypertensive individuals sustain higher levels of heat strain as compared
to normotensive counterparts. Although this study did not consider the medications taken by
hypertensive respondents which may have contributed to the lack of significant difference in the
level of heat strain, it is important to note that certain medications commonly prescribed for
hypertension, such as diuretics, B-blockers, and vasodilators, were also noted to contribute to heat
intolerance especially during hyperthermic conditions (Coco et al., 2016; Cheshire & Fealey,
2008). In addition, the presence of existing measures to protect HCWs with hypertension from
heat stress and consequent heat strain in the workplace were not assessed in the study which could

have potentially minimize the observable differences in the level of heat strain as well.

This study also demonstrated that the majority of HWCs without diabetes were
categorized under the safe level. On the contrary, most of the HC Ws who reported having diabetes


were also in the safe level. The CDC (2017) recognized diabetes as a significant risk factor for
heat stress among individuals in occupational settings. Several studies have demonstrated the
association of diabetes and impairment in thermoregulation which leads to heat strain. In addition,
the concomitant metabolic and neurological impairments observed among individuals with
diabetes also compromise mechanisms for thermoregulatory functions (Kenny et al., 2010).
Individuals with diabetes exhibited decreased sweating and blood flow to the skin therefore
resulting in decline in heat dissipation especially during hot environmental conditions or during
performance of physical activity. This leads to higher levels of heat strain among diabetics as
compared to non-diabetic counterparts (Kenny, Sigal & McGinn, 2016). Interestingly, this is not
the trend observed in the present study. This could possibly be attributed to a small proportion of

respondents with diabetes mellitus.

Heat Strain and Work-related Factors (level of PPE, work schedule, work break duration,
water intake status, and perceived adequacy of workplace ventilation)

The result of this study showed that half of the respondents under the danger level of heat
strain reported using Level 4 PPE while most of HCWs under the alarm level declared using
Level 3 PPE in their daily treatment and care activities. Moreover, the majority of HCWs in the
danger level reported using PPE for 12 hours or more. When considering the frequency of doffing
PPE, it was observed that the majority of HCWs under the danger level reported doffing their
PPE once only during duty hours. The result of this study is aligned with the report of Zhang
(2020) where he stated that PPE can add to the physical burden experienced by the HCWs due to
accompanying heat stress imposed on their bodies. This can be attributed to the reduction in the
transfer of vapor molecules from the body towards the external environment which consequently
limits evaporation and heat exchange thus leading to an increased risk of heat strain (Kuklane et

al., 2015; Potter, Gonzales & Xu, 2015). Aside from the limited heat dissipation, the higher sweat


rate among HCWs using PPE further causes thermal discomfort and subsequent increase in the
level of heat strain (Liu et al., 2020; Kenefick & Sawka,2007).

Potter et al. (2015) suggested a two to ten times increase in evaporative resistance when
wearing high risk PPE that covers the head and neck of HCWs. Even in thermoneutral conditions,
fluid-resistant PPE was still observed to contribute to heat stress (Messeri et al., 2021;
Kaywhite,1991). Messeri et al. (2021) also showed that 78% of HCWs reported heat strain when
wearing PPE even if they are working indoors in a fully-air-conditioned workstation.
Furthermore, the added weight and the limitation in movement when wearing PPE also magnify
heat stress which consequently increases heat strain among HC Ws (Coca et al., 2017).

However, it should be noted that there was no significant difference observed in the level
of heat strain when HCWs were grouped according to different PPE-related variables. Some
possible reasons for the observed result include differences in tasks performed while wearing
PPE, differences in environmental factors that could interact with PPE usage such as temperature
and humidity, and variations in PPE material.

Upon examination of the water intake status, the result of this study demonstrated that
almost half of the respondents in the safe level have adequate water intake. Meanwhile, there’s
an almost equal number of HCWs in the alarm and danger level who reported to have adequate
and inadequate water intake. Additionally, there was no observed statistically significant
difference in the different levels of heat strain when considering the water intake status possibly
because there is a high percentage of nonresponse for this variable.

Theoretically, the high heat vaporization capacity of water enables the body to dissipate
heat, even in situations where the surrounding temperature is higher than the body's temperature
(Montain et al, 1999). The evaporation of water when an individual sweats is a very effective way
of dissipating heat from the body (Jequier and Constant, 2009). In addition to sweating as one of

the body’s heat dissipation mechanisms, it may also lead to dehydration and associated loss of

electrolytes in the body. These are also accompanied by decline in plasma volume which
ultimately precipitate an increase in plasma osmolality. The sweat output declines and becomes
inadequate to counter elevation in core body temperature during periods of increased plasma
osmolality and decreased plasma volume. Thus, for the sweating mechanism to effectively
compensate for elevation in body temperature, the body must receive adequate fluids to combat
elevation in plasma osmolality and decrease in plasma volume caused by dehydration (Popkin,
D'Anci & Rosenberg, 2010). Sawka & Montain (2000) also suggested that even a small-scale
decrease in hydration can threaten thermoregulatory functions of the body. This is similar with
the finding in the study of Hun (2011) which elucidated that there is a concomitant increase in
core body temperature as the level of dehydration rises.

Aside from diabetes and hysterectomy status, the study also found significant difference
in the level of heat strain when HCWs were aggregated according to their perceived adequacy of
ventilation in the workplace. The result of this study revealed that almost all HCWs categorized
as having danger level of heat strain reported inadequate ventilation in the workplace while more
than half in the alarm level also reported inadequate ventilation. Without appropriate and adequate
ventilation, especially in tropical countries, indoor workers are predisposed to heat strain, heat-
related illnesses, and even premature death due to extreme heat (Lundgren et al., 2013). As
reported by Morris et al., (2020), OSHA (n.d.), and Coco et al. (2016), engineering controls were
found to be an effective strategy to reduce occupational heat stress in the immediate environment
through air-conditioning or use of electric fan.

The result of this study also showed that the majority of HCWs who were on a rotating
shift, day shift, and shift work were categorized under the safe level. Conversely, an equal number
of HCWs on day shift, rotating shift, and shift work were classified as being in the danger level
of heat strain. Notably, the study’s findings indicated that no HCWs working evening or night

shifts were categorized as being in the danger level of heat strain. This is aligned with the result

of the by Flouris et al. (2019) who concluded that night shift workers were less exposed to heat
stress as compared to day shift workers (Flouris et al., 2019). Additionally, a recent study that
assessed variation in indoor and outdoor environmental temperature during the morning,
afternoon, and evening shift revealed that temperature is lowest during the night shift and highest
in the afternoon shift (Ciuha et al., 2019). These findings also provide a plausible explanation as
to why the majority of HCWs in the shift work were also in the safe level of heat strain.

Examination of work break duration reveals that almost all HCWs categorized under the
danger level reported having a work break duration of less than one hour and 20 minutes per day
whereas the majority of HCWs with a work break duration of 1 hour and 20 minutes per day or
more were classified under the safe level. In the Philippines, the Department of Labor and
Employment (n.d.) indicates that workers should be provided with at least one hour of meal break
and an additional rest break or coffee break of 5-20 minutes per day for a typical work duration
of 8 hours. Provision of adequate rest periods is important in reducing the impact of heat strain
during thermally challenging conditions (Brake & Bates, 2002). One study by Vargheses et al.
(2020) reported statistically significant correlation between very limited rest breaks and heat-
related injuries in workers (PR: 1.28; 95% CI: 1.04-1.44). Appropriate work and rest cycle
heightens endurance to sustain work throughout the shift, lowers the heart rate, increases
cutaneous blood flow, and allows dissipation of accumulated heat in the body towards the
environment (Panter-Brick, 2003; OSHA, n.d.).

It is important to consider that the findings of this study revealed no significant difference
in the level of heat strain when HCWs were aggregated according to work schedule and work
break duration. Some possible reasons for the observed result include inability of this study to
account other environmental factors such as ambient temperature and humidity in the workplace
that can influence the impact of work schedule and work break duration on heat strain. In addition,

the categories under the work schedule variable were not mutually exclusive which could have

resulted to the lack of significant difference in the level of heat strain. Lastly, the variability in
workload intensity across different work schedule and the nature of work break were also not
accounted in the study which could have obscured significant differences in the level of heat
strain.

Levels of Cognitive Function Aggregated According to Risk Factors

Level of Cognitive Function and Personal Factors (age, socioeconomic status, mental status,
body mass index, menopausal status)

The findings of this study revealed that most of the HCWs, regardless of age groups, were
categorized under worse cognitive function. However, when comparing the percentage of HCWs
with worse cognitive function across age groups, those aged fifty-five and above showed the
highest proportion. Albeit the difference in the level of cognitive function when HCWs were
grouped according to age was not statistically significant. Several potential factors acould account
for the absence of a significant difference. For instance, the underrepresentation of HCWs in the
upper age bracket might have influenced the observed result. Additionally, the lack of assessment
of specific job roles within the workplace could have contributed to the lack of significant age-
related differences in cognitive function.

Numerous studies have demonstrated that advancing age creates functional and structural
alterations in the brain that consequently lower cognitive performance. For instance, levels of
neurotransmitters and hormones gradually decline with age. The brain undergoes a reduction in
volume accompanied by a decline in cerebral blood flow. Additionally, the chanes in brain
vascularity can elevate susceptibility to stroke and other neurological disorders. Lastly, the
diminishing white matter integrity contributes to a less efficient neural communication network
(Peters,2006). However, the influence of age on different domains of cognition is more significant

among the older adult population (Maldonado et al., 2020; Murman, 2015; Lezak et al., 2004).


In terms of BMI, the study did not find a significant difference in the prevalence of various
levels of cognitive function when respondents were aggregated according to BMI. However, it is
worth considering that the high number of nonresponses for this item could have contributed to
the observed result. Nevertheless, it was noted that the majority of HCWs with better cognitive
function level had normal weight, whereas more than half of overweight HCWs exhibited worse
cognitive function than the average of the reference population.

To support the result of the study, previous research has shown that increased adiposity
was associated with poorer cognitive performance (Yang et al., 2017; Bocarsly et al., 2015) and
executive function had been predominantly affected among obese and overweight individuals as
compared to their normal weight counterparts (Yang et al., 2017; Bartholdy et al., 2016; Jansen
et al., 2015). One possible mechanism behind the observed association is the low-grade
inflammation induced by activation of innate immunity that is commonly observed among obese
individuals which ultimately yield untoward consequences in optimal cognitive functioning (D
O'Brien at al., 2017).

Upon examination of menstruation status, it was revealed that there was no significant
difference in the levels of cognitive function among the respondents. Studies have highlighted the
influence of factors such as the use of hormone replacement therapy, oophorectomy (surgical
removal of the ovaries), age at menopause, and age at first menses (reproductive period) on
cognitive performance during menopause (Yoo et al., 2020, Georgakis et al., 2019, Ryan et al.,
2014, Ryan et al., 2009). The absence of assessment of these factors in the study may have limited
the ability to detect significant differences in cognitive function across menstruation status
groups. Additionally, the small number of HCWs in the menopausal and perimenopausal group
may have potentially influenced the observed result of the study. The study could have noted

more robust findings with a more balanced distribution across the menopausal groups.


Several studies have also demonstrated impact on cognitive performance during the
menopausal period due to short-term effects of hot flushes which hinders optimum capacity to
concentrate and accomplish difficult cognitive tasks (Kingma et al., 2021; Gaoua et al., 201 2).
Epperson et al. (2011) suggested a decline in cognitive domains such as attention, working
memory, focus, and organization among women in the perimenopausal and menopausal period.
Furthermore, premature menopause, which is characterized by having a final menstrual period at
the age of 40 or younger, was also noted to be associated with a 30% increased risk of developing
cognitive deterioration (Ryan et al., 2014). The reduction in hormone levels during menopause,
specifically estrogen, which plays a neuroprotective and neurotrophic role in the central nervous
system, disrupt brain bioenergetics, leading to synaptic loss and a simultaneous decrease in brain
metabolism (Conde et al., 2021;Genazzani et al, 2007). Moreover, the reduction in estrogen
negatively affects cerebral blood flow, further contributing to the decline in cognitive function
(Krause, Duckles & Pelligrino, 2006).

The evaluation of mental health status indicated that 80% of respondents with present
mental illness exhibited worse cognitive function than the average of the reference population. In
contrast, only half of those without mental illness demonstrated worse cognitive function.

Several mental conditions, including depression, obsessive-compulsive disorders (OCD),
and attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), can affect cognitive functions.

Depression has been associated with moderate declines in cognitive functions,
particularly memory, attention, and executive functions (Rock et al., 2014). One study utilizing
neuroimaging to assess impact of depression on working memory revealed that individuals with
depression required additional effort to accomplish activities involving working memory which
might be due to problematic inhibition of other information that are not pertinent to the task at
hand (Gartner et al., 2018). A separate study by Gotlib & Joormann (2010) reported that memory

impairments, problems in concentration, and distractibility were commonly observed among

individuals with depression. They further added that the resource-allocation hypothesis may
possibly explain the observed cognitive decline associated with depression.

In the case of ADHD, which is a common neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by
patterns of hyperactivity, impulsivity, and inattention, cognitive performance was also affected
(CDC, 2021). While ADHD is generally considered as a childhood disorder, several studies
reported that it lingers into adulthood for approximately 60% of individuals (Fayyad et al., 2017;
Ebejer et al., 2012).

Research has shown that individuals with ADHD exhibited significantly lower scores in
executive function, memory, planning, inhibition, organizational skills, and processing speed as
compared to individuals without ADHD (Krieger, & Amador-Campos, 2018; Kofler et al., 2018;
Mayes & Calhoun. 2006).

Impairment in the executive functioning domain was not exclusive to depression and
ADHD but had been observed in other conditions like schizophrenia, obsessive-compulsive
disorders (OCD), autism-spectrum disorder (ASD), and dementia (Demetriou et al., 2018; Kuelz
et al., 2004).

Neurotransmitter imbalance alongside with the changes in neuroplasticity, brain structure,
volume, and connections among individuals with mental illness contribute to the decline in
cognitive function (Kays, Hurley, & Taber, 2012).

It should also be noted that there was no significant difference in the level of cognitive
function when HCWs were categorized based on their mental illness status. This outcome could
be attributed to several possible factors. First, HCWs who reported having mental illness were
underrepresented in the study. Aside from the nonresponses, there were also several respondents
who expressed uncertainty about their mental health status. In addition, the medication and
treatment regimens among respondents with mental illness were not considered possibly

contributing to the absence in significant difference in the level of cognitive function. Lastly, the

pervasive stigma associated with individuals with mental illness could have resulted to
underreporting of the condition leading to underestimation of the observed differences as well.
Level of Cognitive Function and Socioeconomic Factors (Highest Educational Attainment
and Household Monthly Income)

In relation to the socioeconomic factors examined in this study, the results demonstrated
that only a third of HCWs with Doctoral degree exhibited worse cognitive function, while more
than half of HCWs with bachelor’s degree and master’s degree demonstrated worse cognitive
function.

These results were consistent with the research conducted among individuals aged 15 to
60 years, which showed that higher levels of educational attainment predicted better performance
in several cognitive domains (Guerra-Carrillo, Katovich, & Bunge, 2017). Similarly, the result
of Lee et al. (2006) revealed that as the level of education increases, there was a concomitant
increase in the mean of cognitive function. Moreover, higher education was associated with a
decreased likelihood of cognitive decline.

In addition to assessing the highest educational attainment, the study also measured the
household monthly income of the respondents. It was noted that the highest percentage of HCWs
with worse cognitive function level were found among those belonging to the income range of
less than PhP 10,957 per month. This aligns with a cross-sectional study by Zhu et al. (2018)
among 20-59-year-old participants which demonstrated a decline in cognitive performance
among those categorized under the lower income bracket. In addition, a separate study
demonstrated significant increase in mean cognitive performance with increasing income.

It is important to note that the study did not find a statistically significant difference in the
prevalence of different levels of cognitive function when HCWs were aggregated according to

socioeconomic factors. The distribution of respondents across the different categories of the


socioeconomic status were not diverse enough and some groups were underrepresented during
the analysis which could have resulted to the observed result.

Level of Cognitive Function and Lifestyle-related factors (exercise status, smoking status,
sleep duration)

Regarding lifestyle-related factors, the study found no statistically significant difference
in the prevalence of different cognitive function levels when HCWs were grouped according to
exercise status. However, it can be noted that the highest percentage of HCWs with worse
cognitive function were those who reported having no exercise. Conversely, those who reported
having high exercise levels had the lowest percentage of HCWs categorized under the worse
cognitive function level. Although not statistically significant, the observed result was aligned
with previous research indicating the potential benefits of exercise on cognitive function.

The randomized controlled trial (RCT) conducted by Stern et al. (2019) among individuals
aged 20 to 67 years demonstrated that exercise increased executive function but the other domains
of cognition such as language, memory, and processing speed did not show significant
improvement.

Another RCT investigated the impact of exercise in improving cognition and found that
there was an evident increase in the volume of the hippocampus, indicating a favorable impact
on memory (Erickson et al., 2011). Another neuroimaging study observed an increase in brain
volume, particularly in the grey and white matter among individuals who exercise. These areas
of the brain that demonstrated improved structural integrity are crucial for performance of
cognitive functions (Colcombe et al., 2006).

A meta-analysis study examining the association between exercise and cognition
demonstrated an increase in cognitive functions, such as attention, executive function, and

intelligence during and after exercise (Chang et al., 2012). Furthermore, several studies have also


highlighted that even short duration of high intensity exercise may also improve executive
functions and attention among healthy individuals (Venckunas et al., 2016; Alves et al., 2014).

The potential of exercise to induce cognitive benefits can be justified by its capacity to
influence synaptic plasticity that supports cognitive function. Therefore, exercise may offset
neurodegenerative changes that come with aging (Gomez-Pinilla & Hillman, 2013).

The current study showed that the highest percentage of HCWs with worse cognitive
function were sleep deprived. Interestingly, the percentage of sleep deprived HCWs with worse
cognitive function was roughly equal to the percentage of HCWs with good sleep who also
exhibited worse cognitive function compared to the reference population.

Several epidemiological studies have shown that insufficient sleep negatively affects
cognition. Goel et al. (2009) provided a summary of negative influences on cognition following
sleep deprivation which includes psychomotor retardation, increasing neglect of duties, decline
in learning acquisition, increase in error under time pressure, and decline in short term and
working memory.

The result of the study by Wilckens et al. (2014) among young and older adults showed
that sleep continuity is associated with better cognitive performance particularly in the executive
function domain. Inhibitory control and working memory were noted to improve among young
adults, while older adults were observed to have enhanced verbal fluency, memory recall, and
inhibitory control.

Thomas and colleagues (2000) reported that the prefrontal areas of the brain are
significantly affected by sleep deprivation. This in turn negatively influences several functions of
the prefrontal cortex such as creativity, attention, and executive functions (Alhola & Polo-
Kantola, 2007). Sleep deprivation also alters the balance of neurotransmitters, and induces
alterations in brain structure, particularly in the gray matter volume and altered neural

connectivity leading to reduce cognitive function (Sun et al., 2020; Parameswari et al, 2017).

Aside from cognition, sleep deprivation also affects workplace productivity and predisposes
workers to accidents and errors (Chattu at al., 2018; Watson & Cherney,2020; Caruso, 2014).

The absence of a significant difference in the level of cognitive function among HCWs
when categorized based on sleep duration status could have resulted from the reliance on self-
reported sleep duration which introduces the possibility of measurement error, as individuals may
not accurately recall or report their actual sleep duration. Moreover, it is also important to note
that the study did not account for sleep quality, which also influences cognitive function.

The study also found that there was no significant difference in the level of cognitive
function when respondents were aggregated according to smoking status. However, it is worth
noting that among HCWs, both ex-smokers and current smokers had a higher percentage of
individuals with worse cognitive function compared to those who had never smoked. The absence
of significant difference when healthcare workers (HCWs) were grouped according to smoking
status could be attributed to several factors such as having a small number of respondents in the
smoker and ex-smoker categories, and lack of assessment of the intensity of smoking.

Cumulative research has demonstrated that cigarette smoking has an associated impact on
cognition. Verbal skill, processing speed, executive function, memory, and visuospatial skills
were notably reduced among chronic smokers as compared to non-smoker counterparts
(Wingbermiihle et al.,2017; Durazzo, Meyerhoff & Nixon ,2012).

The presence of different cytotoxic substances such as nitrosamines, aldehydes, nicotine,
and carbon monoxide in cigarette smoke negatively affect neurons and cell membrane which
result in subsequent atrophy of brain tissue and other concomitant degenerations in several brain
regions including those responsible for memory and attention (Durazzo et al., 2012). Furthermore,
Martin-Rios (2021) suggested a significant inverse association between working memory and
duration of smoking, indicating that prolonged smoking is associated with poorer working

memory.

Level of Cognitive Function and Non-communicable diseases (hypertension status, diabetes
mellitus status)

When considering non-communicable diseases, the study did not find a significant
difference in the level of cognitive function. However, it was observed that the highest percentage
of HCWs with worse cognitive function were those who did not report diabetes and hypertension.
Interestingly, an equal percentage of HCW with diabetes and hypertension were found to be
categorized under the worse and better cognitive function. It is possible that the nonresponse
and those who were uncertain if they have diabetes or hypertension may have influenced the
observed result of the study. Another plausible explanation is that HCWs who have diabetes and
hypertension may have differences in the way their conditions are being managed. The variability
in the duration and severity of their conditions were also not assessed in the present study which
could have possibly contributed to the lack of significant difference in the level of cognitive
function.

There are widely available studies on the association of diabetes and cognitive function.
A study by Van den Berg et al. (2010) concluded that impairments in executive function,
attention, processing speed, and memory were noted among individuals with Type II Diabetes
Another meta-analysis study by Vincent & Hall (2015) revealed mild to moderate decrease in
executive function among individuals with Type II Diabetes as compared to non-diabetic
counterparts. In the same study, an inverse association was noted between duration of the disease
and decline in cognitive function. Similarly, one recent study conducted among 35 to 74 years
old participants from the Brazilian Longitudinal Study of Adult Health reported statistically
significant association between diabetes and decrements in executive function, language, and
memory (Teixeira et al., 2020). Persistent elevation in glucose levels damage the blood vessels
in the body leading to compromised delivery of nutrients and oxygen to the brain consequently

leading to decrease in cognitive function (CDC, 2022). In addition, insulin resistance can disrupt

the regulation of neurotransmitters and survival of neurons leading to neurodegenerative changes
and cognitive decline (Al-Sayyar et al., 2023). Lastly, the heightened oxidative stress associated
with diabetes also damages brain cells (Li et al., 2023).

With respect to hypertension, the results of the study by Gasecki and colleagues (2013)
suggested that elevated blood pressure caused a reduction in optimal executive functioning,
impairments in memory, and decline in processing speed. The interruption of normal cerebral
blood flow creates structural damage to the white matter that is relevant for cognitive processes
(Iacodela et al., 2016).

Moreover, there are also structural changes in the grey matter due to the physiological
mechanisms following hypertension. Regions of the brain that are particularly vulnerable to
abnormal elevation in blood pressure include the hippocampus, inferior parietal lobe, temporal
cortex, and prefrontal cortex (Raz et al., 2007).

Level of Cognitive Function and Work-related factors (level of PPE, work schedule, work
break duration, water intake status)

The study findings indicated that there was an approximately equal percentage of HCWs
with worse cognitive function across the different levels of PPE (ranging from Level 1 to Level
4). Additionally, HCWs who wore PPE for five to eight hours demonstrated the highest
prevalence of worse cognitive function. Furthermore, the study revealed that HCWs who had to
don and doff their PPE two to three times had the highest percentage of worse cognitive function.
However, it is important to note that the differences observed in cognitive function across PPE
variables were not statistically significant.

The lack of statistical significance may possibly suggest that the different PPE levels
examined did not have a substantial impact on cognitive function. In addition, other factors
influencing cognitive function may have played a more prominent role in determining the

cognitive function of HCWs.

The present study found no significant difference in the level of cognitive function when
water intake status was considered. Notably, there was almost an equal percentage of HCWs with
worse cognitive function between those assessed to have adequate and inadequate water intake.
This finding aligns with the results of several studies that have concluded that the effect of
hydration on cognition is inconclusive and needs further analysis (Masento et al., 2014,
McCartney et al., 2017).

It is important to note that there are several factors that were not considered in this study
which could have influenced the impact of hydration on cognitive function such as dehydration
tolerance and level of fitness (Secher & Ritz, 2012). The absence of these considerations may
contribute to the lack of significant differences observed in cognitive function related to water
intake status. Furthermore, it should also be noted that there was a high percentage of nonresponse
for the item related to water intake in the questionnaire.

On the contrary, several studies have also demonstrated the association of dehydration
and cognitive performance. Different domains of cognition such as concentration, alertness, and
short-term memory were altered by mild dehydration among young adults 18 to 25 years old
(D’Anci, 2009) and even adults 60 years old and above (Suhr, 2005). Separate studies also
demonstrated that quantitative aptitude, visuomotor coordination, and psychomotor abilities were
also influenced by mild to moderate dehydration (D’Anci, 2009; Cian et al., 2001).

Insufficient water intake can lead to a decrease in brain volume and a simultaneous
reduction in cerebral blood flow, resulting in cognitive decline (Tan et al., 2016; Trangmar et al.,
2015). Additionally, dehydration can disturb the equilibrium of neurotransmitters and electrolytes
thereby precipitating unfavorable cognitive outcomes (Hodges, 2012).

The highest prevalence of HCWs with worse cognitive function than the average of the
reference population was observed among those who reported to have shift work schedule which

is a nonstandard work schedule (including evening or night shifts, rotating shifts, split shifts, and

extended duty hours) in which most of the hours worked are outside the period between 8 am and
4 pm. Nonetheless, the difference in prevalence of cognitive function level when HCWs were
aggregated according to work schedule was not statistically significant. This finding could have
resulted from the lack of mutually exclusive categories within this variable, the absence of stress
assessment and job roles specific to individual work schedules, and the potential influence of the
types of cognitive task pertinent to various work schedule arrangements.

These findings are consistent with the result of several epidemiological studies that
examined the effects of night shift and shift work and demonstrated decline in various domains
of cognitive performance of workers including response inhibition, memory, learning, and
response speed (Shwetha & Sudhakar, 2012; San Chang et al., 2011; Rouch et al.,2005).

Another study suggested that response speed, commission errors, and omission errors
were substantially higher among workers in the night shift which suggest probability of attention
issues among night shift workers (Kazemi et al., 2016). The results of Haidarimoghadam et al.
(2017) further supported these findings, demonstrating fatigue, decline in cognitive functions,
and subsequent increase in errors among workers designated to the night shift.

The result of this study showed that the highest prevalence of worse cognitive function
was observed among HCWs who reported to have less than one hour and 20 minutes of work
break per day although the difference between cognitive function level with reference to work
break duration was not statistically significant. Several studies have demonstrated that any kind
of work break has a positive effect on accuracy and concentration of workers (Scholz et al., 2018;
van den Heuval et al., 2003). Furthermore, a study by Steinborn and Huestegge (2016) suggested
a similar beneficial effect of active and passive break on cognitive performance. They also

highlighted that the benefits of rest breaks substantially increase with more demanding jobs.


Association between heat strain score index and level of cognitive function among HCWs

According to Davey et al. (2021), 65% of healthcare workers reported difficulty in
performing cognitive tasks while 92% mentioned that the accompanying heat stress from wearing

PPE made their job more challenging.

In a related study of Malcolm et al (2018), a decline in cognitive performance was
observed upon exposure of workers to a temperature of 39.6 + 0.4°C as compared to moderate
temperature of 21.2 + 1.8°C. In this present study, it was observed that after holding other
variables constant, the chance of having a worse cognitive function increases by 3.6 times when

the heat strain of HCWs were considered at an unsafe level.

Ina related study by Schmidt et al. (2017), it was found that an increase in the core body
temperature up to 38.5 °C enhances cognition. However, cognitive performance declines when
the core body temperature reaches 39 °C and above. Mazloumi et al. (2014) observed that
cognitive functioning, including the capacity to react timely and attention span, declines during

thermally challenging conditions.

Impairment of memory functions was also observed suggesting decline in attention span,
processing speed, and response speed which can be attributed to increase in core body temperature
among male participants (Stubblefield et al. (2013). Furthermore, executive function during
conflict resolution was also observed to be impaired when participants were exposed in a

hyperthermic environment (Liu et al 2013).

However, Van Den Heuvel et al (2017) suggested that there was no significant association
between moderate hyperthermia, dehydration, and their combined impact in reducing cognitive

functions particularly in the working memory and visual perception of healthy, non-smoking male


participants. These findings were supported by Sun et al. (2012) suggesting no significant
association between exposure to hot conditions and alerting and orienting functions of cognition.
Nevertheless, the same study suggested a significant association between heat stress and

executive functions.

Differences in the findings of the previously mentioned studies might be attributed to
differences in the methodology being utilized including the use of different tools to assess
cognition and heat strain. Moreover, length or duration of exposure to prolonged heat was not
controlled across different studies which might result in difference in findings. However, it can
be observed that in this present study, exposure to heat strain worsen the cognitive functioning of

HCWs.
Limitations of the Study

This study had several limitations. Firstly, there was underrepresentation of some
categories of variables measured in the study. For example, there was a small number of HCWs
in the age category of 55 and above, as well as those in the perimenopausal and menopausal
stages. Additionally, the number of HCWs with danger level were underrepresented in the study
resulting to combining alarm and danger level of heat strain during data analysis. The study could
have noted more robust findings with a more balanced distribution of HCWs across the different
categories of variables measured. Additionally, nonresponse to several items in the questionnaire
may have influenced the observed association between heat strain score index and cognitive
function level.

Furthermore, there were also some factors that could have been included to further
validate significant differences between level of cognitive function and level of heat strain score

index when HCWs were aggregated according to the different confounders measured in the study.


For instance, the study did not consider the medications taken by hypertensive and diabetic
respondents, which can also affect predisposition to heat strain.

The measurement of heat strain and cognitive function levels relied on self-report, which
introduces potential bias. Further testing with objective measures such as environmental or
biological monitoring could provide more valid results for heat strain and cognitive function.
Moreover, the tool used to assess the outcome utilized the US 2000 Census as the reference
population.

Social desirability bias may have also influenced the results, as respondents may have
been hesitant to report undesirable behavior in some questions. It is also important to consider
that this study was conducted during the summer and the results may differ if the study had been
conducted in a different season. Additionally, the result of this study cannot be generalized to
HCWs working outside the hospital setting, such as clinics and health centers. Lastly, the study
was cross-sectional in design, hence causality between heat strain and cognitive function cannot

be established.


CHAPTER VI
CONCLUSIONS, AND RECOMMENDATION

Summary

This study aimed to assess the prevalence of different categories of heat strain score index
and the prevalence of worse cognitive function level among hospital HCWs in Batangas.
Additionally, the study explored the relationship between heat strain score index and level of
cognitive function.

A total of 449 HCWs from various departments in public and private hospitals participated
in the study. The findings revealed that only a small percentage of HC Ws were categorized under
the alarm and danger levels of heat strain score index. However, the majority of HCWs were

found to have worse cognitive function than the average of the reference population.

Moreover, this study indicated that, after holding other variables constant, the chance of
having worse cognitive function increased by 260% when HCWs experienced heat strain at an
unsafe level. In addition, significant differences were observed in the level of heat strain score
index when HCWs were grouped based on diabetes status, hysterectomy status, and perceived

adequacy of workplace ventilation.

On the other hand, no statistically significant differences were found in cognitive function
level when HCWs were aggregated based on personal factors (age, socioeconomic status, mental
status, body mass index), lifestyle-related factors (exercise status, smoking status, sleep duration
status), non-communicable diseases (hypertension status, diabetes mellitus status), and work-

related factors (level of PPE, work schedule, work break duration, and water intake status).


Conclusion

This study concludes that there is high prevalence of worse cognitive function among
hospital HCWs in Batangas, Philippines compared to the reference population. In addition, the
findings revealed that only a small percentage of hospital HCWs were categorized under the alarm
and danger levels of heat strain score index. Lastly, after holding other variables constant, the
likelihood of having worse cognitive function increases by 3.6 times when the heat strain of
HCWs was considered in unsafe level. This suggests that while heat strain is not widely prevalent

among hospital HCWs, it still significantly impacts cognitive function.

Recommendations

The results of this study can be used by different stakeholders in mitigating the impact of

heat strain among HCWs, particularly on cognitive function.

Future Researchers. Future studies may include the distribution of raw score in the PROMIS
Cognitive Function tool to provide more information regarding the cognitive outcomes among
hospital HCWs. Increasing the sample size may also be considered to counter the
underrepresentation in some categories of the variables considered in the current study.

Future studies may also explore other potential factors that influence heat strain and cognitive
function which were not measured in this study. Researchers may also further advance knowledge
in heat strain and its association to the level of cognitive function by incorporating objective
measures such as environmental or biological monitoring to provide more valid results.
Additionally, future research may focus on evaluating the effectiveness of interventions directed
towards reduction of impact of heat strain on cognitive function of hospital HCWs. Lastly, other
researchers may also replicate the study in different populations that require good cognitive

functioning but are also exposed to heat stress in the immediate working environment.


Hospital Administrators, Safety Officers, and Health and Safety Committee. The results of this
study can provide valuable insights to hospital administrators, safety officers, and health and
safety committees regarding the heat strain experienced by their HCWs and the factors that need
to be prioritized to develop targeted recommendations in mitigating heat strain and its impact on
cognitive function among hospital HCWs. For example, it is advisable to conduct a
comprehensive evaluation of workplace ventilation within their respective institutions. This
assessment could lead to the implementation of enhanced engineering controls aimed at reducing
the effects of heat stress among hospital healthcare workers (HC Ws). Moreover, special attention
should be given to HCWs with conditions such as diabetes or a history of hysterectomy,
necessitating a more in-depth analysis of their heat stress and strain encountered while on duty.
By using the result of this study, hospital administrators are taking active measures in creating a

safer and healthier work environment for our hospital HCWs.

Healthcare Workers. The findings of this study can increase awareness among hospital HCWs
about the association between heat strain and cognitive function. This knowledge can prompt
them to seek additional trainings related to managing heat strain in the workplace and improving
cognitive performance. Additionally, the knowledge gained from this study can provide concrete
evidence to support program initiatives directed towards reduction of heat strain that they may

lobby to the management.

Department of Health and allied health agencies. The Department of Health (DOH) and allied
health agencies and organizations may develop training programs or awareness campaigns
focusing on recognizing heat-induced cognitive effects among hospital HCWs. Moreover, they
may also invest in future research to further advance the knowledge on association of heat strain

and cognitive function among HCWs.


Policymakers. The findings of this study could inspire policymakers to create enhanced
workplace safety regulations aimed specifically at addressing heat stress and heat strain among
healthcare workers (HCWs) who have diabetes or have undergone hysterectomy. Policymakers
could also consider forming partnerships with allied health institutions and organizations to

collectively refine and strengthen policies related to heat-related health concerns.


REFERENCES

Abdelmoety, D. A., El-Bakri, N. K., Almowalld, W. O., Turkistani, Z. A., Bugis, B. H., Baseif, E. A., ...
& Abu-Shaheen, A. (2018). Characteristics of heat illness during Hajj: a cross-sectional
study. BioMed research international, 2018.

Abusafia, Ali. (2017). Re: How will I conduct face validity?. Retrieved from:
https://www.researchgate.net/post/How-will-I-conduct-face-
validity/5933c73 1£7b67e3ded429c 1 8/citation/download.

Al-Aidroos, N., Said, C. P., & Turk-Browne, N. B. (2012). Top-down attention switches coupling
between low-level and high-level areas of the human visual cortex. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 109(36), 14675-14680.

Albert, J. R. G., Abrigo, M. R. M., Quimba, F. M. A., & Vizmanos, J. F. V. (2020). Poverty, the Middle
Class, and Income Distribution amid COVID-19.

Alhola, P., & Polo-Kantola, P. (2007). Sleep deprivation: Impact on cognitive performance.
Neuropsychiatric disease and treatment.

Al-Sayyar, A., Hammad, M. M., Williams, M. R., Al-Onaizi, M., Abubaker, J., & Alzaid, F. (2023).
Neurotransmitters in Type 2 Diabetes and the Control of Systemic and Central Energy
Balance. Metabolites, 13(3), 384.

Alvarez, J. A., & Emory, E. (2006). Executive function and the frontal lobes: a meta-analytic review.
Neuropsychology review, 16(1), 17-42.

Alves, C. R., Tessaro, V. H., Teixeira, L. A., Murakava, K., Roschel, H., Gualano, B., & Takito, M. Y.
(2014). Influence of acute high-intensity aerobic interval exercise bout on selective attention and
short-term memory tasks. Perceptual and motor skills, 118(1), 63-72.

American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (DSM-
5®). American Psychiatric Pub.

Arnaud, M. J. (Ed.). (1998). Hydration Throughout Life: International Conference, Vittel, France, June
9-12, 1998. John Libbey Eurotext.

Arnetz, J. E., Arble, E., Sudan, S., & Arnetz, B. B. (2021). Workplace cognitive failure among nurses
during the COVID-19 pandemic. International Journal of Environmental Research and Public
Health, 18(19), 10394.

Arlinghaus, A., Lombardi, D. A., Courtney, T. K., Christiani, D. C., Folkard, S., & Perry, M. J. (2012).
The effect of rest breaks on time to injury—a study on work-related ladder-fall injuries in the
United States. Scandinavian journal of work, environment & health, 560-567.

Armstrong, L. E., & Johnson, E. C. (2018). Water intake, water balance, and the elusive daily water
requirement. Nutrients, 10(12), 1928.

American Psychological Association. (2020). Cognition. Retrieved from
https://dictionary.apa.org/cognition

Bangen, K. J., Meeks, T. W., & Jeste, D. V. (2013). Defining and assessing wisdom: A review of the
literature. The American Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 21(12), 1254-1266.

Bartholdy, S., Dalton, B., O’Daly, O. G., Campbell, I. C., & Schmidt, U. (2016). A systematic review of
the relationship between eating, weight and inhibitory control using the stop signal task.
Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 64, 35-62.

Bernard, T. Thermal Stress. In Barbara, P. & Quinlan P. (2002). Fundamentals of Industrial Hygiene 5"
edition. National Safety Council

Bernard, T., Ashley, C., Trentacosta, J., Kapur, V., & Tew, S. (2010). Critical heat stress evaluation of
clothing ensembles with different levels of porosity. Ergonomics, 53(8), 1048-1058.

Bernstein, E. E., & McNally, R. J. (2018). Exercise as a buffer against difficulties with emotion
regulation: A pathway to emotional wellbeing. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 109, 29-36.

Bhagat, R. K., & Linden, P. F. (2020). Displacement ventilation: a viable ventilation strategy for
makeshift hospitals and public buildings to contain COVID-19 and other airborne diseases. Royal
Society open science, 7(9), 200680.

Bocarsly, M. E., Fasolino, M., Kane, G. A., LaMarca, E. A., Kirschen, G. W., Karatsoreos, I. N., ... &
Gould, E. (2015). Obesity diminishes synaptic markers, alters microglial morphology, and
impairs cognitive function. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 112(51), 15731-
15736.

Botha, E., Gwin, T., & Purpora, C. (2015). The effectiveness of mindfulness-based programs in reducing
stress experienced by nurses in adult hospital settings: a systematic review of quantitative
evidence protocol. JBI Evidence Synthesis, 13(10), 21-29.

Brake, D. J., & Bates, G. P. (2002). Deep body core temperatures in industrial workers under thermal
stress. Journal of occupational and environmental medicine, 44(2), 125-135.

Burneo-Garcés, C., Cruz-Quintana, F., Pérez-Garcia, M., Fernandez-Alcantara, M., Fasfous, A., & Pérez-
Marfil, M. N. (2019). Interaction between socioeconomic status and cognitive development in
children aged 7, 9, and 11 years: a cross-sectional study. Developmental neuropsychology, 44(1),
1-16.

Bursac, Z., Gauss, C. H., Williams, D. K., & Hosmer, D. W. (2008). Purposeful selection of variables in
logistic regression. Source code for biology and medicine, 3(1), 1-8.

Butterworth, P., Cherbuin, N., Sachdev, P., & Anstey, K. J. (2012). The association between financial
hardship and amygdala and hippocampal volumes: results from the PATH through life project.
Social cognitive and affective neuroscience, 7(5), 548-556.

Campbell, S. (2004). Dietary reference intakes: water, potassium, sodium, chloride, and sulfate. Clinical
Nutrition Insight, 30(6), 1-4.

Canadian Centre for Occupational Health and Safety(CCOHS).(August 4, 2016). Hot Environments -

Health Effects and First Aid. Retrieved from
https://www.ccohs.ca/oshanswers/phys_agents/heat_health.html


Canadian Centre for Occupational Health and Safety. (September 1, 2016).Industrial Ventilation.
Retrieved from https://www.ccohs.ca/oshanswers/prevention/ventilation/introduction.html

Caruso, C. C. (2014). Negative impacts of shiftwork and long work hours. Rehabilitation Nursing, 39(1),
16-25.

Cella, D., Riley, W., Stone, A., Rothrock, N., Reeve, B., Yount, S., ... & Hays, R. (2010). Initial adult
health item banks and first wave testing of the patient-reported outcomes measurement
information system (PROMIS™) network: 2005-2008. Journal of clinical epidemiology, 63(11),
1179.

Chartier, Y., & Pessoa-Silva, C. L. (2009). Natural ventilation for infection control in health-care settings.

Chan, M. Y., Na, J., Agres, P. F., Savalia, N. K., Park, D. C., & Wig, G. S. (2018). Socioeconomic
status moderates age-related differences in the brain’s functional network organization and
anatomy across the adult lifespan. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 115(22),
E5144-E5153.

Chowdhury, M. Z. I., & Turin, T. C. (2020). Variable selection strategies and its importance in clinical
prediction modelling. Family medicine and community health, 8(1).

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.(March 3, 2021). Defining Adult Obesity. Retrieved from
https://www.cdc.gov/obesity/adult/defining.html

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2021) Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD).
Retrieved from https://www.cdc.gow/ncbddd/adhd/diagnosis.html

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (May 2, 2017).Sleep and Sleep Disorders. Retrieved from
https://www.cde.gov/sleep/data_statistics.html

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (May 19, 2020). What is blood pressure?. Retrieved from
https://www.cdc.gov/bloodpressure/about.htm#:~:text=High”%20blood%20pressure%2C%20als
0%20called,blood%20pressure%20(or%20hypertension).

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (June 6, 2018). Control of Heat Stress. Retrieved from
https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/topics/heatstress/recommendations.html#:~:text=Control%200f%20
Heat%20Stress&text=Engineering%20controls%20might%20include%20those,%2C%20wet%
20floors%2C%200r%20humidity.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (August 6, 2020). Managing Diabetes in the Heat. Retrieved
from https://www.cdc.gov/diabetes/library/features/manage-diabetes-heat.html

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2017). Heat Stress Risk Factors. Retrieved from
https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/mining/UserF iles/works/pdfs/2017-125.pdf

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2022). The Effects of Diabetes on the Brain. Retrieved from
https://www.cdc.gov/diabetes/library/features/diabetes-and-your-
brain. html#:~:text=High%20blood%20sugar%20over%20time,can%20lead%20to%20vascular
%20dementia.


Chan, M. Y., Na, J., Agres, P. F., Savalia, N. K., Park, D. C., & Wig, G. S. (2018). Socioeconomic status
moderates age-related differences in the brain’s functional network organization and anatomy
across the adult lifespan. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 115(22), E5144-
E5153.

Chang, Y. K., Labban, J. D., Gapin, J. I., and Etnier, J. L. (2012). The effects of acute exercise on
cognitive performance: a meta-analysis. Brain Res. 1453, 87-101. — doi:
10.1016/j.brainres.2012.02.068

Charkoudian, N. (May 2003). Skin blood flow in adult human thermoregulation: how it works, when it
does not, and why. In Mayo clinic proceedings (Vol. 78, No. 5, pp. 603-612). Elsevier.

Chan, R. C., Shum, D., Toulopoulou, T., & Chen, E. Y. (2008). Assessment of executive functions:
Review of instruments and identification of critical issues. Archives of clinical neuropsychology,
23(2), 201-216.

Chattu, V. K., Manzar, M. D., Kumary, S., Burman, D., Spence, D. W., & Pandi-Perumal, S. R. (2019,
March). The global problem of insufficient sleep and its serious public health implications. In
Healthcare (Vol. 7, No. 1, p. 1). Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute.

Cheshire, W. P., & Fealey, R. D. (2008). Drug-induced hyperhidrosis and hypohidrosis. Drug safety,
31(2), 109-126.

Chuni, N., & Sreeramareddy, C. T. (2011). Frequency of symptoms, determinants of severe symptoms,
validity of and cut-off score for Menopause Rating Scale (MRS) as a screening tool: a cross-
sectional survey among midlife Nepalese women. BMC women's health, 11(1), 1-9.

Cities and Municipalities Competitive Index. (2020). Batangas. Retrieved from
https://cmci.dti.gov.ph/prov-profile.php?prov—Batangas& year=2020

Ciuha, U., Pogatar, T., Bogataj, L. K., Gliha, M., Nybo, L., Flouris, A. D., & Mekjavic, I. B. (2019).
Interaction between indoor occupational heat stress and environmental temperature elevations
during heat waves. Weather, climate, and society, 11(4), 755-762.

Cian, C., Barraud, P. A., Melin, B., & Raphel, C. (2001). Effects of fluid ingestion on cognitive function
after heat stress or exercise-induced dehydration. International Journal of Psychophysiology,
42(3), 243-251.

Coca, A., Quinn, T., Kim, J. H., Wu, T., Powell, J., Roberge, R., & Shaffer, R. (2017). Physiological
evaluation of personal protective ensembles recommended for use in West Africa. Disaster Med
Public Health Prep, 11(5), 580-586.

Coco, A., Jacklitsch, B., Williams, J., Kim, J. H., Musolin, K., & Turner, N. (2016). Criteria for a
recommended standard: occupational exposure to heat and hot environments. control Cefd,
editor.

Consensus Conference Panel, Watson, N. F., Badr, M. S., Belenky, G., Bliwise, D. L., Buxton, O. M., ...
& Heald, J. L. (2015). Joint consensus statement of the American Academy of Sleep Medicine
and Sleep Research Society on the recommended amount of sleep for a healthy adult:
methodology and discussion. Sleep, 38(8), 1161-1183.


Colcombe, S. J., Erickson, K. I. Scalf, P. E., Kim, J. S., Prakash, R., McAuley, E., ... & Kramer, A. F.
(2006). Aerobic exercise training increases brain volume in aging humans. The Journals of
Gerontology Series A: Biological Sciences and Medical Sciences, 61(11), 1166-1170.

Conde, D. M., Verdade, R. C., Valadares, A. L., Mella, L. F., Pedro, A. O., & Costa-Paiva, L. (2021).
Menopause and cognitive impairment: A narrative review of current knowledge. World Journal
of Psychiatry, 11(8), 412.

Daanen, H., Bose-O’Reilly, S., Brearley, M., Flouris, D. A., Gerrett, N. M., Huynen, M., ... & Van den
Hazel, P. (2021). COVID-19 and thermoregulation-related problems: _ practical
recommendations. Temperature, 8(1), 1-11.

Dababneh, A. J., Swanson, N., & Shell, R. L. (2001). Impact of added rest breaks on the productivity and
well being of workers. Ergonomics, 44(2), 164-174.

D'anci, K. E., Mahoney, C. R., Vibhakar, A., Kanter, J. H., & Taylor, H. A. (2009). Voluntary
dehydration and cognitive performance in trained college athletes. Perceptual and motor skills,
109(1), 251-269.

Davey, S. L., Lee, B. J., Robbins, T., Randeva, H., & Thake, C. D. (2021). Heat stress and PPE during
COVID-19: impact on healthcare workers' performance, safety and well-being in NHS settings.
Journal of Hospital Infection, 108, 185-188.

Deecher, D. C. (2009). Thermoregulation and menopause: Understanding the basic pathophysiology of
vasomotor symptoms. The Menopausal Transition, 175, 77-87.

Dehghan, H., Mortazavi S. B., Jafari, M.J., Meraci, M.R., Khavanin A., & Jahangiri, M. (2011).
Construct validation of a heat strain score index with structural equation modeling.

Dehghan, H., Mortazavi, S. B., Jafari, M. J., & Maracy, M. R. (2013). Cardiac strain comparison
between workers with normal weight and overweight in the hot humid weather of the Persian
Gulf region. Journal of education and health promotion, 2.

Dehghan, H., Habibi, E., Khodarahmi, B., HA, H. Y., & Hasanzadeh, A. (2013). The relationship
between observational-perceptual heat strain evaluation method and
environmental/physiological indices in warm workplace

Dehghan, H., Mortzavi, S. B., Jafari, M. J., & Maracy, M. R. (2015). Development and validation of a
questionnaire for preliminary assessment of heat stress at workplace. Journal of research in
health sciences, 15(3), 175-181.

Department of Labor and Employment. (n.d.).FAQS On Wage and Wage- Related Benefits. Retrieved
from https://owc.dole.gov.ph/faqs/8-faqs

Dehghan, H. Habibi, E.Khodarahmi, B., Yousefi, H., Akbar Hasanzadeh, A. (2012). A Survey of the

Relationship of Heat Strain Scoring Index and Wet Bulb Globe Temperature Index with
Physiological Strain Index among Men in Hot Work Environments.


Delgado-Rico, E., Soriano-Mas, C., Verdejo-Roman, J., S. Rio-Valle, J., & Verdejo-Garcia, A. (2013).
Decreased insular and increased midbrain activations during decision-making under risk in
adolescents with excess weight. Obesity, 21(8), 1662-1668.

de Menezes, S. T., Giatti, L., Brant, L. C. C., Griep, R. H., Schmidt, M. I., Duncan, B. B., ... & Barreto,
S. M. (2021). Hypertension, Prehypertension, and Hypertension Control: Association With
Decline in Cognitive Performance in the ELSA-Brasil Cohort. Hypertension, 77(2), 672-681.

Demetriou, E. A., Lampit, A., Quintana, D. S., Naismith, S. L., Song, Y. J. C., Pye, J. E., ... & Guastella,
A. J. (2018). Autism spectrum disorders: a meta-analysis of executive function. Molecular
psychiatry, 23(5), 1198-1204.

Department of Health. Department Memorandum No. 2020-0123: Interim Guidelines on the
Management of Surge Capacity through Conversion of Public Spaces to Operate as Temporary
Treatment and Monitoring Facilities for the Management of Persons under Investigation and Mild
Cases of COVID-19. Retrieved —_ from https://doh.gov.ph/sites/default/files/health-
update/dm2020-0123.pdf

Department of Labor and Employment. (n.d.).FAQS On Wage and Wage- Related Benefits. Retrieved
from https://bwe.dole.gov.ph/faqs/8-faqs

Derakhshanjazari, M., Jangjou, A., Bagherzadeh, R., Reza, M., & Monazzan, Z. Z. (2021). Prevalence
of Heat-Related Illnesses among Outdoor Workplaces Workers in Hot and Dry Areas of
Iran. Journal of Environmental Treatment Techniques, 9(1), 253-258.

Diamond, A. (2013). Executive functions. Annual review of psychology, 64, 135-168.

Ding, G., Li, J., & Lian, Z. (2020). Both short and long sleep durations are associated with cognitive
impairment among community-dwelling Chinese older adults. Medicine, 99(13).

D OBrien, P., Hinder, L. M., Callaghan, B. C., & Feldman, E. L. (2017). Neurological consequences of
obesity. The Lancet Neurology, 16(6), 465-477.

Druyan, A., Makranz, C., Moran, D., Yanovich, R., Epstein, Y., & Heled, Y. (2012). Heat tolerance in
women—reconsidering the criteria. Aviation, space, and environmental medicine, 83(1), 58-60.

Druyan, A., Atias, D., Ketko, I., Cohen-Sivan, Y., & Heled, Y. (2017). The effects of smoking and
nicotine ingestion on exercise heat tolerance. Journal of basic and clinical physiology and
pharmacology, 28(2), 167.

Durazzo, T. C., Meyerhoff, D. J., & Nixon, S. J. (2012). A comprehensive assessment of neurocognition
in middle-aged chronic cigarette smokers. Drug and alcohol dependence, 122(1-2), 105-111.

Ebejer, J. L., Medland, S. E., Van Der Werf, J., Gondro, C., Henders, A. K., Lynskey, M., ... & Duffy,
D. L. (2012). Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder in Australian adults: prevalence, persistence,
conduct problems and disadvantage.

Edvinsson, M. L., Andersson, S. E., Xu, C. B., & Edvinsson, L. (2008). Cigarette smoking leads to
reduced relaxant responses of the cutaneous microcirculation. Vascular health and risk
management, 4(3), 699.


Edwards, M. K., & Loprinzi, P. D. (2018). Comparative effects of meditation and exercise on physical
and psychosocial health outcomes: A review of randomized controlled trials. Postgraduate
medicine, 130(2), 222-228.

Eilertsen, T., Thorsen, A. L., Holm, S. E. H., Bge, T., Sorensen, L., & Lundervold, A. J. (2016). Parental
socioeconomic status and child intellectual functioning in a Norwegian sample. Scandinavian
journal of psychology, 57(5), 399-405.

Elias, P. K.; Elias, M. F.; Robbins, M. A.; Budge, M. M. (2004). Blood Pressure-Related Cognitive
Decline: Does Age Make a _ Difference? Hypertension,  44(5), 631-636.
doi:10.1161/01.HYP.0000145858.07252.99

Engle, R. W. (2002). Working memory capacity as executive attention. Current directions in
psychological science, 11(1), 19-23.

Epperson, C. N., Pittman, B., Czarkowski, K. A., Bradley, J., Quinlan, D. M., & Brown, T. E. (2011).
Impact of atomoxetine on subjective attention and memory difficulties in perimenopausal and
postmenopausal women. Menopause (New York, NY), 18(5), 542.

Erickson, K. I., Voss, M. W., Prakash, R. S., Basak, C., Szabo, A., Chaddock, L., ... & Kramer, A. F.
(2011). Exercise training increases size of hippocampus and improves memory. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences, 108(7), 3017-3022.

Farrell, M. J., Zamarripa, F., Shade, R., Phillips, P. A., McKinley, M., Fox, P. T., ... & Egan, G. F. (2008).
Effect of aging on regional cerebral blood flow responses associated with osmotic thirst and its
satiation by water drinking: a PET study. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
105(1), 382-387.

Farquhar, C. M., Sadler, L., Harvey, S. A., & Stewart, A. W. (2005). The association of hysterectomy
and menopause: a prospective cohort study. BJOG: An International Journal of Obstetrics &
Gynaecology, 112(7), 956-962.

Fayyad, J., Sampson, N. A., Hwang, I., Adamowski, T., Aguilar-Gaxiola, S., Al-Hamzawi, A., ... &
WHO World Mental Health Survey Collaborators. (2017). The descriptive epidemiology of
DSM-IV adult ADHD in the world health organization world mental health surveys. ADHD
Attention Deficit and Hyperactivity Disorders, 9(1), 47-65.

Farahat, S. A., Amin, O. R., Hamdy, H. S., & Fouad, M. M. (2021). The impact of work-related stress
on the cognition domain of executive functioning of health care workers during the COVID-19
pandemic. International Archives of Occupational and Environmental Health, 1-12.

Fieo, R., Ocepek-Welikson, K., Kleinman, M., Eimicke, J. P., Crane, P. K., Celia, D., & Teresi, J. A.
(2016). Measurement equivalence of the Patient Reported Outcomes Measurement Information
System®(PROMIS®) Applied Cognition—General Concerns, short forms in ethnically diverse
groups. Psychological test and assessment modeling.

Fink, A. (2010). Survey research methods. Retrieved from
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/288161943_Survey_Research_Methods last June 28,


Fisk, J.E., Mongormery, C., & Murphy, P.N. (2009). The Association Between the Negative Effects
Attributed to Ecstasy Use and Measure of Cognition and Mood Among Users. Experimental and
Clinical Psychopharmacology, 17(5), 326-336.

Flouris, A. D., Dinas, P. C., Ioannou, L. G., Nybo, L., Havenith, G., Kenny, G. P., & Kjellstrom, T.
(2018). Workers' health and productivity under occupational heat strain: a systematic review and
meta-analysis. The Lancet Planetary Health, 2(12), e521-e531.

Flouris, A. D., Ioannou, L. G., Dinas, P. C., Mantzios, K., Gkiata, P., Gkikas, G., ... & Kapnia, A. (2019).
Assessment of Occupational Heat Strain and Mitigation Strategies in Qatar—Summary of Key
Findings. International Labour Organization: Geneva, Switzerland.

Flouris, A. , Leonidas G. Ioannou, Petros C. Dinas, Konstantinos Mantzios, Paraskevi Gkiata, Giorgos
Gkikas, Maria Vliora, Tania Amorim, Lydia Tsoutsoubi, Areti Kapnia, Konstantinos Dallas,
Eleni Nintou, Davide J. Testa, Konstantinos Sfakianakis, Gerasimos Agaliotis. (2019).
Assessment of occupational heat strain and mitigation strategies in Qatar. Retrieved from
https://www.ilo.org/wemsp5/groups/public/---arabstates/---ro-
beirut/documents/publication/wems_723545.pdf

Folkard, S., Lombardi, D. A., & Tucker, P. T. (2005). Shiftwork: safety, sleepiness, and sleep. Industrial
health, 43(1), 20-23.

Freedman, R. R. (2014). Menopausal hot flashes: mechanisms, endocrinology, treatment. The Journal of
steroid biochemistry and molecular biology, 142, 115-120.

Fujita, M., Lee, D., Ismail, M. S., & Tochihara, Y. (2003). Seasonal effects of sleep deprivation on
thermoregulatory responses in a hot environment. Journal of Physiological Anthropology and
Applied Human Science, 22, 273— 278.

Gandy, Joan. "Water intake: validity of population assessment and recommendations." European journal
of nutrition 54.2 (2015): 11-16.

Gaoua, N., Grantham, J., Racinais, S., & El Massioui, F. (2012). Sensory displeasure reduces complex
cognitive performance in the heat. Journal of environmental psychology, 32(2), 158-163.

Gartner, M., Ghisu, M. E., Scheidegger, M., Bonke, L., Fan, Y., Stippl, A., ... & Grimm, S. (2018).
Aberrant working memory processing in major depression: evidence from multivoxel pattern
classification. Neuropsychopharmacology, 43(9), 1972-1979.

Gasecki, D., Kwarciany, M., Nyka, W., & Narkiewicz, K. (2013). Hypertension, brain damage and
cognitive decline. Current hypertension reports, 15(6), 547-558.

Georgakis, M. K., Beskou-Kontou, T., Theodoridis, I., Skalkidou, A., & Petridou, E. T. (2019). Surgical
menopause in association with cognitive function and risk of dementia: a systematic review and
meta-analysis. Psychoneuroendocrinology, 106, 9-19.

Genazzani, A. R., Pluchino, N., Luisi, S., & Luisi, M. (2007). Estrogen, cognition and female
ageing. Human reproduction update, 13(2), 175-187.


Gianaros, P. J., Kuan, D. C. H., Marsland, A. L., Sheu, L. K., Hackman, D. A., Miller, K. G., & Manuck,
S. B. (2017). Community socioeconomic disadvantage in midlife relates to cortical morphology
via neuroendocrine and cardiometabolic pathways. Cerebral cortex, 27(1), 460-473.

Gitelman, D. R. (2003). Attention and its disorders: Imaging in clinical neuroscience. British medical
bulletin, 65(1), 21-34.

Glass, K., Tait, P. W., Hanna, E. G., & Dear, K. (2015). Estimating risks of heat strain by age and sex:
A population-level simulation model. Jnternational journal of environmental research and public
health, 12(5), 5241-5255.

Goel, N., Rao, H., Durmer, J. S., & Dinges, D. F. (2009, September). Neurocognitive consequences of
sleep deprivation. In Seminars in neurology (Vol. 29, No. 4, p. 320). NIH Public Access.

Gomez-Pinilla, F., & Hillman, C. (2013). The influence of exercise on cognitive abilities. Comprehensive
Physiology, 3(1), 403-428.

Gotlib, I. H., & Joormann, J. (2010). Cognition and depression: current status and future directions.
Annual review of clinical psychology, 6, 285-312.

Grélot, L., Koulibaly, F., Maugey, N., Janvier, F., Foissaud, V., Aletti, M., ... & Sagui, E. (2016).
Moderate thermal strain in healthcare workers wearing personal protective equipment during
treatment and care activities in the context of the 2014 Ebola virus disease outbreak. The Journal
of infectious diseases, 213(9), 1462-1465.

Gruber, R. (2013). Making Room for Sleep: The Relevance of Sleep to Psychology and the Rationale for
Development of Preventative Sleep Education Programs for Children and Adolescents in the
Community. Canadian Psychology / Psychological Canadience, 54(1), 62-71.

Guerra-Carrillo, B., Katovich, K., & Bunge, S. A. (2017). Does higher education hone cognitive
functioning and learning efficacy? Findings from a large and diverse sample. PloS one, 12(8),
e0182276.

Habibi, P., Momeni, R., & Dehghan, H. (2016). The effect of body weight on heat strain indices in hot
and dry climatic conditions. Jundishapur journal of health sciences, 8(2).

Hackman, D. A., & Farah, M. J. (2009). Socioeconomic status and the developing brain. Trends in
cognitive sciences, 13(2), 65-73.

Habibi, P., Momeni, R., & Dehghan, H. (2015). Relationship of environmental, physiological, and
perceptual heat stress indices in Iranian Men. International journal of preventive medicine, 6.

Haidarimoghadam, R., Kazemi, R., Motamedzadeh, M., Golmohamadi, R., Soltanian, A.. &
Zoghipaydar, M. R. (2017). The effects of consecutive night shifts and shift length on cognitive
performance and sleepiness: a field study. International Journal of Occupational Safety and
Ergonomics, 23(2), 251-258.

Hallare, K. (2021).Senators tell PhilHealth to urgently come up with guidelines on hospital tent coverage.
Retrieved from https://newsinfo.inquirer.net/1414326/senators-urge-philhealth-to-immediately-
come-up-with-policy-guidelines-on-hospital-tent-coverage


Harvard Health (January 2019).Heat Stroke (Hyperthermia).Retrieved from
https://www.health.harvard.edu/a_to_z/heat-stroke-hyperthermia-a-to-z

Harvey, P. D. (2019). Domains of cognition and their assessment. Dialogues in clinical neuroscience,
21(3), 227

Havenith, G., & van Middendorp, H. (1990). The relative influence of physical fitness, acclimatization
state, anthropometric measures and gender on individual reactions to heat stress. European journal
of applied physiology and occupational physiology, 61(5), 419-427.

Havers, F. P., Pham, H., Taylor, C. A., Whitaker, M., Patel, K., Anglin, O., ... & McMorrow, M. (2022).
COVID-19-associated hospitalizations among vaccinated and unvaccinated adults 18 years or
older in 13 US States, January 2021 to April 2022. JAMA Internal Medicine, 182(10), 1071-1081.

HealthMeasures (July 18, 2023). PROMIS Reference Populations. Retrieved from
https://www. healthmeasures.net/score-and-interpret/interpret-scores/promis/reference-
populations

Heffernan, T. M.; Carling, A.; O’Neill, T. S.; Hamilton, C. (2014). Smoking impedes executive function
and related prospective memory. Irish Journal of Psychological Medicine, 31(3), 159-165.
doi:10.1017/ipm.2014.17

Hermida, M. J., Shalom, D. E., Segretin, M. S., Goldin, A. P., Abril, M. C., Lipina, S. J., & Sigman, M.
(2019). Risks for child cognitive development in rural contexts. Frontiers in psychology, 9, 2735.

Higuchi, K. A. S., & Donald, J. G. (2002). Thinking processes used by nurses in clinical decision making.
Journal of Nursing Education, 41(4), 145-153.

Hunt, A. P. (2011). Heat strain, hydration status, and symptoms of heat illness in surface mine workers
(Doctoral dissertation, Queensland University of Technology).

Hodges, M. (2012). The effects of dehydration on cognitive functioning, mood, and physical
performance. The Corinthian, 13(1), 2.

Holford, T. R., Meza, R., Warner, K. E., Meernik, C., Jeon, J., Moolgavkar, S. H., & Levy, D. T. (2014).
Tobacco control and the reduction in smoking-related premature deaths in the United States,
1964-2012. Jama, 311(2), 164-171.

Hyde, J. S. (2016). Sex and cognition: gender and cognitive functions. Current opinion in neurobiology,
38, 53-56.

Tadecola, C., Yaffe, K., Biller, J., Bratzke, L. C., Faraci, F. M., Gorelick, P. B., ... & Zeki Al Hazzouri,
A. (2016). Impact of hypertension on cognitive function: a scientific statement from the American
Heart Association. Hypertension, 68(6), e67-e94.

Inoue, Y., Kuwahara, T., & Araki, T. (2004). Maturation- and Aging-related Changes in Heat Loss
Effector Function. Journal of PHYSIOLOGICAL ANTHROPOLOGY and Applied Human
Science, 23(6), 289-294. doi:10.2114/jpa.23.289


International Diabetes Federation. (March 26, 2020). What is Diabetes.Retrieved from
https://www.idf.org/aboutdiabetes/what-is-diabetes.html

International Labour Organization. (2015). Rest Periods: Definitions and Dimensions. Retrieved from
https://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---ed_protect/---protrav/---
travail/documents/publication/wems_491374.pdf

Iverson, G. L., Marsh, J. M., Connors, E. J., & Terry, D. P. (2021). Normative Reference Values,
Reliability, and Item-Level Symptom Endorsement for the PROMIS® v2. 0 Cognitive Function-
Short Forms 4a, 6a and 8a. Archives of Clinical Neuropsychology.

Jacklitsch, B., Williams, J., Musolin, K., Coca, A., Kim, J. H., & Tumer, N. (2016). Occupational
exposure to heat and hot environments. US Department of Health and Human Services, Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention, NIOSH: Cincinnati, OH, USA, 1-159.

James, S. L., Abate, D., Abate, K. H., Abay, S. M., Abbafati, C., Abbasi, N., ... & Briggs, A. M. (2018).
Global, regional, and national incidence, prevalence, and years lived with disability for 354
diseases and injuries for 195 countries and territories, 1990-2017: a systematic analysis for the
Global Burden of Disease Study 2017. The Lancet, 392(10159), 1789-1858.

Jancke, L. (2018). Sex/gender differences in cognition, neurophysiology, and neuroanatomy.
F1000Research, 7.

Jansen, A., Houben, K., & Roefs, A. (2015). A cognitive profile of obesity and its translation into new
interventions. Frontiers in Psychology, 6, 1807.

Jamal, A., King, B. A., Neff, L. J., Whitmill, J., Babb, S. D., & Graffunder, C. M. (2016). Current
cigarette smoking among adults—United States, 2005-2015. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly
Report, 65(44), 1205-1211.

Jéquier, E., & Constant, F. (2010). Water as an essential nutrient: the physiological basis of
hydration. European journal of clinical nutrition, 64(2), 115-123.

Jha, A. K. (2018). Patient Safety-A Grand Challenge for Healthcare Professiona Is and Policymakers
Alike. A Roundtable at the Grand Challenges Meet ing of the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation.

Jha, A. K., Larizgoitia, I., Audera-Lopez, C., Prasopa-Plaizier, N., Waters, H., & Bates, D. W. (2013).
The global burden of unsafe medical care: analytic modelling of observational studies. BMJ
quality & safety, 22(10), 809-815.

Jhangiani, R. S., Chiang, I. A., & Price, P. C. (2015). Research methods in psychology-2nd Canadian
Edition. BC Campus.

Jugovac, D.; & Cavallero, C. (2011). Twenty-four hours of total sleep deprivation selectively impairs
attentional networks. Experimental Psychology,59(3), 115-123.

Kakamu, T., Hidaka, T., Hayakawa, T., Kumagai, T., Jinnouchi, T., Tsuji, M., ... & Fukushima, T. (2015).

Risk and preventive factors for heat illness in radiation decontamination workers after the
Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant accident. Journal of occupational health, 14-0218.


Kanaya, A. M., Barrett-Connor, E., Gildengorin, G., & Yaffe, K. (2004). Change in cognitive function
by glucose tolerance status in older adults: a 4-year prospective study of the Rancho Bernardo
study cohort. Archives of internal medicine, 164(12), 1327-1333.

Kanda, J., Wakasugi, M., Kondo, Y., Ueno, S., Kaneko, H., Okada, Y., ... & Yokobori, S. (2023). Heat
stroke management during the COVID-19 pandemic: Recommendations from the experts in
Japan. Acute Medicine & Surgery, 10(1), e827.

Kaliyaperumal, D., Elango, Y., Alagesan, M., & Santhanakrishanan, I. (2017). Effects of sleep
deprivation on the cognitive performance of nurses working in shift. Journal of clinical and
diagnostic research: JCDR, 11(8), CC01.

Kaywhite, M., Hodous, T. K., & Vercruyssen, M. (1991). Effects of thermal environment and chemical
protective clothing on work tolerance, physiological responses, and subjective ratings.
Ergonomics, 34(4), 445-457.

Kakitsuba, N., Mekjavic, I. B., & Katsuura, T. (2007). Individual variability in the peripheral and core
interthreshold zones. Journal of physiological anthropology, 26(3), 403-408.

Kaliyaperumal, D., Elango, Y., Alagesan, M., & Santhanakrishanan, I. (2017). Effects of sleep
deprivation on the cognitive performance of nurses working in shift. Journal of clinical and
diagnostic research: JCDR, 11(8), CC01.

Kays, J. L., Hurley, R. A., & Taber, K. H. (2012). The dynamic brain: neuroplasticity and mental
health. The Journal of neuropsychiatry and clinical neurosciences, 24(2), 118-124.

Kazemi, R., Haidarimoghadam, R., Motamedzadeh, M., Golmohamadi, R., Soltanian, A., &
Zoghipaydar, M. R. (2016). Effects of shift work on cognitive performance, sleep quality, and
sleepiness among petrochemical control room operators. Journal of circadian rhythms, 14.

Kenny, G. P., & Jay, O. (2011). Thermometry, calorimetry, and mean body temperature during heat
stress. Comprehensive Physiology, 3(4), 1689-1719.

Kenny, G. P., Sigal, R. J., & McGinn, R. (2016). Body temperature regulation in diabetes. Temperature,
3(1), 119-145.

Kenny, G. P., Yardley, J., Brown, C., Sigal, R. J., & Jay, O. (2010). Heat stress in older individuals and
patients with common chronic diseases. Cmaj, 182(10), 1053-1060.

Kenefick, R. W., & Sawka, M. N. (2007). Hydration at the work site. Journal of the American College
of Nutrition, 26(sup5), 597S-603S.

Keramidas, M. E., & Botonis, P. G. (2021). Short-term sleep deprivation and human thermoregulatory
function during thermal challenges. Experimental Physiology, 106(5), 1139-1148.

Kingma, B. R., Roijendijk, L. M., Van Maanen, L., Van Rijn, H., & Van Beurden, M. H. (2021). Time

perception and timed decision task performance during passive heat stress. Temperature, 8(1),
53-63.


Kjellstrom, T. (2009). Climate change, direct heat exposure, health and well-being in low and middle-
income countries. Global Health Action, 2.

Knowlden, A. P. (2011). Theory of Planned Behavior based predictors of sleep intentions and behaviors
in undergraduate college students at a Midwestern university (Doctoral dissertation, University
of Cincinnati).

Ko, L. W., Komarov, O., Hairston, W. D., Jung, T. P., & Lin, C. T. (2017). Sustained attention in real
classroom settings: An EEG study. Frontiers in human neuroscience, 11, 388.

Kofler, M. J., Sarver, D. E., Harmon, S. L., Moltisanti, A., Aduen, P. A., Soto, E. F., & Ferretti, N.
(2018). Working memory and organizational skills problems in ADHD. Journal of Child
Psychology and Psychiatry, 59(1), 57-67.

Krause, D. N., Duckles, S. P., & Pelligrino, D. A. (2006). Influence of sex steroid hormones on
cerebrovascular function. Journal of applied physiology, 101(4), 1252-1261

Krieger, V., & Amador-Campos, J. A. (2018). Assessment of executive function in ADHD adolescents:
contribution of performance tests and rating scales. Child Neuropsychology, 24(8), 1063-1087.

Krishnadas, R., McLean, J., Batty, G. D., Burns, H., Deans, K. A., Ford, I., ... & Cavanagh, J. (2013).
Socioeconomic deprivation and cortical morphology: psychological, social, and biological
determinants of ill health study. Psychosomatic medicine, 75(7), 616-623.

Krishnamurthy, M., Ramalingam, P., Perumal, K., Kamalakannan, L. P., Chinnadurai, J., Shanmugam,
R,, ... & Venugopal, V. (2017). Occupational heat stress impacts on health and productivity in a
steel industry in Southern India. Safety and health at work, 8(1), 99-104.

Kuelz, A. K., Hohagen, F., & Voderholzer, U. (2004). Neuropsychological performance in obsessive-
compulsive disorder: a critical review. Biological psychology, 65(3), 185-236.

Kuklane, K., Lundgren, K., Gao, C., Léndahl, J., Hornyanszky, E. D., Ostergren, P. O., ... & Kjellstrom,
T. (2015). Ebola: improving the design of protective clothing for emergency workers allows them
to better cope with heat stress and help to contain the epidemic. Annals of Occupational Hygiene,
59(2), 258-261.

Lai, P. S. M. (2013). Validating instruments of measure: Is it really necessary?. Malaysian family
physician: the official journal of the Academy of Family Physicians of Malaysia, 8(1), 2.

Lai, J. S., Wagner, L. I., Jacobsen, P. B., & Cella, D. (2014). Self-reported cognitive concerns and
abilities: two sides of one coin?. Psycho-Oncology, 23(10), 1133-1141.

Lawes, C. M., Vander Hoorn, S., & Rodgers, A. (2008). Global burden of blood-pressure-related disease,
2001. The Lancet, 371(9623), 1513-1518.

Lee, J., Venugopal, V., Latha, P. K., Alhadad, S. B., Leow, C. H. W., Goh, N. Y. D., ... & Lee, J. K. W.
(2020). Heat Stress and Thermal Perception amongst Healthcare Workers during the COVID-19
Pandemic in India and Singapore. International Journal of Environmental Research and Public
Health, 17(21), 8100.


Lee, S., Buring, J. E., Cook, N. R., & Grodstein, F. (2006). The relation of education and income to
cognitive function among professional women. Neuroepidemiology, 26(2), 93-101.

Lehto, J. E., Juujarvi, P., Kooistra, L., & Pulkkinen, L. (2003). Dimensions of executive functioning:
Evidence from children. British Journal of Developmental Psychology, 21(1), 59-80.

Lenzner, Timo, Cornelia Neuert, and W. Otto. "Cognitive pretesting." GESIS Survey Guidelines (2016):
3.

Lezak, M. D., Howieson, D. B., Loring, D. W., & Fischer, J. S. (2004). Neuropsychological assessment.
Oxford University Press, USA.

Li, H., Ren, J., Li, ¥., Wu, Q., & Wei, J. (2023). Oxidative stress: The nexus of obesity and cognitive
dysfunction in diabetes. Frontiers in Endocrinology, 14, 1134025

Lim, J., Teng, J., Wong, K. F., & Chee, M. W. (2016). Modulating rest-break length induces differential
recruitment of automatic and controlled attentional processes upon task
reengagement. Neuroimage, 134, 64-73.

Liu, K., Sun, G., Li, B., Jiang, Q., Yang, X., Li, M., ... & Liu, Y. (2013). The impact of passive
hyperthermia on human attention networks: an {MRI study. Behavioural Brain Research, 243,
220-230.

Liu, Q., Luo, D., Haase, J. E., Guo, Q., Wang, X. Q., Liu, S., ... & Yang, B. X. (2020). The experiences
of health-care providers during the COVID-19 crisis in China: a qualitative study. The Lancet
Global Health, 8(6), €790-e798.

Lynn, A. G., Gagnon, D., Binder, K., Boushel, R. C., & Kenny, G. P. (2012). Divergent roles of plasma
osmolality and the baroreflex on sweating and skin blood flow. American Journal of Physiology-
Regulatory, Integrative and Comparative Physiology, 302(5), R634-R642

Lytle, M. E., Vander Bilt, J., Pandav, R. S., Dodge, H. H., & Ganguli, M. (2004). Exercise level and
cognitive decline: the MoVIES project. Alzheimer Disease & Associated Disorders, 18(2), 57-
64.

Los, K., Chmielewski, J., & Luczyiski, W. (2020). Relationship between Executive Functions,
Mindfulness, Stress, and Performance in Pediatric Emergency Simulations. International journal
of environmental research and public health, 17(6), 2040.

Lépez-Sanchez, J. I., & Hancock, P. A. (2018). Thermal effects on cognition: a new quantitative
synthesis. International Journal of Hyperthermia, 34(4), 423-431.

Luckhaupt, S.E., Tak, S.W.Z., & Calvert, G.M. (2010). The prevalence of short sleep duration by industry
and occupation in the National Health Interview Survey. Sleep, 33, 149-159.

Lundgren, K., Kuklane, K., Gao, C., & Holmer, I. (2013). Effects of heat stress on working populations
when facing climate change. Industrial health, 51(1), 3-15.


Malcolm, R. A., Cooper, S., Folland, J. P., Tyler, C. J., & Sunderland, C. (2018). Passive heat exposure
alters perception and executive function. Frontiers in physiology, 9, 585.

Maldonado, T., Orr, J. M., Goen, J. R., & Bernard, J. A. (2020). Age differences in the subcomponents
of executive functioning. The Journals of Gerontology: Series B, 75(6), €31-e55.

Mandolesi, L., Polverino, A., Montuori, S., Foti, F., Ferraioli, G., Sorrentino, P., & Sorrentino, G. (2018).
Effects of physical exercise on cognitive functioning and wellbeing: biological and psychological
benefits. Frontiers in psychology, 9, 509.

Martin Rios, R., Lopez-Torrecillas, F., & Martin Tamayo, I. (2021). Executive Functions in Tobacco Use
Disorder: New Challenges and Opportunities. Frontiers in Psychiatry, 12, 285.

Masento, N. A., John, A., Wilton, V., Benzesin, V., Field, D. T., Butler, L. T., & van Reekum, C. M.
(2014). Investigating the effects of acute water supplementation on cognitive performance and
mood in young and older adults. Appetite, (83), 355.

May, C. P., Einstein, G. O., & Freedman, S. (2013). A Five-Day Unit Lesson Plan for High School
Psychology Teachers. Memory, 6-7.

Mayes, S. D., & Calhoun, S. L. (2006). WISC-IV and WISC-III profiles in children with ADHD. Journal
of Attention Disorders, 9(3), 486-493.

Maslach, C., & Leiter, M. P. (2008). Early predictors of job burnout and engagement. Journal of applied
psychology, 93(3), 498.

Mazloumi, A., Golbabaei, F., Khani, S. M., Kazemi, Z., Hosseini, M., Abbasinia, M., & Dehghan, S. F.
(2014). Evaluating effects of heat stress on cognitive function among workers in a hot industry.
Health promotion perspectives, 4(2), 240.

McCartney, D., Desbrow, B., & Irwin, C. (2017). The effect of fluid intake following dehydration on
subsequent athletic and cognitive performance: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Sports
medicine-open, 3, 1-23

McCotter, L., Douglas, P., Laur, C., Gandy, J., Fitzpatrick, L., Rajput-Ray, M., & Ray, S. (2016).
Hydration education: developing, piloting and evaluating a hydration education package for
general practitioners. BMJ open, 6(12), e012004.

McLellan, T. M., Daanen, H. A., & Cheung, S. S. (2013). Encapsulated environment. Comprehensive
Physiology, 3(3), 1363-1391.

McNamara, M., Batur, P., & DeSapri, K. T. (2015). Perimenopause. Annals of internal medicine, 162(3),
ITC1-ITC16.

Méndez-Lazaro, P. A., Pérez-Cardona, C. M., Rodriguez, E., Martinez, O., Taboas, M., Bocanegra, A.,

& Méndez-Tejeda, R. (2018). Climate change, heat, and mortality in the tropical urban area of
San Juan, Puerto Rico. /nternational journal of biometeorology, 62(5), 699-707.


Mehrert, P., Bréde, P., & Griefahn, B. (2002). Gender-related difference in sweat loss and its impact on
exposure limits to heat stress. International journal of industrial ergonomics, 29(6), 343-351.

Messeri, A., Bonafede, M., Pietrafesa, E., Pinto, I., de’Donato, F., & Crisci, A. (2021). A web survey to
evaluate the thermal stress among healthcare workers during the COVID-19 pandemic in Italy.
Dentist, 5, 3.

Mills, K. T., Bundy, J. D., Kelly, T. N., Reed, J. E., Kearney, P. M., Reynolds, K., ... & He, J. (2016).
Global disparities of hypertension prevalence and control: a systematic analysis of population-
based studies from 90 countries. Circulation, 134(6), 441-450.

Moghadas, S. M., Vilches, T. N., Zhang, K., Wells, C. R., Shoukat, A., Singer, B. H., ... & Galvani, A.
P. (2020). The impact of vaccination on COVID-19 outbreaks in the United States (preprint).

Momtaz, Y. A., Ibrahim, R., Hamid, T. A., & Chai, S. T. (2015). Smoking and cognitive impairment
among older persons in Malaysia. American Journal of Alzheimer's Disease & Other
Dementias®, 30(4), 405-411.

Montain, S. J., Latzka, W. A., & Sawka, M. N. (1999). Fluid replacement recommendations for training
in hot weather. Military medicine, 164(7), 502-508.

Morales, N. (2021). Philippines seeks to lift medical capacity as COVID-19 cases top one million.
Retrieved from https://www.reuters.com/world/asia-pacific/philippines-records-more-than-one-
million-coronavirus-cases-2021-04-26/

Moriguchi, Y., & Shinohara, I. (2019). Socioeconomic disparity in prefrontal development during early
childhood. Scientific reports, 9(1), 1-8.

Morris, N. B., Jay, O., Flouris, A. D., Casanueva, A., Gao, C., Foster, J., ... & Nybo, L. (2020).
Sustainable solutions to mitigate occupational heat strain—an umbrella review of physiological
effects and global health perspectives. Environmental Health, 19(1), 1-24.

Moussa, S., Achkouty, I., Malaeb, D., Ghosn, A., Obeid, S., & Hallit, S. (2023). Personality traits and
perceived cognitive function in lebanese healthcare professionals. BMC psychology, 11(1), 90.

Muginshtein-Simkovitch, E., Dagan, Y., Cohen-Zion, M., Waissengrin, B., Ketko, I., & Heled, Y.
(2015). Heat tolerance after total and partial acute sleep deprivation. Chronobiology international,
32(5), 717-724.

Murman, D. L. (2015, August). The impact of age on cognition. In Seminars in hearing (Vol. 36, No. 3,
p. 111). Thieme Medical Publishers

National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. (2018). Crossing the global quality chasm:
Improving health care worldwide.

National Alliance on Mental Illness. (August 2017). Depression. Retrieved from
https://www.nami.org/A bout-Mental-IlIness/Mental-Health-Conditions/Depression


National Health Service. (February 1, 2019). Hysterectomy. Retrieved from
https://www.nhs.uk/conditions/hysterectomy/considerations/

National Institutes of Health. (January 24, 2018). Do Memory Problems Always Mean Alzheimer’s
Disease. Retrieved from https://www.nia.nih.gov/health/do-memory-problems-always-mean-
alzheimers-disease

National Institutes of Health. (June 27, 2017). What is Menopause. Retrieved from
https://www.nia.nih.gov/health/what-
menopause#:~:text=Menopause%20is%20a%20point%20in, between%20ages%2045%20and%
2055.

National Institutes of Health. (n.d.). Calculate Your Body Mass Index. Retrieved from
https://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health/educational/lose_w/BMI/bmicalc.htm

National Institutes of Health. (n.d.). Depression. Retrieved from
https://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/topics/depression/index.shtml

Nevo, B. (1985). Face validity revisited. Journal of Educational Measurement, 22(4), 287-293.

New Zealand Ministry of Health. (June 4, 2015). Definitions of Smoking Status. Retrieved from
https://www.health.govt.nz/our-work/preventative-health-wellness/tobacco-control/tobacco-
control-information-practitioners/definitions-smoking-status

Nunnally J. C., Bernstein I.H. (1994). Psychometric theory. New York: McGrawHill

O’Brien, C., Blanchard, L. A., Cadarette, B. S., Endrusick, T. L., Xu, X., Berglund, L. G., ... & Hoyt, R.
W. (2011). Methods of evaluating protective clothing relative to heat and cold stress: thermal
manikin, biomedical modeling, and human testing. Journal of occupational and environmental
hygiene, 8(10), 588-599.

Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA). (September 15, 2017). Section III: Chapter 4
Heat Stress. Retrieved from
https://www.osha.gov/dts/osta/otm/otm_iii/otm_iii_4.htm]#:~:text=Heat%20Stress%20%E2%8
0%93%20The%20net%20heat,stress%20(e.g.%2C%20sweating).

Occupational Safety and Health Administration (n.d.). COVID-19 Guidance on the Use of Cloth Face
Coverings while Working Indoors in Hot and Humid Conditions. Retrieved from
https://www.osha.gov/sites/default/files/covid-19-cloth-coverings-indoor-heat.pdf

Occupational Safety and Health Administration (n.d.). About Work/Rest Schedules. Retrieved from
https://www.osha.gov/heat/heat-index/work-rest-schedules

Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA). (n.d). Overview: Working in Outdoor and
Indoor Heat Environments. Retrieved from https://www.osha.gov/heat-
exposure#:~:text=Federal%200SHA %20has%20a%20General,employees.%E2%80%9D%20T
he%200SHA%20Technical%20Manual

Omar, A. K. A. E., Dahesh, S. M., Ellakwa, D. E. S., Gomaa, M. K., Abdulsamad, B., Hanafy, R., ... &
Alamrawy, R. G. (2022). Cognitive impairment in health care workers recovering from COVID-
19 infection: a cross-sectional comparative study. Middle East Current Psychiatry, 29(1), 79.


O'Neal, E. K., & Bishop, P. (2010). Effects of work in a hot environment on repeated performances of
multiple types of simple mental tasks. International Journal of Industrial Ergonomics, 40(1), 77-
81.

Panter-Brick, C. (2003). Issues of work intensity, pace, and sustainability in relation to work context
and nutritional status. American Journal of Human Biology, 15(4), 498-513.

Pantoni, L. (2010). Cerebral small vessel disease: from pathogenesis and clinical characteristics to
therapeutic challenges. The Lancet Neurology, 9(7), 689-701.

Parameswari, P., Chethan, N., & Saravana Babu, C. (2017). Neurochemicals and behavioural alterations
in sleep deprivation: a revisit. J. Dement, 1, 104.

PBS. (2000). Night Shift Glossary. Retrieved from
http://www. pbs.org/livelyhood/nightshift/glossary.html

Peralta-ramirez, M. (2018). professionals: influence of burnout on decision making. An. Sist. Sanit.
Navar, 41(2), 171-180.

Périard, J. D., Racinais, S., & Sawka, M. N. (2015). Adaptations and mechanisms of human heat
acclimation: applications for competitive athletes and sports. Scandinavian journal of medicine
& science in sports, 25, 20-38.

Peters, M. & Rabins, P. (January 29, 2017). Cognitive Impairment, Retrieved from
https://www.hopkinsguides.com/hopkins/view/Johns_Hopkins_Psychiatry_Guide/787027/all/C
ognitive_Impairment

Peters, R. (2006). Ageing and the brain: This article is part of a series on ageing edited by Professor Chris
Bulpitt. Postgraduate medical journal, 82(964), 84-88.

Peterson, K. H., & Muckey, E. J. C. (2022). Deployment and Operation of Outdoor Treatment Tents
During the COVID-19 Pandemic. Disaster Medicine and Public Health Preparedness, 16(2), 460-
463.

Popkin, B. M., D'Anci, K. E., & Rosenberg, I. H. (2010). Water, hydration, and health. Nutrition reviews,
68(8), 439-458.

Potter, A. W., Gonzalez, J. A., & Xu, X. (2015). Ebola response: modeling the risk of heat stress from
personal protective clothing. PLoS One, 10(11), e0143461.

Presser, S., & Blair, J. (1994). Survey pretesting: Do different methods produce different results?
In P.V. Marsden (Ed.), Sociological Methodology, 24, 73-104. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.

Prochaska, J. J., Das, S., & Young-Wolff, K. C. (2017). Smoking, mental illness, and public health.
Annual review of public health, 38, 165-185.

PROMIS. (June 25, 2019). Cognitive Function: A brief guide to the PROMIS Cognitive Function

Instruments. Retrieved from
http://www. healthmeasures.net/images/PROMIS/manuals/PROMIS_Cognitive_Function_Scori
ng_Manual.pdf


Pilcher, J. J., Nadler, E., & Busch, C. (2002). Effects of hot and cold temperature exposure on
performance: a meta-analytic review. Ergonomics, 45(10), 682-698.

Pross, N. (2017). Effects of dehydration on brain functioning: A life-span perspective. Annals of Nutrition
and Metabolism, 70(Suppl. 1), 30-36.

Qian, S., Li, M., Li, G., Liu, K., Li, B., Jiang, Q., ... & Sun, G. (2015). Environmental heat stress enhances
mental fatigue during sustained attention task performing: evidence from an ASL perfusion study.
Behavioural brain research, 280, 6-15.

Quinn, T. D., Pettee Gabriel, K., Siddique, J., Aaby, D., Whitaker, K. M., Lane-Cordova, A., ... & Barone
Gibbs, B. (2020). Sedentary time and physical activity across occupational
classifications. American Journal of Health Promotion, 34(3), 247-256.

Ramsey JD, Bernard TE. Heat stress. Chapter 22. In: Harris RL, editor. Patty's industrial hygiene. 5th
edition. New York: John Wiley and Sons; 2000. pp. 925-84

Rahman, M. S., Harun, M. G. D., Sumon, S. A., Mohona, T. M., Abdullah, S. A. H. M., Khan, M. N. H.,
.. & Anwar, M. M. U. (2022). Hospitalization and Mortality by Vaccination Status among
COVID-19 Patients Aged> 25 Years in Bangladesh: Results from a Multicenter Cross-Sectional
Study. Vaccines, 10(12), 1987.

Rajapaksha, U. (2020). Environmental Heat Stress on Indoor Environments in Shallow, Deep and
Covered Atrium Plan Form Office Buildings in Tropics. Climate, 8(2), 36.

Rav-Acha, M., Hadad, E., Heled, Y., Moran, D. S., & Epstein, Y. (2004). Fatal exertional heat stroke: a
case series. The American journal of the medical sciences, 328(2), 84-87.

Raz, N., Rodrigue, K. M., Kennedy, K. M., & Acker, J. D. (2007). Vascular health and longitudinal
changes in brain and cognition in middle-aged and older adults. Neuropsychology, 21(2), 149.

Razu, S. R., Yasmin, T., Arif, T. B., Islam, M. S., Islam, S. M. S., Gesesew, H. A., & Ward, P. (2021).
Challenges faced by healthcare professionals during the COVID-19 pandemic: a qualitative
inquiry from Bangladesh. Frontiers in public health, 1024.

Red Cross Red Crescent Climate Centre, 2023. (2023). Extreme Heat during the COVID-19 pandemic
[PDF]. Retrieved from
https://climatecentre.org/downloads/files/HWG%20appendix%20Extreme%20Heat%20during
%20the%20COVID-19%20pandemic.pdf

Relf, R., Willmott, A., Mee, J., Gibson, O., Saunders, A., Hayes, M., & Maxwell, N. (2018). Females
exposed to 24 h of sleep deprivation do not experience greater physiological strain, but do
perceive heat illness symptoms more severely, during exercise-heat stress. Journal of sports
sciences, 36(3), 348-355.

Rock, P. L., Roiser, J. P., Riedel, W. J., & Blackwell, A. D. (2014). Cognitive impairment in depression:
a systematic review and meta-analysis. Psychological medicine, 44(10), 2029.


Rodriguez-Sanchez, E., Mora-Simén, S., Patino-Alonso, M. C., Garcia-Garcia, R., Escribano-
Hernandez, A., Garcia-Ortiz, L., ... & Gémez-Marcos, M. A. (2011). Prevalence of cognitive
impairment in individuals aged over 65 in an urban area: DERIVA study. BMC neurology, 11(1),
1-13.

Rogerson, S., Brearley, M., Meir, R., & Brooks, L. (2020). Influence of age, geographical region, and
work unit on heat strain symptoms: a cross-sectional survey of electrical utility workers. Journal
of occupational and environmental hygiene, 17(11-12), 515-522.

Rosner, E. (2020). Adverse effects of prolonged mask use among healthcare professionals during
COVID-19. J Infect Dis Epidemiol, 6(3), 130.

Rouch, I., Wild, P., Ansiau, D., & Marquié, J. C. (2005). Shiftwork experience, age and cognitive
performance. Ergonomics, 48(10), 1282-1293.

Rowlinson, S., YunyanJia, A., Li, B., & ChuanjingJu, C. (2014). Management of climatic heat stress risk
in construction: a review of practices, methodologies, and future research. Accident Analysis &
Prevention, 66, 187-198.

Rutstein, D. D., Mullan, R. J., Frazier, T. M., Halperin, W. E., Melius, J. M., & Sestito, J. P. (1983).
Sentinel Health Events (occupational): a basis for physician recognition and public health
surveillance. American journal of public health, 73(9), 1054-1062.

Ryan, J., Scali, J., Carriere, I., Amieva, H., Rouaud, O., Berr, C., ... & Ancelin, M. L. (2014). Impact of
a premature menopause on cognitive function in later life. BJOG: An International Journal of
Obstetrics & Gynaecology, 121(13), 1729-1739.

Ryan, J., Carriére, I., Scali, J., Ritchie, K., & Ancelin, M. L. (2009). Life-time estrogen exposure and
cognitive functioning in later life. Psychoneuroendocrinology, 34(2), 287-298.

Saffer, B. Y., Lanting, S. C., Koehle, M. S., Klonsky, E. D., & Iverson, G. L. (2015). Assessing cognitive
impairment using PROMIS® applied cognition-abilities scales in a medical outpatient sample.
Psychiatry Research, 226(1), 169-172.

San Chang, Y., Wu, Y. H., Hsu, C. Y., Tang, S. H., Yang, L. L., & Su, S. F. (2011). Impairment of
perceptual and motor abilities at the end of a night shift is greater in nurses working fast rotating
shifts. Sleep medicine, 12(9), 866-869.

Sangoseni, O., Hellman, M., & Hill, C. (2013). Development and validation of a questionnaire to assess
the effect of online learning on behaviors, attitudes, and clinical practices of physical therapists
in the United States regarding evidenced-based clinical practice. Internet Journal of Allied Health
Sciences and Practice, 11(2), 7.

Sawka, M. N., Cheuvront, S. N., & Carter, R. (2005). Human water needs. Nutrition reviews,
63(suppl_1), $30-S39.

Sawka, M. N., & Montain, S. J. (2000). Fluid and electrolyte supplementation for exercise heat stress.
The American journal of clinical nutrition, 72(2), 564S-572S.


Scholz, A., Ghadiri, A., Singh, U., Wendsche, J., Peters, T., & Schneider, S. (2018). Functional work
breaks in a high-demanding work environment: an experimental field study. Ergonomics, 61(2),
255-264.

Schwartz, J. (2005). Who is sensitive to extremes of temperature? A case-only analysis. Epidemiology,
67-72.

Schmit, C., Hausswirth, C., Le Meur, Y., & Duffield, R. (2017). Cognitive functioning and heat strain:
performance responses and protective strategies. Sports Medicine, 47(7), 1289-1302.

Schwartz, J. (2005). Who is sensitive to extremes of temperature? A case-only analysis. Epidemiology,
67-72.

Secher, M., & Ritz, P. (2012). Hydration and cognitive performance. The journal of nutrition, health &
aging, 16, 325-329.

Sela, T., & Lavidor, M. (2014). High-level cognitive functions in healthy subjects. In The stimulated
brain (pp. 299-329). Academic Press.

Sison, J., Divinagracia, R., & Nailes, J. (2020). Asian management of hypertension: Current status, home
blood pressure, and specific concerns in Philippines (a country report). The Journal of Clinical
Hypertension, 22(3), 504-507.

Shaheen, N. A., Alqahtani, A. A., Assiri, H., Alkhodair, R., & Hussein, M. A. (2018). Public knowledge
of dehydration and fluid intake practices: variation by participants’ characteristics. BMC public
health, 18(1), 1-8.

Shwetha, B., & Sudhakar, H. (2012). Influence of shift work on cognitive performance in male business
process outsourcing employees. Indian journal of occupational and environmental medicine,
16(3), 114.

Slawomirski, L., Auraaen, A., & Klazinga, N. S. (2017). The economics of patient safety: Strengthening
a value-based approach to reducing patient harm at national level.

Speakman, J. R. (2018). Obesity and thermoregulation. Handbook of clinical neurology, 156, 431-443.
Spector JT , Masuda YJ, Wolff NHet al. (2019) Heat exposure and occupational injuries: review
of the literature and implications. Curr Environ Health Rep; 6: 286-96.

Stachenfeld, N. S. (2014). Hormonal changes during menopause and the impact on fluid
regulation. Reproductive Sciences, 21(5), 555-561.

Stern, Y., MacKay-Brandt, A., Lee, S., McKinley, P., McIntyre, K., Razlighi, Q., ... & Sloan, R. P.
(2019). Effect of aerobic exercise on cognition in younger adults: a randomized clinical trial.
Neurology, 92(9), e905-e916.

Steinborn, M. B., & Huestegge, L. (2016). A walk down the lane gives wings to your brain. Restorative

benefits of rest breaks on cognition and self-control. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 30(5), 795-
805.


Stubblefield, Z. M., Cleary, M. A., Garvey, S. E., & Eberman, L. E. (2013). Effects of active
hyperthermia on cognitive performance.

Sun, G., Yang, X., Jiang, Q., Liu, K., Li, B., Li, L., ... & Li, M. (2012). Hyperthermia impairs the
executive function using the Attention Network Test. Jnternational Journal of Hyperthermia,
28(7), 621-626.

Suhr, J. A., Hall, J., Patterson, S. M., & Niinisté, R. T. (2004). The relation of hydration status to
cognitive performance in healthy older adults. Jnternational journal of psychophysiology, 53(2),
121-125.

Sun, J., Zhao, R., Yang, X., Deng, H., Zhu, Y., Chen, Y., ... & Qin, W. (2020). Alteration of brain gray
matter density after 24 h of sleep deprivation in healthy adults. Frontiers in Neuroscience, 14,
754,

Székely, M., & Garai, J. (2018). Thermoregulation and age. Handbook of clinical neurology, 156, 377-
395.

Taherdoost, H. (2016). Validity and reliability of the research instrument; how to test the validation of a
questionnaire/survey in a research. How to test the validation of a questionnaire/survey in a
research (August 10, 2016).

Tan, X. R., Low, I. C., Stephenson, M. C., Kok, T., Nolte, H. W., Soong, T. W., & Lee, J. K. (2017).
Effects Of Exercise-induced Hypohydration On Brain Structure And Function, A MRI Study.

Tantuco, V. (April 3, 2020). The PPE keeping our healthcare workers safe. Retrieved from
https://www.rappler.com/newsbreak/iq/explainer-personal-protective-equipment-keeping-
healthcare-workers-safe-coronavirus

Tawatsupa, B., Yiengprugsawan, V., Kjellstrom, T., Berecki-Gisolf, J., Seubsman, S. A., & Sleigh, A.
(2013). Association between heat stress and occupational injury among Thai workers: findings of
the Thai Cohort Study. /ndustrial health, 51(1), 34-46.

Taylor, N., Kondo, N., & Kenney, W. L. (2008). The physiology of acute heat exposure, with
implications for human performance in the heat.

Teixeira, M. M., Passos, V. M., Barreto, S. M., Schmidt, M. I., Duncan, B. B., Beleigoli, A. M., ... &
Maria de Fatima, H. S. (2020). Association between diabetes and cognitive function at baseline
in the Brazilian Longitudinal Study of Adult Health (ELSA-Brasil). Scientific reports, 10(1), 1-
10.

Thomas, M., Sing, H., Belenky, G., Holcomb, H., Mayberg, H., Dannals, R., ... & Redmond, D. (2000).
Neural basis of alertness and cognitive performance impairments during sleepiness. I. Effects of
24 h of sleep deprivation on waking human regional brain activity. Journal of sleep research,
94), 335-352.

Thornton, S. N. (2010). Thirst and hydration: physiology and consequences of dysfunction. Physiology
& behavior, 100(1), 15-21.


Tong, J., Zhang, J., Zhu, N., Pei, Y., Liu, W., Yu, W., ... & Sun, X. (2023). Effects of COVID-19
pandemic on mental health among frontline healthcare workers: A systematic review and meta-
analysis. Frontiers in psychology, 13, 1096857.

Trangmar, S. J., Chiesa, S. T., Llodio, I., Garcia, B., Kalsi, K. K., Secher, N. H., & Gonzalez-Alonso, J.
(2015). Dehydration accelerates reductions in cerebral blood flow during prolonged exercise in
the heat without compromising brain metabolism. American Journal of Physiology-Heart and
Circulatory Physiology, 3099), H1598-H1607.

Tucker, P., Folkard, S., & Macdonald, I. (2003). Rest breaks and accident risk. The Lancet, 361(9358),
680.

Turrell, G., Lynch, J. W., Kaplan, G. A., Everson, S. A., Helkala, E. L., Kauhanen, J., & Salonen, J. T.
(2002). Socioeconomic position across the lifecourse and cognitive function in late middle age.
The Journals of Gerontology Series B: Psychological Sciences and Social Sciences, 57(1), S43-
S51.

United Nations (2023). WHO chief declares end to COVID-19 as a global health emergency. Retrieved
from https://news.un.org/en/story/2023/05/1 136367

US Department of Health and Human Services. (2014). The health consequences of smoking—S0 years
of progress: a report of the Surgeon General.

Van den Berg, E., Reijmer, Y. D., De Bresser, J., Kessels, R. P. C., Kappelle, L. J., & Biessels, G. J.
(2010). A 4 year follow-up study of cognitive functioning in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus.
Diabetologia, 53(1), 58-65.

van den Heuvel, S. G., de Looze, M. P., Hildebrandt, V. H., & Thé, K. H. (2003). Effects of software
programs stimulating regular breaks and exercises on work-related neck and upper-limb
disorders. Scandinavian journal of work, environment & health, 106-116.

Van Den Heuvel, A. M., Haberley, B. J., Hoyle, D. J., Taylor, N. A., & Croft, R. J. (2017). The
independent influences of heat strain and dehydration upon cognition. European journal of
applied physiology, 117(5), 1025-1037.

Varghese, B. M., Hansen, A. L., Williams, S., Bi, P., Hanson-Easey, S., Barnett, A. G., ... & Pisaniello,
D. L. (2020). Determinants of heat-related injuries in Australian workplaces: Perceptions of
health and safety professionals. Science of the total environment, 718, 137138.

Venckunas, T., Snieckus, A., Trinkunas, E., Baranauskiene, N., Solianik, R., Juodsnukis, A., ... &
Kamandulis, S. (2016). Interval running training improves cognitive flexibility and aerobic power
of young healthy adults. Journal of strength and conditioning research, 30(8), 2114-2121.

Venugopal, V., Latha, P. K., Shanmugam, R., Krishnamoorthy, M., & Johnson, P. (2020). Occupational
heat stress induced health impacts: A cross-sectional study from South Indian working
population. Advances in Climate Change Research, 11(1), 31-39.

Verbraecken , J., Van de Heyning, P., De Backer, W., & Van Gaal, L. (2006). Body surface area in
normal-weight, overweight, and obese adults. a comparison study. Metabolism, 55, 515-24.


Vincent, C., & Hall, P. A. (2015). Executive function in adults with type 2 diabetes: a meta-analytic
review. Psychosomatic medicine, 77(6), 631-642.

Ward, T., Bernier, R., Mukerji, C., Perszyk, D., McPartland, J. C., Johnson, E., & Perszyk, D. (2013).
Face Validity. Encyclopedia of Autism Spectrum Disorders. New York, NY: Springer New York,
1226-7.

Watson, S. & Cherney, K. (2020). The Effects of Sleep Deprivation on Your Body. Retrieved from
https://www.healthline.com/health/sleep-deprivation/effects-on-body#Central-nervous-system

Wendsche, J., Lohmann-Haislah, A., & Wegge, J. (2016). The impact of supplementary short rest breaks
on task performance: A meta-analysis. Sozialpolitik. ch, 2(2), 2-3.

Wilckens, K. A., Woo, S. G., Kirk, A. R., Erickson, K. I., & Wheeler, M. E. (2014). Role of sleep
continuity and total sleep time in executive function across the adult lifespan. Psychology and
aging, 29(3), 658.

Williams, W. & Cichowicz, J.(August 6, 2020). Heat Stress Imposed by PPE Worn in Hot and Humid
Environments. Retrieved from https://blogs.cdc.gov/niosh-science-blog/2020/08/06/ppe-heat-
stress/

Wingbermiihle, R., Wen, K. X., Wolters, F. J., Ikram, M. A., & Bos, D. (2017). Smoking, APOE
genotype, and cognitive decline: the Rotterdam study. Journal of Alzheimer's Disease, 57(4),
1191-1195.

World Health Organization. (May 27,2020). Tobacco. Retrieved from https://www.who.int/news-
room/fact-
sheets/detail/tobacco#:~:text=Tobacco%20kills%20more%20than%208,%2D%20and%20middl
e%2Dincome%20countries.

World Health Organization. (September 13, 2019. Hypertension. Retrieved from
https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/hypertension

World Health Organization. (2008). WHO POLICY ON NON-RECRUITMENT OF SMOKERS OR
OTHER TOBACCO USERS: FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS. Retrieved from
https://www.who.int/employment/FAQs_smoking_ English.pdf

World Health Organization. (September 13, 2019). Patient Safety. Retrieved from
https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/patient-safety

World Health Organization. (March 19, 2020). Rational use of personal protective equipment (PPE) for
coronavirus disease (COVID-19).Retrieved from
https://apps.who. int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/33 1498/WHO-2019-nCoV-IPCPPE_use-
2020.2-eng.pdf

World Health Organization. (December 23, 2020). Rational use of personal protective equipment for
COVID-19 and _ considerations during severe shortages. Retrieved from
https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/338033/WHO-2019-nCoV-IPC_PPE_use-
2020.4-eng.pdf


World Health Organization. (2020). Depression. Retrieved from https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-
sheets/detail/depression#:~:text=Globally%2C%20more%20than%20264%20million,affected%
20by%20depression%20than%20men.

World Health Organization. (June 8, 2020). Diabetes. Retrieved from https://www.who.int/news-
room/fact-sheets/detail/diabetes

World Health Organization. (2021). Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). Retrieved from
https://www.who.int/health-topics/sustainable-development-goals#tab=tab_2

World Health Organization (2022). Health advice for hot weather during the COVID-19 outbreak.
Retrieved from https://who.canto.global/v/coronavirus/library ?keyword=COVID-
19_HealthAdviceHotWeather&viewIndex=1

Yang, Y., Shields, G. S., Guo, C., & Liu, Y. (2018). Executive function performance in obesity and
overweight individuals: A meta-analysis and review. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 84,
225-244.

Yisma, E., Eshetu, N., Ly, S., & Dessalegn, B. (2017). Prevalence and severity of menopause symptoms
among perimenopausal and postmenopausal women aged 30-49 years in Gulele sub-city of Addis
Ababa, Ethiopia. BMC women's health, 17(1), 1-8.

Yoo, J. E., Shin, D. W., Han, K., Kim, D., Won, H. S., Lee, J., ... & Park, H. S. (2020). Female
reproductive factors and the risk of dementia: a nationwide cohort study. European journal of
neurology, 27(8), 1448-1458.

Yount, S. E., Cella, D., & Blozis, S. (2019). PROMIS®: Standardizing the patient voice in health
psychology research and practice. Health Psychology, 38(5), 343-346.

Yuan, P., & Raz, N. (2014). Prefrontal cortex and executive functions in healthy adults: a meta-analysis
of structural neuroimaging studies. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 42, 180-192.

Yuan, Y., Li, J., Zhang, N., Fu, P., Jing, Z., Yu, C., ... & Zhou, C. (2021). Body mass index and mild
cognitive impairment among rural older adults in China: the moderating roles of gender and
age. BMC psychiatry, 21(1), 1-11.

Yuniarti, E., & Handayani, P. (2020). Factors Associated with Heat Strains in Workers at the PT
Multikarya Asia Pasifik Raya Workshop in 2019.

Zacher, H., Brailsford, H. A., & Parker, S. L. (2014). Micro-breaks matter: A diary study on the effects
of energy management strategies on occupational well-being. Journal of Vocational Behavior,
85(3), 287-297.

Zander, K. K., Moss, S. A., & Garnett, S. T. (2017). Drivers of self-reported heat stress in the Australian
labour force. Environmental research, 152, 272-279.

Zhang, M., Zhou, M., Tang, F., Wang, Y., Nie, H., Zhang, L., & You, G. (2020). Knowledge, attitude,
and practice regarding COVID-19 among healthcare workers in Henan, China. Journal of
Hospital Infection, 105(2), 183-187.


Zelazo, P. D. (2004). The development of conscious control in childhood. Trends in cognitive sciences,
8(1), 12-17.

Zhu, S., Zhao, J., Chen, Z., & Wang, Y. (2018). Influential factors on cognitive performance in middle-
aged cohort: Third national health and nutrition examination survey-based study. Medicine,
97(37).

Zhu, Y., Qiao, S., Wu, W., Li, Y., Jian, H., Lin, S., ... & Fang, Z. (2022). Thermal discomfort caused by
personal protective equipment in healthcare workers during the delta COVID-19 pandemic in
Guangzhou, China: A case study. Case Studies in Thermal Engineering, 34, 101971.

Zhu, Z., Kuykendall, L., & Zhang, X. (2019). The impact of within-day work breaks on daily recovery

processes: An event-based pre-/post-experience sampling study. Journal of Occupational and
Organizational Psychology, 92(1), 191-211.
