Soil Quality Assessment of Selected Fruit Tree Plantations in Bacnotan, La Union, Philippines

JAY MARK GADIA CORTADO

UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES LOS BAÑOS

Master of Science in Forestry: Silviculture and Forest Influences

AUGUST 2022

ABSTRACT

Maintenance of soil quality is crucial to environmental sustainability and vital for
economic success. Thus, the study attempted to evaluate the soil quality of the banana,
calamansi, coffee, and rambutan plantations in the northern part of Luzon, Philippines; and
assessed whether there is a degree of degradation or improvement of these plantations from
the reference forest through the use of a soil quality index (SQI) approach. SQl is a viable
tool to evaluate soil quality that integrates various soil properties into a valuc that can be
easily interpreted and provide support to management decisions. Soil quality was evaluated
within the 0-30 cm and 30-60 cm soil depths, employing 15 different soil physical,
chemical, and biological indicators that individually showed distinct responses to
plantation establishment. A combined data from both depths, forming the 0-60 cm depth,
was also included in the analysis. It was found that the soil quality of the various sites was
graded from low to high, regardless of soil depth. With reference to the secondary forest,
Tesults revealed that the soil quality in the banana plantation declined while in the
calamansi, coffee and rambutan plantations were improved within the upper (0-30 cm) soil
depth. Inversely, only the banana plantation has increased the quality of the soil in the
lower (30-60 cm) soil depth, while the quality of the soil within the calamansi, coffee, and
rambutan plantations was decreased. For the total (0-60 cm) soil depth, only the coffee
plantation has caused an improved soil quality compared to the reference forest. In the
opposite manner, the banana, calamansi, and rambutan plantations have caused a decrease
in the quality of the soil. Across sites and soil depths, the physical indicator highly
contributing to the SQI value was the water holding capacity. Cation exchange capacity
and exchangeable potassium also highly influenced the SQI value of the different sites
compared to other chemical indicators. While the earthworm and bacteria counts were the
biological propertics that showed high contributions to the SQI values.

Keywords: fruit tree plantation, reference forest, soil depth, soil quality, soil quality index

CHAPTER I

INTRODUCTION

Background of the Study

The sustainability of food production has become a significant concem today
(Medici ct al., 2020). With the world's population expected to reach nearly 10 billion people
by 2050, the associated global demand for food — projected to increase by 50% during this.
time — is putting massive pressure on how we use productive lands (FAO, 2018). This issue
compels holistic action and well-balanced response, not only in terms of increasing

productivity, but also in terms of safeguarding the health of the land.

Forest conversion involves the replacement of natural forests with other forms of
land use. The rising demand for crops such as cocoa, soy, coffee, rice, tea, rubber, and oil
palm, among other crops, is translating into the expansion of plantations worldwide at the
expense of natural forests (Jiang et al., 2020; WWF, 2020) that occurs predominantly in
tropical arcas (Liu ct al., 2006; Meijide ct al., 2018). Conversion of the forest has been
shown to have a negative impact on soil quality around the world (Zhijun ct al., 2018).
Tropical soils, in particular, respond quickly to environmental changes (Jiang et al., 2020).
Forest conversion, for example, can contribute to increased soil erosion (Mohamad et al.,

2018), chronic removal of soil nutrients (Overbeek et al., 2012), losses of soil fertility,

carbon sequestration, and biodiversity (Guillaume et al., 2016), and alterations in nutrient

cycles (Ngaba et al., 2019).

Maintaining soil structure and fertility in any plantation is cssential for
sustainable management. In the study of Zarafshar et al. (2020) focusing on forest
plantations, they emphasized that the soil quality of tree plantations should ideally be
comparable to that of natural forests. But they reported that these plantations fail to
retain natural forests’ soil fertility. However, as to what influence does fruit tree plantations
bring to the quality of the soil remains a question. The recent realization that soil is critical
to both the production of food and fiber as well as the functioning of global ecosystems has

sparked interest in assessing and monitoring its quality and health (Doran, 2002).

Soil quality was broadly defined by Doran (2002) as the capacity of a living soil to
function within natural or managed ecosystem boundaries, sustain plant and animal
productivity, maintain or enhance water and air quality, and promote plant and animal
health. It is a concept that improves our understanding of soils; a tool for assessing current
management practices and comparing alternative management approaches; and a guide to
usage and inputs allocation (Wienhold et al., 2004). Soil quality is a notion based on the
idea that management can degrade, stabilize, or increase soil_ccosystem
functioning (Franzluebbers, 2002). As affirmed by Lal (2015), the cornerstone fora healthy

economy, environment, and terrestrial biosphere is high soil quality or healthy soil.

Despite the already existing studies on the soil quality under tree plantations for

timber and pulp and paper production, fruit tree plantations remain

largely unexplored, particularly in the Philippines. This type of research endeavor is not
yet mainstream in spite of its significance to sustainable management, production and
conservation, and potential contribution to improving practices. Because the maintenance
of soil quality is crucial to environmental sustainability (Arshad & Martin, 2002) and vital
for economic success, especially in rapidly developing regions (Qi et al., 2009), there is a
pressing need to evaluate the impacts of forest land conversions, including fruit tree
plantations, to soil quality. Hence, this study shall assess the soil quality of selected fruit
tree plantations including banana (Musa sp.), calamansi (Citrus * microcarpa Bunge),

coffee (Coffea spp.), and rambutan (Nephelium lappaceum L.) plantations.

Statement of the problem

The critical role of soil in environmental productivity is widely acknowledged.
However, efforts to assess the soil quality are only given minimal attention, particularly in
the Philippines. Additionally, land use change for commodity products such as forestry and
agriculture has primarily decreased the forest cover in the country, while it is believed that
conversion of forests has detrimental effects. Previous reports have shown that many forest
plantations fail to retain natural forests’ soil fertility after conversion. However, it remains
unclear how fruit tree plantations influence soil quality. In fact, assessing the soil quality
of fruit tree plantations, specifically by integrating the different physical, chemical, and

biological indicators into a soil quality index has not yet been conducted in the Philippines,

particularly in northern Luzon, as far as the researcher's knowledge. Hence, this study
establishes knowledge of soil quality of selected fruit tree plantations in Bacnotan, La

Union, Philippines.

Generally, the study aims to address on what is the level of soil quality of the
different fruit tree plantations and reference forest. Specifically, the study seeks to answer
the questions:
1. How do the soil indicators and the result of the soil quality index differ from
cach other, across soil depths?
2. What possible measures can be taken to improve the soil quality of the fruit tree

plantation if found lower than the reference site?

Significance of the Study

With the current deficit of information regarding soil quality of converted forest
areas to other land uses, particularly in the Philippines, the study generally aims to
contribute in the knowledge building on this endeavor, especially in assessing the soil
quality of fruit tree plantations and comparing these plantations to adjacent reference forest.
This study can be considered one of the country’s pioneers in this specific ficld of rescarch,
contributing further to establishing baseline information for future and more extensive

studies on soil quality evaluations of fruit tree plantations.

With the observation of various physical, chemical and biological indicators, and
the involvement of a soil quality index to arrive at a general assessment from the combined
soil properties, the results of the study have gathered relevant information to improve future
soil management strategies of fruit tree plantations to increase production and safeguard
good soil quality simultaneously. The results could also serve as a basis for future
monitoring and evaluation activities in Don Mariano Marcos Memorial State University
(DMMMSU). It could also guide the planning and decision-making of plantation owners,
managers, and farmers on fruit tree plantation establishment, particularly in the province
of La Union and Region I (Ilocos Region). In addition, results could provide additional

insights on the benefits of forest in improving and sustaining good soil quality.

The study will also help encourage concerned individuals and institutions to give
more attention to the impacts of land use and land cover changes and take bold steps in

addressing soil quality concerns of the country.

Objectives of the Study

The main objective of the study is to asscss the soil quality of selected fruit tree
plantations in Bacnotan, La Union, Philippines. Specifically, it aims to:

1) Describe the different fruit tree plantations — banana (Musa sp.), calamansi (Citrus

x microcarpa Bunge), coffee (Coffea spp.), and rambutan (Nephelium lappaceum

L.) — and the adjacent reference forest in the study area;

2) compare each of the soil physical, chemical and biological indicators of the
different fruit tree plantations and the reference forest;

3) evaluate the overall soil quality using the soil quality index of the different fruit tree
plantations and the reference forest; and

4) recommend measures to improve soil quality of the fruit tree plantations if found

lower than the reference forest.

Scope and Limitations of the Study

The study was conducted within the Agroforestry Research and Demo-Farm and
the North La Union Campus (NLUC) Forest Reserve of the Don Mariano Marcos
Memorial State University (DMMMSU) situated in Barangay Sapilang and Barangay
Casiaman, Bacnotan, La Union, Philippines. The selection of the fruit tree plantations was
based on the established plantations under the management of the DMMMSU-College of
Agroforestry and Forestry. The study was only focused on the soil quality assessment of
the selected fruit tree plantations and the reference forest. The various soil physical,
chemical, and biological indicators were sclected considering the availability of tests and
the testing capabilitics of the laboratories. Time and financial resources also limited the
number and types of soil quality indicators that were chosen for the assessment. Two soil
depths (0-30 em & 30-60 cm) were covered in the study using a customized soil probe in

collecting soil samples. By means of mathematical computation, all the data gathered from

the two soil depths for each of the soil quality indicators were also combined forming the

total depth (0-60 cm) that was also included in the analysis.

CHAPTER Il

REVIEW OF RELATED LITERATURE

Forest conversion to tree plantation

The loss of natural forests is still a significant concern (Altamirano ct al., 2020).
According to FAO (2020), the total forest arca in the world is 4.06 billion hectares (ha), or
31% of the total land area, However, 178 million hectares of forest have been lost since
1990. But, the pace of net forest loss has decreased from 7.8 million hectares per year in
the 1990s to 5.2 million hectares per year in 2000-2010 and 4.7 million hectares per year
in 2010-2020, and is expected to continue but will slow down by 2030 (Annunzio ct al.,

2015; FAO, 2020).

The main driver of tree cover loss on a worldwide scale is the permanent land-use
change for commodity products such as forestry and agriculture, particularly in developing
countries, to mect global demand for products such as food, forage, and fuel (Curtis ct al.,
2018; Gibbs ct al., 2010). Whether these new land uses replace forests, degraded forests,
or grasslands significantly influences the ecological impacts of expansion to biodiversity

and the landscape (Gibbs et al., 2010; Nahuelhual et al., 2012).

According to a study conducted by Curtis et al. (2018), deforestation is responsible
for 27% of worldwide forest loss. The yearly rate of deforestation was predicted to be 10
million ha in 2015-2020 (FAO, 2020). It is widely agreed that deforestation occurs
predominantly in the tropics and that agricultural expansion is the leading direct source of
deforestation, contributing 70-95% of the total forest loss (Annunzio et al., 2015). Tropek
et al. (2014), for example, found that monocultures of oil palm, Eucalyptus, or rubber are
expanding at an alarming rate into tropical forest systems. Industrial plantations of oil palm
(Elaeis guineensis Jacq.) and pulpwood (Acacia mangium Willd. and other tree species)
have transformed vast portions of old-growth forests in Southeast Asia, particularly in
Malaysia and Indonesia (Gaveau et al., 2018). Gibbs et al. (2010) estimated that as much as
10 billion additional ha of agricultural land will be required to support global demands by

2050.

FAO (2020) excludes in its definition of “forest” those tree stands in agricultural
production systems, such as fruit tree plantations, olive orchards, oil palm plantations, and
agroforestry systems when crops are grown under tree cover. As such, these areas are
classified by FAO (2020) as “other land use with tree cover,” which mentioned that land
use is the primary consideration for differentiating forest and other lands with tree cover.
By following the FAO (2020) definition of “forest,” tree plantations belonging under
agricultural production systems such as fruit tree plantations can be regarded as a
significant contributor to forest loss if these areas were previously forested and undergone

conversion to such present land uses.


Penna (2010) defined “tree plantations” as areas composed primarily of trees
established through planting or deliberate seeding and are likely to be more intensively
managed than other native forests. The borderline between plantations and agriculture is a
challenge for defining the term "tree plantation” (Niskanen & Saastamoinen, 1996). But
the use of the term ‘tree plantation’ takes into account such unconventional plantation kinds

as those with fruit trees and agroforestry (Niskanen & Saastamoinen, 1996).

Tree plantations increasingly meet market demands for timber, food, energy, and
carbon storage (Holt et al., 2016). On the other hand, Carle et al. (2002) pointed out that
not all plantation projects have favorable environmental, economic, social, or cultural
consequences. Plantations may be planted in the wrong places, with the wrong
species/provenances, and for inappropriate purposes, if proper planning and management
are not in place. If policies encourage the conversion of natural forests to other land uses,
negative environmental consequences may occur (Altamirano ct al., 2020). As Holt et al.

(2016) affirmed, tree plantations frequently endanger native forests for their establishment.

Tree crops agriculture/Tree orchard

Tree orchards belong to the sub-category of “other land with tree cover” that mainly
comprises trees for producing fruits, olives, or nuts (FAO, 2020). Plieninger (2012) also
characterized orchards as a land-use system that consists of open stands of conventional

fruit trees in crop fields, meadows, or gardens. The term ‘tree crop,’ which Yan et al. (2020)

in

defined as a cluster of established tree species with purposes other than timber production,
can also be associated. Although primarily focused on trees, tree crop
agriculture/cultivation also covers shrubs and perennial herbaccous plants, such as bananas

(MacDanicls & Lieberman, 1979).

Smallholders may find tree crops a viable source of income (Yan et al., 2020). Its
cultivation has been acknowledged as a prominent and vital element of the agricultural
frontier elsewhere (Chomitz & Griffiths, 1996; Kennedy, 2012). It aims to promote
national economies, particularly in tropical producing countries (Asubonteng ct al., 2018).
Throughout Southeast Asia, high-value export-oriented crops have rapidly emerged and

expanded over the past decades (Fox & Castella, 2013).

According to MacDaniels & Lieberman (1979), the possible significant
contributions of tree crops include erosion management, satisfying cnergy demands and
increasing energy efficiency, and providing numerous uscs in addition to food and forage.
Due to minimum to no-tillage activities, there is less disruption of the soil biota and organic
matter in the soil (Molnar et al., 2013). Tree crops have several other qualities that can be
improved to produce highly effective and sustainable agriculture without requiring heavy

mechanization (MacDaniels & Lieberman, 1979; Molnar ct al., 2013).

Fruit and multi-purpose trees can help with soil and water management and
conservation (Molnar et al., 2013; Temudo & Abrantes, 2014; Plieninger, 2012). Fruit tree
orchards also can mitigate global warming by sequestrating carbon (C) and supplying

biofuels (Aguilera et al., 2015; Plieninger, 2012; Temudo & Abrantes, 2014). Many animal


species also benefit because these trees provide food, nesting sites, and physical protection.
Furthermore, these can link forests and other semi-natural habitats, which is often vital for

the sustainability of wildlife (Plieninger, 2012).

Tree crops could offer promising options for addressing on-farm labor shortages
and creating income for underprivileged rural communities, as well as preserving natural
forest integrity through alternative livelihoods (Yan et al., 2020). Fruit trees, in particular,
are land-extensive and low labor-intensive crops, making them a suitable choice in

situations where land is ample but labor is limited (Keys & McConnell, 2005).

Tree crops may assist farmers in protecting their harvests from year-to-year
fluctuations in rainfed annual crop yields (Damatta, 2008; Temudo & Abrantes, 2014).
These should be considered a supplement to conventional grain crop cultivation, according
to MacDaniels & Lieberman (1979). Agricultural systems containing tree crops
exemplifying ecologically appropriate practices have been employed successfully in the
production of food and forage in many places of the world for long periods, despite the fact
that grains will remain the primary source of food globally (MacDaniels & Lieberman,
1979), In fact, several countries, such as China, have pushed tree crops to

achicve economic development with environmental rehabilitation (Yan ct al., 2020).

Planting the right mix of perennial species in degraded lands would allow for
supplemental food or energy while also protecting, building, and improving the
soil (Molnar et al., 2013). Furthermore, tree crops cultivated on rough, marginal lands will

not produce yields equivalent to intense cultivation on level land; yet, future food supply


concems may make tree crop production on marginal land feasible (MacDaniels &
Lieberman, 1979). According to MacDaniels & Lieberman (1979), there are vast
lands gencrating very little that may support tree crops if adequately managed. However,
the ecological advantages of tree crops are often inferior to that of naturally regenerated
forests (Yan et al., 2020). Tree crops can enhance soil retention and carbon sequestration
when they replace field crops, but their effects can be unfavorable if they compete with
forests (Yan et al., 2020). Agriculture commodities like oil palm, cocoa, and coffee are
expanding at the expense of biodiversity, carbon storage, water conservation, and other

essential ecosystem services (Asubonteng et al., 2018).

Tree crops may result in tradeoffs with natural forest regeneration. However, even
if deforestation continues, the state of the remaining forests may improve if earnings from
tree crops replace the demand for natural forests (Yan et al., 2020). Improving the flow of
forest goods and services necessitates balancing human needs with environmental
protection (Molnar et al., 2013; Peryea, 2001). However, if a meaningful advantage to the
farmer is to be realized, crop productivity must also be evaluated in the context of naturally
changing environmental circumstances. After all, the primary purpose is to improve yield
under such circumstances (Damatta, 2008). To ensure sustainability, a clear understanding
of what is most appropriate for specific agro-ccological zones and which intervention can

be used effectively are required (Dewi ct al., 2017).

The orchard floor, particularly the soil, makes up a large part of the orchard

agroecosystem. Still, it has gotten less attention in research and management than pest and


disease control and tree horticulture (Granatstein & Sanchez, 2009). However, there are
opportunities to increase orchard sustainability by manipulating the orchard floor, which
could improve tree fruit yield and cut costs (Granatstein & Sanchez, 2009). Aguilera ct al.

(2015) suggested a necd to optimize management in orchards to maximize the quality of

the soil.

Good tree performance (e-g., tree growth) and high, constant yields of quality fruits
are the desired outcomes of orchard-floor management. Like biodiversity and soil carbon
sequestration, other objectives are increasingly garncring more attention (Granatstein &
Sanchez, 2009). However, according to Granatstein & Sanchez (2009), increases in soil
quality are not always linked to gains in tree performance, but they do indicate changes

that will be more highly appreciated in the future.

Soil quality

Soil is a living, dynamic natural body that performs many vital functions in
terrestrial ecosystems essential to life (Doran & Parkin, 1994; Wienhold et al., 2004). It
acts as a growing medium for plants, a nutrient reservoir, and a hub for various biological
processes such as decomposition and recycling of animal and plant products, as well as
pollution management. Soils influence air quality by interacting with the atmosphere
and acting as storage and purifying medium for water as it moves through the soil profile

(Obade & Lal, 2016; Wienhold et al., 2004).


The increased awareness that soil is a crucial component of the Earth’s biosphere,
operating not only in food and fiber production but also in the maintenance of local,
regional, and global environmental quality, has sparked interest in measuring the quality
of our soil resources (Doran & Jones, 1996; Doran & Parkin, 1994; Doran, 2002). It is a

complex medium that requires understanding on multiple levels (Karlen et al., 1997).

The soil is not an unlimited resource. It can be lost in a relatively short amount of
time if it is misused or mishandled, with minimal possibility for regeneration or
replacement (Nortcliff, 2002). Placing a value on soil based on its purpose, function, or use
gives rise to the concept of soil quality (Carter ct al., 1997). Some individuals believe that
soil quality is solely determined by the amount of crops grown. Others have stressed the
necessity of illustrating how soil quality influences forage and food quality and how soil
quality influences the habitat given for a diverse range of biota (Karlen et al., 1997).
Individual priorities in terms of soil function influence perceptions of what makes a good
soil. However, soil quality must be defined to manage and preserve our soils in an
acceptable form for future generations. The definition must be comprehensive to capture

the numerous dimensions of soil function (Doran & Parkin, 1994).

Soil quality can be broadly defined as the capacity of a living soil to function within
natural or managed ecosystem boundaries, sustain plant and animal productivity, maintain
or enhance water and air quality, and promote plant and animal health (Doran, 2002).
According to Karlen et al. (1997), the simplest definition for soil quality is "the capacity

(of soil) to function." An expanded version of this definition displays soil quality as "the


capacity of a specific kind of soil to function, within natural or managed ecosystem
boundaries, to sustain plant and animal productivity, maintain or enhance water and air

quality, and support human health and habitation" (Karlen ct al., 1997).

Doran & Parkin (1994) also defined soil quality as “the capacity of a soil to function
within ecosystem boundaries to sustain biological productivity, maintain environmental
quality, and promote plant and animal health.” Larson & Pierce (1991) also functionally
defined soil quality as the ability to function within the bounds of an ecosystem while also
positively interacting with the cnvironment outside of that ecosystem. Larson & Pierce
(1994) added that soil quality is mainly related to the capacity of soil to act as a medium
for plant growth, in the partitioning and management of water flow in the environment,
and as an environmental buffer. The capacity of soil to perform efficiently in the present

and future is a feature shared by all definitions of soil quality (Doran & Parkin, 1994).

Soil quality has distinct properties that change through time and space (Karlen et
al., 2001). That is why, according to Sojka and Upchurch (1999), soil quality must be
described in terms of distinctive environmental and management considerations specific to
one soil under particular conditions for a given usage. Biological, economic, social, and

other value judgments are among the factors to consider.

Wienhold ct al. (2004) stated that the soil quality concept was developed to
supplement soil science research by improving our understanding of soils and guiding the
usage and allocation of labor, energy, financial, and other inputs as agriculture intensifies

and expands to satisfy growing global demand. Soil quality serves as a unifying idea for


educating producers, professionals, and the general public about soils' critical functions. It
also serves as a tool for assessing current management practices and comparing alternative
management approaches (Wienhold ct al., 2004). Soil quality is a notion based on the idea
that management can degrade, stabilize, or increase soil ecosystem

functioning (Franzluebbers, 2002).

This concept has been accepted as a science-based assessment and educational tool
for examining the sustainability of various soil management and land-use approaches
(Karlen ef al., 2001). It is regarded as a critical indicator of ecosystem sustainability (Carter
et al., 1997). Soil quality impacts three crucial aspects of sustainable land management,
according to Doran & Jones (1996) namely; agricultural productivity, environmental
quality of natural resources, and plant, animal, and human health. These are in comparison
to what Karlen et al. (2001) enumerated, except with the addition of food safety and quality

to the list.

The comerstone for a healthy economy, environment, and terrestrial biosphere is
high soil quality or healthy soil (Lal, 2015). On the other hand, the general deterioration in
soil quality, caused by natural processes and human activities, has strong feedback,
resulting in a reduction in ecosystem services and conservation (Lal, 2015). They benefit
from management and land-use decisions that consider the numerous functions of soil
instead of decisions that focus solely on one function, such as crop productivity (Doran,
2002). That is why maintaining soil quality is vital to environmental sustainability (Arshad

& Martin, 2002).

The resilience of soil and natural processes to maintain global energy and matter
balances has been tested by agricultural and other ecosystem management in the
past (Doran, 2002). In the carly years of the 21st century, Gibbs & Salmon (2015) reported
that the global estimates of total degraded lands range from less than 1 billion ha to over 6
billion ha, These show how the condition of many soils throughout the world has
deteriorated dramatically when grasslands and forests conversion to arable agriculture and
cultivation began (Doran, 2002). Feeding the world population, which is expected to reach
9.5 billion by 2050, entails approximately a 70% increase in agricultural production
between 2005 and 2050, putting greater pressure on soil resources (Lal, 2015; Wienhold et
al., 2004). However, soil degradation is a significant hindrance to obtaining the necessary
increase in food production (Lal, 2015; Wienhold et al., 2004). It is a global concern in the
2st century, particularly severe in the tropics and subtropics (Lal, 2015). It remains one

of the most serious and widespread threats to humanity (Karlen ct al., 2008).

Soll quality indicators

Soil quality cannot be quantified directly (Obade & Lal, 2016). As a result,
measured soil physical, chemical, and biological components, also known as soil quality
indicators, can reflect the capacity of soil to function (Shukla et al., 2006). The soil
Tesource emerges from the distinct balance and interaction of these three components

(Karlen et al., 1997). The indicators to be chosen will vary according to the nature of the


function under consideration. Nortcliff (2002) has grouped the soil quality indicators into
four broad categories, comprising the three common groups of physical, chemical, and

biological indicators, along with visible indicators.

Physical indicators. These are primarily focused on the physical arrangement of the
solid particles and pores. In this study, the soil physical indicators included were soil
texture, bulk density (BD), particle density (PD), soil porosity and water holding capacity
(WHC). Soil texture refers to the relative proportion of sand, silt, and clay in the soil (Rai
et al., 2017). It has a profound influence on many soil properties, and it affects the
suitability of a soil for most uses (Weil & Brady, 2017). Many consider soil texture as the
most important soil property as it can influence soil/water relationships, gas exchange, and
plant nutrition (Ritchey et al. 2015). Meanwhile, BD is a crucial soil property that
influences infiltration rates, aeration, root proliferation, and plant growth (Throop et al.,
2012). The PD is one of the basic physical properties of soil and is defined as the mass per
unit volume of solid soil components (Weil & Brady, 2017). Soil porosity is the total
number of pores and open space between soil particles (Bizuhoraho et al., 2018). In crop
Production, soil porosity is important to conduct water, air, and nutrients into the soil
(Indoria ct al., 2020). WHC is the amount of water which can be held by soil against gravity
(Deng et al., 2016). The capacity of soils to store available water determines to a great
extent their usefulness for plant growth. This capacity provides a buffer between an adverse

climate and plant production (Weil & Brady, 2017).


Chemical indicators. The list of possible indicators is rather long in this case, and
the final selection will be determined by the soil function being considered, Soil pH, cation
exchange capacity, clectrical conductivity, soil nutrient contents, organic matter content,
concentrations of potentially toxic clements, and, perhaps most importantly, the soil's

ability to buffer against change are all indicators under this group.

The soil chemical indicators examined in this study include the following: soil pH,
cation exchange capacity (CEC), available phosphorus (P), exchangeable potassium (K),
total nitrogen (N), electrical conductivity (EC), and soil organic matter (SOM). Soil pH
expresses the degree of soil acidity or alkalinity. It is a master variable that affects a wide
range of soil chemical and biological properties (Weil & Brady, 2017). CEC is a measure
of a soil’s capacity to retain and release elements such as K, Ca, Mg, and Na (Homeck et
al., 2011). It is an important indicator for soil quality that can be influenced by soil
properties, land use and management (Khaledian ct al., 2017). Meanwhile, P is an essential
nutrient and vital to plant growth and development in most terrestrial ecosystems. Soil P is
the least mobile of all plant nutrients and most P components are difficult for plants to
absorb and assimilate. Hence, P deficiency is one of major nutrient limiting factor for plant
growth and development, and the availability of soil P also become an important indicator
for the evaluation of soil quality and fertility (Wang ct al., 2021). K is an essential nutrient
that affects most of the biochemical and physiological processes that influence plant
growth and metabolism. It also contributes to the survival of plants exposed to various
biotic and abiotic stresses (Wang et al., 2013). While N is the most important nutrient that

affects the growth and development of plants; availability of N in soils largely controls


plant productivity (Saez-Plaza, 2013). Soil EC is a measure of the amount of salts in soil
(salinity of soil) (USDA, 2014). It is an excellent indicator of nutrient availability and loss,
soil texture, and available water capacity. Lastly, SOM plays an important role in
‘maintaining the productivity of tropical soils because it provides energy and substrates, and
promotes the biological diversity that helps to maintain soil quality and ecosystem

functionality (Guimaraes et al., 2013).

Biological indicators. Biological attributes are generally used for short-term
evaluations because they are highly dynamic and susceptible to changes in soil conditions.
Macro-, meso-, and micro-organism populations, respiration rate or other markers of
microbial activity, and more thorough characterization of soil organic matter are some

indicators that could be examined.

There were three biological indicators included in the study namely: carthworm,

bacteria and fungi count. Earthworms are often keystone species in soil ecosystems and
can have major impacts on soil function (Weil & Brady, 2017). In orchard agroecosystems,
earthworms are often the most important component of the soil macrofauna due to their
influence on soil structure and the breakdown of SOM. Earthworms benefit plant
metabolism and crop production, cause increased nitrogen-fixing activity, greater amounts
of available macro- and micronutrients and polysaccharides, and an enhanced biosynthesis,
of plant growth regulators (Sofo et al., 2020), Meanwhile, bacteria participate vigorously
in virtually all of the organic transactions that characterize a healthy soil (Weil & Brady,

2017). They control soil processes such as decomposition and mineralization, including the


associated release of greenhouse gases into the atmosphere. Moreover, several soil bacteria
promote plant growth and productivity (Kaiser et al., 2016). Lastly, soil fungi play a crucial
role in the ecosystem diversity and functional reconstruction and represent an essential
functional component of soil and ecological systems as decomposers, symbionts, and
pathogens. Furthermore, fungi are closely involved in the energy flow, nutrient cycle, and

transformation of organic substances in soil (Wu et al., 2019).

Visible indicators. The observation of visible indicators frequently brings changes
in soil quality to our attention. It raises public awareness and alarm, but in many cases,
when there is visible evidence of the decrease in soil quality, the process of decline may
have progressed too far, and the opportunity of restoring the quality has been lost. Signs of
erosion in the form of rills and subsoil exposures, surface run-off, and poor plant growth

are all apparent attributes.

Wienhold et al. (2004) discussed that soil quality indicators could also be
categorized as either inherent or dynamic. The soil-forming variables of climate,
topography, parent material, time, and biota determine inherent indicators. The inherent
soil qualities and their interpretation concerning potential land use serve as the basis for
soil surveying, categorization, and land use recommendations. On the other hand, the
condition of the soil as a result of recent land use or management decisions is described by
dynamic indicators. The impact of soil management decisions on use-dependent soil

Properties is assessed using dynamic indicators.


Due to the rising demand for information and the need for rapid interpretation of
soil science knowledge, an emphasis has been placed on analyzing numerous soil quality
indicators to comprehend the positive, negative, and interaction effects on soil propertics
and processes, as well as the correlations between those parameters, for a variety of land
uses and soil management strategies (Karlen et al., 2001). These indicators interact in
various ways across space, time, and intensity, and they are interdependent (Gil-Sotres et

al., 2005; Karlen et al., 1997).

One way to identify these indicators is by developing an essential list of quantifiable
soil attributes that characterize the significant processes operating in soil and guarantee that
the measurements being taken accurately represent existing field conditions. The set of
fundamental soil quality indicators should fulfill the suitability criteria: (a) encompass
ecosystem processes and relate to process-oriented modeling; (b) integrate soil physical,
chemical, and biological properties and processes; (c) be accessible to a wide range of users
and applicable to field conditions; (d) be sensitive to management and climate variations;
and (e) be components of existing soil databases (Doran & Parkin, 1994). At the same time,
it is critical to select indicators that allow for the quantification of soil quality and are
appropriate for the task (Nortcliff, 2002; Gil-Sotres et al., 2005). Furthermore, the approach
to identifying soil quality indicators must be comprehensive rather than reductionistic

(Doran & Parkin, 1994).

Many authors have presented different key soil indicators for soil quality

assessment (Arshad & Martin, 2002; Bunemann et al., 2018; Doran & Parkin, 1994; Karlen


etal., 2008, 2001, 1997; Larson & Pierce, 1991, 1994; Wienhold et al., 2004). For example,
ina review of 65 different soil quality assessment methodologies undertaken by Bunemann
tal. (2018), total organic matter/carbon and pH were identified as the most often proposed
soil quality indicators, followed by exchangeable phosphorus, various indicators of water
storage, and bulk density. Texture, available potassium, and total nitrogen were also
commonly employed. Furthermore, the average number of proposed indicators is 11, which
is likely more than is practicable and financially feasible under most conditions, and at
least one indicator from each group (physical, chemical, and biological) is included in the

majority of the publications reviewed.

According to Shukla et al. (2006), the most dominant soil quality indicator is soil
organic carbon (SOC). They proposed that if only one soil characteristic were to be utilized
to track changes in soil quality every 3-5 years, SOC should be chosen. Lal (2015)
additionally stated that the SOC pool is not only a significant measure of soil quality but
also a key driver of agricultural sustainability. Without clear guidance on selecting
indicators, assessing soil quality may be misdirected and of little value. Indicators are
significant because they (a) present reference material for measuring trends and patterns;
(b) link soil quality to other components of the system; and (c) where trigger or

precautionary levels are set, the quality may be tested against them (Nortcliff, 2002).

Doran and Zeiss (2000) stated that in order to assist farmers, foresters, ranchers,
conservationists, and other land managers in identifying suitable interventions, a soil

quality indicator must do more than simply predict whether a soil would serve a good


function. The indicator should additionally explain why the soil will or will not perform as
expected. Indicators are required to assist land managers in understanding the chain of
cause and effect that connects land management decisions to the health and productivity of

plants and animals.

Soil quality assessment

To develop, perform, and cvaluate sustainable land and soil management systems,
the ability to define and assess soil quality is critical (Doran & Parkin, 1994). Due to
growing land-use pressures, soil quality assessments are in increasing demand which can
be done at a small research plot or at the landscape level (Armenise et al., 2013; Bolinder

ctal., 1999).

Various authors have emphasized that the main objectives for assessing soil quality
appeared to be as an instrument for evaluating the effectiveness and sustainability of the
different soil and land use management practices, farming systems, policies, and
technologies, to determine how soil properties and processes are responding to
anthropogenic decisions and actions over time, and ensure ecological balance; delivering
further the recommendations which may translate into improved soil function (Arshad &
Martin, 2002; Karlen et al., 2001; Monsalud et al., 2021; Nakajima et al., 2015; Sojka &
Upchurch, 1999; Wienhold et al., 2004). While Bunemann et al. (2018) noted that the

ultimate goal of a soil quality evaluation is to inform farmers and other land managers


about the influence of soil management on soil functionality. It is therefore critical that any
assessment of soil quality begin with a clear understanding of the function or functions of
the soil being addressed — both natural and user-oriented functions — as well as the
properties of the soil that can be measured to assess quality concerning these functions

(Nortcliff, 2002).

Quantifying the important relationships of soil quality indicators, linking them to
various management approaches, and establishing tradeoffs among these factors are all
instances of how soil quality assessments could be cmployed (Karlen ct al., 1997). A
farming system or practices that have a negative impact on any of the chosen indicators
may be considered unsustainable and consequently discouraged or modified. To ensure
sustainability, systems that increase indicator performance can be promoted and enhanced

(Arshad & Martin, 2002).

It is important to emphasize that valid comparison can only be made by soil series,
within a specific location, with a known management history when developing a baseline
for soil quality assessment. Because of variations in the inherent soil-forming factors,
comparisons across different soils are often irrelevant (Karlen et al., 2008). As Karlen et
al. (2001) pointed out, soils with varying forming components have absolute differing
capabilities and cannot be compared directly in a sensible manner when it comes to soil
health or assessing impacts of human activities. Such soils can be compared in terms of
inherent productivity differences and their ability to support a particular land use in the

absence of human interventions (Karlen et al., 2001)


Minimum data set (MDS)

Collincarity and the complexity of the interactions between indicators and
management options can both be increased by increasing the number of indicators.
However, measurement costs can quickly escalate, particularly when precise soil biological
parameters are added (O'Sullivan et al., 2017). Hence, the number of soil quality indicators
that are evaluated on a particular set of samples must be limited to a minimum dataset and
must be identified to generate relevant soil quality assessment (Arshad & Martin, 2002;

Bunemann et al., 2018).

Larson & Pierce (1991) proposed that a MDS be adopted for assessing the health
of world soils, A vital feature of a MDS is that it must comprise soil attributes that can be
measured quantitatively in a short amount of time and are valuable in land use or
management decision. The components of a MDS are chosen for their convenience of
measurement, reproducibility, and how well they represent critical soil quality
characteristics. It is crucial to note that any MDS represents the least number of attributes
that must be measured to determine soil quality. Additional attributes may be included in

a more extensive data set intended for other analyses (Larson & Pierce, 1994).

The method for determining the minimum data set can also differ significantly.
Two often used techniques are expert opinion (EO) and principal component analysis
(PCA). The EO approach works best when a diverse team of scientists, landowners, land

operators, and other interested stakeholders collaborate to identify soil quality goals,


essential functions, relevant indicators, scoring methodologies, and preferences among
each factor. In contrast, PCA is a statistical technique for determining the indicators that
best represent variability in a broad sct of available data (Andrews ct al., 2002; Karlen et
al., 2001). According to Tesfahunegn (2014), Arguments favoring EO method for selection
of a MDS stress its focus on sustainable management goals, but many researchers have
also relied on statistical techniques such as PCA. His study confirmed PCA selection could
reduce expert biases as compared to an EO method. Hence in this study, PCA was

employed

Soil quality indices (SQIs)

SQIs that synthesize key soil attributes, which were developed in response to a need
for a science-based tool to assess soil quality, provide land managers with the necessary
integration of information to assist them in making informed decisions about complex
issues like agroecosystem management (Andrews & Carroll, 2001; Armenise et al., 2013;
Obade & Lal, 2016). The SQI is a value that rates a soil's "fitness" to perform one or more
functions (a low fitness results in a low SQI valuc) by combining a range of
information (chemical, physical, and biological attributes) about it. Thus, the interpretation
of overall ‘soil health’ or ‘fitness for purpose’ is simplified (Armenise et al., 2013). A robust
SQI should (a) be sensitive to soil management, (b) be responsive to changes in soil

function(s), and (c) be easily measured (Armenise et al., 2013).


The soil quality index used in this study was the additive soil quality index which
was based on the approach of Andrews et al. (2003). In the index, each sclected indicator
was transformed using a nonlinear (NL) scoring function ranging from 0 to 1. Once
transformed, the indicator scores for each observation were integrated by summing the
indicator scores for each indicator and dividing by the total number of indicators. It was
assumed that a higher-index outcomes meant greater performance of soil functions or better
soil health (Andrews et al., 2003). The Additive soil quality index is a useful tool to
evaluate soil quality in relatively casy and user-friendly (AbdelRahman & Mohamed,
2018). This indexing method is a straightforward approach which was alrcady used
worldwide under various soil types, land uses and geographical locations, as many authors
have employed this index to their soil quality assessment studies (AbdelRahman &
Mohamed, 2018; Chaudhary et al., 2021; Marzaioli et al., 2010; Mukherjee & Lal, 2014;
Santos-Frances ct al., 2022; Sinha ct al., 2013; Tesfahunegn, 2014). In the recent study of
Santos-Frances et al. (2022), they revealed that the Additive soil quality index can best
reflect the state of the quality of the soil. They also found that this index could provide a
better estimate of soil quality than other indices, such as the Nemero Soil Quality Index,
and was also found to be comparable with the Weighted Additive Soil Quality Index which

involves a more complicated method of index computation.

Moreover, a nonlinear scoring function was also used as the scoring method in the
study, which is necessary for the calculation of the SQI. This scoring function was selected

over the linear (L) scoring function, which is a relatively easier way of obtaining the


indicator scores, due to the fact that many studies have confirmed that it represents system
function better than the linear scores, have resulted in higher SQI values than LSF, and also
showed maximum response to the land usc system impacts on soil quality changes

(Andrews ct al., 2002; Askari & Holden, 2014; Masto ct al., 2008; Sinha ct al., 2013).

The most crucial point about soil quality indexing is that there are no "magic" scores
or ideal ratings because inherent and dynamic features and processes are involved. The
scores on the SQI are always relative, not absolute. The comparisons must be rational (e.g.,
temporal changes or comparisons of practices on soils with similar inherent soil quality

features) and defendable to be meaningful and valuable (Karlen ct al., 2001).

Comparative assessment and reference condition

There is no absolute soil health standard against which an individual soil's condition
can be measured. However, it is still necessary to have a basis for comparison to assess
whether there has been a relative soil improvement or deterioration (Sarrantonio et al.,
1996). A comparison can be made by gathering data from two or more systems (Larson &
Pierce 1994). It is effective for identifying variations in soil attributes and functions among

management approaches that have becn in place for a while (Wienhold ct al., 2004).

Identifying reference values is one stage that will likely benefit from and draw on

the knowledge base of traditional soil morphology and genesis, particularly concerning


inherent chemical and physical indicators (Karlen et al., 2001). Although farm field
conditions are unlikely to return to their original undisturbed form, comparing them to
natural ecosystems or undisturbed arcas might reveal natural limits, such as the highest
organic matter content expected to be obtained under similar soil type and climatic
conditions. As much as possible, the reference area should be close by, have similar parent
material and topography, and be in the same ecosystem as the site was originally under, as
best as can be determined. A native forest might serve as an ideal comparison in some
circumstances, but an undisturbed fencerow may also be adequate (Sarrantonio et al.,

1996).

Dynamic assessment

A dynamic assessment is possible when data from a system is collected over time.
A dynamic assessment is required to determine the magnitude and direction of change in
management practice (Wienhold et al., 2004). Changes and trends over time are the only
sensible approach to project the impacts of soil management or land use on the long-term

viability of a dynamic, living, and ever-changing natural resource (Karlen ct al., 2001).

There is no way to go back in time and establish a bascline state for assessing soil
quality. Hence, Karlen et al. (2008) proposed that evaluating long-term trends for the same
soil within the same management unit requires repeated assessments over time. The critical

baseline is the state or quality of the soil resource at the time of the initial measurements,


whereas the assessment is the trend in response to subsequent soil management actions.
Measurements taken over time (often every 3 to 5 years) will reveal if the methods
implemented are causing the indicators to improve, decline, or remain steady at all scales

- from the smallest cultivated ficld or the whole planet.

Soil resource management

Soil management that degrades the quality of the soil decreases the soil's functional

abilities, whereas stewardship safeguards them (Franzluebbers, 2002). A soil management
system is only sustainable if it preserves or improves soil quality (Larson & Pierce, 1994).

Whereas soil quality assessment offers an opportunity to redesign soil and land

management systems for sustainability (Doran & Parkin, 1994).

We are challenged to establish management strategies that balance food and fiber
production needs with environmental conservation since soil quality involves both a soil's
productive and environmental capacities (Doran & Zeiss, 2000; Lal, 2015; Wander et al.,
2002). Farmers ned strategies or frameworks to help them maintain soil quality because a
mere focus on productivity might have adverse environmental repercussions, and a sole

focus on ecological concerns could jeopardize food and fiber supplics (Wander ct al.,

2002).


The wise use of the limited soil resource is critical for sustainable development
and feeding the world's rising population (Arshad & Martin, 2002). Thus, a basic lack of
understanding will lead to unfavorable resource management decisions (Karlen et al.,
2001). Making decisions based on a better understanding of the different soil
properties and processes would benefit everyone involved more than simply disregarding
the unintended environmental and social consequences of poor soil management or land-

use decisions (Karlen et al., 2001)

Soil resources are limited in quantity, unevenly distributed geographically, and
vulnerable to degradation due to land mismanagement and misuse, but they are critical to
all terrestrial life and human well-being (Lal, 2015). Without secure soil, we cannot be sure
of enough quantities of food and fiber, safe and fresh water, or landscape diversity. We
also limit the ability of the soil to function as a sink in the carbon cycle, and we eliminate
a vital platform for the production of renewable energy sources (McBratney et al., 2014).
Soil security can only be accomplished by preserving and improving the global soil
resource, which necessitates reversing existing degradation processes (Bouma, 2015). The
ultimate goal of soil resource management should be to implement a holistic and integrated
approach. The finite nature of soil resources should never be overlooked; they must be
utilized, enhanced, and restored (Lal, 2015). Given the limited resources and access to
inputs, soil quality management is critical for strengthening and sustaining ecosystem
services (Lal, 2015) and building economic success, particularly in rapidly developing

regions (Qi et al., 2009).

CHAPTER III

CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK

The conceptual framework of the study is presented in Figure 1. It shows that a
teference site has to be included in addition to the selected fruit tree plantations in the soil
quality assessment. The reference site should be close by, have similar parent material and
topography, and be in the same ecosystem as the site was originally under, as best as can
be determined (Sarrantonio et al., 1996). In this study, the adjacent secondary forest was
selected as the reference site, hence termed as reference forest. The inclusion of the
reference site is necessary to have a basis for comparison to assess whether there has been
a relative soil improvement or deterioration (Sarrantonio ct al., 1996). The framework
shows that there were two soil depths that were investigated: 0-30 cm, the upper soil depth,
and 30-60 cm, the lower soil depth. Tolessa & Senbetta (2018) have stated that many
studies generally accept that there is a difference between the two soil depths. There were
selected soil physical, chemical, and biological indicators for soil quality assessment. After
measuring the soil quality indicators, soil quality index computation was done to determine
the overall soil quality, yielding to the identification of management implications and

recommendations to improve soil quality.

Gm, &

Two Soil Depths
Soil Quality Indicators

[ee
Physical | [Chemical | [Biological]

|

Minimum Data Set

|

Soil Quality Index

—
Management implication/ =|
Recommendation

Figure 1. Conceptual framework of the study.

CHAPTER IV

METHODOLOGY

Location of the study

The study was conducted in the Municipality of Bacnotan, a I*' class municipality
in the province of La Union, Philippines (Figure 2). Bacnotan is 283 km from Metro Manila
and 14 km from San Femando, the provincial capital. It has a Type I climate based on
Corona’s Classification System which is characterized as having a distinct dry and wet
season; wet from June to November and dry for the rest of the year. The south-west
monsoon brings an abundant rainfall experienced during the wet season. The relative dry
season is caused by the north-cast monsoon passing over the Cordillera Mountain Range

Average temperature is 27.2 °C (81.0 °F).

The study area was particularly situated in Barangay Casiaman and Barangay
Sapilang, within the vicinity of DMMMSU-North La Union Campus, the lone state
university in the province. It is geographically situated in latitude 16°44” North and
longitude 120°24° East and it covers an arca of approximately 900 hectares. The study area
is 304 km north of Manila and 5 km east of MacArthur Highway (Manila North Road).

The area has a hilly landform with elevation ranging from 40 to 430 mast and the soil types


present are Bauang Clay and San Manuel Silt (Appendix Figure 1). The exact location of

each fruit tree plantations and the reference forest are summarized in Table 1.

N

3 5

| ®

H i Location Map
i i

i 8

HY a

: :

F :

i I

Figure 2. Location of the study.

Site description

Based from the geologic data of the DENR-Mines and Geosciences Bureau (MGB),
the geology of Bacnotan, La Union was characterized to have surface deposits of mostly
marine and terrestrial sediments associated with extensive reef limestone and sporadic
terrace gravel deposits, As well as alluvium composed mainly of clay, silt, sand and gravel

deposits along stream beds and flood plains. Beach deposits and raised coral reefs are


essentially calcareous materials occurring along seashore. Marine clastics overlain by
pyroclastics, associated with silty limestones are also present in the area. In the province

of La Union, limestone was the top mineral export in 2021, according to DENR-MGB.

Four fruit tree plantations were selected for the study, including banana, calamansi,
coffee, and rambutan plantations. These plantations were established in an area that was
previously a part of the existing secondary forest. Therefore, the secondary forest adjacent
to these plantations was also included in the study as the reference site, hence termed as
the reference forest. All the identified plantations are located within the vicinity of
DMMMSU and managed by the university through the College of Agroforestry and
Forestry. An interview to the concerned faculty and staff was conducted, along with field
observations, in order to gain site descriptions and record the activities done on each study
areas. Previous tree species assessment conducted by the DMMMSU-CAFF was also

utilized to describe the reference forest.

Table 1. The geographic coordinates of the fruit tree plantations and reference forest.

GEOGRAPHIC COORDINATES

SITE OO
aatitude Longitude
“Reference forest 16.72472 120,39694
Banana plantation 16.72139 120.3978
Calamansi plantation 16.7200 120.39944
Coffee plantation 16.71722 ~ 120.40194

Rambutan plantation 16.72500 120.39806



Further, a 20 m x 20 m plot was also established to verify and record the existing
tree species in the forest, by identifying all the trees that attained a diameter of not less than
5 cm within the plot. The same size of plot was also established on cach plantation to record
the diameter (25 cm) and height of the fruit trees within the plot. The depths of A-horizon
of each study site were also determined by direct measurement in pits exposed down to a
60.cm depth. A color swatch analysis was also conducted based on the Soil Munsell Color

Chart to determine the color of soil within their respective A-horizon

Soil sampling

Soil sampling for whole-field management (Ackerson, 2018) was conducted on
cach fruit tree plantations and the reference forest. An area of onc hectare was established
on cach of the study site. Subsample collection was distributed across cach identified study
area following a zig-zag pattern of 10 m distance from one subsample to another (Figure
3), to ensure that the entire field is represented. Soil samples were taken directly below the
rim of the crown of the tree (DA-BSWM, 2022). 15 subsamples were collected to form one

composite sample for cach soil depth per study site.

Two soil depths were observed in the study: 0-30 cm and 30-60 cm. A customized
soil auger was used for collecting soil samples by vertically inserting the instrument to the
desired depth. Each subsample belonging to the same soil depth observation for each study

sites were thoroughly mixed, using a trowel, to form a homogenous mixture as composite


sample. The composite samples were removed with unnecessary debris such as roots and
stones and undergone air drying for 7 days. Three representative samples, weighing 2.5
kilograms cach were taken from each of the composite sample, which were placed into
sample bags printed with proper labeling ready for transport to the laboratories for

analyses.

Figure 3. An example of zig-zag sampling pattern for whole field sampling. Subsamples
are collected by traveling in a zig-zag pattem collecting subsamples at cach
location indicated by black dots. Background lines represent the various soil
types in the field (Ackerson, 2018).

For the microbial analysis, representative samples collected were packed

immediately into a sample bag and placed in an ice box to cool, which were then


transported immediately to the laboratory for analysis. Meanwhile, three undisturbed soil
samples in each study sites were randomly collected through the use of soil core sampler

intended for the bulk density test.

Soil processing and analysis

The soil samples were analyzed for 15 selected physical, chemical, and biological
soil quality indicators using standard tests (Table 2). The tests conducted were Hydrometer
Method (Gee & Bauder, 1986), Core Method (Blake & Hartge, 1986a), Pycnometer
Method (Blake & Hartge, 1986b), mathematical computation from particle and bulk
densities (Danielson & Sutherland, 1986), Percolation Method (Bhadha et al., 2017),
Modified Walkley Black Method (Nelson & Sommers, 1982), Potentiometric method
(Thomas, 1996), Ammonium Acetate Extraction/Distillation (Rhoades, 1982; Pratt, 1965),
Bray Method (Bray & Kurtz, 1945), Macro Kjeldahl Method (Bremner, 1960),

Conductivity Test (Rhoades, 1996), and Standard Plate Count Method (DA-BSWM).

The analyses for the soil texture (sand, silt, clay) and particle density were done at
the Soils Laboratory of the Benguct State University ~ College of Agriculture, La Trinidad,
Benguet. The analyses for the soil BD and WHC at the College of Agroforestry and
Forestry (CAFF) Laboratory, DMMMSU, Bacnotan, La Union. The analyses for the SOM,
soil pH, CEC, available P, exchangeable K and EC were done at the Soils and Plant Tissue

Laboratory of the Sericulture Research and Development Institute, DMMMSU, Bacnotan,


La Union. While the analyses for the total N, and bacterial and fungal population count
were done at the Laboratory Services Division of the Department of Agriculture ~ Bureau

of Soils and Water Management (DA-BSWM), Diliman, Quezon City.

Table 2. Soil indicators evaluated, their standard tests, and references for their

methodologies.
Soil indicators Standard test Reference for
methodology
Soil Physical Indicators
1. Soil texture (sand, silt, Hydrometer Method Gee & Bauder, 1986
clay)
2. Soil bulk density (BD) Core Method Blake & Hartge, 1986a
3. Particle density (PD) Pycnometer Method Blake & Hartge, 1986b
4. Soil porosity Computation from BD and Danielson & Sutherland,
5. Soil water holding _ Percolation method Bhadha ct al., 2017
capacity (WHC)

Soil Chemical Indicators
6. Soil Organic Matter Modified Walkley Black Nelson & Sommers,

(SOM) Method 1982
7. Soil pH Potentiometric method Thomas, 1996
8. Cation Exchange Ammonium Acetate Rhoades, 1982
Capacity (CEC) Extraction/Distillation
9. Available Phosphorus Bray Method Bray & Kurtz, 1945
(P)
10. Exchangeable Ammonium Acctate Pratt, 1965
Potassium (K) Extraction/Distillation
11. Total Nitrogen (N) Macro Kjeldahl Method Bremner, 1960
12, Electrical Conductivity Conductivity Test. Rhoades, 1996
(EC)
Soil Biological Indicator
13. Earthworm count Counting the average Tesfahunegn, 2014
number of earthworms ina
soil sample
14. Bacteria count Standard Plate count DA-BSWM

15. Fungi count Standard Plate count DA-BSWM.


For the determination of bacterial and fungal count, the method used was microbial
plate count. A series of dilution was done to the soil samples to be able to count 30-300
bacterial and fungal colonics. While soil porosity was derived using a mathematical

formula involving the bulk density and particle density, as shown in the formula below.
Percent porosity (1 - 2) «100

Where:
BD = bulk density

PD = particle density

The procedure in determining earthworm population count was conducted on each
study site by selecting three random soil samples (25 x 25 x 60 cm) from a | m? area that
will be sieved to separate and then count the average number of earthworms in cach study
site, following the methodology of Tesfahunegn (2014). A combination of both soil depths
was also analyzed in the study forming the total depth (0-60 cm). The data gathered from
the upper and lower depth for each of the soil quality indicators under various study sites
were also combined, by means of mathematical computation, to form the total soil depth

(0-60 cm).


Soil Quality Index Computation

After measuring the 15 soil quality indicators using field and laboratory analyses,
computing the SQI values were carried out. The process of soil quality indexing followed
three basic steps (Figure 4). These steps are indicator selection, interpretation/scoring, and
integration into index value (Andrews et al., 2002; Andrews & Carroll, 2001; Karlen et al.,

2003; Masto et al., 2008).

(1) Indicator selection’

‘Minimum data set

: ini) ERR] iar

2) Interpretation

L

[Score] [Score Score

Index value

Figure 4. A conceptual model for computing soil quality indices (Andrews, 1998 as cited
by Tesfahunegn, 2014).

Score

Indicator selection

The 15 soil quality indicators were selected because of their sensitivity to land use

and management practices, ability to describe major soil processes, capability of available


laboratory for testing, costs of tests and financial consideration. Soil quality assessment is
based on the selection of representative soil indicators (Jiang et al., 2020). Standardized
principal component analysis (PCA) was used for the sclection of the minimum data sct
(MDS) following the procedure elaborated by Andrews ct al. (2002); Andrews & Carroll

(2001); and Dunteman (1989).

Principal components (PCs) for a data set are defined as linear combinations of the
variables that account for maximum variance within the set by describing vectors of closest
fit to the n observations in p-dimensional space, subject to being orthogonal to onc another
(Dunteman, 1989). One-way analysis of variance was performed on the 15 indicators,
separately analyzing the fraction of sand, silt and clay for the soil texture, to assess the
influence of fruit tree plantations and the reference forest on soil indicators. Only those
indicators having a significant difference (P < 0.05) among the five sites were utilized for
the PCA to select key properties for the MDS. As assumed by Andrews ct al. (2002), PCs
receiving high eigenvalues best represent variation in the systems. Therefore, only the PCs
with eigenvalues >1 were examined in this study. A VARIMAX rotation was also
performed on selected PCs in order to enhance interpretability of the uncorrelated

components (Qiu ct al., 2019).

Under a particular PC, cach indicator was given a weight or factor loading that
represents the contribution of that indicator to the composition of the PC. Only the highly
weighted indicators were retained trom each PC for the MDS. Highly weighted factor

loadings were defined as having absolute values 20.40. When there is only one highly


loaded indicator within a PC, this indicator will be retained in the MDS. However, this
study had more than one factor that was retained under a single PC. Therefore, a
multivariate correlation coefficient was used to determine if the indicators could be
considered redundant and, therefore, climinated from the MDS. If the highly loaded
indicators were observed to be not well correlated (r<0.70) then each will be considered
important, and thus, retained in the MDS. Among well correlated variables (>0.70), the
variable with the highest factor loading (absolute value) will be chosen for the MDS

(Andrews et al., 2002; Qiu et al., 2019).

Indicator transformation (scoring)

After selecting the MDS using PCA, each value was transformed for inclusion in
the SQI method examined using the non-linear scoring function (Chaudhary ct al., 2021).
The selected indicators were nonlinearly transformed into a score between 0 and | which

was achieved using the equation:

a
—on
(1+ %))
Where:
S = Score of indicator

a= maximum score (=1)


X = soil indicator value
Xo = mean value of indicator
b = value of the slope (-2.5 = ‘more is better’; 2.5 = ‘less is

better’)

Indicators were ranked in ascending or descending order depending on whether a
higher value is considered “good” or “bad” in terms of soil function. The ‘more is better’
curve was applied for the indicators such as CEC, total N and earthworm population count.
The ‘less is better’ curve was applied for the indicators such as BD and PD. While for some
indicators, such as soil pH, soil porosity and EC, observations were scored as ‘higher is
better’ up to a threshold value (e.g. pH 6.5) then scored as ‘lower is better’ above the

threshold.

Integrating indicator scores into SQI

The transformed indicator scores were used to derive the soil quality index values
using the Additive Soil Quality Index (SQI) (Askari & Holden, 2014; Masto et al., 2008),
In this method, the sclected MDS indicators are integrated into the index by summing the
scores from individual indicators and dividing by the total number of indicators. The

equation for the SQI:


Sql =) sin
T

where SQI is the soil quality index, 5; is the indicator score, and nis the number of soil
indicators in the MDS. Higher SQI values mean better soil function and soil process, and
reflect the positive effects of land use changes. The SQI values were then compared with

the reference forest to assess the degree of soil degradation or improvement.

To further interpret the result of the SQI, a classification criteria of the soil quality
for the minimum data set was used based from the study of Li et al. (2018), as also adopted

by Klimkowicz-Pawlas et al. (2019), presented on Table 3

Table 3. Classification criteria of the soil quality (Li et al., 2018).

Soil Quality Grade
Indicator ~ Grade 1 Grade2 Grade 3 Grade4 Grade 5
Very high High Moderate Low Very low
sql >0.60 0.55-0.60  0.45-0.54 0.38-0.44 <0.38

Statistical Analysis

The normality of data was tested using the Shapiro-Wilk normality test. To
determine the effects of fruit tree plantations on the different soil quality indicators, F-test

was used as the test procedure. This was done by constructing a One-way analysis of


variance (ANOVA) at 0.05 level of significance, wherein the result of each soil quality
indicators was used as the response variables and the four fruit tree plantations and one
reference forest as the treatment levels. Kruskal-Wallis, a nonparametric test, was also
performed for the indicators that showed a non-normal data distribution. For a statistically
significant result, a post hoc analysis was conducted with Tukey’s Honestly Significant
Difference (HSD) as the procedure to determine which treatment has a different mean
value. Dunn’s Multiple Comparison tests was also used for the post-hoc analysis when the
Kruskal-Wallis test was used. Both multivariate correlation and PCA analyses were used
to select the MDS indicators. All statistical analyses were generated using Rstudio v. 2022

(R Core Team, 2022).

CHAPTER V

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Site descriptions

Fruit tree plantations

The selected fruit tree plantations are banana, calamansi, coffee, and rambutan tree
plantations. These plantations are all located within the Agroforestry Research and Demo-
Farm of DMMMSU and were established as income generating projects of the university.
These were managed by the College of Agroforestry and Forestry and also being utilized
for academic purposes that cater students and rescarchers particularly under the BS
Agriculture, BS Agribusiness Management, BS Agroforestry, BS Forestry and MS
Agroforestry programs offered by the university. These fruit tree plantations are generally
situated in flat to rolling terrain, while the main source of irrigation is rainwater. The area
where these plantations were established was previously a part of the existing secondary

forest that was considered in this study as the reference forest.

The banana plantation has an estimated area of | ha, established in 2000 (22 years
old). The spacing used in planting was 3 m x 3 m. The saba variety (Musa sp.) was

dominantly planted within the area and has an average height of 3.6 m. Maintenance

St

activities include cleaning and removal of fallen vegetative parts of the banana plants.
Harvesting activities are being done all year round. It was also found that the A-horizon in

this plantation is 12 cm thick, and has a color of brown.

The calamansi plantation has an estimated area of | ha that was established in 1986
(36 years old). The spacing used in planting was 5 mx 5 m which approximately comprises
a total of 400 calamansi fruit trees with an average height of 3.87 m and an average
diameter of 13 cm. It was observed that most of the plants have been coppiced which
allowed for the regrowth of two or three stems. Management activities include annual
application of fertilizers; as well as weeding, pruning and other minimal maintenance
activities, Harvesting activities are also being done all year round. This plantation has an

A-horizon of 8 cm depth, and classified as color light yellowish brown.

The coffee plantation has an estimated area of 2 ha that was established in 1982 (40
years old). The spacing used in planting was 2 m x 3 m which approximatcly compriscs of
3,000 coffee fruit trees of mixed variety dominated by Coffea excelsa A. Chev. The coffee
plants have a mean diameter of 6.8 cm and a mean height of 6.4 m. Management activities
include application of fertilizers, as well as weeding, pruning and other minimal
maintenance activities. Harvesting is being done during its fruiting scason, usually at the
1* quarter of every ycar. It was observed that when harvesting coffee fruits, trees that
attained taller heights were usually pollarded and the cut stem of the trees, along with their
branches and leaves, were left within the orchard floor. The A-horizon of this plantation

was found to have a color of brown and recorded a depth of 30 cm.


Figure 5. Fruit tree plantations assessed in the study: a) banana; b) calamansi; c) coffee;
and d) rambutan plantations.

The rambutan plantation has a total area of 1.17 ha, established in 2000 (22 years
old). The spacing used in planting was 8 mx 8 m which approximately comprises a number
of 180 rambutan trees. The trees have an average height of 9.3 m and an average diameter
of 21.1 cm. Management activities include fertilization every after seasonal fruit harvest,
watering (flooding) during summer period; as well as weeding, pruning and other minimal
maintenance activities. The fruiting season of the rambutan is usually from August to
October, hence the schedule of harvesting. Rambutan fruits are harvested when fully ripe

on the tree. The color of its A-horizon was observed to be brown and has a depth of 15 cm.


Reference forest

The reference site used was the existing secondary forest in the area, hence termed
as reference forest in this study. It was described to composc of various species of animals
and plants, mostly indigenous/endemic, that dominates the landscape of DMMMSU,
Bacnotan, La Union. Some parts of this reference forest were already converted into other
land uses such as the different fruit tree plantations. The reference forest was also

undergone cnrichment planting of tree species such as teak (Tectona grandis L.f.)

Previous tree species assessment conducted within the arca showed that the
secondary forest is dominated by 23 various tree species belonging to I families such as
Lamiaceae, Fabaceae, Meliaceae, Anacardiaceae, Moraceae and Dipterocarpaceae. Some
of the tree species include Intsia bijuga (Colebr.) 0. Kuntze, Anisoptera thurifera (Blanco)

Blume, Vitex parviflora Ju:

Pterocarpus indicus Willd., Mangifera indica L.,
Dracontomelon dao (Blanco) Mert. & Rolfe, Parkia timoriana (DC.) Merr., Broussonetia
luzonica (Blanco), Canarium asperum Benth., Ficus septica Burm. f., Swietenia
macrophylla King, Tamarindus indica L., Wrightia pubescens R.Br., Sandoricum koetjape
(Burm, f.) Merr., and Leucaena leucocephala (Lam.) de Wit, among others. The average
diameter of cach of the tree species ranges from 23 cm, which was attained by Vitex
parviflora Juss, to 109.5 cm, which was the average diameter attained by Parkia timoriana

(DC.) Mert.


Tectona grandis L.f. has the largest population within the reference forest. Based
on local knowledge, teak was first introduced in the reference forest around 1970s through
enrichment planting. As this species observed to be well adapted in the area may explain

its increased population through time.

The established 20 m x 20 m plot have also likely recorded the same species, such
as Tectona grandis L.f, Pterocarpus indicus Willd, and Swietenia macrophylla King.
Other tree species observed were Streblus asper Lour. and Semecarpus cuneiformis
Blanco., as well as Oncosperma tigillarium (Jack) Ridl., a species of palm. The largest
mean diameter and tallest mean height of the tree species was measured from the

Pterocarpus indicus Willd. with 72.67 cm and 29.33 m, respectively.

Sapahian, 12.39726
cay fm

Figure 6. Reference forest assessed in the study.

Presence of shrubs and other understory vegetation were also observed in the area.

While a moderately thick layer of forest litters (approximately 2 cm deep) above the forest.


soil was noticed that is composed of fallen leaves, branches and other plant debris. Little
to no anthropogenic disturbance or activities was observed in the area. It has an A-horizon

depth that was observed to be yellowish brown in color and is 30 cm thick.

Characterization of soil quality indicators in the
different fruit tree plantations

Soil texture

The results of the study found no significant differences in the soil texture of the
various fruit tree plantations and the reference forest, at both depths. For the total depth (0-
60 cm), only the fraction of clay displayed significant difference when the rambutan
plantation recorded a significantly lower value compared to the rest of the sites assessed.
Silty clay loam was recorded as the soil textural classification of most of the sites observed,
including the reference forest, banana, calamansi and coffee plantations. While the
rambutan plantation has a soil texture classified as silt loam. The fraction of sand was found
highest in the rambutan plantation at the upper, lower and total soil depths with 18.39%,
18.09% and 18.24%, respectively. However, the lowest fraction of sand was attained in the
calamansi plantation at two depths (0-30 cm and 0-60 cm), both attaining 17.53%, while
the reference forest at 30-60 cm depth attained a value of 17.40%. Meanwhile, the
rambutan plantation consistently recorded the highest silt content at all depths with 55.12%

in the upper, 55.48% in the lower and 55.3% for the total soil depth. While the banana


plantation (0-30 cm depth), calamansi plantation (30-60 cm depth) and reference forest (0-
60 cm depth) attained the lowest silt content of 53.90%, 54.35% and 54,16%, respectively.
Lastly, the lowest fraction of clay was found in the rambutan plantation at all depths (upper,
lower, total soil depth) with 26.50%, 26.42% and 26.46, respectively. While the highest
fraction of clay at all depths was recorded in the reference forest with 28.34% in the 0-30

cm depth, 28.21% in the 30-60 cm depth, and 28.28% in the 0-60 cm depth (Figure 7).

Forest Banana Cala

psi Coffee Rambutan

Figure 7. Clay (%) content under the 0-60 cm soil depth. Bars with the same letters are not
significantly different from each other.

The texture of a soil in the field is not readily subject to change, so it is considered
a basic permanent property of a soil (Weil & Brady, 2017). This is in accordance with the
result of the present study where land use has generally found no significant influence on
soil texture, except only for the percentage clay within the total soil depth which was
believed not to be heavily influenced by the change of land use but rather as maybe

Pronounced by its soil type. However, Fentie et al. (2020) mentioned that even though the


texture is an inherent soil property, management practices may contribute indirectly to the
changes in particle size distribution particularly in the surface layers as a result of removal
of soil by sheet and rill erosions, and mixing up of the surface and the subsurface layers

during continuous tillage activities.

The previous study of Samani et al. (2018) strengthens the findings of Fentie et al.
(2020), where they observed that land-use change from forest to orchard, agriculture, and
agroforestry affects soil texture by increasing the amount of soil clay and silt and decreased
the amount of soil sand. As they mentioned, their observation may be duc to the disruption
of soil and plowing where soil organic matter becomes oxidized and climinated. Hence,
this change leads to collapse of larger soil aggregates into smaller ones. But the present
study observed no increase in clay and significant increase in silt contents within the fruit
tree plantations compared to the reference forest. In fact, generally greater sand contents
were observed in the fruit tree plantations compared to the reference forest. The findings
of the present study also corroborate with the study of Tesfahunegn (2013), where he found
lesser % sand and greater % clay in the natural forest land compared to other land use such
as in tree plantations and other cultivated fields. Nevertheless, the comparable results
found, specifically at the upper and lower depth, for the soil particle distribution of the
various fruit tree plantations to that of the reference forest may also be due to a lesser
intensive cultivation taking place in the former which may have helped maintain a likely

condition to that of the latter.


Overall, the textural classes identified in the present study all belong under the
medium-textured soils or loams which have a more even distribution between clay and
sand particles. Medium-textured soils generally are very productive soils that allow for
sufficient water infiltration without excessive drainage and have good water holding

capacity and nutrient retention (Ritchey et al., 2015).

Soil bulk density

The lowest bulk density (BD) of 0.92 g/cm? was obtained under the reference forest
and was revealed to be significantly lower than all the fruit tree plantations observed in the
study. On the other hand, the highest BD was recorded in the calamansi plantation (1.153
g/cm’) followed by the banana, rambutan, and coffee plantations with BD of 1.147 g/cm’,
1.11 g/m’, and 1.087 g/cm’, respectively, as presented in Figure 8. However, the values
obtained from the different fruit tree plantations were significantly comparable with each
other and still within the optimum BD for fruit tree growth which ranges from 1.00 to 1.30
g/cm’, according to Wei et al. (2021). Further, all the values obtained were not found to be
greater than 1.55 g/cm’ which is sct to limit soil conditions for plant growth, specifically
under the silt loam soil texture classification (Kaufmann ct al., 2010). The BD values
revealed in the study might have affected by the canopy cover of the different sites
evaluated. The calamansi plantation have poorer canopy cover compared to the rest of the
plantations and forest observed. Wherein with the thin canopy structure of a calamansi

plant and a 5m x 5m spacing used in the plantation, it is evident that there is a lesser


interception potential of the plantation from rain drops that may contribute to soil
compaction. Also, management activities done in the site may influence the increased BD
compared to arcas with minimal to none anthropogenic activities or disturbances, such as
in the reference forest as observed in the study. A relatively higher BD was also seen at the
banana plantation compared to the rambutan and coffee plantations which have both

greater canopy covers compared to the former.

Forest Banana Calamansi Coffee Rambutan

Figure 8. Bulk density under the 0-30 cm soil depth. Bars with the same letters are not
significantly different from cach other.

The results of the BD relate to the study of Fentie et al. (2020) where BD was
reported to be higher in cultivated land and eucalyptus plantation compared to the forest
land. Similar studies (Bizuhoraho et al., 2018; Chowdhury et al., 2007; and Maru et al.,
2015) also support that BD in forest lands were found to be lower than in other land uses,

such as in cultivated lands, grazing lands, forest tree plantations and orchards.


Particle density

The present study revealed significant differences across various plantations and
reference forest at all soil depths. In the upper soil depth, the highest particle density (PD)
was attained by the rambutan plantation with 2.17 g/cm’, it was revealed to be
insignificantly different from the values gathered in the banana and coffee plantations with
2.03 and 1.92 g/cm’, respectively. On the other hand, the lowest PD was obtained in the
reference forest with 1.76 g/cm? followed by the calamansi plantation with 1.79 g/em?,
these sites were found to be comparable with cach other, as shown in Figure 9. At the lower
soil depth, the rambutan plantation consistently attained the highest PD with 2.16 g/cm’, it
was found to be significantly different from the calamansi plantation which attained the
lowest PD of 1.69 g/cm? While the coffee plantation (1.95 g/cm*), reference forest (1.85
g/cm) and banana plantation (1.79 g/cm?) were found to be insignificantly different from
the sites attaining the highest and the lowest values. In terms of the total soil depth, the
rambutan plantation recorded the highest (2.17 g/cm?) and was found to be significantly
greater than the rest of the sites observed following the order coffee plantation > banana
plantation > reference forest > calamansi plantation, with 1,93, 1.91, 1.81 and 1.74 gicm’,

Tespectively.

In the discussion of Weil & Brady (2017), they mentioned that particle densities for
most mineral soils vary between the narrow limits of 2.60 and 2.75 g/cm? because quartz,
feldspar, micas, and the colloidal silicates that usually make up the major portion of mineral

soils all have densities within this range. They further discussed that for general


calculations concerning arable mineral surface soils (1%-5% organic matter), a particle
density of about 2.65 g/cm’ may be assumed if the actual particle density is not known
(Weil & Brady, 2017). However, the values obtained in the present study were observed to
be lower than the abovementioned gencral limits and standard PD. This observation is
similar with the result in the study of Chimdi et al. (2012) as they also found lower PD in
different land use, including forest, grazing and cultivated lands. Chimdi et al. (2012)
further revealed greater PD in cultivated than in forest land, this is also particularly related
to the result obtained in the upper soil depth in the present study where the reference forest
obtained lower value compared to the fruit tree plantations. Additionally, the PD within
the 30-60 cm soil depth in the reference forest was also found to be lower than the rambutan
and coffee plantations while the other two plantations, being lower than the reference
forest, were still recorded insignificantly different. While the reference forest for the total
soil depth was found to be lower among all fruit tree plantations, except for the calamansi

plantation but was not found to be significantly different.

In the study of Khaledian et al. (2016), the variability of PD in different land use
may also be influenced by human activities, such as heavy and frequent human and
machinery traffic, which likely affect an increased valuc of PD, as with BD (Khaledian ct
al., 2016). In the present study, the different fruit tree plantations are frequently visited by
farm managers and other affiliated individuals, especially constituents of the university, to
conduct management activities, harvesting, and site visitation, which may also explain why

most plantations, regardless of soil depth, have generally attained greater PD.


B0-30em 930-60 em



120-60 em

ab

Forest Banana

Calamansi Coffee

Rambutan

Figure 9, Particle density under various soil depths. Bars with similar letters of the same

soil depth are not significantly different from each other.

Soil porosity

Within the 0-30 cm depth, the highest percentage soil porosity was attained by the

rambutan plantation with 48.77% which was found to be statistically comparable with the

reference forest, coffee and banana plantations with 47.41%, 43.30% and 43.27%,

respectively (Figure 10). The lowest percentage of soil porosity was significantly attained

by the calamansi plantation with 35.38%. Out of the four fruit tree plantations observed,

three plantations recorded a lower soil porosity than the reference forest, while the other

was found comparable with the latter. This may be due to the greater disturbance of the

land under the various plantations compared to the reference forest. The result of the

present study is also related to the findings of other studies where they found greater soil


porosity in reference forest compared to other land use, such as cultivated and grazing lands
(Bizuhoraho et al., 2018; Chimadi et al., 2012; Selassie & Ayana, 2013; Tesfahunegn,
2013). It can also be observed in this study that the highest bulk density which was attained
in the calamansi plantation may have corresponded to attaining the lowest soil porosity of
the same. It is known that as the bulk density of soil gets higher, the soil porosity becomes
lower (Tanveera et al., 2016). Additionally, according to Ritchey et al. (2015), a soil with
a finer texture has greater surface area and smaller soil pores. Further, in sandy soils, the
decrease in porosity is less; it is higher in soils having higher clay content (Indoria ct al.,
2020). This somehow explains why the calamansi plantation with the least sand content in
its soil textural fraction have lesser porosity compared to all other sites, while the rambutan
plantation having a relatively higher sand fraction in its soil texture among all sites also

recorded the highest total soil porosity.

Forest Banana Calamansi Coffee Rambutan

Figure 10. Soil porosity under the 0-30 cm soil depth. Bars with the same letters are not
significantly different from each other.


Based on the reports from other studies, high organic matter and earthworms, along
with other soil biota, that play an important role in the decomposition of organic material
and altering soil structure by redistributing soil and organic matters, contribute to
increasing of soil porosity (Bizuhoraho et al., 2018; Chimdi ct al., 2012; Indoria et al.,
2020). Additionally, organic matter has generally a lower particle density and can increase
soil porosity (Ramananjatovo et al., 2021). However, the present study found

inconsistencies with these soil indicators to soil porosity.

Soil water holding capacity

The result of the Water holding capacity (WHC) in the present study revealed that
the reference forest yielded the highest value of 48.67% in the 0-30 cm depth, it was found
comparable to the 45.33% WHC attained by the coffee plantation, as presented in Figure
11. On the other hand, the lowest WHC in the 0-30 cm depth was obtained in the rambutan
plantation with a yield of 36%, followed by the banana and calamansi plantations, with a
WHC of 41.33% and 42%, respectively. While the highest WHC obtained in the 30-60 cm
depth was recorded in the banana plantation with 47.33%, It is comparable to coffe and
calamansi plantations which yielded a WHC of 45.33% and 44.67%, respectively.
Meanwhile, the reference forest recorded 43.33%. The lowest maximum WHC in the 30-
60 cm depth was again obtained in the rambutan plantation with 36.33%. The values

obtained for the total soil depth also revealed that the lowest value was found in the


rambutan plantation, with a mean of 37.17%. This plantation was recorded to be
significantly lower compared to other sites for all the examined soil depths. On the other
hand, the highest value in the total soil depth was found in the reference forest with 46%,
and was comparable to coffee, banana and calamansi plantations with 45.33%, 44.33% and

43.33%, respectively.

Oem 30-60 em 0-60 em

A a3 ab ab
ab aba
b 5 b

°
Forest Banana Calamansi Coffee Rambutan

Figure 11. Soil water holding capacity under various soil depths. Bars with similar letters
of the same soil depth are not significantly different from cach other.

Squire et al. (2015) supports the result of the study which they mentioned that
agricultural exploitation may result in the decrease in WHC, particularly in upper soil
layers. Furthermore, it is known that sand has lower WHC than silt and clay soil textures
(Rai et al., 2017). Therefore, the greater sand fraction recorded in the rambutan plantation

compared to other sites, may also explain why this plantation also recorded the lowest


value in terms of the WHC. Inversely, the reference forest, banana, calamansi and coffee
plantations that were categorized to have a soil texture of silty clay loam has greater WHC
due to their generally higher % clay content compared to the silt loam soil of the rambutan
plantation. In addition to this, though the rambutan plantation recorded the highest total
porosity in the present study, its higher sand fraction may have contained larger pores
making it more difficult to hold soil water against gravity and causing it to have higher

water infiltration rate.

Soil organic matter

In this study, all the data gathered for the SOM within two soil depths, as well as
the total depth, across different sites revealed no significant differences. Nevertheless, the
reference forest had the highest SOM content of 3.53% and 3.12% in the upper and total
soil depths. Within the 30-60 cm depth, the rambutan plantation attained an increased SOM
of approximately 21% to that of the reference forest, as the rambutan plantation recorded
the highest SOM of 3.29% followed by the reference forest having only 2.71% SOM. The
sites that recorded the lowest SOM contents were the rambutan plantation with 1.74% in
the 0-30 cm depth, the calamansi plantation with 1.53% in the 30-60 cm depth, and the
banana plantation with 2.15% in the total soil depth. Furthermore, all the values obtained
fall into low (1.0% — 2.0%) to medium (2.1% - 4.2%) SOM content category based on DA-

BSWM.


The forest attaining the highest SOM in the upper and total depths might be directly
related to the rich forest litters contained in its soil surface as contributed by the various
plant species in the area. This result corroborates the study of Guimaraes ct al. (2014)
wherein they found that the change in land use from native forest to fruit crops reduced
SOM content and reduced soil quality. As well as to other studies (Bravo-Espinosa et al.,
2012; Emiru and Gebrekidan, 2013; and Wang and Wang, 2011) where the forest area
favored a higher SOM content than in tree plantations and other cultivated fields.
Additionally, the fruit tree plantations tend to have lower SOM content due to the lesser
canopy cover and minimal crop residues in the soil surface of these areas which also
weakens their capacity to minimize soil erosion. According to Sullivan et al. (2019), soil
erosion must be controlled as a prerequisite to increasing SOM, as SOM concentration,
which is lighter than mineral soil particles, is highest at the soil surface where it is the
source of croded topsoil. However, the soils in the rambutan plantation increased in its
SOM content with depth. This is probably due to an increase in soil density with depth in

the rambutan plantation, reducing aeration and decomposition of the SOM.

In addition, the SOM content of the fruit tree plantations and the reference forest
may also have an effect on the different soil physical indicators observed from cach site,
such as soil BD. Relatively higher biomass production in the forest land causes continuous
litter addition to the soil that rendered the low BD of the soil as compared to other land
uses, such as crop and grazing lands (Fentie et al., 2020). The presence of organic matter
on surface soils also lowers PD (Chimdi et al., 2012). Hence, the lower PD in the reference

forest compared to the plantations may be due to the generally higher SOM content of the


soils found in the former. Furthermore, the present study agrees with the findings of
Tesfahunegn (2013) where he found that the variation in soil WHC among the different
land use and soil management systems could be associated with differences in SOM or clay
content or their combined effects on soil structure. Ouyang ct al. (2018) discussed that a
higher BD and a lower SOM can cause a decrease in the soil WHC. This may explain the
result of the study where a higher BD and a lower SOM were recorded in the fruit tree
plantations compared to the reference forest, thereby resulting a higher WHC in the latter

particularly within the upper and total soil depths.

Soil pH

According to Homeck ct al. (2011), most crops grow best when the soil pH is
between 6.0 and 8.2, as in the present study, all the data gathered fall under this range.
Results revealed significant differences in upper and total depths, except in the lower depth.
Within the 0-30 cm soil depth, the highest value was attained by the calamansi plantation
with 7.40 pH level, which were classified to be moderately alkaline, but was observed to
be statistically comparable with the reference forest, banana plantation and rambutan
plantation with 7.27, 7.08 and 6.69 pH level, respectively, Wherein these areas fall under
neutral range of soil pH. The lowest pH level was attained significantly by the coffee
plantation with 6.27 pH level, which was classified to be slightly acidic. On the other hand,

the highest pH level within the lower soil depth was recorded in the banana plantation with


7.37 pH level, but was not observed to be statistically significant from all other sites. The
rambutan plantation, calamansi plantation and reference forest, with 7.30, 7.14 and 7.10
pH level, respectively, were classified under the ncutral soil pH range, including the banana
plantation. The lowest pH level was again recorded in the coffee plantation having 6.08 pH
level and was classified to be slightly acidic. Consistent with the upper depth, the calamansi
plantation also attained the highest pH level of 7.27 in the total depth, that was found
comparable with the banana plantation, reference forest and rambutan plantation with 7.23,
7.19 and 7.00 pH levels, respectively (Figure 12). All categorized under the neutral pH
range. While the statistically lowest pH was attained in the coffee plantation with a value

of 6.17, categorized as slightly acidic, as have also been found in the upper and lower depth.

0-30 em 0-60 em

Forest Banana Calamansi Coffee Rambutan

Figure 12. Soil pH under 0-30 and 0-60 cm soil depths. Bars with si
soil depth are not significantly different from each other.

ilar letters of the same



The result of the study was also evident in the study conducted by Hanisch et al.
(2011) where they found a significantly lower pH level in a coffee agroforestry system
compared to forest sites and grasslands in Indonesia. As well as the study of Abera and
Wolde-Meskel (2013) where they observed that the soils in an agroforestry coffce
plantation had a slightly acidic condition compared to other crop lands which were

recorded to be slightly and strongly alkaline across the soil profile.

Surprisingly, both soil depths, including the total depth, in the reference forest were
classified under the neutral soil pH. As Osman (2013) stated, most forest plants favor
slightly to moderately acid soil conditions. At least, soils in their natural habitats are acidic.
However, he further stated that for some tree species, such as teak, grow well on well-
drained, deep, fertile soils of pH above 6.5. In this study, Tectona grandis is a common
tree species found within the reference forest. Furthermore, the geology of Bacnotan, La
Union, as described earlier, may also explain the range of pH levels recorded in the study

area,

Except for the coffee plantation, the other fruit tree plantations were classified to
be nonacidic and were found to be comparable with the reference forest, this may be due
to the minimal fertilization being done in the different fruit tree plantations. In further
support to the result of the study, Liao ct al. (2012) concluded in their meta-analysis on soil
properties between natural and planted forests that the effect of plantations on soil pH was
to a certain extent determined by their reference systems. Nevertheless, the various pH

levels found in the study were generally less varied, particularly between the reference

n

forest, banana, calamansi and rambutan plantations. This was in accordance to the study of
Liao et al. (2012) in which their results showed that soil pH did not differ between

plantations and natural forests across various factors.

Cation exchange capacity

In this study, the influence of land use in the cation exchange capacity (CEC) for
the two soil depths, including the total depth, were found to be significant. Highest CEC in
the upper soil depth was attained by the calamansi plantation with 19.6 m.c./100g soil, but
it was revealed to be comparable with the reference forest, rambutan, and banana plantation
with 17.82, 17.62 and 7.45 m.e./100g soil, respectively. Significantly lowest value was
attained by the coffee plantation with 4.65 m.e./100g soil, but was found not to be
significantly different with the banana plantation. On the other hand, the highest CEC value
within the lower soil depth was obtained by the reference forest with 15.23 m.e./100g soil
and it was found to be significantly different against the banana, coffee and calamansi
plantations, recording 9.04, 5.04, and 4.67 m.e./100g soil, respectively. While the rambutan
plantation (10.88 m.c./100g soil) was found to be comparable with the reference forest and
attained the highest CEC among all plantations, as shown in Figure 13. Consistently, results
of the total depth also found that the forest had the highest CEC of 16.52 m.c./100g soil, it
was found to be comparable with rambutan and calamansi plantations with 14.25 and 12.13
m.e./100g soil, respectively. On the other hand, the lowest CEC value for the total depth

was attained by the coffee plantation (4.85 m.e./100g soil), as in accordance to what was


observed in the upper soil depth, which was found comparable to the banana plantation

with 8.24 m.e./100g soil.
120-30 cm 1230-60 em 0-60 em
25 7
a
2041 Ff Fy a ab
o ab
be
10 a» A ;
o
Forest fanana Calamansi coffee Rambutan

Figure 13. Cation exchange capacity under various soil depths. Bars with similar letters of
the same soil depth are not significantly different from each other.

All the values obtained were categorized to be very low (<5), low (5-14.9) to
medium (15-24.9) CEC ratings based on the soil fertility rating chart presented by Chhetri
et al. (2020). The reference forest recorded medium CEC while most of the fruit tree
plantations recorded low to very low CEC, regardless of depth. These plantations attaining
low to very low CEC values might be attributed to leaching and soil erosion which occurs
more frequently in agricultural lands than in forest areas. Low CEC implies that soil will
have less exchangeable cations required as crop nutrients, nutrients are weakly adsorbed

and hence may be leached out (Tellen & Yerima, 2018). The result of the present study

B

also relates to the findings of Fentie et al. (2020) where they found greater CEC values
within 0-40 soil depth in forest areas compared to other land uses, such as eucalyptus
plantation, grazing land and cultivated land. Further, they also cited that the depletion of
exchangeable bases as a result of intensive cultivation and application of inorganic

fertilizer also caused for a decrease in CEC values under cultivated lands.

According to Horneck et al. (2011), soils with high clay and/or organic matter
content have high CEC while sandy, low organic matter soils have low CEC. In the present
study, higher OM contents and greater fraction of clay in the soil textures of the reference
forest and calamansi plantation within the upper and total soil depth, and within the lower
soil depth of the reference forest may explain why these areas also attained higher CEC
values. In addition, the higher CEC value of the rambutan plantation compared to other
sites within the 30-60 cm and total depth may also relate to the fact that a high OM content
was also recorded in the rambutan plantation despite of having a higher sand fraction

compared to other sites, particularly within the lower soil depth

Available phosphorus

This study revealed no significant differences among all the data gathered for the
available phosphorus (P) content of the soils from the two soil depths, including the total
depth, across all sites. The available P content recorded in the 0-30 cm depth followed the

order rambutan plantation > banana plantation > calamansi plantation > coffee plantation


> reference forest, and ranged from 32.67 ppm to 37.67 ppm. In the 30-60 cm depth, the
values ranged from 27.67 ppm to 39.33 ppm. It follows the order coffee plantation >
calamansi plantation > banana plantation > reference forest > rambutan plantation. While
in the total depth, available P contents ranged from 32.33 ppm to 36.33 ppm, which follows
the order coffee plantation > banana plantation > calamansi plantation > rambutan
plantation > reference forest. All the available P measured in this study are categorized to
be high, based on the index of P availability suggested by Homeck et al. (2011). In this

case, P application is generally not recommended in these areas.

As discussed by Weil & Brady (2017), the total quantity of phosphorus in most
soils is low, with most of what is present in forms quite unavailable to plants, often because
they are highly insoluble. Low phosphorus availability in agricultural soils often leads to
major social and environmental problems. Phosphorus deficiency limits growth of both
crops and native vegetation on an estimated 1~2 billion ha of land worldwide. In this study,
the high available P content of the fruit tree plantations and the reference forest may be due
to their pH levels. According to Penn & Camberato (2019), the maximum plant P
availability lies within the near-neutral pH or near 6.5 pH level, wherein this study recorded
that majority of the sites observed within two soil depths has pH levels categorized under
the slightly acidic (6.1 — 6.5) to neutral range (6.6 — 7.3). It can be further observed that the
rambutan plantation (6.69 pH), closest to 6.5 pH level among other sites in the above soil
depth, has recorded the highest available P of 37.67 ppm. The same instance can be
observed in the lower and total soil depth, where the coffee plantation, closest to 6.5 pH

level, obtained the highest available P of 39.33 ppm and 36.33 ppm, respectively.


The result of the study also relates to the findings of Janiola & Marin (2016), where
they found a higher P content in the soils under the 0-30 cm depth within the rambutan
plantation compared to mango and santol plantations in Southern Philippines. Moreso, the
lower available P content observed in the reference forest, particularly in the upper and
total depth, maybe due to the fact that forest vegetation with their larger biomass utilizes P
toa greater extent compared to the fruit tree plantations. This observation was also seen in
the separate studies of Emiru & Gebrekidan (2013) and Bizuhoraho et al. (2018), when
they compared the available P content between forest arca and managed agro ecosystems

in Ethiopia and Rwanda, respectively.

Exchangeable potassium

The exchangeable potassium (K) content in the upper soil depth was highest in the
banana plantation with 2.91 cmol./kg soil. It was found to be significantly different from
all the other sites observed in the study, as presented in Figure 14. While the lowest
exchangeable K content was recorded in the reference forest with 1.47 emol./kg soil, and
‘was seen to be comparable to coffee and calamansi plantations, with 1.54 nd 1.81 cmol/kg
soil, respectively. Further, the rambutan plantation recorded an exchangeable K content of
2.3 cmold/kg soil. In the lower soil depth, the banana plantation was again seen to contain
the highest exchangeable K content of 3.41 cmoldkg soil, and it was observed to be

comparable with calamansi plantation (3.26 cmole/kg soil). Similar to the upper soil depth,


the lowest exchangeable K content was significantly attained by the reference forest with
1.48 cmol./kg soil. Meanwhile, the coffee and rambutan plantations were comparable at

2.04 and 2.16 cmol-/kg soil, respectively.

130 cm 30-60 cm 00-60 cm

35 3 T 2

3 a

ae bob be
- b ed

coc d c

]

0s

°

Forest Banana

Cotte Rambutan

Figure 14. Exchangeable potassium under various soil depths. Bars with similar letters of
the same soil depth are not significantly different from each other.

Consistent to the two soil depths observed, the highest and lowest K content in the
total depth was attained by the banana plantation (3.16 cmole/kg soil) and reference forest
(1.48 cmold/kg soil), respectively. The banana plantation was significantly higher among
all other sites followed by the rambutan plantation (2.3 cmol./kg soil) while the reference
forest was found to be insignificantly different to calamansi and coffee plantations with
1.81 and 1.54 cmole/kg soil, respectively. Based on the K soil test categories suggested by

Horneck et al. (2011), the exchangeable K contents of the banana and rambutan plantations


from both soil depths, including the total depth, were classified to be excessive (>2).
Additionally, those soils found in the lower soil depths within the calamansi and coffee
plantations, as well as in the total depth of the calamansi plantation were also classified to
be excessive. On the other hand, high (0.6-2.0) exchangeable K contents were found in the
rest of sites observed, regardless of depth. Therefore, results indicate that exchangeable K
concentration is not limiting in the soils of the different sites observed and it can be
suggested that fertilizer application is no longer recommended, at least for a certain period

of time.

The lower concentration of exchangeable K in the reference forest compared to the
fruit tree plantations may be attributed to the application of fertilizers under the latter and
also to the limited replenishment of the nutrients by animal excreta and by the
decomposition of plant residues in forest soils. This is similar to the observation of Bravo-
Espinosa ct al. (2012), when the K nutrient was found favorable in the soils examined in
the avocado orchard than in the forest area. Meanwhile, in the study of Kalhoro et al. (2015)
wherein they analyzed the concentrations of NPK in different banana growing locations of
coastal areas in Pakistan, they found a high number of K content in the leaves of banana
plant and relatively, they also found medium to high content of exchangeable K in the soils
of the banana plantation. As to what Osman (2013) mentioned, the content of nutrients in
plants and their litters differ greatly with the type of tree species and so does the rate of
litter decomposition and release of nutrients. This may be a sound explanation on why the
present study also observed greater concentration of exchangeable K in the soils of the

banana plantation compared to other sites observed. It can be further add herein the


statement of Osman (2013) that the change in soil properties due to plantations depends

also on the tree species along with soil and environment.

It was also noticed that the exchangeable K content of the different sites tend to
increase with depth, but with the exception of the rambutan plantation which decreased for
only about 6%. According to Weil & Brady (2017), amounts as great as 30,000-50,000 kg
K in the upper 15 cm of | ha of soil are not at all uncommon, and the supplies of K in the
subsoil layers are commonly many-fold higher. The great amount of exchangeable K
within the soils of the different sites observed can be beneficial, since deep-rooted plants
and fruit trees may depend on exchangeable and nonexchangeable K in deep soil layers for

much of their needs.

Total Nitrogen

Results found in the study showed that in the 0-30 cm depth, the coffee plantation
attained the highest total nitrogen (N) content having 0.14%. It was not significantly
different from the reference forest and calamansi plantation with 0.13% and 0.10%,
respectively. The lowest total N content was attained by the rambutan plantation with
0.04%, but revealed to be comparable with banana (0.07%) and calamansi plantations
(Figure 15). On the other hand, no significant differences were seen among the different
sites within the 30-60 cm depth. However, the coffee plantation and the reference forest
both attained the highest total N content of 0.07%. Further, banana and rambutan

plantations both attained 0.05%. While the calamansi plantation, being the lowest, attained


aN content of 0.03%. Consistent with the result of the upper soil depth, the coffee (0.11%)
and rambutan (0.05%) plantations also attained the significantly highest and lowest values,
respectively. While the reference forest, calamansi and banana plantations with 0.10%,
0.07% and 0.06% respectively were found to be comparable with both the highest and

lowest values recorded.

B0-30em 0-60.em

0.16
ab

abe
0144 ab
0.2 ab
0.08 be ob
0.06 b
0.04 a }
0.02


Forest Banana Calamansi Coffee Rambutan

=|,

Figure 15. Total nitrogen under 0-30 and 0-60 cm soil depths. Bars with similar letters of
the same soil depth are not significantly different from each other.

In tropical soils, total N varies from 0.02% to 0.40% (Stevenson, 1994 as cited by
Guimaraes et al., 2013). Therefore, the values attained in the study were all within the
‘normal range (0.03% — 0.14%). Further, the surface layer of most cultivated soils contains
between 0.05% to 0.06% N (Bremner, 1965). However, the greater N concentrations

observed in the upper soil depth for most of the fruit tree plantations may be due to the fact


that these plantations undergo lesser soil anthropogenic disturbances than in other
cultivated fields, especially those planted with annual crops. As these areas could be
attributed to rapid mineralization of soil organic matter following more intensive
cultivation, lower input of plant residues resulting to lower soil SOM thereby soil N, and
greater possibility of soil erosion due to lack of canopy cover. Also, the result of the study
remains consistent with the findings Abera and Wolde-Meskel (2013), where they found
higher total N concentrations in the agroforestry coffee plantation than in other crop lands.
They further discussed that the higher total N attained by the coffee plantation might be
ascribed to less intensive cultivation and higher organic residues return through litter fall

and root exudates from coffee plants and shade trees.

Total N analysis measures N in all organic and inorganic forms (Horneck et al.,
2011). It might not reflect the inorganic additions from N fertilizer but rather the organic
portion of the SOM wherein 98% of soil total N is found in the SOM (Dhillon ct al., 2018;
Sullivan et al., 2020). In fact, leaf litter alone contributes 70% to the total N returns in the
soil (Osman, 2013). In the study of Bahrami et al. (2010), they found that the change of
total N content followed a similar pattern as the organic matter change, when they
compared the forest area to the tea plantation in Iran, Their findings scem to corroborate
with the result of the present study where it was obscrved to have a considerably the same
trend within the upper soil depth. However, it was not evident in the 30-60 cm soil depth,
as the results were seen to be insignificantly affected by different land use change. This
may also explain why the rambutan plantation, among all other plantations observed,

attained a lower total N concentration than what is generally found on the surface layer of


most cultivated soils. Additionally, Total N values were greater in the upper than in the
lower soil depth among the different sites observed, but with the exemption of rambutan
where it increased for only about 0.01%. This observation was also in accordance to the
findings of other studies (Emiru & Gebrekidan, 2013; Guimaraes ct al., 2013) under
different land use including the forest area, grazing lands, shrub lands, fruit tree plantations,

and other agricultural fields.

Electrical conductivity

The electrical conductivity (EC) in the above soil depth was highest in the
calamansi plantation with 0.0021 dS/m but is not significantly different from the reference
forest and banana plantation with 0.00143 dS/m and 0.0014 dS/m, respectively. The lowest
EC in the above soil depth was attained by the rambutan plantation with 0.0006 dS/m and
is comparable to the coffee plantation with 0.00103 dS/m (Figure 16). Contrastingly, the
lowest EC below soil depth was found in the calamansi plantation with 0.0009 dS/m while
the highest was obtained in the reference forest with 0.0014 dS/m. Further, the banana and
rambutan plantation both recorded an EC of 0.00123 dS/m while 0.0012 dS/m was
recorded in the coffce plantation. These three plantations were found to be insignificantly
different from both of the highest and lowest values obtained within the 30-60 cm depth.
Similarly to the result obtained in the lower soil depth and considerably to the total depth,

Halecki et al. (2017) also reported a higher soil salinity in the forest area compared to the


cultivated area, However, the study of Zhang et al. (2010) supports the result obtained in
the upper soil depth particularly in the calamansi plantation where they found that EC is
lesser in the forest area compared to the cultivated area within the 0-20 cm depth. They
point out that the greater number of trees in the forest can minimize the salt accumulation
in the topsoil, thus showing an obvious ameliorative effect of trees to saline soils. On the
result of the total depth, no significant difference was found, however, values obtained
ranged from 0.0009 to 0.0015 dS/m and follows the order calamansi plantation > reference

forest > banana plantation > coffee plantation > rambutan plantation.

B0-30cm 30-60 em

0.003
0.0025

0.002

»
2 ab
0.0015 ab u ab r
0.001 Q 8
o.000s
o

Forest Banana Calamansi Coffee Rambutan

Figure 16. Electrical conductivity under 0-30 and 30-60 cm soil depths. Bars with similar
letters of the same soil depth are not significantly different from each other.

Nevertheless, all the gathered EC values within all soil depths across different sites

were considered to be nonsaline, wherein salinity in these soils does not affect most plants


and soil microbial processes. According to USDA (2014), soils that have EC of more than
1 dS/m are considered to be saline. Important microbial processes, such as nitrogen cycling,
production of nitrous gases and other N oxide gascs, respiration, and decomposition of
organic matter are affected. While populations of parasitic nematodes and loss of nitrogen
can be higher in these soils. High EC causes dehydration of plant cells, which in tum results

in reduced plant growth and often death (Zhang et al., 2010).

Earthworm count

Earthworm count was significantly affected by land use within the 0-30 cm depth
but were found to be unaffected within the lower and total depth of soil. The highest count
in the upper soil depth was attained in the coffee plantation with an average of 19
individuals, and it was found to be insignificantly different to calamansi plantation with a
mean count of 13 (Figure 17). The lowest was attained by the reference forest having only
an average count of 3.33, and was found to be comparable to the banana (5.67) and
rambutan plantations (10.67). The lower soil depth, on the other hand, revealed that there
were no earthworms encountered in the banana, calamansi and rambutan plantations. While
the coffee plantation and reference forest recorded a total of 4 (1.33 average) and 1 (0.33
average) individual/s on the entire observation, respectively. On the total depth, the average
number of earthworms ranged from 1.83 to 10.17 and follows the order coffee plantation

> calamansi plantation > rambutan plantation > banana plantation > reference forest.



Forest Banana Calamansi_ Coffee Rambutan

Figure 17. Earthworm count under the 0-30 cm depth. Bars with the same letters are not
significantly different from each other.

According to Weil & Brady (2017), earthworms prefer cool, moist, but well-aerated
soils. In this condition, an average earthworm count of 100/m? would indicate a good-sized
population of these organisms. However, the low average earthworm count attained in the
present study could be influenced by the time of data collection which was conducted
during the dry season when lesser precipitation accompanied by drier soil condition is
experienced, But the data gathered, specifically within the fruit tree plantations, still concur
with the general numbers commonly found in agricultural soils which range from 0 to
300+/m?, where the highest populations occurring in meadows, pastures, and under no-till
rotations with cover crops (Weil & Brady, 2017). Furthermore, the less abundant
earthworm count recorded in the lower soil depth may be due to the higher bulk density of

the soil as compaction tends to be greater with depth.


Atall soil depths, the coffee plantation recorded the highest earthworm count. This
observation was found similar to the findings of Amador et al. (2010) where they also
found greater carthworm abundance in the coffee plantations, both under full shade and
full sun exposure, compared to the forest arca, and showed consistent result under three
various soil types. This observation was also similar to the findings of Tao et al. (2013)
when they recorded greater earthworm population in pear orchard compared to a Chinese
ash forest. They argued that their result may be due to the inputs of organic residues in the
orchard which is important in the development of sustainable carthworm populations. They
further discussed that the lesser carthworm abundance in the forest arca could be due to
lack of inorganic fertilizer as this fertilizer can promote decomposition of organic litter and

growth of plant that affect soil microorganisms and fauna in low-level nutrient soils.

Moreover, in contrast to different studies such as those of Adil et al. (2019),
Chauhan ct al. (2015), Sofo ct al. (2020) and Solomou ct al. (2013) stating that soil
properties such as soil texture, WHC, pH, SOM, total N and available P contents regulate
earthworm abundance in various fruit tree plantations, the present study neither observed
the same as results did not show any obvious trend or relationship between earthworm
population and the aforementioned soil propertics. The present observation also
corroborates to what Amador ct al. (2010) observed in their study where in gencral, neither
carthworm biomass nor abundance was significantly related to litter quantity, litter

composition or soil properties for any of the natural and agricultural ecosystems studied.


Bacteria count

The greatest count of bacteria within the upper soil depth was found in the
calamansi plantation with 1.7x10° total plate count, and was scen to be significantly higher
among all other sites observed. It was followed by the banana plantation (9.03x10°), coffee
plantation (8.87x10%) and rambutan plantation (5.6x 10°), which were all comparable to the
reference forest attaining the lowest count with 3.63x10° total plate count. Within the lower
soil depth, all sites observed were seen to be insignificantly different among each other.
The sites follow the order coffee plantation (1.02x10’) > banana plantation (9.6x10°) >
calamansi plantation (8.3x10*) > reference forest (2.95x10*) > rambutan plantation
(289x105), ranging from 2.89x10° to 1.02x107. While for the total soil depth, the influence
of land use was found to be significant as the results revealed that the highest count of
bacteria was significantly attained in the coffee plantation with 5.54x 10° mean count, while
the lowest was attained in the reference forest with 3.29x10° and was found comparable to
the rambutan plantation with 4.25x10° (Figure 18). Meanwhile, the calamansi and banana
plantations, which were comparable with each other, attained a mean count of 1.27x10°

and 9.32x10¥, respectively.

The numbers of prokaryotes, specifically bacteria, in soils are cnormous but
extremely variable, ranging from a few billion to more than a trillion in cach gram of soil
(Weil & Brady, 2017). In the present study, soil plate counts range from thousands to
millions. Generally, greater number of bacteria was observed in the different fruit tree

plantations compared to the reference forest. This result relates with the study of Pandey


et al. (2010) when they also found higher bacteria population in an oak plantation compared
to a natural forest in India. According to Hoorman & Islam (2010), bacteria can tolerate
more soil disturbance than other microorganisms, such as fungi, so they tend to dominate

in tilled soils.

90-30 cm 0-60em



2000000 od

Rambutan
-2000000


Figure 18. Bacteria count under 0-30 and 0-60 cm soil depths. Bars with similar letters of
the same soil depth are not significantly different from each other.

Based on Shen et al. (2010), soil pH could have a major effect on the population
sizes of bacteria as their study found that a low soil pH decreases the bacterial abundance
of soil in Northeast China. This is the same with the findings of Kaiser et al. (2016) and
concluded that the pH was the strongest influencing factor for bacterial community
regardless of exploratory and land use. Even so with the study of Zhalnina et al. (2014) as

they added that the most likely effect that pH has on microbial community structure is


modulating the nutrient availability in soil. This may hold true in the present study as
results revealed that the highest count within the 0-30 cm depth was attained by the
moderately alkaline soil of the calamansi plantation and is significantly greater than in the

slightly acidic soil of the coffee plantation. Kaiser et al. (2016) also affirmed that pH is the

strongest predictor of soil bacterial diversity where it is lowest at low pH, then increased
and appeared to be stable between pH 5 and 7 and increases again under slightly alkaline
conditions. The study may only be limited on the quantitative estimation of soil bacteria,
however, the majority of the soil pH levels recorded in the different sites observed may

encourage greater bacterial diversity.

Fungi count

The fungi count was found to be insignificantly influenced by land usc at the upper
and lower depths, however, the total depth revealed a significant difference between the
different sites observed. Nevertheless, results follow the order calamansi plantation
(1.93x10*) > coffee plantation (1.89x10*) > banana plantation (6.17x10°) > rambutan
plantation (4.57x10°) > reference forest (2.76x10°) in the upper soil depth. While in the
lower soil depth, the sites follow the order calamansi plantation (5.23x10*) > coffee
plantation (4.77x10°) > reference forest (4.43x10°) > banana plantation (4.23x10°) >
rambutan plantation (4.17x10°). Consistent with the two soil depths, the calamansi

plantation also attained the highest fungi count in the total depth with 5.23x10" and was


found to be significantly different against the reference forest and the rambutan plantation
with 3.60x10? and 4.37x10, respectively (Figure 19). On the other hand, the banana and
coffee plantations which were also comparable with cach other attained a mean count of

5.2x10? and 1.18x10*, respectively.


Forest Banana Calamansi_ColfeRambutan

Figure 19. Fungi count under the 0-60 cm soil depth. Bars with the same letters are not
significantly different from each other.

Calamansi plantation recorded the highest count at all depths, while the fungal
count within the reference forest was the lowest in the upper and total soil depths and only
two plantations higher in the lower depth. This result contradicts the findings of Pandey et
al. (2010) where they found greater population of fungi in a natural mixed oak forest soil
than in the soil of a managed oak plantation in India, In the study of Wang et al. (2015),
they found that total N content, soil organic matter content and available P content are the

three most influential factors affecting arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi (AMF) community,


when they observed the soils of three land use, incuding forest, orchard and vegetable field,
in southern China. However, results revealed in the present study seems not to support the
findings of Wang ct al. (2015), in terms of fungal abundance. Moreover, they also
discussed that land usc has a significant effect on AMF community favoring the forest arca,
as they affirmed that increased land use intensity is unbeneficial to AMF development. It
is similar to what Bonanomi et al. (2011) concluded that highly intensive and long-lasting
cultivation significantly decreased the fungal population compared with the selected less-
intensive crop cultivation system (tree orchards). This point was further supported by Sofo
et al. (2014) where they found that sustainable soil management of orchards subjected to
lesser cultivation, cover cropping with light pruning positively affected the fungal
community than in conventional orchard management involving more intense tillage,
removal of organic residues and severe pruning. The present study revealing a comparable
fungal population between the fruit tree plantations and the reference forest at the lower
and upper soil depths may relate to the fact that the plantations are not being subjected to
intense cultivation, while it is a common practice to retain organic residues to soil surfaces,
and conduct pruning activities only as needed, hence providing more beneficial soil

conditions to the fungal community.

a1

Soil quality index computation

SQI is a valuable tool that is capable of integrating information and providing
simplified reports to soil quality asscssment. As previously discussed, the different fruit
tree plantations, including the reference forest, revealed varying effects in terms of the
various physicochemical and biological soil quality indicators. Hence, the present study
utilized a soil quality index to facilitate easier interpretation and understanding on the

results of the assessment.

Principal component analysis

A PCA was performed separately for each soil depth to select the most appropriate
indicators which will be the key properties for the MDS. The main objective of PCA is to
reduce the dimensionality of a data-set while limiting the loss of information (Armenise et
al, 2013), A total of 11, 5, and another 11 indicators for the upper, lower, and total depths,
respectively, where chosen for the PCA since these indicators revealed significant
differences (p<0.05) among cach study sites. There was a total of 11 principal components
formed under the PCA of the upper soil depth. Based on Lenka ct al. (2022), the PCs with
eigenvalues of >1 describe more data variability. Therefore, out of the 11 PCs, three
Principal components were observed to have eigenvalue of >1.0 and explained 78.43% of

the variability, hence retained (Table 4).


Table 4. Results from the principal component analysis of statistically significant indicators
in upper (0-30) cm depth.

STATISTIC OR INDICATOR PCI PC2 PC3
Eigenvalue 3.63 2.84 215
Percent of Total Variance (%) 33.03% 25.81% 19.58%
Cumulative Percent 33.03% 58.85% 78.43%
Eigenvector

BD 0.258 0.451 0.207
PD 0.49 -0.068 0.081
Soil Porosity (%) 0.231 -0.494 -0.101
WHC -0.422 -0.249 0.104
Soil pH -0.224 0.19 0.498
CEC -0.125 oll 0.433
Exchangeable K 0.38 0.191 -0.23
Total N -0.384 -0.171 0.312
EC -0.309 0.362 -0.099
Earthworm Count 0.006 0.132 0.545,
Bacteria Count -0.096 0.474 0.193

BD ~ bulk density, PD ~ particle density, WHC ~ water holding capacity, CEC ~ cation exchange capacity,
K = potassium, N = nitrogen, EC = electrical conductivity; PC= principal component; boldface values
correspond to the PCs highly weighted indicators examined for the index and retained in the minimum data
set

The retained PCs were also subjected to varimax rotation to maximize the
correlation between cach PC and soil indicators by distributing the variance, this procedure
was also employed in each of the PCA at all depths. The three principal components were
considered sufficient to account for the total variation in the PCA of the 0-30 cm depth.
Under the PC1, the PD and WHC were chosen as the highly weighted indicators as they
both attained a >40 factor loading. It was observed that about 87.2% of the variation in
PCI can be explained by PD. While in the PC2, BD, soil porosity and bacteria population
count were selected, while the highly weighted indicators selected under the PC3 were soil

pH, CEC, and earthworm population count. Soil porosity explained about 69.3% of the


variation in PC2 while earthworm population count explained about 64% of the variation

in PC3.

Table 5. Results from the principal component analysis of statistically significant indicators
in lower (30-60) cm depth.

STATISTIC OR INDICATOR PCI PC2
Eigenvalue 2.61 1.16
Percent of Total Variance (%) 52.21% 23.19%
Cumulative Percent 52.21% 75.40%
Eigenvector

PD 0.436 0.479
WHC -0.433 -0.571
CEC 0.464 -0.338
Exchangeable K 0.495 0.157
EC 0.401 -0.553

P water holding capacity, Cl jon exchange capacity, K = potassium, EC
= electrical conductivity. PC= principal component: boldface values correspond to the PCs highly weighted
indicators examined for the index and retained in the minimum data sct

In the case of the lower soil depth, five principal components were formed, wherein
two of those PCs had an eigenvalue of >! and explained 75.4% of the variability, thus
retained for the analysis, as shown in Table 5. Under the PC1, the PD, WHC, CEC,
exchangeable K, and EC attained a >40 factor loading: hence these indicators were
considered as highly weighted indicators. However, about 64.0% of the variation in PCI
can be explained by Exchangeable K. On the other hand, PC2 also found three indicators
to have attained a >40 factor loading, these include the PD, WHC, and EC. In this PC,

about 37.8% of the variation can be explained by Soil WHC.


Further, four principal components were retained out of the 11 PCs formed under
the total soil depth, as these PCs had an eigenvalue of >1 and explained 75.29% of the
variability. Hence, these four PCs were considered sufficient to account for the total
variation in the PCA of the total soil depth (Table 6). Under the PC1, the BD, soil porosity,
and total N accounted a >40 factor loading, thus considered to be highly weighted
indicators. About 70.8% of the variation in PC1 can be explained by BD. The PC2, on the
other hand, considered clay, PD, and WHC as highly weighted indicators while each of the
PC3 and PC4 had two highly weighted indicators namely, soil pH and bacteria population
count under the PC3, and CEC and exchangeable K under the PC4. Under the PC2, about
68.2% of the variation can be explained by Soil WHC. While approximately 81.7% and
41.1% of the variations in PC3 and PC4 can be explained by Soil pH and Exchangeable K,

respectively.

Table 6. Results from the principal component analysis of statistically significant indicators
in total (0-60) cm depth

STATISTIC ORINDICATOR PCI PC2 PC3 PCS
Eigenvalue 3.14 2.35 1.75 1.05
Percent of Total Variance (%) 28.51% 21.34% = 15.91% 9.52%
Cumulative Percent _ 28.51% 49.85% 65.76% 75.29%
Eigenvector

Clay 0.214 0.427 0.061 0.078
BD 0.475 0.209 0.016 0.315
PD -0.026 — -0.482 -0.386 0.013
Soil porosity 0.462 0.216 -0.02 0.26
WHC 0.039 0.539 0.148 0.045
Soil pH -0.071 0.115 0.683 0.064

CEC 0.263 0.247 0.333 0.502



Table 6. Continued.

STATISTIC ORINDICATOR __ PCI PC2 PC3 PCa
Exchangeable K 0.364 0.017 0.152 0.626
Total N 0.444 0.222 0.031 0.115
Bacteria Count -0.084 0.26 0.466 -0.275
Fungi Count 6 6 75 95,

Bi ‘cation exchange capacily,

K = potassium, N ~ nitrogen, EC ~ electrical conductivity; PC= principal component; boldface values
correspond to the PCs highly weighted indicators examined for the index and retained in the minimum data
set

Selected indicators for the MDS

The selection of a MDS derived from a larger sct of soil quality indicators is an
essential step in soil quality assessments because of time and financial limitations and to
avoid collinearity (Bunemann et al., 2018). In the study, the various indicators which were
considered highly weighted were identified for each of the PCs. These highly weighted
indicators were selected as candidate variables for inclusion in the MDS. Additionally, a
multivariate correlation cocfficient was used since cach PC in the analysis across all depths
were scen to have two or more highly weighted indicators. This statistical tool checked the

redundancy and correlation present between the indicators (Vasu et al., 2016).

Results of the study showed that all highly weighted indicators were not well
correlated (F< .70) with cach other, from all PCs under all soil depths, as presented in the
Tables 7-9, regardless if the p valuc is less or greater than 0.05. Particularly, for the upper
soil depth, PD and WHC were found to be weakly correlated with each other as they only

tecorded a correlation value of -0.639. Hence, both PD and WHC were retained under PCI


for the MDS formation. In PC2, correlations for the BD and soil porosity, BD and bacteria
population count, and soil porosity and bacteria population count with -0.504, 0.579 and -
0.675, respectively, were not found to be well correlated, hence also retained in the MDS.

For the PC3, soil pH and CEC (r= 0.510), soil pH and earthworm population count (r

0.428), and CEC and earthworm population count (r = -0.330), were also not well
correlated and were subjected to the MDS. To add all, the MDS for the upper (0-30 cm)
soil depth in the study were comprised of eight soil quality indicators, namely PD, WHC,
BD, soil porosity, bacteria population count, soil pH, CEC and earthworm population

count.

Alll the indicators selected for the MDS in the upper soil depth were observed to be
representatives of the soil’s physical, chemical, and biological components. PD, WHC, BD
and soil porosity were all important indicators that are sensitive to management or
disturbances done in a site. These physical indicators were also related to water storage,
wherein according to Bunemann et al. (2018), these indicators are the most frequently
proposed physical indicators for soil quality assessments. Soil pH and CEC are common
soil chemical analyses that represent the capacity of the soil to retain and hold the various
macro- and micronutricnts essential for plants’ growth. Two biological indicators were also
included namely the earthworm and bacteria population counts. Earthworm population
count is an casy way of obtaining as a biological component of the soil that is often
considered as the most significant biological constituent of soil macrofauna due to their
influence on soil structure, breakdown of SOM, other soil microbial activities and serves

as indicator for both water and nutrients cycling (Bunemann et al., 2018; Sofo et al., 2020),


cd esanyea svynfuein saddn :1u91314}909 9 4 osttag =sanyen.
inploy oie = 11M “Austop 2]o1ued = Gd

sen Five 29mo} ‘Aa

Ors'0 $s0'0- £670 OF

rES'0- 870 £8€0-  91qeosueyoxy,
8€0°0 8L6°0- sev’ oa0
sr8'0 ziro $910 OHM
067'0 oslo 660 7 da
BE aigqesdueyoxy PER) SHAY dd __

-ndop j1os (wo 99-9¢) 19Mo] aYp UI suOeOIPU ParysroA KjYBIY a4 BuoUre 1U91911J909 UOHE|24I09 aTEUEANIM, °g 21421

“onyea-d =sonyea sejnfiurt soddn “1uoioyj909 Honejouio9 4 wosieag =Sonyen se{NRUPLA J9MO] :AwuAHIMpUDD
wolnoa]9 = 3a ‘uoBontU = Ni “umnisseiod = yy “Avroedeo afueyoXo UONeD = 94.) “Ar1gedeD BupIoy JoVem = DHA “Ausuap aponsed = Ga “Ausuop ¥INg = GE
BAFO 900 «KOO ~—«SROD FTO CHO SLI ACI «LSD nO ENOIOE

+070 zs0'0- RETO 1ee0- EO RHO €LZO- TO! TIE Uno uNOMYIE
$900 S80 oso vero 1oL0- 979" 9Or'0 oa
1x0 s790 £590 £69°0- rEr0- Lor 7S SEE NImOL
R680 870 $650 P00 600 £00 9550 -RPSTO—-MaIgPaRUCYOXY
x90 evo 1zr0L9s0 99" oso Oz0- 170" ETO PEP)
£090 10 L600 Se9'0 669°, Lecor RPS Or zo Hd 10s
zo £690 —sev'0 0000> z100 6650 8090 6100-690" L190 OHM
900°0 seco p00" zo 9060 0190 90z0 Leo 8r5°0 Asoiod,
8¥9°0 Leo0 IDO «EEO teo0 80rd FEO O10] SEO dd
+200 ose) coe'n_ azz reo zso ovo FO Sso'0 «8600 ag

Wonnindod — wane] '

mobeg wionqieg 29 jena ayestimprg 239 HENS OHI Gos Gd aa

-undap j10s (wo 9¢-0) 4addn ayp ut suoweorput parydions Ayysry ay Tuowe waty3909 uoNE|as00 SIEUCANINN “L198


While the bacteria population represents the group of soil microorganisms that also

perform vital functions that contribute in improving soil quality.

For the lower (30-60 cm) soil depth, the two PCs generated also revealed no highly
correlated indicators. Under the PC1, the PD, WHC, CEC, Exchangeable K and EC were
all not well correlated with each other, as presented in Table 8. About 64% of the variation
in PCI can be explained by Exchangeable K. While the PD, WHC, and EC in PC2 were
also not well correlated. About 37.8% of the variation in PC2 can be explained by Soil
WHC. It can also be observed between the two PCs that some indicators, such as PD,
WHC, and EC were twice observed to be highly weighted and thus are all considered
candidates for the MDS. Nevertheless, all of these indicators were selected in the MDS

under the lower soil depth.

The sclected MDS under this depth were all belong to the physicochemical
component of the soil. No biological indicator was chosen in the list with respect to the
result of the statistical computations, However, as may be observed in the study,
earthworms, bacteria and fungi in the lower soil depth were generally observed to have
fewer in number compared to the upper depth. According to Bunemann et al. (2018) who
conducted a critical review on soil quality, all the five selected indicators in the present

study were also proposed more frequent as a component in soil quality assessment.

In the case of the total (0-60 cm) depth, all indicators under the four PCs retained
were found to be not well correlated (r < .70) with each other, thus all the highly weighted

indicators were retained for the MDS (Table 6). Specifically, the BD, soil porosity, and


total N were not well correlated under PC1; clay, PD, and soil WHC were also not well
correlated under PC2 (Table 9). Correlation for soil pH and bacteria population count with
a value of -0.474, as well as correlation for CEC and exchangeable K with a value of -
0.416, also recorded to be weak. Therefore, the indicators selected for the MDS in the total
soil depth include BD, soil porosity, total N, clay, PD, soil WHC, soil pH, bacteria

population count, CEC and exchangeable K.

These 10 indicators completely represent the physical, chemical and biological
components of a soil. The various physical indicators best represent the structural and
functional characteristics of the soil. The soil pH, CEC, total N, and exchangeable K are
all highly relevant factors that affect plants’ growth and development. All these indicators
were also recorded by Bunemann et al. (2018) as four of the five most selected soil
chemical indicators, in all the 65 reviewed soil quality assessment approaches. In addition,
the soil pH, CEC, total N were discussed by Glover et al. (2000) to sustain fruit quality in
an apple orchard. While the biological component of the MDS was represented by the
bacteria population count, a critical microorganism that is involved in various soil

processes that characterize a healthy soil (Kaiser et al., 2016; Weil & Brady, 2017)


d =sonyea sen uri saddn Syu2toyj209 uoneja1i09 J uosinad =Sanqea arjnFueAs 19Avof :-AuAnonpuod
eotnsop9 = Ja ‘uoSosmu = Ni ‘wnisseod = ¥ ‘Aaloedeo oBuetoxo uoNeD = J3 ‘ArlvedeD Suipjoy JoVem = IIA *Aususp apo1ued = Cd ‘Ausuop H1Nq = GE

air 0 ira 8800 9410" S100- —ce90- IZ EHOS9EO Tunos ung

8800 £900- IZzO-PLP'O- —-8OL'0—SL9'O-— «BROT 6LS'D— RID no eDIeg
zz0'0 L09°0" 910 EFO- Eby LOT LT SEEO MEO NiO.
e970 0000 OIF" 8hTO BIO EEO SSO BESO ONTO" M1QRDBUEYDXA
v49'0 £6€'0 zz00 toro crTO- OTF CLWYD HOD 249
ese0 osro Lavo 8200 CeO" LEO TO EIT O- LOU uid pos
£60 ri00 9760 sero $980 6100- LL LIF ou
1100 zar0 9060 0190 = 90770 L¥60 arS0 FOS'OBREO Aatso10g
szs0 8960 10 Lreo = zE0 OOD! SEO erro boy 0 aa
sro eal) E00 zs0 Shh PLO SSO; «RGD 9800" aa
8H00 £900 oro Iweo  sico zoo oz 19D a9
Toneindor Y
funy NIMOL  sigeafunyxg 229 HES HAL Asongd id aa

adap [Yos (U9 99-9) [e101 auf Ur SioreoIpUT parysiam A{ysIy ay FuourE UdI914J209 UONE]aLI09 JeUEANIINN. “6 F1GEL


Indicator scores

Following the non-lincar scoring function, the various indicators selected in the
MDS for cach of the soil depths were transformed into a dimensionless scores ranging from
0 to I for inclusion in the SQI. The “more is better” function was used to obtain the
corresponding scores for the % clay, soil WHC, CEC, total N, exchangeable K, earthworm
population and bacteria population. Generally, if these indicators increase their level, the
quality of the soil also increases (Armenise ct al., 2013). Conversely, the “less is better”
function was used to derive the corresponding scores for the BD and PD. This function
suits those indicators whose increment negatively affects soil quality (Armenise et al.,
2013). While the “optimum” function was used to obtain the corresponding scores for the
soil pH (6.5 optimum value), soil porosity (50% optimum value), and electrical
conductivity (0.2 dS/m optimum value) (Glover et al., 2000; Marzaioli et al., 2010; USDA,
1998). The “Optimum” indicators arc those which have positive influence up to a certain
level beyond which the influence could be considered detrimental (Mukherjee and Lal,
2014). The assigning of function for the other indicators were based on literatures such as
Chimdi et al. (2012); Jiang et al. (2020), Khaledian et al. (2016); Lenka et al. (2022); Masto
ct al. (2008), and Tesfahunegn (2014). Table 10 presents the score of cach indicator for

each of the sites observed under three soil depths.


Table 10. The corresponding scores of the selected soil indicators for each of the sites
observed under three soil depths.

Reference Banana Calamansi Coffee | Rambutan
forest plantation plantation plantation plantation
0-30 cm depth
BD 0.6011 0.4631 0.4631 0.4966 0.4852
PD 0.5587 0.4698~—0.5482—(0.5045 0.4285
Porosity 0.5518 0.4949 0.3720 0.4953 0.5692
WHC 0.5816 0.4801 0.4902 0.5378 0.3954
Soil pH 0.4712 0.4877 0.4602 (0.4367 0.5231
cEC 0.6689 =—0.18650.7202—(0.0659 0.6636
Earthworm count (0.0557. 0.1823 —0.6396-——(0,8209 0.5200
Bacteria count 0.0981 0.5145. 0.8373 (0.5028 0.2428
30-60 cm depth
PD 05127 0.5333 -(0.5688 (0.4798 0.4167
WHC 0.4990 0.5540 0.5180 0.5272 0.3907
CEC 0.7897 0.5047 0.1635 0.1913 0.6182
ExchangeableK 0.2175 0.6913 0.6668» 0.3827, 0.4170
EC 0.6053 0.5105 0.33690. 105 0.5105
0-60 cm depth
Clay 05115 0.5010 0.5099 0.5068 0.4699
BD 0.6011 0.4631 0.4631 0.4966 0.4852
PD 0.5342 0.5007 0.5586 0.4941 0.4215
Porosity 0.5518 0.4949 «0.3720 (0.4953 0.5692
WHC 0.5387 0.5157 0.5157 0.5296 0.3903
Soil pH 0.4808 0.4773 0.4739 0.4242 0.4975
CEC 0.7255 0.3172, 0.5498 = 0.1099 0.6462
ExchangeableK 0.2619 (0.7027 (0.5779 (0.3634. 0.4972
Total N 0.6629 0.3476 «= 0.4115. (0.7071 0.2343
Bacteria count 0.0162 (0.1822,-—«0.3237——0.9506 0.0303

BD = bulk density, PD = particle density, WHC = water holding capaci
K = potassium, N = nitrogen, EC = electrical conductivity.

. CEC = cation exchange capacity,


Soil quality index

Based on the classification criteria of the soil quality given by Li et al. (2018), the
calamansi plantation which attained an index value of 0.57, particularly in its upper soil
depth, was categorized under Grade II that is characterized to have high soil quality (Table
3; Figure 20). This plantation attained the highest index value within the said depth
compared to other sites observed in the study. According to the description of Li et al.
(2018), a Grade II quality index value has a suitable soil condition for crop growth. It was
followed by the coffee and rambutan plantation that both attained an index value of 0.48,
while the reference forest closely attained an index value of 0.45. These sites are all
categorized under Grade IIT, characterized as moderate soil quality. A Grade TIT index
classification had a moderate value and had some limitation in terms of supporting plants”
growth (Li ct al., 2018). While the lowest index value within the upper soil depth was
attained by the banana plantation. This plantation had an index value of 0.41 and is
therefore belongs to Grade IV quality index classification, characterized to be low. This
grade had more limitations than Grade III, according to Li et al. (2018). Thus, the quality
of the soil found in the banana plantation decreased (-9%) while in the calamansi (+26%),
coffee (+7%) and rambutan (+7%) plantations were improved within the 0-30 cm depth,

taking into reference the index value attained by the forest.

Goren Aron LB Piatcn  }CaamanaPictance M)Cofee Platon Wl Fanbutm Fanon

080 = TT i Raa eee 4
039 |

08 |

Ey

(60m

ON DEPTH

Figure 20. Soil quality index values of the different fruit tree plantations and reference
forest within the upper (0-30 cm), lower (30-60 cm), and total (0-60 cm) soil
depths.

Conversely, the banana plantation attained the highest index value of 0.56 within
the lower soil depth, which falls under Grade II: High soil quality classification. On the
other hand, the reference forest, rambutan and calamansi plantations generated an index
value of 0.52, 0.47 and 0.45, respectively. These three areas were categorized under Grade
III that has moderate soil quality. While a Grade IV: Low classification was assigned to
the coffee plantation as it attained an index value of 0.42. In contrast to the result of the
SQI within the upper soil depth, only the banana plantation has enhanced the quality of the

soil in the lower depth with an increase of 8%, compared to the reference forest (Figure


20). While the quality of the soil within the calamansi, coffee and rambutan plantations

decreased to an extent of -13%, -19% and -10%, respectively.

It can also be observed that the reference forest and the banana plantation has
increased their soil quality with depth with +16% and +37%, respectively. While all the
remaining fruit tree plantations revealed otherwise. In particular, the calamansi and coffee
plantations had a percentage decrease in their index value of -21% and -13%, respectively.
However, the rambutan plantation was considerably unchanged from 0.48 to 0.47 index
value, showing a decrease of only about -2%. However, it should be note that the MDS of

the two soil depths differ from each other.

In terms of the total soil depth, four out of five sites observed were categorized
under Grade III: Moderate soil quality classification. These include the coffee plantation,
being the highest, followed by the reference forest, calamansi and banana plantations with
0.51, 0.49, 0.48, and 0.45 index values, respectively. While the rambutan plantation
recorded the least index value of 0.42 which is categorized under Grade IV: Low soil
quality classification. This means that when considering a depth of soil from 0 to 60 cm,
only the coffee plantation has caused an improved soil quality of +4% from its previous
land use/cover. Inversely, the banana, calamansi and rambutan plantations has caused a

decrease in the quality of the soil to an extent of -8%, -2%, and -14%, respectively.

The study of Olivares et al. (2022) has revealed that soil quality is clearly related
to productivity on commercial banana plantations. For this reason, it is also recommended

that the banana plantation observed in this study should also integrate in their management


objectives the improvement of its soil, particularly within the 0-30 cm depth, to increase
yield. Specifically enhancing those soil properties that has observed to be lower in quality
than the standard condition or to other plantations observed including the reference forest.
It is also evident that the coffee plantation has caused the greatest decrease in soil quality
within the 30-60 cm soil depth, which may also become a limiting factor on the growth and
yield of the coffee stand. The study of Marbun et al. (2019) also found within the different
coffee plantations in Indonesia a soil quality that is only marginally suitable with a limiting
factor that is soil fertility characteristic, wherein they also recommended soil management
improvements, such as giving lime, organic material, fertilization or reclamation. This is
the same with the report of Raghavendra and Venkatesha (2020) where they also confirmed
a depletion trend of the soil of the various coffee plantations they studied. In this case, soil

improvement efforts should also be done in the coffee plantation since the 30-60 cm depth

may still be within the rhizosphere of the plant. In support to this, the study of Zhang and
Zhang (2005) found that conservation practices in coffee plantations protected or improved

organic matter concentration and soil structure, resulting in higher soil quality indices.

Similar to the soils of the upper depth in the banana plantation and in the lower
depth of the coffee plantation, the rambutan plantation also was categorized under Grade
IV, characterized to contain soils with low quality. It is therefore expected that the soils of
this area have certain limitations that also negatively influence plants’ growth and yicld. It
is therefore recommended that soil management efforts should be emphasized on

enhancing the various soil properties that was found limiting to soil quality.


However, some fruit tree plantations, across soil depths, have caused an increase in
soil quality, with reference to the forest. This justifies that not all forest land conversions
into fruit tree plantations cause a reduction in the quality of the soil, at least under the
influence of a lesser intensive management activitics. Therefore, relative to the benefit of
fruit tree plantations through sales of their products, these plantations also provide
important ecological services, such as the improvement of soil quality. This is also in
accordance with the findings of Do et al. (2020), where they found that fruit tree-based
agroforestry increases soil fertility and minimizing soil degrading factors, such as soil

erosion.

The influence of each soil indicator to the SQIs was also evaluated, as shown in
Figure 21. Results revealed that CEC has the greatest contribution in the index value of the
reference forest and rambutan plantation at all soil depths observed. Within the upper,
lower and total soil depths, CEC has a percentage contribution of 18.67%, 30.09% and
14.85% in the reference forest, while 17.34%, 26.27% and 15.24% in the rambutan
plantation. In the banana and calamansi plantations, bacteria population count has the
greatest influence, particularly within the upper soil depth, with 15.69% and 18.48%,
respectively. While exchangeable K has the most influence within the lower and total
depths with 24.74% and 15.61% in the banana plantation, and 29.58% and 12.15% in the
calamansi plantation, respectively. Meanwhile, two biological indicators had the highest
contributions in the index values attained in the coffee plantation, namely earthworm

population count (21.26%) at the upper soil depth and bacteria population count (18.72%)


at the total depth. The soil WHC (25.21%) had also a high influence in the coffee

plantation, particularly within the lower soil depth.

These observations justified the important role of the different soil biological
components in the soil quality of the fruit tree plantations, specifically of the banana,
calamansi and coffee plantations. However, biological indicators are rarely assessed in soil
quality assessments, and if included, this group of indicators are still underrepresented and
mostly limited to measurements such as microbial biomass and soil respiration (Bunemann
ct al., 2018). Possible constraints on why most studies have excluded soil biological
indicators could be their associated cost and case of sampling and measurement. As
mentioned by O'Sullivan et al. (2017), biological indicators are the most expensive to
analyze. This is compounded by the fact that the dynamic biological parameters are those
that would benefit from a more frequent monitoring interval. Nevertheless, the result of the
present study revealed that including soil biological indicators can greatly influence soil
quality assessments. In addition, the areas recording the highest percentage of contribution
by the biological indicators may also relate to the fact that these areas, with respect of soil

depths, has recorded the greatest values compared to other sites observed.

The soil chemical indicators that have the greatest influence in the study were CEC
and exchangeable K. Central to its function in the soil to retain and release clements such
as K, Ca, Mg, and Na, this indicator must be provided ways to be enhanced by management
practices not just only in the rambutan plantation, where it recorded the highest influence,

but also out of the three remaining fruit tree plantations assessed. According to Aplire and

plantations and reference forest within a) upper (0-30 cm), b) lower (30-60 cm), and c) total (0-60 cm)

soil depth.

Figure 21. Radar plot of the percentage contribution of the selected indicators to SQI among various fruit tree



Lorandi (2012), when a low CEC is recorded, it causes the necessity of greater investment
in fertilization, especially with humic compounds. In this study, most of the fruit tree
plantations recorded low to very low CEC, regardless of depth. One possible way of
increasing the CEC of the different sites observed is the improvement of the organic matter
content of the soil (Homneck et al., 2011). On the other hand, exchangeable K is an essential
nutrient that affects most of the biochemical and physiological processes that influence
plant growth and metabolism (Wang et al., 2013). As previously discussed, the present
study found high exchangeable K contents within the different fruit tree plantations and the
reference forest, therefore the condition of this indicator to the different sites was found
favorable and nonlimiting to their overall soil quality. It is suggested that K fertilizer
application is no longer recommended, but it is encouraged that continuous monitoring on
the exchangeable K content of the soil is to be maintained to relatively assess its influence

to soil quality.

The soil WHC was also revealed to highly influence the soil quality, particularly in
the coffee plantation. This is an important soil quality indicator that functions in facilitating
water movement and availability (Glover et al., 2000). According to Tesfahunegn (2013),
WHC could be associated with the differences in SOM and clay content of the soil. Further,
a higher bulk density and a lower soil SOM can cause a decrease in the soil WHC (Ouyang
et al., 2018). Therefore, the inclusion of WHC cnhanccment to plantation management
objectives, such as increasing the SOM content of the soil and avoiding activities that
causes too much soil compaction, could significantly improve the overall soil quality of

the area.

CHAPTER VI

SUMMARY

A oil quality assessment was conducted on selected fruit tree plantations, including
the banana, calamansi, coffee and rambutan plantations in Bacnotan, La Union,
Philippines. The adjacent forest was also assessed and considered as the reference site. The
study aimed to determine the quality of the soil for each of the fruit tree plantations and the
forest are by evaluating their soil physical, chemical, and biological quality indicators and
assessing their overall soil quality through a soil quality index computation to facilitate
casier interpretation and understanding on the results of the assessment. The study
evaluated two soil depths, 0-30 and 30-60 cm, as well as the combined depth, 0-60 cm, in
order to arrive at a comprehensive but more specific result. Three replications were
considered in the study. While all the areas observed belong to a single soil series - San

Manuel silt loam.

The different sites observed were described and the management activitics in the
fruit trec plantations were recorded to gain insights of the various sites that may contribute
to influencing the variability of the different land uses. These were done by conducting

interview to the concerned individuals and also through personal observations. Tree species


assessment conducted by the institution that manages the area was also used to describe

the reference forest.

A total of 16 soil indicators were considered in the study, including cight indicators
under the group of soil physical properties. This group was composed of the soil texture
(sand, silt, clay), bulk density, particle density, soil porosity, water holding capacity, and
A-horizon depth. Seven indicators were also included under the group of soil chemical soil
properties, which are composed of the soil pH, cation exchange capacity, available
phosphorus, exchangeable potassium, total nitrogen, electrical conductivity, and soil
organic matter. While three indicators were included under the group of soil biological
properties, comprising of the earthworm, bacteria, and fungi population counts. A number
of 15 indictors were considered in the analysis for both of the upper (0-30 cm) and total (0-
60 cm) soil depths, while 13 soil quality indicators were considered for the lower (30-60

cm) soil depth, excluding the bulk density, soil porosity and A-horizon depth.

As appropriate, one-way analysis of variance and Kruskal-Wallis along with
Tukey's honestly significant difference and Dunn’s multiple comparison test as post-hoc
analyses were performed to determine the effects of fruit tree plantations and reference
forest to various soil quality indicators. Principal component analysis for cach depth
observed was performed to determine the minimum data set necessary for the soil quality
index computation. Nonlinear scoring function and additive soil quality index were

employed to finally derive the soil quality index values of each site at different soil depths.


All the fruit tree plantations were established and managed by the Don Mariano
Marcos Memorial State University, intended for instruction, research, and production
purposes. The banana and rambutan plantations were established in the year 2000 while
the calamansi and coffee plantations were established in the years 1986 and 1982,
respectively. Each of the plantations have an area ranging from 1 to 2 hectares and
receiving management activities such as cleaning, weeding, pruning, annual application of
fertilizers, watering during dry season, and fruit harvesting. On the other hand, the
reference forest found adjacent to the fruit tree plantations is dominated by 43 various tree
species belonging to 11 different families. Teak (Tectona grandis) has the largest
population in the reference forest. Presence of shrubs and other understory vegetation were

also observed.

Based on the assessment conducted for the various soil physical indicators, the soil
textural classification of the reference forest, banana, calamansi and coffee plantations is
silty clay loam while the rambutan plantation has a soil texture classified as silt loam,
Overall, the textural classes belong under the medium-textured soils or loams which are
generally very productive that allow for sufficient water infiltration without excessive
drainage and have good water holding capacity and nutrient retention. The lowest bulk
density of 0.92 g/cm* was obtained under the reference forest and was revealed to be
significantly lower than all the fruit tree plantations observed in the study. However, the
values obtained from the different fruit tree plantations were still within the optimum bulk
density for fruit tree growth which ranges from 1.00 to 1.30 g/cm’. The greater bulk density

within the fruit tree plantations compared to the reference forest may be due to their lesser


canopy cover that led to a lesser interception potential, lesser organic matter content, and
to the greater anthropogenic activities done in the plantations. Further, the rambutan
plantation consistently recorded the highest particle density (PD) at all depths with a total
mean value 2.17 g/em®, While the reference forest (1.76 g/cm*) had the lowest PD within
the upper soil depth and the calamansi plantation within the lower and total soil depths,
with 1.69 and 1.74 g/cm’, respectively. The lower PD in the reference forest compared to
the majority of the plantations may be due to the generally higher soil organic matter
(SOM) content of the soils found in the former. While the greater PD recorded in the
rambutan plantation may be due to its higher sand content compared to the rest of the sites
observed. The variability of PD recorded seemed to not only be controlled by parent
material but also human activities which likely caused an increased value of PD in the

majority of the plantations.

The highest percentage soil porosity was attained by the rambutan plantation with
48.77% while the lowest was significantly attained by the calamansi plantation with
35.38%. Out of the four fruit tree plantations observed, three plantations recorded a lower
soil porosity than the reference forest, while the other was found comparable with the latter.
This may be duc to the greater disturbance of the land under the various plantations
compared to the reference forest. It can also be observed that the highest bulk density which
was attained in the calamansi plantation may have corresponded to attaining the lowest soil
porosity of the same. Additionally, it was found that the calamansi plantation with the least
sand content in its soil textural fraction have lesser porosity compared to all other sites,

while the rambutan plantation having the highest sand fraction among all sites also


recorded the highest total soil porosity. Therefore, it can be said that a soil with a finer
texture has greater surface area and smaller soil pores. For the water holding capacity
(WHC), the lowest value was consistently attained by the rambutan plantation at all depths
with a total mean of 37.17%. While the reference forest attained the highest WHC within
the upper (48.67%) and total (46%) soil depths, and the banana plantation recorded the
highest in the lower soil depth with 47.33%. A higher bulk density and a lower SOM that
were recorded in the fruit tree plantations compared to the reference forest may have
resulted to a higher maximum WHC in the latter particularly within the upper and total soil
depths. Further, the greater sand fraction recorded in the rambutan plantation compared to
other sites, may also explain why this plantation also recorded the lowest value in terms of
the WHC. In terms of the A-horizon (AH) depth of the different sites observed, the deepest
‘AH was both found in the reference forest and coffee plantation each having 30 cm depth
while the shallowest AH was recorded in the calamansi plantation recording only 8 cm
thick. Based on the Munscll Color Chart, the color of the AH of the reference forest is
yellowish brown, light yellowish brown for the calamansi plantation, and brown for the
banana, coffee and rambutan plantations. The reference forest and the coffee plantation
may have greater opportunity of root development and greater accessibility of nutrients

and water resources due to their deeper AH.

For the different chemical indicators cxamined, all the data gathered for the SOM
within two soil depths, as well as the total depth, across different sites revealed no
significant differences. Nevertheless, the reference forest had the highest SOM content of

3.53% and 3.12% in the upper and total soil depths. Within the 30-60 cm depth, the


rambutan plantation attained an increased SOM of approximately 21% to that of the
reference forest, as the rambutan plantation recorded the highest SOM of 3.29% followed
by the reference forest having only 2.71% SOM. The forest attaining the highest SOM in
the upper and total depths might be directly related to the rich forest litters contained in its
soil surface as contributed by the various plant species in the area. It was also observed that
the soils in the rambutan plantation increased in its SOM content with depth. This is
probably due to an increase in soil density with depth in the rambutan plantation, reducing
aeration and decomposition of the SOM. While the sites that recorded the lowest SOM
contents were the rambutan plantation with 1.74% in the 0-30 cm depth, the calamansi
plantation with 1.53% in the 30-60 cm depth, and the banana plantation with 2.15% in the
total soil depth. The fruit tree plantations tend to have lower SOM contents due to the lesser
canopy cover and minimal crop residues in the soil surface of these areas which also

weakens their capacity to minimize soil crosion.

The resulted soil pH level revealed significant differences in the upper and total
depths, but insignificant within the lower depth. However, all the data gathered fall under
the most preferred growing level. The pH levels recorded in the study were classified as
moderately alkaline, such as the soil found in the upper soil depth of the calamansi
plantation, neutral pH level, such as in the soils found in the reference forest, banana and
rambutan plantations, and slightly acidic, which was found in the coffee plantation. On the
other hand, the highest cation exchange capacity (CEC) was found in the reference forest
within the lower and total soil depths with 15.23 and 16.52 m.e./100g soil, respectively,

while the highest within the upper soil depth was found in the calamansi plantation (19.6

M7

m.e./100g soil). The coffee plantation attained the lowest CEC within the upper and total
soil depths while the calamansi plantation attained the lowest value within the lower soil
depth. All the values obtained were categorized to be very low (<5), low (5-14.9) to
medium (15-24.9) CEC ratings. The reference forest recorded medium CEC within the two
soil depths while most of the fruit tree plantations recorded low to very low CEC, regardless
of depth. These plantations attaining low to very low CEC values might be attributed to
leaching and soil erosion which occurs more frequently in agricultural lands than in forest
arcas. It was also observed in the study that high clay and/or organic matter content have
generally higher CEC while sandy, low organic matter soils have lower CEC. Moreover,
results of the study revealed no significant differences among all the data gathered for the
available P content of the soils from the two soil depths, including the total depth, across
all sites. However, all the available P measured are categorized to be high, thus, P
application is generally not recommended in these arcas. While it was revealed that there
was a significant effect of the different land usc to the exchangeable potassium (K) of the
soil at all depths. Specifically, the highest and lowest contents of exchangeable K were
recorded in the banana plantation and reference forest, respectively. The exchangeable K
contents of the banana and rambutan plantations, were classified to be excessive (>2).
Additionally, those soils found in the lower soil depths within the calamansi and coffee
plantations, as well as in the total depth of the calamansi plantation were also classified to
be excessive. On the other hand, high (0.6-2.0) exchangeable K contents were found in the
rest of sites observed, regardless of depth. Therefore, results indicate that exchangeable K

concentration is not li

iting in the soils of the different sites observed and it can be


suggested that fertilizer application is no longer recommended. The lower concentration of
exchangeable K in the reference forest compared to the fruit tree plantations may be
attributed to the application of fertilizers under the latter and also to the limited
replenishment of the nutrients by animal excreta and by the decomposition of plant residues
in forest soils. As to the total nitrogen (N), the coffee plantation consistently attained the
highest total N, under all depths observed. While the lowest was recorded in the rambutan
plantation for the upper and total soil depths with 0.04% and 0.05%, respectively. While
the lowest value within the lower soil depth was attained by the calamansi plantation with
0.03%. In tropical soils, total N varies from 0.02% to 0.40%, therefore, the values attained

in the study were all within the normal range.

In terms of the electrical conductivity (EC), the highest in above soil depth was the
calamansi plantation with 0.0021 dS/m while the lowest was attained by the rambutan
plantation with 0.0006 dS/m. Contrastingly, the lowest EC below soil depth was found in
the calamansi plantation with 0.0009 dS/m while the highest was obtained in the reference
forest with 0.0014 dS/m. However, on the result of the total depth, no significant difference
was found, however, values obtained ranged from 0.0009 to 0.0015 dS/m. Nevertheless,
all the gathered EC values within all soil depths across different sites were considered to
be nonsaline, wherein salinity in these soils does not affect most plants and soil microbial

Processes.

The biological soil quality indicators were comprised of three observations. For the

earthworm population count, this indicator was significantly affected by land use within


the 0-30 cm depth but were found to be unaffected within the lower and total depth of soil
The highest count in the upper soil depth was attained in the coffee plantation with an
average of 19 individuals while the lowest was attained by the reference forest having only
an average count of 3.33. The lower soil depth, on the other hand, revealed that there were
no earthworms encountered in the banana, calamansi and rambutan plantations. While the
coffee plantation and reference forest recorded a total of 4 (1.33 average) and 1 (0.33
average) individual/s on the entire observation, respectively. On the total depth, the average
number of earthworms ranged from 1.83 to 10.17. The low average carthworm population
count attained in the present study could be influenced by the time of data collection which
was conducted during the dry season when lesser precipitation accompanied by drier soil
condition is experienced. But the data gathered, specifically within the fruit tree
plantations, still concur with the general numbers commonly found in agricultural soils
which range from 0 to 300+/m?. Furthermore, the less abundant carthworm count recorded
in the lower soil depth may be due to the higher bulk density of the soil as compaction
tends to be greater with depth. For the bacteria population count, greater number of these
microorganisms were observed in the different fruit tree plantations compared to the
reference forest. The greatest number within the upper soil depth was found in the
calamansi plantation with 1.7x10° total plate count, and was scen to be significantly higher
among all other sites obscrved. A significant difference was also recorded in the total depth,
wherein the coffee plantation recorded the highest mean count of 5.54x10%, it was
significantly greater among all other sites, while the reference forest significantly attained

the lowest count of 3.29x10°. Within the lower depth, all sites observed were seen to be


insignificantly different among each other. It was observed in the study that soil pH could
have an effect on the population of bacteria, that a high soil pH increases their number, as
results revealed that the highest count within the 0-30 cm depth was attained by the
modcrately alkaline soil of the calamansi plantation and is significantly greater than in the
slightly acidic soil of the coffee plantation. Lastly, the fungi population count was found
to be significantly influenced by land use type only at the total soil depth. However, results
consistently revealed that the calamansi plantation has the highest fungal population with
1.23x10* mean count in the total depth while the fungal count within the reference forest
was the lowest in the upper and total soil depths and only two plantations higher in the
lower depth. The present study revealing a comparable fungal population between the fruit
tree plantations and the reference forest, particularly within the upper and lower depths,
may relate to the fact that the plantations are not being subjected to intense cultivation,
while it is a common practice to retain organic residues to soil surfaces, and conduct
pruning activities only as needed, hence providing more beneficial soil conditions to the
fungal community. While it is known that highly intensive and long-lasting cultivation may

decrease the fungal population compared with the lesser intensive cultivation practices.

APCA was performed separately for each soil depth to sclect the most appropriate
indicators which will be the key properties for the MDS. A total of 11, 5, and another 11
indicators for the upper, lower, and total depths, respectively, where chosen for the PCA
since these indicators revealed significant differences among each study sites, The PCs
with eigenvalues of >1 were selected as these describe more data variability. Therefore, a

total of three, two and four PCs were retained under the upper, lower, and total depths,


respectively. A factor loading of 20.40 were considered to be highly weighted. Thus, within
the upper soil depth, the PD and WHC in the PCI, the BD, soil porosity and bacteria
population count in PC2, and the Soil pH and CEC in PC3 were considered to be highly
weighted. For the lower soil depth, the PD, WHC. CEC, exchangeable K, and EC attained
a >40 factor loading, while the PD, WHC, and EC in the PC2 were also considered highly
weighted. Under the total depth, the BD, soil porosity, and total N in PCI, the % clay, PD,
and WHC in PC2, soil pH and bacteria population count under the PC3, and CEC and
exchangeable K under the PC4 accounted a >40 factor loading, thus considered to be highly
weighted. A multivariate correlation coefficient was also employed to further check for
redundancy of indicators in each PC. However, results of the study showed that all highly
weighted indicators were not well correlated (r<.70) with each other, from all PCs under
all soil depths observed. Thus, all the highly weighted indicators were selected as a

component for the MDS.

Following the non-linear scoring function, the various indicators selected in the
MDS for each of the soil depths were transformed into a dimensionless scores ranging from
0 to I for inclusion in the SQI. The “more is better” function was used to obtain the
corresponding scores for the % clay, soil WHC, CEC, total N, exchangeable K, carthworm
population and bacteria population. Converscly, the “less is better” function was used to
derive the corresponding scores for the BD and PD. While the “optimum” function was
used to obtain the corresponding scores for the soil pH, soil porosity, and electrical

conductivity.


After transforming each indicator to their corresponding scores, the MDS was
subjected to the additive soil quality index to obtain the index values of the different sites
observed that will show if there is an improvement or degradation to the soil quality after
forest conversion. Under the upper soil depth, the calamansi plantation attained an index
value of 0.57 which was categorized under Grade II that is characterized to have high soil
quality. Therefore, this plantation has a suitable soil condition for crop growth, particularly
within 0-30 cm. A Grade III index classification was assigned to the coffee and rambutan
plantation that both attained an index value of 0.48 and to the reference forest that attained
an index value of 0.45. These areas had a moderate valuc and had some limitation in terms
of supporting plants’ growth. While the lowest index value within the upper soil depth was
attained by the banana plantation (0.41) and was categorized under Grade IV. This grade
had more limitations than Grade III. Thus, the quality of the soil found in the banana
plantation decreased (-9%) while in the calamansi (+26%), coffee (+7%) and rambutan
(+7%) plantations were improved within the 0-30 cm depth, taking into reference the index

value attained by the forest.

Within the lower soil depth, the banana plantation attained the highest index value
of 0.56 which falls under Grade II: High soil quality classification. On the other hand, the
reference forest, rambutan and calamansi plantations generated an index value of 0.52, 0.47
and 0.45, respectively, which were categorized under Grade III that has moderate soil
quality. While a Grade IV: Low classification was assigned to the coffee plantation as it
attained an index value of 0.42. Hence, only the banana plantation has enhanced the quality

of the soil in the lower depth with an increase of 8%, compared to the reference forest.


While the quality of the soil within the calamansi, coffee and rambutan plantations

decreased to an extent of -13%, -19% and -10%, respectively.

For the total soil depth, the coffee plantation, being the highest, followed by the
reference forest, calamansi and banana plantations with 0.51, 0.49, 0.48, and 0.45 index
values, respectively, all belong to Grade III: Moderate soil quality classification. While the
rambutan plantation recorded the least index value of 0.42 which is categorized under
Grade IV: Low soil quality classification. This means that only the coffee plantation has
caused an improved soil quality of +4% from its previous land use/cover. Inversely, the
banana, calamansi and rambutan plantations has caused a decrease in the quality of the soil

to an extent of -8%, -2%, and -14%, respectively.

The influence of each soil indicator to the SQIs was also evaluated. Results revealed
that CEC has the greatest contribution in the index value of the reference forest and

rambutan plantation at all soil depths observed. In the banana and calamansi plantations,

bacteria population count has the greatest influence, particularly within the upper s
depth. While exchangeable K has the most influence within the lower and total depths of
these two plantations. Meanwhile, two biological indicators had the highest contributions
in the index valucs attained in the coffee plantation, namely carthworm population count
at the upper soil depth and bacteria population count at the total depth. The soil WHC had
also a high influence in the coffee plantation, particularly within the lower soil depth. These
observations justified the important role of the different soil biological components in the

soil quality of the fruit tree plantations, specifically of the banana, calamansi and coffee


plantations. While the soil chemical indicators that have the greatest influence in the study
were CEC and exchangeable K; two soil properties that greatly imply the significant role
of soil nutrient availability to the growth of a plant. The soil WHC was also revealed to
highly influence the soil quality, particularly in the coffee plantation; an important soil

quality indicator that functions in facilitating water movement and availability.

CONCLUSION

The influence of the reference forest and four fruit tree plantations, namely, banana,
calamansi, coffee, and rambutan plantations, on the soil quality under different soil depths
in Bacnotan, La Union was determined. The results revealed that the different sites have
varying influences on the 16 soil physical, chemical, and biological properties observed.
‘Across soil depths, the sites showed significant influences, particularly for the soil’s
fraction of clay, bulk density, particle density, soil porosity, and soil water holding capacity
among the soil's physical propertics. Out of the seven chemical properties, the soil pH,
cation exchange capacity, exchangeable potassium, total nitrogen, and clectrical
conductivity responded differently at each site. At the same time, all the three biological

propertics observed also showed significant variations.

Results of the soil quality index revealed that the soil quality in the banana
plantation declined while in the calamansi, coffee and rambutan plantations were improved
within the upper soil (0-30 cm) depth, considering the index value attained by the reference
forest. Further, only the banana plantation has increased the quality of the soil in the lower
(30-60 cm) soil depth, while the quality of the soil within the calamansi, coffee and
rambutan plantations decreased. For the total (0-60 cm) soil depth, only the coffee
plantation has caused an improved soil quality compared to the reference forest. Inversely,
the banana, calamansi, and rambutan plantations have caused a decrease in the quality of

the soil. All the soil quality of the different sites was graded from low to high.

RECOMMENDATIONS

The following measures or strategies are hereby recommended to improve the

quality of the soils of the different fruit tree plantations in Bacnotan, La Union:

1.

The lesser intensive management approach currently being employed in the various
plantations should at least be maintained since some fruit tree plantations, across
soil depths, have caused an increase in soil quality with reference to the secondary
forest.

However, it should also integrate into the management objectives of the different
fruit tree plantations the improvement of its soil. Specifically enhancing those soil
properties observed to be lower in quality than the optimal or most preferred
condition and emphasizing the soil indicators that were found to be highly affecting
the overall soil quality.

A dynamic soil quality asscssment is also recommended to determine the
magnitude and direction of change as influenced by the established plantation
coupled with management decisions.

Future soil quality assessment of other fruit tree plantations in La Union should
consider the biological indicators, in addition to the physical and chemical
properties of the soil that are usually assessed.

The role of any fruit tree plantation to the soil, whether to enhance or reduce its
quality, should not be neglected. Hence, the government and other concerned

institutions are encouraged to address the negative impacts of fruit tree plantations


on soil quality or further enhance these land uses if found to contribute to soil

quality improvement.

LITERATURE CITED

ABERA, G. and E. WOLDE-MESKEL. (2013). Soil properties, and soil organic carbon
stocks of tropical andosol under different land uses. Open Journal of Soil Science, 3,
153-162. http://dx.doi.org/10.4236/0jss.2013.33018

ACKERSON, J.P. (2018). Soil sampling guidelines. Purdue extension: Agronomy.
Ag.purdue.edw/Agry, AY-368-W.

ADIL, M.A., S. SHAFAQUE, N.H.B. NORDIN, A.N. CHAUNDHRY, G. JILANI, IH.
SHAMSI, and N. SHAKOOR. (2019). Effect of spatio-temporal and land-use
variability on earthworm distribution in mango orchards, Wulfenia Journal. Austria

AGUILERA, E., G. GUZMAN, and A. ALONSO. (2015). Greenhouse gas emissions
from conventional and organic cropping systems in Spain. Il. Fruit tree orchards.
Agron. Sustain. Dev., 35:725-737. DOI 10.1007/s13593-014-0265-y

ALTAMIRANO, A., A. MIRANDA, P. APLIN, J. CARRASCO, G. CATALAN, L.
CAYUELA, T. FUENTES-CASTILLO, A. HERNANDEZ, M. MARTINEZ-
HARMS, F. PELUSO, M. PRADO, R. REYES-RIVEROS, T. HOLT, C.
VERGARA, C. ZAMORANO-ELGUETA and C. BELLA. (2020). Natural forests
loss and tree plantations: large-scale tree cover loss differentiation in a threatened
biodiversity hotspot. Environmental Rescarch Letters 15, 124055.
htips://doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/abca64

AMADOR J.A., C.V. RAMOS, M. ALFORO, and D. SOTOMAYOR-RAMIREZ.
(2010). Impact of coffee management practices on earthworm populations in Puerto
Rico, Caribbean Journal of Science, Vol. 46, No. 2-3, 186-193.
http://dx.doi.org/10.18475/cjos.v46i2.a7

ANDREWS, S. and R. CARROLL. (2001). Designing a Soil Quality Assessment Tool for
Sustainable Agroccosystem Management. Ecological Applications, 11(6), pp. 1573—
1585.

ANDREWS, S., D. KARLEN and J. MITCHELL. (2002). A comparison of soil quality
indexing methods for vegetable production systems in Northern California.
Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment 90 (2002) 25-45.

ANNUNZIO, R., M. SANDKER, Y. FINEGOLD and Z. MIN. (2015). Projecting global
forest area towards 2030. Forest Ecology and Management 352 (2015) 124-133.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.foreco.2015.03.014


APRILE, F., and R. LORANDI. (2012). Evaluation of cation exchange capacity (CEC) in
tropical soils using four different analytical methods. Journal of Agricultural
Science; Vol. 4, No. 6. DOI: :10.5539/jas.v4n6p278

ARMENISE, E., M.A. REDMILE-GORDON, A.M. STELLACCI, A. CICCARESE and
P. RUBINO. (2013). Developing a soil quality index to compare soil fitness for
agricultural use under different managements in the Mediterranean environment. Soil
& Tillage Research 130, 91-98. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.still.2013.02.013

ARSHAD, M.A. and S. MARTIN. (2002). Identifying critical limits for soil quality
indicators in agro-ecosystems. Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment 88, 153—
160.

ASKARI, M.S., and N. HOLDEN. (2014). Indices for quantitative evaluation of soil
quality under grassland management. Geoderma.
www elsevier.com/locate/geoderma

ASUBONTENG, K., K. PFEFFER, M. ROS-TONEN, J. VERBESSELT and I. BAUD.
(2018). Effects of Tree-crop Farming on Land-cover Transitions in a Mosaic
Landscape in the Eastern Region of Ghana. Environmental Management.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00267-018-1060-3

BAHRAMI, A., I. EMADODIN, M.R. ATASHI, and H.R. BORK. (2010). Land-use
change and soil degradation: A case study, North of Iran. Agriculture And Biology
Journal of North America 1(4): 600-605. ISSN Online: 2151-7525

BIZUHORAHO, T., A. KAYIRANGA, N. MANIRAKIZA, and K.A. Mourad. (2018).
The effect of land use systems on soil properties; A case study from Rwanda
Sustainable Agriculture Research; Vol. 7, No. 2. doi: 10.5539/sar.v7n2p30

BLAKE, G.R. and K.H. HARTGE (1986a). Bulk density. p. 363-375. In A. Klute (ed.)
Methods of soil analysis, Part I: Physical and Mincralogical Methods. 2nd ed. Agron.
Monogr. 9. ASA and SSSA, Madison, Wisconsin, 53711 USA.

BLAKE, G.R. and K.H. HARTGE (1986b). Particle density. p. 377-381. In A. Klute (ed.)
Methods of soil analysis, Part I: Physical and Mineralogical Methods. 2nd ed. Agron.
Monogr. 9. ASA and SSSA, Madison, Wisconsin, 53711 USA.

BOLINDER, M.A., D.A . ANGERS, E.G. GREGORICH, and M.R. CARTER. (1999).
The response of soil quality indicators to conservation management. Canadian
Journal of Soil Science

BONANOMI, G., R. D'ASCOLI, V. ANTIGNANI, M. CAPODILUPO, L.
COZZOLINO, R. MARZAIOLI, G. PUOPOLOA, F. A. RUTIGLIANOC, R.


SCELZA, R. SCOTTI, M.A. RAO and A. ZOINAA. (2011). Assessing soil quality
under intensive cultivation and tree orchards in Southern Italy. Applied Soil Ecology
47; 184-194, doi:10.1016/j.apsoil.2010.12.007

BOUMA, J. 2015. Reaching out from the soil-box in pursuit of soil security. Soil Science
and Plant Nutrition, 61, 556-565. DOI: 10.1080/00380768.2015.1045403

BRAVO-ESPINOSA M. M. E. MENDOZA, T. CARLON ALLENDE, L. MEDINA, J.
T. SAENZ-REYES, and R. PAEZ. (2012). Effects of converting forest to avocado
orchards on topsoil properties in the Trans-Mexican volcanic system, Mexico. land
degradation & development. DOI: 10.1002/Idr.2163

BRAY, R.H. and KURTZ, L.T. 1945. Determination of Total Organic and Available
Forms of Phosphorus in Soils. Soil Science, 59, 39-45.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/00010694- 19450 1000-00006.

BREMNER, J.M. (1960). Determination of nitrogen in soil by the Kjeldahl method. J.
Agric. Sci., 55, 1

BREMNER J.M. (1965). Total Nitrogen. Journal Paper No. J-4712 of the lowa Agr. and
Home Econ. Exp. Sta., Ames, Towa. Project No. 1070. Contribution from the
Department of Agronomy.

BUNEMANN, E., G. BONGIORNO, Z. BAI, R. CREAMER, G. DEYN, R. GEODE, L.
FLESKENS, V. GEISSEN, T. KUYPER, P. MADER, M. PULLEMAN, W.
SUKKEL, J.W. GROENINGEN, and L. BRUSSAARD, (2018). Soil quality - A
critical review. Soil Biology and Biochemistry 120, 105-125
https://doi.org/10,10164soilbio.2018.01.030

CARLE, J., P. VUORINEN, and A, DEL LUNGO, (2002). Status and Trends in Global
Forest Plantation Development. Forest Products Journal, Vol. 52, No. 7

CARTER, M.R., E.G. GREGORICH, D.W. ANDERSON, J.W. DORAN, H.H. JANZEN,
and F.J. PIERCE, (1997). Concepts of Soil Quality and their Significance.

CHAUDHARY, R. S., S. JAYARAMAN, N.K., SINHA, B.L. LAKARIA, S. R.
MOHANTY, A.B.. SINGH, M. MOHANTY, K. M. HATI, R. K. SINGH, and A. K.
PATRA. (2021). Participatory soil quality assessment using low cost tools under
contrasting management practices in a vertisol. NAAS (National Academy of
Agricultural Sciences). Agric. Res. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40003-02 1-00598-0

CHAUHAN R.P., K.R. PANDE, S.C. SHAH, and D.D. DHAKA. (2015). Soil properties
and earthworm dynamics affected by land use systems in Western Chitwan, Nepal
J. Inst. Agric. Anim. Sci. 33-34: 123-128.


CHHETRI, S., T. R. GURUNG, T. UDEN, M. GURUNG and K. L. JAMTSHO, (2020).
Assessment of soil fertility status using soil nutrient index in three landuse systems
in Bhutan. Bhutanese Journal of Agriculture 2(1) 60-72.

CHIMDI, A., H. GEBREKIDAN, K. KIBRET and A. TADESSE. (2012). Status of
selected physicochemical propertics of soils under different land use systems of
Western Oromia, Ethiopia. J. Bio. & Env. Sci. Vol. 2, No. 3, p. 57-71.

CHOMITZ, K. and C. GRIFFITHS, (1996). Deforestation, shifting cultivation, and tree
crops in Indonesia: nationwide patterns of smallholder agriculture at the forest
frontier, World Bank. Washington DC 20433

CHOWDHURY, M.S.H., M.A. HALIM, S. BISWAS, S.M.S. HAQUE, N.
MUHAMMED, and M. KOIKE. (2007). Comparative evaluation of phi
properties in soils of orange orchard and bushy forest in Chittagong Hill Tracts,
Banglandesh. Journal of Forestry Research, 18 (3): 245-248. DOI: 10.1007/s1 1676-
007-0050-8

CURTIS, P., C. SLAY, N. HARRIS, A. TYUKAVINA, and M. HANSEN, (2018).
Classifying drivers of global forest loss. Science 361 (6407), 1108-1111. DOI:
10.1126/science.aau3445

DA- BUREAU OF SOILS AND WATER MANAGEMENT. (2022). How to collect soil
sample for analysis [Pamphlet]. http://bswm.da.gov.ph/download/how-to-collect-
soil-samples-for-analysis/

DAMATTA, F. (2008). Ecophysiology of tropical tree crops: an introduction. Braz. J.
Plant Physiol., 19(4):239-244,

DANIELSON, R.E. and P.L. SUTHERLAND, (1986). Porosity. p. 443-460. In A. Klute
(ed.) Methods of soil analysis, Part I: Physical and Mineralogical Methods. 2nd ed.
‘Agron, Monogr. 9. ASA and SSSA, Madison, Wisconsin, 53711 USA

DEWI, S.,M.V. NOORDWIK, M.T. ZULKARNAIN, A. DWIPUTRA, G. HYMAN, R.
PRABHU, V. GITZ, and R. NASI, (2017). Tropical forest-transition landscapes: a
portfolio for studying people, tree crops and agro-ccological change in context.
International Journal of Biodiversity Science, Ecosystem Scrvices & Management,
13:1, 312-329, DOI: 10.1080/21513732.2017.1360394

DHILLON, J., M. R. Del CORSO, B. FIGUEIREDO, E. NAMBI and W. RAUN. (2018).
Soil organic carbon, total Nitrogen, and soil pH, in a long-term continuous winter
wheat (Triticum Aestivum L.) experiment, Communications In Soil Science and Plant
Analysis. bttps://doi.org/10.1080/00103624.2018.1435678


DO V.H., N. LA , R. MULIA, G. BERGKVIST, A.S. DAHLIN, V.T. NGUYEN, H.T.
PHAM, and I, OBORN. (2020). Fruit tree-based agroforestry systems for
smallholder farmers in Northwest Victnam—A Quantitative and Qualitative
Assessment. Land. Land 2020, 9, 451. DOI: 10.3390/land91 10451

DORAN, J. W. (2002). Soil health and global sustainability: translating science into
practice. Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment 88, 119-127.

DORAN, J.W. and A.J. JONES, (1996). Methods for Assessing Soil Quality. SSSA
Special Publication Number 49. Soil Science Society of America, Inc. Madison,
Wisconsin, USA.

DORAN, J.W. and T.B. PARKIN, (1994). Defining and Assessing Soil Quality. In:
Defining Soil Quality for a Sustainable Environment. SSSA Special Publication no.
35. Soil Science Society of America, 677 S. Segoe Rd., Madison, WI 53711, USA.

DORAN, J.W. and M.R. ZEISS, (2000). Soil health and sustainability: managing the
biotic component of soil quality. Applied Soil Ecology 15, 3-11

DUNTEMAN, G.H., (1989). Principal Components Analysis. Sage Publications, London,
UK.

EMIRU N. and H. GEBREKIDAN. (2013). Effect of land use changes and soil depth on
soil organic matter, total nitrogen and available phosphorus contents of soils in
Senbat Watershed, Western Ethiopia. ARPN Journal of Agricultural and Biological
Science. VOL. 8, NO. 3. ISSN 1990-6145

FAO. (2018). The state of the world’s forests 2018 — Forest pathways to sustainable
development. Rome. Licence: CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 IGO.

FAO. (2020). 0. Global Forest Resources Assessment 2020: Main report. Rome.
https://doi.org/10.4060/ca9825en

FOX, J. and J. CASTELLA, (2013). Expansion of rubber (Hevea brasiliensis) in Mainland
Southeast Asia: what are the prospects for smallholders? The Journal of Peasant
Studies, 2013 Vol. 40, No. 1, 155-170,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/03066 150.2012.750605

FENTIE S.F., K. JEMBERE, E. FEKADU and D. WASIE. (2020). Land use and land
cover dynamics and properties of soils under different land uses in the Tejibara
Watershed, Ethiopia. Hindawi: The Scientific World Journal Volume 2020, Article
ID 1479460, 12 pages https://doi.org/10.1155/2020/1479460


FRANZLUEBBERS, A.J. (2002). Soil organic matter stratification ratio as an indicator
of soil quality. Soil & Tillage Research 66, 95-106.

GAVEAU, D., B. LOCATELLI, S. MOHAMMAD, Y. HUSNA, P. PACHECO, and D.
SHEIL, (2018). Rise and fall of forest loss and industrial plantations in Bornco
(2000-2017). Conservation Letters. 2018;¢12622. DOI: 10.111 1/conl.12622

GEE, G.W. and J.W. BAUDER (1986). Particle-size analysis. p. 383-409. In A. Klute
(ed.) Methods of soil analysis, Part I: Physical and Mineralogical Methods. 2nd ed.
Agron. Monogr. 9. ASA and SSSA, Madison, Wisconsin, 53711 USA.

GIBBS, H.K. and J.M. SALMON, (2015). Mapping the world's degraded lands. Applied
Geography 57, 12-21. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/}.apgeog.2014.11.024

GIBBS, H.K., A.S. RUESCH, F. ACHARD, M.K. CLAYTON, P. HOLMGREN, N.
RAMANKUTTY, and J.A. FOLEY, (2010). Tropical forests were the primary
sources of new agricultural land in the 1980s and 1990s. PNAS; vol. 107, no. 38.
www -pnas.org/egi/doi/10.1073/pnas.0910275107

GIL-SOTRES, F., C. TRASAR-CEPADA, M.C, LEIROS, and S. SEOANE, (2005).
Different approaches to evaluating soil quality using biochemical properties. Soil
Biology & Biochemistry 37, 877-887. doi:10.1016/}.soilbio.2004.10.003

GLOVER, J.D., J.P. REGANOLD, and P.K. ANDREWS. (2000). Systematic method for
rating soil quality of conventional, organic, and integrated apple orchards in
Washington State. Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment 80, 29-45.

GRANATSTEIN, D. and E, SANCHEZ. (2009). Research Knowledge and Needs for
Orchard Floor Management in Organic Tree Fruit Systems. International Journal of
Fruit Science, 9:257-281. DOI: ~—_‘10.1080/15538360903245212

GUILLAUME, T., A. HOLTKAMP, M. DAMRIS, B. BRUMMER, and Y.
KUZYAKOV. (2016). Soil degradation in oil palm and rubber plantations under land
resource scarcity. Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment 232 (2016) 110-118.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.agee.2016.07.002

GUIMARAES D.V., M.S. GONZAGA, and J.0.M. NETO. (2014). Management of soil
organic matter and carbon storage in tropical fruit crops. Revista Brasilcira de
Engenharia Agricola e Ambiental. v.18, n.3, p.301-306.

GUIMARAES D.V., M.LS. GONZAGA, T.O. DA SILVA, T.L. DA SILVA, N.S. DIAS
and M.I. S. MATIAS. (2013). Soil organic matter pools and carbon fractions in soil
under different land uses. Soil & Tillage Research 126; 177-182.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016j.still.2012.07.010


HALECKI W., D. MEYNSKI, M. RYCZEK, E. KRUK, and A. RADECKI-PAWLIK.
(2017). Applying an artificial neural network (ann) to assess soil salinity and
temperature variability in agricultural areas of a mountain catchment. Pol. J.
Environ. Stud. Vol. 26, No. 6, 2545-2554. DOT: 10.15244/pjoes/70925

HANISCH, S., Z. DARA, K. BRINKMANN, and A. BUERKERT. (2011). Soil fertility
and nutrient status of traditional gayo coffee agroforestry systems in the Takengon
region, Aceh Province, Indonesia. Journal of Agriculture and Rural Development in
the Tropics and Subtropics. Vol. 112 No. 2; 87-100.

HOLT, T., M. BINFORD, K. PORTIER, and R. VERGARA. (2016). A stand of trees does
not a forest make: Tree plantations and forest transitions. Land Use Policy 56; 147—
157. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.landusepol.2016.04.015

HOORMAN, J.J. and R. ISLAM. (2010), Understanding soil microbes and nutrient
cycling.  Ohioline: Ohio — State. University Extension.
hitps://ohioline.osu.edw/factsheevSAG-16

HORNECK, D.A., D.M. SULLIVAN, J.S. OWEN, and J.M. HART. (2011). Soil test
interpretation guide. Oregon State University — Extension Service.

INDORIA A.K., K. L. SHARMA and K. S. REDDY. (2020). Hydraulic properties of soil
under warming climate. Climate Change and Soil Interactions. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0- 12-8 18032-7.00018-7

JANIOLA M.D.C. and R.A. MARIN. (2016). Carbon sequestration potential of fruit tree
plantations in Southern Philippines. Journal of Biodiversity and Environmental
Sciences (JBES). Vol. 8, No. 5, p. 164-174.

JIANG, M., L. XU, X. CHEN, H. ZHU, and H. FAN. (2020). Soil quality assessment
based on a minimum data set: A case study of a county in the typical river delta
wetlands. Sustainability 2020, 12, 9033; doi:10.3390/sul2219033

JIANG, Y., L. CHUNLING, D. ZHANG, N. OSTLE, Z. CHENG, P. DING, C. SHEN,
and G. ZHANG. (2020). Radiocarbon evidence of the impact of forest-to-plantation
conversion on soil organic carbon dynamics on a tropical island. Geoderma 375;
114484. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.geoderma.2020.114484

KAISER K., B. WEMHEUER, V. KOROLKOW, F. WEMHEUER, H. NACKE, I
SCHONING, M. SCHRUMPF and R. DANIEL. (2016). Driving forces of soil
bacterial community structure, diversity, and function in temperate grasslands and
forests. Scientific Reports; 6:33696. DOI: 10,1038/srep33696



KALHORO S.A., X. XU, A. MAHAR, A. ALI, F. A. KALHORO, S. A. OTHO, R. N.
SOOMRO, F. ALI and Z. A. BALOCH. (2015). Study on growth effects of major-
nutrients composition to banana cultivation in coastal areas of Sindh, Pakistan.
American Journal ~—of-_~—~Plant_~—Sciences, 6,-~—=—(1003-1010.
http://dx.doi.org/10.4236/ajps.2015.67106

KARLEN, D.L., S.S. ANDREWS, and J.W. DORAN. (2001). Soil Quality: Current
Concepts and Applications. Advances in Agronomy, Volume 74.

KARLEN, D.L., S.S. ANDREWS, B.J. WIENHOLD, and T.M. ZOBECK. (2008). Soil
Quality Assessment: Past, Present and Future. Electronic Journal of Integrative
Biosciences 6(1):3-14. Special Issue: Soil Quality for a Sustainable Environment.

KARLEN, D.L., C.A. DITZLER, and S.S. ANDREWS. (2003). Soil quality: why and
how? Geoderma 114, 145 ~ 156, doi:10.1016/S0016-7061(03)00039-9

KARLEN, D.L., M.J. MAUSBACH, J.W. DORAN, R.G. CLINE, R.F. HARRIS, and
G.E. SCHUMAN. (1997). Soil Quality: A Concept, Definition, and Framework for
Evaluation (A Guest Editorial). n Soil Sci. Soc. Am. J. 61:4-10.

KARLEN D.L., N.C. WOLLENHAUPT, D.C. ERBACH, E.C. BERRY, J.B. SWAN,
N.S. EASH, and J.L. JORDAHL. (1994). Crop residue effects on soil quality
following 10- years of no-till com. Soil & Tillage Research 31, 149-167.

KAUFMANN, M., S. TOBIAS and R. SCHULIN. (2010). Comparison of critical limits
for crop plant growth based on different indicators for the state of soil compaction.
J. Plant Nutr. Soil Sci., 173, 573-583. DOL: 10.1002/jpIn.200900129

KENNEDY, J. (2012). Agricultural systems in the tropical forest: A critique framed by
tree crops of Papua New Guinea. Quaternary International 249 (2012) 140-150.
doi: 10.1016/j.quaint.201 1.06.020

KEYS, E. and W. MCCONNELL. (2005). Global change and the intensification of
agriculture in the tropics. Global Environmental Change 15, 320-337.
doi:10.1016/}.glocnvcha.2005.04.004

KHALEDIAN, Y., F. KIANI, S. EBRAHIMI, E. C. BREVIK and J. AITKENHEAD-
PETERSON. (2016). Assessment and monitoring of soil degradation during land
use change using multivariate analysis. Land Degrad. Develop. DOI
10.1002/Idr.2541

KHALEDIAN Y., ERIC C. BREVIK, P. PEREIRA, A. CERDA, M. A. FATTAH and H
TAZIKEH. (2017). Modeling soil cation exchange capacity in multiple countries,
Catena 158, 194-200. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.catena.2017.07.002


KLIMKOWICZ-PAWLAS, A., A. UKALSKA-JARUGA, and B. SMRECZAK. (2019).
Soil quality index for agricultural areas under different levels of anthropopressure.
International Agrophysics. _ www.international-agrophysics.org. DOI:
10.31545/intagr/113349

LAL, R. (2015). Restoring Soil Quality to Mitigate Soil Degradation. Sustainability, 7,
5875-5895. doi: 10.3390/su7055875

LARSON, W.E. and F.J. PIERCE. (1991). Conservation and enhancement of soil quality.
In Evaluation for sustainable land management in the developing world. Vol. 2.
IBSRAM Proc. 12(2). Int. Board for Soil Res. and Management, Bangkok, Thailand.

LARSON, W.E. and F.J. PIERCE. (1994). The Dynamics of Soil Quality as a Measure of
Sustainable Management. In: Defining Soil Quality for a Sustainable Environment.
SSSA Special Publication no. 35. Soil Science Society of America, 677 S. Segoe Rd.,
Madison, WI 53711, USA.

LENKA, N.K., B. MEENA, R. LAL, A. KHANDAGLE, S. LENKA and ABHAY
OMPRAKASH SHIRALE. (2022). Comparing four indexing approaches to define
soil quality in an intensively cropped region of northern India. Frontiers in
Environmental Science. DOI: 10.3389/fenvs.2022.865473

LI, X., H. LI, L. YANG, and Y. REN. (2018). Assessment of soil quality of croplands in
the com belt of northeast China. Sustainability.
www.mdpi.com/journa/sustainability. DOI: 10.3390/su10010248

LIAO C., Y. LUO, C. FANG, J. CHEN and B. LI, (2012). The effects of plantation
practice on soil properties based on the comparison between natural and planted
forests: a meta-analysis. Global Ecology and Biogeography, (Global Ecol.
Biogeogr.) 21, 318-327. DOT: 10.111 1/j.1466-8238.2011.00690.x

LIEBIG, M., G. VARVEL, and J. DORAN. (2001). A simple performance-based index
for assessing multiple agroccosystem functions. Agronomy & Horticulture — Faculty
Publications. 336. https://digitalcommons.unl.cdw/agronomyfacpub/336

LIU, W., H. HU, Y. MA, and H. LI. (2006). Environmental and sociocconomic impacts
of increasing rubber plantations in Menglun Township, Southwest China.
International Mountain Society: Mountain Research and Development, 26(3):245-
253. http://dx.doi.org/10.1659/0276-474 | (2006)26[245:EASIOI]2.0.CO;2

MACDANIELS, L.H. and A.S. LIEBERMAN. (1979). Tree Crops: A Neglected Source
of Food and Forage from Marginal Lands. BioScience, Vol. 29, No. 3, pp. 173-175.


MARBUN, P., Z. NASUTION, H. HANUM, and A. KARIM. (2019). Evaluation of land
suitability on arabica coffee plantation by parametric method in Lintongnihuta
District. IOP Conf. Series: Earth and Environmental Science 260 (2019) 012155.
DOI: 10.1088/1755-1315/260/1/012155

MARU, S., M. RUTTEN, G.C. SCHONEVELD and E. ZEWUDE. (2015). Land-use
changes by large-scale plantations and their effects on soil organic carbon,
micronutrients and bulk density: empirical evidence from Ethiopia. Agric Hum
Values. DOI 10,1007/s10460-015-9664-1

MARZAIOLI, R., R. D’ ASCOLI, R.A. DE PASCALE, and F.A. RUTIGLIANO. (2010).
Soil quality in a Mediterranean area of Souther Italy as related to different land
use types. Applied Soil Ecology. DOI: 10.1016/}.apsoil.2009. 12.007

MASTO, R.E., P.K. CHHONKAR, D. SINGH, and A.K. PATRA. (2008). Alternative soil
quality indices for evaluating the effect of intensive cropping, fertilisation and
manuring for 31 years in the semi-arid soils of India. Environ Monit Assess,
136:419-435. DOT 10.1007/s10661-007-9697-z

MCBRATNEY, A., D.J. FIELD, and A. KOCH. (2014). The dimensions of soil security.
Gcoderma 213, 203-213. http://dx.doi-org/10.1016/j.geoderma.2013.08.013

MEDICI, M., M. CANAVARI and M. TOSELLI. (2020). Interpreting environmental
impacts resulting from fruit cultivation in a business innovation perspective. MPDI:
Sustainability, 12, 9793; doi: 10.3390/su12239793

MEIJIDE, A., C. BADU, F. MOYANO, N. TIRALLA, D. GUNAWAN, and A. KNOHL,
(2018). Impact of forest conversion to oil palm and rubber plantations on
microclimate and the role of the 2015 ENSO event. Agricultural and Forest
Meteorology 252; 208-219. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agrformet.2018.01.013

MOHAMAD, N., M. JAMAL, K. ANNAMMALA, Z. YUSOP, N. ALIAS, and D.
SUGUMARAN. (2018). Impact of forest conversion to agricultural plantation on soil
erosion. MATEC Web of Conferences 250, 04004; SEPKA-ISEED 2018.
https://doi.org/10.105 1/matecconf/20 1825004004

MOHAMED, A.E., A. RAHMAN, A. SHALABY, and ES, MOHAMED. (2016).
Comparison of two soil quality indices using two methods based on geographic
information system. The Egyptian Journal of Remote Sensing and Space Sciences.
DOI: 10.1016/j.cjrs.2018.03.001

MOLNAR, T., P. KAHN, T. FORD, C.J. FUNK, and C.R. FUNK. (2013). Tree Crops, a
Permanent Agriculture: Concepts from the Past for a Sustainable Future. Resources,
2, 457-488. doi: 10.3390/resources2040457


MONSALUD, R.G., E. ARGUELLES, M.B. BROWN, M.S. PEDRO, R.A.
NEPOMUCENO, S.A. VILLADIEGO, and F.C. MONSALUD. (2021).
Relationship Between Microbial Soil Quality Indicators and Soil Productivity Under
Cassava-Based Farming Systems in Various Sites in the Philippines. Journal of the
International Society for Southeast Asian Agricultural Sciences Vol. 27, No. 1: 87-
105.

MUNSELL COLOR (Firm). (2010). Munsell soil color charts: with genuine Munsell color
chips. Grand Rapids, MI :Munsell Color.

NAHUELHUAL, L., A. CARMONA, A. LARA, C. ECHEVERRIA, and M.
GONZALEZ. (2012). Land-cover change to forest plantations: Proximate causes and
implications for the landscape in south-central Chile. Landscape and Urban Planning
107; 12-20. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.landurbplan.2012.04.006

NAKAJIMA, T., R. LAL, and S. JIANG. (2015). Soil quality index of a crosby silt loam
in central Ohio. Soil & Tillage Rescarch 146, 323-328.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.still.2014.10.001

NELSON, D.W. and L.E. SOMMERS. (1982). Total carbon, organic carbon, and organic
matter. p. 539-579. In A.L. Page (ed.) Methods of soil analysis. Part 2. 2nd ed. Agron.
Monogr. 9. ASA and SSSA, Madison, Wisconsin, 53711 USA.

NGABA, M., Y-L. HU, R. BOL, X-Q. MA, S-F. JIN, and A. MGELWA. (2019). Effects
of land use change from natural forest to plantation on C, N and natural abundance
of ?C and 'SN along a climate gradient in eastern China. Scientific Reports: 9:16516.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-52959-z,

NISKANEN, A. and 0. SAASTAMOINEN. (1996). Tree Plantations in the Philippines
and Thailand: Economic, Social and Environmental Evaluation. UNU World
Institute for Development Economics Research (UNU/WIDER). ISSN 1239-6761.

NORTCLIFF, S. (2002). Standardisation of soil quality attributes. Agriculture,
Ecosystems and Environment 88, 161-16.

OBADE, V. and R. LAL. (2016). Towards a standard technique for soil quality
assessment. Geoderma 265, 96-102.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.geoderma,2015.11.023

OLIVARES, B.O., J. CALERO, J.C. REY, D. LOBO, B.B. LANDA, and J.A, GOMEZ.
(2022). Correlation of banana productivity levels and soil morphological properties
using regularized optimal _— scaling —regression. Catena. DOT:
10.1016/j.catena.2021.105718


O'SULLIVAN, L., F. BAMPA, K. KNIGHTS, and R.E. CREAMER. (2017). Soil
protection for a sustainable future: options for a soil monitoring network for Ireland.
Soil Use and Management. doi: 10.111 1/sum.12351

OSMAN K.T. (2013). Soils: Principles, properties and management. Springer
Science+Business Media Dordrecht. DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-5663-2_14

OUYANG, W., Y. WU, Z. HAO, Q. ZHANG, Q. BU and X. GAO. (2018). Combined
impacts of land use and soil property changes on soil erosion in a mollisol area under
long-term agricultural development. / Science of the Total Environment 613-614,
798-809. http://dx.doi.org/10.10161j.scitotenv.2017.09.173

OVERBEEK, W., M. KROGER, and J-F. GERBER. (2012). An overview of industrial
tree plantation conflicts in the global South: Conflicts, trends, and struggles. EJOLT
Report No. 3. 100 p.

PANDEY, R.R., G. SHARMA, T. B. SINGH and S. K. TRIPATHI. (2010). Factors
influencing soil CO2 efflux in a northeastern Indian oak forest and plantation. African
Journal of Plant Science Vol. 4(8), pp. 280-289.

PARKINSON, D., T.R.G. GRAY, and S.T. WILLIAM. (1971). Isolation of
microorganisms. In: Methods for Studying the Ecology of Soil Microorganisms. IBP
Handbook No. 19, Blackwell Scientific Publication, London. pp. 36-56.

PENN, C.J. and J.J. CAMBERATO. (2019). A critical review on soil chemical processes
that control how soil pH affects phosphorus availability to plants. Agriculture 2019,
9, 120; doi: 10.3390/agriculture9060120

PENNA, I. (2010). Understanding the FAO's ‘Wood Supply from Planted Forests’
Projections. Series Editor A.JJ. Lynch, University of Ballarat Centre for
Environmental Management Monograph Series No. 2010/01. University of Ballarat,
Victoria.

PERYEA, F. (2001). Heavy Metal Contamination in Deciduous Tree Fruit Orchards:
Implications for Mincral Nutrient Management. Acta Hort. 564, ISHS 2001

PLIENINGER, T. (2012). Monitoring directions and rates of change in trees outside
forests through multitemporal analysis of map sequences. Applicd Geography 32,
566-576. doi:10.1016/j.apgeog.2011.06.015

PRATT, P.F. (1965). Potassium. p. 1022-1030. In A.G. Norman, Methods of soil analysis,
Part 2: Chemical and Microbiological Properties. Agronomy Monograph no. 9. ASA
and SSSA, Madison, Wisconsin, 53711 USA.


QI, Y., J. DARILEK, B. HUANG, Y. ZHAO, W. SUN, and Z. GU. (2009). Evaluating
soil quality indices in an agricultural region of Jiangsu Province, China. Geoderma
149, 325-334. doi:10.1016/}.geoderma.2008. 12.015

QIU, X., D. PENG, H. WANG, Z. WANG, and S. CHENG. (2019). Minimum data set for
evaluation of stand density effects on soil quality in Larix principis-rupprechtii
plantations in North China. Ecological Indicators 103, 236-247.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolind.2019,04.010

RAGHAVENDRA, L., and M.G. VENKATESHA. (2020). Water and soil quality of
coffee plantations in the Westen Ghats Region, Chikkamagaluru District,
Karnataka, India. Current World Environment. ISSN: 0973-4929, Vol. 15, No. (3)
2020, Pg. 502-514. DOT: 10.12944/CWE.15.3.14

RAI, RK., VJ. SINGH and A. UPADHYAY. (2017). Soil analysis. In book: Planning
and Evaluation of _—irvigation Projects. (pp. 505-523).
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-811748-4.00017-0

RAMANANJATOVO, T., E. CHANTOISEAU, P. GUILLERMIN, R. GUENON, M.
DELAIRE, G. BUCK-SORLIN and P. CANNAVO. (2021). Growth of vegetables
in an agroecological garden-orchard system: The role of spatiotemporal variations
of microclimatic conditions and soil properties. Agronomy, I, 1888.
https://doi.org/10.3390/agronomy 1 1091888

R CORE TEAM. (2022). R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing. R
Foundation for Statistical Computing. Vienna, Austria. https://www.R-project.org

RITCHEY, E.L., J.M. MCGRATH and D. GEHRING. (2015). Determining soil texture
by feel. Agriculture and Natural Resources Publications. 139.
https://uknowledge.uky.edwant_reports/139

RHOADES, J.D. (1982). Cation exchange capacity. p. 149-157. In Methods of Soil
Analysis, Part 2. Chemical and Microbiological Propertics. 2"! ed. Agronomy
Monograph no. 9. ASA and SSSA, Madison, Wisconsin, 53711 USA.

SAEZ-PLAZA, P., M. J. NAVAS, S. WYBRANIEC, T. MICHALOWSKI, and A.
ASUERO. (2013). An overview of the Kjeldahl method of nitrogen determination.
part II. Sample preparation, working scale, instrumental finish, and quality control.
Critical Reviews in Analytical © Chemistry, 43:224-272.. DOI:
10.1080/10408347.2012.751787

SANTOS-FRANCES, F., A. MARTINEZ-GRANA, C. AVILA-ZARZA, M. CRIADO,
and Y. SANCHEZ-SANCHEZ. (2022). Soil quality and evaluation of spatial


variability in a semi-arid ecosystem in a region of the southeastern Iberian Peninsula
(Spain). Land 2022, 11, 5. DOI: 10.3390/land! 1010005

SAMANI, K.M., N. PORDEL, V. HOSSEINI and Z. SHAKERI. (2018). Effect of land-
use changes on chemical and physical properties of soil in western Iran (Zagros oak
forests). J. For. Res. https://doi.org/10.1007/s1 1676-018-0799-y.

SARRANTONIO, M., J.W. DORAN, M.A. LIEBIG, and J.J. HALVORSON (1996). On-
Farm Assessment of Soil Quality and Health. In: Methods for Assessing Soil Quality,
SSSA Special Publication 49. Soil Science Society of America, 677 S. Segoe Rd.,
Madison, WI 53711, USA.

SELASSIE, Y. and G. AYANNA. (2013). Effects of different land use systems on selected
physico-chemical properties of soils in Northwestern Ethiopia. Journal of
Agricultural Science; Vol. 5, No. 4. doi:10.5539/jas.v5n4p112

SHEN, J.P.,L.M. ZHANGA, J.F. GUOA, J. L. RAY, and J.Z. HE. (2010). Impact of long-
term fertilization practices on the abundance and composition of soil bacterial
communities in Northeast China, Applied Soil Ecology 46 (2010) 119-124.
doi:10.1016/j.apsoil.2010.06.015

SHUKLA, M.K., R. LAL, and M. EBINGER. (2006). Determining soil quality indicators
by factor analysis. Soil & Tillage Research 87, 194-204.
doi:10.1016/j still.2005.03.011

SINHA N.K., U.K., CHOPRA§ and A.K., SINGH. (2013). Cropping system effects on soil
quality for three agro-ccosystems in India. Exp! Agric. (2014), volume 50 (3), pp.
321-342. DOI: 10.1017/S001447971300046X

SOFO, A., A. CIARFAGLIA, A. SCOPA, I. CAMELE, M. CURCI, C. CRECCHIO, C.
XILOYANNIS and A. M. PALESE. (2014). Soil microbial diversity and activity in
a Mediterranean olive orchard using sustainable agricultural practices. Soil Use and
Management, March 2014, 30, 160-167. doi: 10.111 1/sum.12097

SOFO, A., A. N. MININNI, and P. RICCIUTI. (2020). Soil macrofauna: A key factor for
increasing soil fertility and promoting sustainable soil use in fruit orchard
agrosystems, Agronomy 2020, 10, 456; doi:10.3390/agronomy 10040456

SOJKA, R.E. and D.R. UPCHURCH. (1999). Reservations Regarding the Soil Quality
Concept. Soil Science Society of America Journal Volume 63:1039-1054, no. 5.

SOLOMOJU, A.D., A. I. SFOUGARIS, E. M. VAVOULIDOU, and C. CSUZDI. (2013).
Species richness and density of carthworms in relation to soil factors in olive orchard


production systems in Central Greece. Communications in Soil Science and Plant
Analysis, 44:301-311. DOI: 10.1080/00103624.2013.741904

SQUIRE, G.R., C. HAWES, T.A. VALENTINE, and M.W. YOUNG. (2015).
Degradation rate of soil function varies with trajectory of agricultural intensification.
Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment 202 (2015) 160-167.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.agee.2014.12.004

SULLIVAN D.M., A.D. MOORE, E. VERHOEVEN and L.J. BREWER. (2020). Baseline
soil nitrogen mineralization: Measurement and interpretation. Oregon State
University Extension Service.

TANVEERA, A., T. A. KANTH, P. A. TALI and M. NAIKOO. (2016). Relation of soil
bulk density with texture, total organic matter content and porosity in the soils of
Kandi Area of Kashmir valley, India. International Research Journal of Earth
Sciences, Vol. 4(1).

TAO, Y., W. GU, J. CHEN, J. TAO, Y.J. XU, and H. ZHANG. (2013). The influence of
land use practices on earthworm communities in saline agriculture soils of the west
coast region of China’s Bohai Bay. Plant Soil Environ. Vol. 59, 2013, No. 1: 8-13.

TELLEN, V.A. and B.P.K. YERIMA. (2018). Efects of land use change on soil
physicochemical properties in selected areas in the North West region of
Cameroon, Environ. Syst. Res. 7:3 https://doi.org/10.1186/s40068-018-0106-0

TEMUDO, M. and M. ABRANTES. (2014). The Cashew Frontier in Guinea-Bissau, West
Africa: Changing Landscapes and Livelihoods. Hum. Ecol. DOI 10.1007/s10745-
014-9641-0

TESFAHUNEGN, GB. (2013). Soil quality indicators response to land use and soil
management systems in northern Ethiopia’s catchment. Land Degradation &
Development. DOI: 10.1002/Idr.2245

TESFAHUNEGN, G.B. (2014). Soil quality assessment strategies for evaluating soil
degradation in Northem Ethiopia. Hindawi Publishing Corporation. Applicd and
Environmental Soil Science. Volume 2014, Article ID 646502, 14 pages
http://dx.doi.org/10.1155/2014/646502

THOMAS, G. (1996). Soil pH and soil acidity. In: Methods of Soil Analysis: Chemical
Methods, D. L. Sparks, Ed., part 3, pp. 475 490, Soil Science Society of America,
Madison, Wis, USA.

THROOP, H.L.,S.R. ARCHER, H.C. MONGER, and S. WALTMAN. (2012). When bulk
density methods matter: Implications for estimating soil organic carbon pools in


rocky soils. Journal of Arid Environments 77 (2012) 66-71.
doi: 10.1016/j jaridenv.2011.08.020

TOLESSA, T. and F. SENBETA. (20180. The extent of soil organic carbon and total
nitrogen in forest fragments of the central highlands of Ethiopia. Journal of Ecology
and Environment (2018) 42:20. _https://doi.org/10.1186/s41610-018-0081-4

TROPEK, R., O. SEDLACEK, J. BECK, Z. MUSILOVA, I. SIMOVA, and D. STORCH.
(2014). Comment on “High-resolution global maps of 2Ist-century forest cover
change”. Science 344, 981. DOI: 10.1126/science. 1248753

USDA - NATURAL RESOURCES CONSERVATION SERVICE. (2014). Soil electrical
conductivity (Soil health — Guide for educators).

USDA ~ NATURAL RESOURCES CONSERVATION SERVICE. (1998). Soil quality
indicators: pH. National Soil Survey Center in cooperation with Soil Quality
Institute, NRCS, USDA, and the National Soil Tilth Laboratory, Agricultural
Research Service, USDA). https://soils.usda.gov

VASU, D., S.K. SINGH, and S.K. RAY. (2016). Soil quality index (SQI) as a tool to
evaluate crop productivity in semi-arid Deccan plateau, India. Geoderma. DOI:
10.1016/j.geoderma.2016.07.010

WANDER, M., G. WALTER, T. NISSEN, G. BOLLERO, S. ANDREWS, and D.
CAVANAUGH-GRANT. (2002). Soil Quality: Science and Process. Agron. J.
94:23-32.

WANG, C.,Z. GU, H. CUI, H. ZHU, S. FU and Q. YAO. (2015). Differences in arbuscular
mycorrhizal fungal community composition in soils of three land usc types in
subtropical hilly arca of Southern China. PLoS ONE 10(6): 0130983.
doi:10.1371/journal. pone.0130983. DOI:10.1371/journal.ponc.0130983

WANG, M., Q. ZHENG, Q. SHEN, and S. GUO. (2013). The critical role of potassium in
plant stress response. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2013, 14, 7370-7390;
doi:10.3390/ijms 14047370

WANG, Q and S. WANG. (2011). Response of labile soil organic matter to changes in
forest vegetation in subtropical regions. Applied Soil Ecology 47 (2011) 210-216.
doi:10,1016/j.apsoil.2010.12.004

WANG, Y., Q. HUANG, H. GAO, R. ZHANG, L. YANG , Y. GUO, H. LI, M. K.
AWASTHI and G. LI. (2021). Long-term cover crops improved soil phosphorus
availability in a rain-fed apple orchard. Chemosphere 275 (2021) 130093.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2021.130093


WEI, O., Y. WU, Z. HAO, Q. ZHANG, Q. BU, and X. GAO. (2018). Combined impacts
of land use and soil property changes on soil erosion in a mollisol area under long-
term agricultural development. Science of the Total Environment 613-614 (2018)
798-809. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2017.09.173

WEI, B,, Z. LI, and Y. WANG. (2021). Study on soil compaction and its causative factors
at apple orchards in the Weibei Dry Highland of China. Soil Use and Management.
DOI: 10.111 1/sum.12714

WEIL, R.R. and N.C. BRADY. (2017). The nature and properties of soils, 15" ed. Pearson
Education Limited. ISBN 10: 1-292-16223-6

WIENHOLD, B.J., S.S. ANDREWS, and D.L. KARLEN. (2004). Soil quality: a review
of the science and experiences in the USA. Environmental Geochemistry and Health
26: 89-95, 2004.

WU, D., M. ZHANG, M., PENG, X. SUI, W. LI, and G. SUN, (2019). Variations in soil
functional fungal community structure associated with pure and mixed plantations in
typical temperate forests of China. Front. Microbiol. 10:1636. doi:
10.3389/fmicb.2019.01636

WWF. (2020). Forest. conversion. Retrieved on 12 August 2021 from
https://wwf panda org/discover/our_focus/forests_practice/deforestation_causes2/fo
rest_conversion/

YAN, R., J.A. ZINDA, and S. KE. (2020). Designating tree crops as forest: Land
competition and livelihood effects mediate tree crops impact on natural forest cover
in south China. Land Use_—- Policy. ~=—96,-—=—(104702.
hitps://doi.org/10.1016/j.landusepol.2020.104702

ZARAFSHAR, M., S. BAZOT, M. MATINIZADEH, S. BORDBAR, M. ROUSTA, Y.
KOOCH, K. ENAYATI, A. ABBASI, and M. NEGAHDARSABER. (2020). Do tree
plantations or cultivated fields have the same ability to maintain soil quality as
natural fores Applicd Soil Ecology 151; 103536,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apsoil.2020.103536

ZHALNINA, K., R. DIAS, P. D. QUADROS, A. DAVIS-RICHARDSON, F. A. O.
CAMARGO, I. M. CLARK, S.P. MCGRATH, P. R. HIRSCH, and E.W.
TRIPLETT. (2014). Soil pH determines microbial diversity and composition in the
park grass experiment. Microb. Ecol. DOI 10.1007/s00248-014-0530-2

ZHANG, J., J. JIANG, L. SHEN, C. PAN, H. WU, A. ABARQUEZ, Q. SHAN, G. CHEN,
and Y. WANG. (2010). Soil salinization and ecological remediation by planting trees,


in China. Scientific & Technological Project of Zhejiang Forestry Department (No.
07A02 and No. 08A02).

ZHANG, H., and G.-L. ZHANG. (2005). Landscape-scale soil quality change under
different farming systems of a tropical farm in Hainan, China. Soil quality changes
in tropical farming systems. Soil Use and Management (2005) 21, 58-64. DOI:
10.1079/SUM2005293

ZHIJUN, H., S. SELVALAKSHMI, D. VASU, Q. LIU, H. CHENG, F. GUO, and X. MA.
(2018). Identification of indicators for evaluating and monitoring the effects of
Chinese fir monoculture plantations on soil quality. Ecological Indicators 93; 547—
554. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolind.2018.05.034
