Copper Recovery from Treatment of Simulated Copper-Iron Wastewater Using Fluidized-Bed Homogeneous Crystallization Reactor

Jayson Sime D. Jeremias

UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES DILIMAN

Master of Science in Chemical Engineering

July 2023

Abstract

Electroless plating wastewater effluents contain Cu-EDTA complex which
has high solubility in water solutions making it difficult to recover copper using readily
available abatement technologies. These complexes are destroyed first using Fenton
Process producing treated solutions with small concentrations of iron that may interfere on
copper recovery. The purpose of this study was to confirm the influence of trace amount
of iron ions, resulting from a Fenton pre-treatment, on copper removal, crystallization, and
recovery as copper salts using Fluidized Bed Homogeneous Crystallization (FBHC)
process. Several process parameters were varied such as effluent’s pH, initial copper and
iron concentrations, and metal and precipitant inlet flowrate and molar ratio (MR). The
optimum conditions include effluent pH of 6.5-7.0, inlet flowrate of 15 mL min-1, and
CO32-/Cu2+ MR of 1.5 with variable copper concentrations of 3.15 — 9.44 mM and iron
concentrations of 0.36 — 1.08 mM. % Copper removal was not affected by addition of iron
ions while increase in copper crystallization ratio was observed with increasing amount of
iron. Superior copper removal and crystallization ranging from 93% — 99% and 80% —
98%, respectively were recorded. Characterization through XRD, XPS, and SEM analyses
of the high-density spheroidal crystals obtained allowed the major identification of the precipitates as copper carbonate and its polymorphs, namely malachite and azurite. The FBHC’s ability to obtain high purity spheroidal solid salts enables resource recovery and catalyzes strategies for circular economy practices.

1. Introduction

1.1 Background of the Study

Heavy metals are naturally occurring elements found in the earth’s crust. However,
human activities have significantly disrupted their geochemical cycles and upset the
biochemical balance over time, leading to elevated concentrations in the biosphere beyond
permissible limits(Singh et al., 2011). Copper is one such heavy metal of concern, where
its concentrations in bodies of water vary depending on location. For instance, studies in
the USA have reported that copper has a median value of 0.01 mg L“', In the United
Kingdom, the mean copper concentration in the River Stour was at 0.006 mg L"! (Donohue
et al., 2004). However, these average copper concentrations were found out to be at least
four times higher at downstream of several industrial plants.

In typical electroplating wastewater, the concentration of copper could reach 1500
mg L"! (Ghorpade & Ahammed, 2018). The etching process involving ammonia solution
is commonly employed in the production of printed circuit boards, resulting in spent
solutions with copper concentrations reported 150 g L"! (Peng et al., 2017). Stringent
effluent standards for copper exist globally, varying from 0.1 mg L” in Italy to 3.0 mg L!
in India (2016 Wastewater Guidelines The Zero Discharge of Hazardous Chemicals
Programme, 2016). Furthermore, the drinking water should not contain more than 2 mg L”
| of copper ions according to the guideline suggested by the World Health Organization

(Sayato, 1989).

Industrial processes such as mining, smelting, surface metal finishing, fertilizer and
pesticide manufacturing, and electroplating release heavy metals into the environment
through wastewater (Dave & Chopda, 2014; Sabela et al., 2019; J. Wang & Chen, 2009).
The heavy metals released into the environment can become bound with sediment,
absorbed by plants and animals, posing potential risks to human health. Adverse effects
may include bronchitis, dermatitis, poisoning, liver and kidney dysfunction, central
nervous system damage, anemia, and mental retardation (Gadd & Griffiths, 1978; Malamis
etal., 2011).

Copper, even at trace amounts, is considered highly toxic, making it of utmost
importance to treat copper-contaminated wastewater from industries before its discharge
into the environment (Ghaedi et al., 2008; S. Yang et al., 2015). Several treatment methods
have been devised to effectively eliminate Cu(II) from industrial wastewater, ensuring
adherence to the required effluent standards. These techniques encompass membrane
filtration, chemical precipitation, ion-exchange, adsorption, _electrocoagulation,
electrodialysis, and crystallization, among others (Azimi et al., 2017).

The presence of ligands and coexisting metals is very common among the
mentioned industrial wastewaters. These usually limits the effectiveness of current copper
removal technologies (Rajoria et al., 2022). For instance, Electroless Plating (EP),
commonly used to obtain even metal coatings of copper, employs organic complexing
agents like ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) is the chelating agent most widely

used to stabilize the metal ion solution, prevent precipitation of Cu(OH)as) precipitation,

and to control the speed of electrodeposition (Deckert, 1995; Y. M. Lin & Yen, 2001).
With this, it is expected that wastewater effluents from EP contain Cu-EDTA. This prompts
a problem since complexed metallic ions like Cu-EDTA cannot be easily recovered given
their higher solubility in water solutions. Resource recovery technologies based on metallic
ion selective precipitation require a pre-treatment to destroy the complex (Q. Wang et al.,
2021).

Advanced oxidation processes (AOP) are implemented to mineralize the organic
chelants prior to their release. The AOPs are based on the generation in situ of strong
oxidants such as hydroxyl radical (*OH) (Ribeiro et al., 2015). The Fenton process is the
main AOP being commercially implemented. The Fenton process yields homogeneous
+OH from the iron-catalyzed decomposition of H2O2 following Fenton reaction (1) (Ameta
et al., 2018).

H,0, + Fe?+ —- OH + OH + Fe** O)

In the context of EP wastewater effluents containing Cu-EDTA, the Fenton process
can induce the mineralization of EDTA, thus breaking down the complex (Guan et al.,
2018). However, treated solutions contain small concentrations of iron ions in solution that
may interfere with copper recovery using available copper abatement technologies(Guan
et al., 2018). Fluidized-bed homogeneous crystallization (FBHC) has demonstrated
promising capabilities for recovery of added-value metallic salts and nutrients through
selective precipitation. Effluents containing one metal that can form an insoluble salt can

be recovered through precipitation in FBHC when inducing supersaturation conditions.

The FBHC obtains high purity spheroidal solid salts, which enables resource recovery and
catalyzes strategies for circular economy practices (Caddarao et al., 2018; Guevara et al,
2017; Salcedo et al., 2016; Vilando et al., 2017). However, despite the extensive research
on copper removal from wastewater, limited studies have investigated treatment under the
coexistence of two different metals susceptible to precipitation (Boonrattanakij et al., 2023;
Quiton et al., 2022). This research gap is significant because industrial wastewaters often
contain multiple heavy metals, and the presence of ligands can complicate the removal
process. Understanding the treatment of wastewater containing coexisting metals and
ligands is crucial for developing efficient and sustainable treatment methods.

The purpose of this study is to confirm the influence of trace amount of ferrous iron
resulting from a Fenton pre-treatment on the removal of copper and recovery of its salts as
Malachite crystals. Beyond the water matrix impacts on abatement and recovery
technology of copper, this work explores the impact of FBHC operational conditions. The
metal concentration, precipitant to metal molar ratio, inflow flow rate, and reaction pH
value showed effects on the reactor’s performance in terms of metal removal,
crystallization, and size distribution of spheroidal solids recovered. The results of this work
may lead the path elucidating implications of treatment technologies for sustainable
management of industrial wastewater.

1.2 Significance of the Study
The detrimental health effects associated with prolonged exposure to heavy metals,

including bronchitis, dermatitis, poisoning, liver and kidney dysfunction, central nervous

system damage, anemia, and mental retardation, have been well-established. Among these
heavy metals, copper is often found in wastewater at ened concentrations due to its
widespread use in industrial applications. As more illnesses are being attributed to metal
exposure, particularly copper, it is important to manage wastewater to ensure that it meets
safety limits. This research aims to address this concern by improving the quality of
industrial wastewater effluents.

By investigating the mechanism of co-precipitation of coexisting metallic ions, this
study seeks to evaluate the barriers and challenges associated with solid recovery
technologies such as fluidized bed homogeneous crystallization. Additionally, exploring
bimetallic salts, specifically those formed by copper and iron ions, presents an opportunity
for unexploited niche applications. For instance, the recovery of layered-double hydroxide
salts (LDHs) from such salts can offer alternative uses as fine products. Moreover, if
proven effective and efficient in copper removal and recovery from simulated copper-iron
industrial wastewaters, the studied FBHC reactor holds potential for scalability to meet the
capacity demands of industrial wastewater treatment. It can also be implemented as a
secondary or tertiary treatment in existing industrial wastewater treatment plants, thereby
enhancing the degradation of copper metal.

By addressing this purpose, this research aligns with the United Nations Sustainable
Development Goals, specifically SDG 6 - Clean Water and Sanitation, underscoring the
importance of achieving cleaner water quality on a global scale (Sustainable Development

Goal 6: Ensure Access to Water and Sanitation for All, n.d.).

1.3 Objectives of the Study
This study is generally aimed to investigate the influence of trace amounts of iron
ions on the performance of the fluidized bed homogeneous crystallization reactor in terms
of copper removal and crystallization ratio as well as the metal salt recovery. The specific
objectives of this research are as follows:
sol. Explore the effects of different reactor effluent pH (pH) on copper
removal, crystallization, and the resulting size distribution of recovered
crystals.
$02. Investigate the effects of different molar ratios (MR) of precipitant

c037~
cua

to metal ) on copper removal, crystallization, and the resulting size

distribution of recovered crystals.
$03. Analyze the effects of varying metal and precipitant inlet flow
rates (Qm and Qppi) on copper removal, crystallization, and the resulting
size distribution of recovered crystals.
S04. Evaluate the impact of varying copper and iron concentrations on
copper removal efficiency, crystallization ratio, and crystal growth.
SOS. Analyze and characterize the properties of the recovered metal
salts.
These objectives will provide valuable insights into the performance and
optimization of the fluidized bed homogeneous crystallization reactor, contributing to the

advancement of copper removal and metal salt recovery technologies.

14 Scope and Limitations

This study utilizes a laboratory-scale fluidized bed reactor with an effective volume
of 513.5 mL. The experimentation involves the treatment of synthetic wastewater, which
emulates a typical copper plating wastewater and incorporates the Fenton process. The
choice of a wide range of copper and iron concentrations is lifted from previous research
(Dib & Makhloufi, 2004; Pirkanniemi et al., 2007), which demonstrates the relevance of
these concentrations to the study the set objectives. Furthermore, other parameters are
selected based on relevant findings from previous studies (Lertratwattana et al., 2019).

The analysis of the reactor's effluent primarily focuses on dissolved and total copper
concentrations to determine the percentage of copper removal and crystallization,

respectively. Since the added iron ions are present in minimal amounts compared to the

£2 <2), the removal and crystallization

magnitude of copper ions in the solution (2, < 25 < =

ratio of iron is not reported within the scope of this study. It is important to note that the
synthetic wastewater used in this study is designed to replicate an effluent after a Fenton
pretreatment, which aims to destroy the Cu-EDTA complex from electroless plating

wastewater before subjecting it to fluidized bed homogeneous crystallization.

2. Review of Related Literature

2.1 Copper: Nature and Utilization

Copper is a versatile metallic element with notable physicochemical properties. Its
inherent malleability and ductility enable easy shaping and manipulation, rendering it an
ideal choice for diverse industries such as construction. Additionally, copper exhibits
exceptional conductivity for heat and electricity, making it indispensable for various
applications like telecommunications and semiconductors (Abhinav K et al., 2015). Copper
is also resistant to corrosion and possesses antimicrobial properties further enhancing its
value in different fields (Vincent et al., 2018).

Copper is naturally abundant, being found in a variety of forms within the Earth's
crust. Sulfide deposits, including minerals such as chalcopyrite, bornite, chalcocite, and
covellite, serve as primary sources of copper (Sinyakova & Kosyakov, 2009). Carbonate
deposits, comprising minerals like azurite and malachite, as well as silicate deposits such
as chrysocolla and dioptase, also contribute to the availability of copper (Selby et al., 2009;
Selvin et al., 2001). Furthermore, copper occurs in its pure form as native copper. A
comprehensive overview of the physical and chemical properties of copper can be found
in Table 1.

Table 1. Copper physicochemical properties lifted from The World Copper Factbook
2022 (Saralli & Yusheng, 2022)

Chemical Symbol Cu
Atomic Number 29
Atomic Weight 63.54


Density (ke m*) 3960

Melting point (K) 1356

Specific heat at 293 K (kJ kg" K") 0.383

Thermal conductivity (Wm K") 394
Coefficient of linear expansion (K"') 16.5 x 10°

‘Young’s Modulus of Elasticity (Nm) 110 x 10°
Electrical Conductivity (ohm-m) 1.673 x 10
Crystal structure Face-centered Cubic

In addition to its presence in the Earth's crust, copper is also naturally found in
humans, animals, and plants. Being an essential nutrient, copper plays a vital role in
maintaining health and supporting life-sustaining functions (Karim, 2018). Its importance
to organic life forms is evident from the evolutionary adaptation to an environment
containing copper. For instance, it was found out that copper functions as a cofactor for a
terminal enzyme (cytochrome c oxidase) of the respiratory electron transport chain in cells.
It is also part of plastocyanin contributing to the photosynthesis process in plants and algae.
In arthropod and gastropod, copper is essential part of their blood’s oxygen-carrying
hemocyanin. Moreover, copper exhibits involvement in regulatory processes such as cell
proliferation, angiogenesis, and certain aspects of body defense in both humans and
animals (Linder, 1991). These diverse involvements of copper in various biological
processes highlights its importance as a trace element with diverse functional implications.

In the context of industrial utilization, the numerous applications of copper and
copper-based alloys are vital for attaining a reasonable standard of living, making their
continued production and use crucial for societal development (Pietrzyk & Tora, 2018). To

ensure sustainable development, responsible exploitation and utilization of resources are

necessary to meet the needs of future generations. According to the 2022 report of
International Copper Study Group, industrial utilization of copper can be categorized into
two. The first group involves the use of copper as wire, rod, tube, sheets, castings, and
melted copper scraps, while the second category comprises the alteration of copper and its
alloys into end-use products by downstream industries. End-use products include |
automobiles, appliances, electronics, among other copper-dependent product the society
uses in day-today life (Saralli & Yusheng, 2022). Figure 1 shows the global distribution of
copper into its respective usage.

First-Use (Semis Production") End-use (Industry)
(5s

10% a8

Wire «Rods brs sections «Flatrotedrodvcts pate sheet sri) «Tube # Fol strction

Figure 1. Copper distribution in terms of its global utilization. Reproduced from (Saralli
& Yusheng, 2022)

Copper is widely utilized in electrical industry due to its remarkable low resistance
compared to other metals. It is also widely utilized in power cables, catering to high,
medium, and low voltage needs which accounts of almost over a third of total copper usage
(Magno & Guzman, 2021). Additionally, copper plays a vital role in renewable energy

sources such as solar (Han et al., 2023), wind (Nasution, 2012), geothermal (Johnston et

al., 2011), fuel cells (Johnston et al., 2011) and other technologies are all heavily reliant on
copper making use of its excellent conductivity. :

Copper holds significant role in global electronics and communications technology.
Internet wires which facilitate high-speed data transmission are mainly composed of
copper. Copper and copper alloy products are commonly utilized in the manufacturing of
mobile phones, laptops, desktops, and various electronic equipment like wires,
transformers, and connectors, exemplifying its widespread presence (Fukuda & Yusheng,
2020). Furthermore, copper finds significant applications in diverse sectors including
construction, industrial machinery, transportation, as well as consumer and general
products, emphasizing its versatility and importance in numerous downstream industries.
2.2. Copper Abatement Technologies
2.2.1 Adsorption

Adsorption removes aqueous pollutant based on its accumulation at solid-liquid
interface. Due to its simplicity in design and low cost in operation, adsorption method is
one of the most adopted processes to treat copper-containing streams (Davarnejad &

Panahi, 2016; Hidalgo vazquez, A.R.; Alfaro cuevas villanueva et al., 2011; Patel et al.,

2013). However, the operation range of copper concentration is often limited to prevent
rapid exhaustion and frequent regeneration (Abdel Salam et al., 2011). Depending on the
property of the surface of adsorbent, copper ion can be immobilized by inner-sphere
complexation or outer-sphere complexation. Therefore, it is essential to consider the

specific surface area, number of active sites, and the affinity between active site and copper

species when designing the adsorbents. Typical choices of adsorbent for copper includes
activated carbon, zeolites, activated alumina, lignite coke, and bentonite (Cossu et al.,
2018). In the past decades, novel adsorbents have been developed to either be more
sustainable or more efficacious, including biomass-derived adsorbents, inorganic
adsorbents, and nanomaterials among others.

The utilization of biomass as adsorbent for the control of copper is efficient and
sustainable. Biomass-derived adsorbents are derived from bacteria, algae, fungi, yeasts,
and agricultural wastes (Bilal et al., 2013; Gavrilescu, 2004). The characteristics of
biosorbents dictates the removal mechanism of heavy metal, which can be physical or
chemical, monolayer or multilayer (Jain et al., 2016).

The surface functional groups on bioadsorbents are critical for chemisorption of
copper ion. Ben-Ali et al. identified the surface groups of pomegranate-derived adsorbent
using the Boehm titration, including carboxylic, lactonic, phenolic, and carbonyl groups
(Ben-Ali et al., 2017). Due to the speciation of the surface group, copper removal was
affected by pH and the maximum adsorption capacity of 20.49 mg g”' was achieved at pH
= 5.8, primarily bound to hydroxyl and carboxyl functional groups. Zhou et al. (Zhou et
al., 2017) investigated the adsorptive mechanism and capacity of a modified biochar
derived from sawdust. The sawdust biochar, doped with iron and zinc (Fe/Zn-biochar), was
studied for its capacity to remove copper (Cu) and tetracycline (TET) co-contaminated
wastewater. The synthesized Fe/Zn-biochar was found out to have a higher Cu adsorption

capacity at pH > 4 where electrostatic attraction of cationic Cu and negatively charged

biochar is beneficial to Cu adsorption. The carboxyl and/or hydroxy! functional groups on
Fe/Zn-biochar immobilized Cu and TET via surface complexation. The competition
between Cu and TET over the active sites were observed at elevated concentrations: from
5 to 10 mg-Cu L"' and from 10 to 25 mg-TET L!. Nearly 90% of recovery rate was
observed even after three adsorption/desorption cycles with 0.1 M NaOH as a regenerating
agent, showing the exemplary regeneration performance of the synthesized Fe/Zn-biochar
(Zhou et al., 2017). Jin et al. (X. Jin et al., 2017) improved the copper adsorption capacity
of bacteria-derived biochar through the functionalization polyethyleneimine. The
introduced amine functional group enabled the surface complexation of copper, with the
maximal adsorption density at pH 4.5. At lower pH, it was noted that large number of H*
competes with copper for the adsorption site of -NH2.

The decoration of biochar by metal oxide is an effective way to improve copper
adsorption capacity. In the study of Wan et al., a hybrid adsorbent (denoted as MO-L-BC)
was fabricated through dispersing manganese oxide (MO) inside a biochar containing
enlarged pore structure (namely L-BC). Enlarged pores of biochar L-BC have large pores
lower the diffusion resistance of target pollutants in the pore region of MO-L-BC. The
fixed bed-adsorption tests performed in the study revealed that MO-L-BC can treat
wastewater that was contaminated by both antimony or copper. It was also observed that
copper was removed through two interactions: (1) electrostatic attractions between copper
ions and negatively charged carboxyl- and hydroxyl-groups covalently bonded on the L-

BC, and (2) inner-sphere complexation between copper and impregnated manganese oxide

(Wan et al., 2020). Yang et al. studied the adsorptive mechanism and capacity of com
straw-derived biochar impregnated with a-FeOOH nanorods to remove copper. This as-
prepared biochar (a-FeOOH@PC) composite has active a-FeOOH nanocrystals
encapsulated in gradient porous carbon (PC) framework via C-O-Fe bonding. The
formation mechanism of a-FEOOH@PC composites is shown in Fig 1. The excellent
performance of this adsorbent can be attributed to the synergistic effect of the large amount
of reactive surface hydroxy! sites ofgoethite and the large surface area and porous volume
of the PC which was proven by the improved removal efficiency of 79% (Fan Yang et al.,
2018).

Copper can be readily adsorbed by a variety of inorganic substances, including
clays, zeolite, metal oxide, and industrial waste. Natural clays such as zeolite and bentonite
are cost-effective in the control of heavy metals. Taamneh et al. demonstrated that the
removal of copper and cadmium are dictated by the availability of active site of natural
zeolites. Therefore, the adsorption capacity increased with higher metal concentration
while the removal was improved with greater dosage of zeolite (Taamneh & Sharadqah,
2017). Bentonite from Norther Luzon, Philippines was modified by the group of De
Castro et al. with ethylenediaminetetraacetic (EDTA). EDTA-modified bentonite (EMB)
ability to adsorb methylene blue and copper ions was investigated. The modification of
bentonite by EDTA increased the adsorption of copper and methylene blue by 100% and
40%, respectively. The result was attributed to the swelling of bentonite by EDTA that

improved the accessibility of positively charged ions in the interlayers, which was further

bounded by the carboxyl groups. The adsorption process was found to be spontaneous,
exothermic, and reversible (De Castro et al., 2018).

Layered double hydroxides (LDHs) are synthetic anionic clays featuring abundant
hydroxyl groups for binding with heavy metals. Yang et al. synthesized Mg-Al layered
double hydroxides/palygorskite (Pal/MgAI-LDHs) through hydrothermal process for the
removal of lead, nickel, and copper ions. It was found out that the copper adsorption
capacity of Pal/MgAI-LDHs was higher than those of palygorskite and Mg-Al LDHs alone
due to the synergistic effects of each building unit. Moreover, the calcination of Pal/MgAI—
LDHs at 400°C improved the copper adsorption capacity of uncalcined Pal/MgAI-LDHs
by 44%. The phenomenon was attributed to the reconstruction of LDHs from CLDHs upon
hydration, which exhibits more active sites than the uncalcined LDHs (J. Y. Lin et al.,
2021; Facui Yang et al., 2016). Removal of copper and zinc from the footbath in
commercial farming of cattle was explored using the calcium-aluminum LDHs with EDTA.
as an interlayer anion (CazAI-EDTA LDHs). The adsorption capacity of CazAl-EDTA
LDHs was 570 mg g"' in CuSOy solution and 280 mg g"' in footbath solution. The result
suggests that the active sites were competed by other components in footbath of cattle. The
group proposed that there is a significant opportunity to retrieve valuable copper and zine
waste stream for secondary copper production (Williams et al., 2019).

Industrial waste are potential sources of low-cost adsorbents. Oliveira et al. used
bagasse fly ash (BFA) as the source of aluminum and silicon to synthesize zeolite. After

calcination, BFA underwent hydrothermal treatment with 0.1 M NaOH as a mineralizing

agent. The zeolite prepared from BFA (Si/AI ratio of 5.9) showed an adsorption capacity
of 100 mg g". The introduction of aluminum source in hydrothermal treatment could tune
the AI/Si ratio of the zeolite to maximize the intrinsic charge due to isomorphic
substitution. Therefore, the optimized zeolite with Si/Al ratio of 1.71 featured an adsorption
capacity of 142 mg g’! (Oliveira et al., 2019). Due to alkaline components of residual solid
wastes from steel-making industries, steel slag is currently being studied due to its great
potential as low-cost high-efficient adsorbent in removing heavy metal ions. The alkaline
matters such as CaO and MgO in steel slag can readily release hydroxide ion that increases
the solution pH to induce the surface precipitation of heavy metal ions on the steel slag
surface (L. Wang et al., 2022). Nikolié et al. applied steel slag waste to remove copper
from aqueous solution. Compared to the pristine slag, the alkali activation significantly
improved the sorption capacity from 200.02 to 256.4] mg g"' due to the increase in specific
surface area (from 0.6 m? g’! to 6.5 m? g"). The adsorption of copper by alkali activated
slag obeyed pseudo-second order kinetic model where the adsorption is film diffusion-
controlled, and data were well-fitted against Langmuir model. XRD also revealed that
adsorption of copper on both steel slag wastes occurs through Cu-complex production
(Nikolié et al., 2020). Wang et al. investigated effectivity of steel slag as a cost-effective
adsorbent for simultaneous removal of collectors and heavy metals (Pb and Cu) from
floatation wastewaters. At a steel slag dosage of 12 g L"', 99.8% removal was observed for
both Pb and Cu with a maximum capacity intake of 110.45 and 160.48 mg g”! for Cu and

Pb, respectively. Several structural analyses also proved the generation of lead and copper

hydroxides and oxides onto the steel slag surface. The surface of the precipitated metal
oxide also provided active sites to bind the flotation reagents such as butyl Pei (BX)
and diethyl dithiocarbamate (DDTC) forming insoluble metal-collector chelates (L. Wang
etal., 2022).

Utilization of nanomaterials draws interest as potential adsorbents for removal of
heavy metal due to its large surface area. The materials of interest include graphene oxide
(GO), carbon nanofibers (CNF), and carbon nanotubes (CNT). On the other hand,
composite adsorbents have been explored, including magnetic composite, metal
hydroxide-hydrogel, and nanocomposites (Behra & Krug, 2008).

Carbonaceous materials with directional structure are potential adsorbents for
heavy metals, For example, CNFs are produced by the hydrothermal carbonization with
precursor material electrospun into fibers showed high mechanical property and specific
surface area, with tunable hydrophilicity (Ding et al., 2016; Qian et al., 2006). Garcia-Diaz
et. al studied the adsorption of copper by commercial CNFs. With an isoelectronic (IEP)
PH of 1.9, the adsorption capacity plateaued at pH > 4 due to the complete dissociation of
surface carboxyl groups. The thermodynamic and kinetic aspects of adsorption process
were described by Langmuir isotherm and pseudo second-order kinetics, respectively. The
adsorption process was analyzed to reveal that the particle diffusion was the rate-limiting
step (Garcia-Diaz et al., 2018). Lee et al. studied the adsorption capacity of a modified
carbon foam to remove heavy metal ions such as copper, nickel, and chromium from metal

plating wastewater. The decoration of FexO3 on macroporous carbon foam not only

improved the adsorption capacity but accelerated the adsorption rate due to the additional
active sites of FexO3. The fixed-bed operation was conducted to evaluate the metal
adsorption of synthetic wastewater that contained Cr*, Cu*, and Ni?*. The breakthrough
time of three metals were different, suggesting that the active sites were not identical (Lee
et al., 2017).

The composite of amine-rich adsorbents shows high adsorption affinity towards
heavy metal. Wang et al. synthesized polyethyleneimine-glutaraldehyde (PEI-GA)
composites of different mass ratios to determine their capability to remove selenium and
copper ions in aqueous solution. The amount of GA to PEI for crosslinking also affects
copper adsorption performance. Increase in amount of GA decreases adsorption since GA
reduces the amount of free amine groups available for copper adsorption. The as-prepared
adsorbents could selectively remove copper for copper-lead system, indicating that the
selectivity was not compromised by cross-linking (S. Wang et al., 2020). Plohl et al.
developed a novel nanoadsorbent from the irreversibly linked amino-rich polymer onto
previously silica-coated magnetic nanoparticles (MNPs). In this experiment, the available
MNP’s were uniformly coated with 3 nm thick silica layer for the core-shell stricture.
Derived branched polyethyleneimine (bPEI) were also added for systematic covalent
attachment modification. The synthesized nanoadsorbent exhibited high density of
chelating amino groups and high saturation magnetization. Experimental data also showed
that the adsorption isotherm was fitted well with Langmuir isotherm with a maximum

adsorption capacity of 143 mg g"'. Reusability was also studied and showed that even after

four cycles of adsorption-desorption, adsorption performance is still at a promising 88%
removal efficiency (Plohl et al., 2019).

Other adsorbent materials being studied are polymer-based. Biopolymers abundant
surface group to immobilize heavy metals are sustainable and widely available. The active
sites of the biopolymers include hydroxyl, carboxyl, and amines (Kanamarlapudi et al.,
2018). Dou et al. prepared an polymer composite that contained Mg/Al LDHs,
polydopamine (PDA), and poly(methyl vinyl ether-alt-maleic anhydride) (PMVE-MA). By
doing so, the LDHs were stabilized by the hydrophilic copolymer (PMVE-MA), featuring
a copper adsorption capacity of 193.8 mg g'. Furthermore, the composite adsorbent
retained 93% of adsorption capacity after 4 cycles of regeneration using 0.1 M HCl, which
was outperformed the LDHs adsorbent (< 20% after 4 cycles) (Dou et al., 2019).
Crosslinked hydrophilic polymers (hydrogels) have the ability to expand their volumes due
to high swelling in presence of moisture, enabling the diffusion of heavy metal into the
hydrogel network and immobilized by strong binding sites (Barakat, 2011). The cross-
linked chitosan composite hydrogel has been developed for copper removal. Zidan et al.
synthesized a novel hydrogel based on N-aminorhodanine modified chitosan hydrogel for
antibacterial and copper ions removal from aqueous systems. N-aminorhodanine was
reacted with glutaraldehyde to yield Schiff base followed by reaction with chitosan to
obtain the new hydrogel adsorbent. The modification of N-aminorhodanine doubled its
maximum adsorption capacity up to 62.5 mg g!. Maximum adsorption for this modified

chitosan was achieved in 15 mins, which is much faster than the unmodified chitosan (360

min) (Zidan et al., 2020). The chitosan hydrogel crosslinked by diphenylcarbazide
(DPCCS) was prepared by Ahmad et al. for copper adsorption. The synergistic effect of
DPC in the improvement of mechanical and adsorption properties of chitosan hydrogel was
observed. Swelling capacity of the CS and DPCCS showed that in acidic media, zero
swelling was observed for the CS while addition of DPCCS showed significant swelling
(50%). No significant loss on the adsorption capacity after 5 cycles of
adsorption/desorption processes with HCI solutions where 85% of copper ions were still
recovered even after regeneration cycles of the hydrogel (Ahmad et al., 2019).
Biodegradable cellulose hydrogel and cellulose/gelatin composite hydrogel were
synthesized by Teow et al. to avoid hydrogel disposal problem after adsorption. The
swelling ability and biodegradability of the hydrogel were tuned through the esterification
cross-linking with epichlorohydrin (ECH). Cellulose hydrogel with 6 v/v% of ECH has the
greatest swelling ability (4650%), highest biodegradability rate (79.5%), and highest
adsorption capacity (28.4 mg/g) compared to other cellulose hydrogels. Biodegradability
rate of cellulose hydrogel also decreases when cross-linking degree increases and
increasing ECH concentration to the cellulose hydrogel decreases its adsorption capacity
due to induced steric hindrances. On the other hand, the gelatin content of hydrogel affected
the swelling property due to intermolecular hydrogen bonding and the abundance of amine

group for binding copper ion. (Teow et al., 2018).

2.2.2 Electrochemical Treatment

Electrochemical treatment features high removal efficiency and compact design but
require large capital investments and high energy supply (Gupta & Ali, 2012; Holt et al.,
2005). A variety of electrochemical methods have been developed for copper removal,
such as electrodialysis, electrocoagulation, electrodeposition, and capacitive deionization.

Electrodialysis (ED) is a membrane-based separation process which utilizes
electrical potential difference as a driving force for ion separation through semi-permeable
membranes. A typical electrodialysis configuration consists of a series of anion- and
cation-exchange membranes in an alternating pattern in between anode and cathode to
individual chambers. In the presence of an electric field, cations would move to cathode
and anions would move towards the anode. Accordingly, the dilute and concentrate streams
will be produced in the alternating chambers (T. Scarazzato et al., 2017).

A pilot-scale electrodialysis that contained 15 compartment chambers was
investigated for the treatment of metal plating wastewater. The group of Min et al.
identified linear velocity as a key operation parameter. Both voltage and limiting current
density were proportional to the linear flow velocity because of the decrease in the
thickness of boundary layer on the surface of ion-exchange membrane. The removal
efficiency of 95% was achieved in the first run of 120 min; the efficiency could be
maintained over 90% in the first ten consecutive operations but decreased sharply after
because of significant increase in the concentration of ions in the concentrate compartment

leading these ions to back-diffuse into the dilution compartment (Min et al., 2021).

Scarazzato et al. studied the treatment of synthetic electroplating wastewater that contained
chelated copper by 1-hydroxyethane 1,1-diphosphonic acid (HEDP). The speciation of the
HEDP-copper complex is pH-dependent, being Cu?* at pH < 2, CuH(HEDPY at pH 3-6,
and CuHEDP* > 6. Therefore, the copper species may move toward to either anionic or
cationic concentrated compartment, depending on the operation pH. The results showed
the extraction of up to 99.7% of the copper and up to 94.4% of the HEDP from the working
solution (Tatiana Scarazzato et al., 2015).Other considerations in the variables affecting
performance of electrodialysis setup are also important in enhancing the said configuration.
It is important to study the effect of remediation time and current density of the
contaminated wastewater since these parameters also dictate the efficiency of heavy metal
removal using electrochemical methods (Al-Saydeh et al., 2017; Chang et al., 2010; Nasef
& Giiven, 2012). Additionally, Caprarescu et al. studied the requirement of membrane to
be used in electrodialysis process. They have found out that this should possess good
chemical and thermal stability, where the separation process can be carried out at high
temperatures, in a solution that has a very high or low pH values (Caprarescu et al., 2012).

Electrocoagulation (EC) is an effective method that produces metal hydroxide
sweeping flocs from the anodic dissolution of aluminum or iron metal. (Escobar et al.,
2006) The advantages of EC include simplicity of equipment, flexibility of operations, and
non-production of secondary pollution. The chemical reactions in EC processes are shown

below (Song et al., 2017).

Anodic reaction: M>M™ +ne~ Q)

Cathodic reaction: 2H,0 + 2e~ > 20H~ + Hp Q)
Precipitation M"* (qq) + NOH™ (aq) > M(OH)n (aq) @)
reaction:

The design of experiment has been applied to evaluate the performance of EC at
various operating conditions. Mehdipoor and Moosavirad employed the response surface
methodology (RSM) to optimize the EC using iron electrodes based on initial pH, current
density, electrode distance, and operation time. Among these variables, analysis of variance
(ANOVA) revealed that the most important parameter was the electrolysis time which
determines production of Fe* from the sacrificial anodes. At the optimum conditions (pH
=the copper current density = 438.2 mA cm, electrode distance = 2.10 cm, and operation
time = 68.05 min), more than 90% of copper was removed. The XRD analysis also showed
that minerals formed were classified mainly into phases of copper and Cuprite with a trace
amount of quartz minerals (Mehdipoor & Moosavirad, 2020). Mateen et al. applied the
four-variable RSM to optimize the EC with iron electrode in a cylindrical reactor. The
group studied the effects of pH, reaction time, applied current, and initial concentration
against the percentage removal of copper as well as the energy consumption per gram
copper removal. Maximum removal of 95% was observed when applied current was 0.26
A, initial copper concentration of 27.8 ppm, and pH of 7 in just 5.4 mins of electrolysis

time. This optimized conditions also gave the minimum energy consumption of 0.903 W-

hg Cu". Studies carried on Cu (II) removal rate also showed adsorption suited best with
pseudo-first order kinetics (Mateen et al., 2020),

Electrocoagulation is known for its versatility to treat multiple pollutants. For
example, Kilany et al. developed an electrocoagulation (EC) cell with sparging air to
achieve oil demulsification and copper removal simultaneously to reduce capital and
operating costs of the plant’s effluent treatment. At optimum conditions, 98% of total
copper (2000 ppm-Cu) and 85% of oil (1000 ppm of paraffin oil) was removed in 15 min
and | h, respectively. This fast removal was attributed to the fact that copper removal was
not only governed by electrocoagulation but also by cathodic deposition. Gas sparging
improves copper removal since this process promotes the rate of diffusion-controlled
cathodic deposition copper. It also decreases electrical energy consumption. Electrical
consumption for copper removal was found out to be ranging from 5.4 x 10° (with
sparging) to 7.5 kW-h kg Cu"! (without sparging). The authors used helical Al tube anode

to offer compactness with high area per unit volume. Its internal surface can also be used

as a built-in cooler to prevent the increase in solution temperature which adversely affects
the efficiency of large-scale electrocoagulation processes (Kilany et al., 2020).

Reduction process of metallic ions from solution and oxidation of a compound from
a solution, followed by film deposition as a result of internal current induced in the process
is the working mechanism of electrodeposition process (EDP) (Vidu et al., 2020). This

process utilizes an external source of electrical current passing through an electrochemical

cell to facilitate the said reduction operation. The advantage of electrodeposition includes

the avoidance of using chemical reagent, zero production of sludge, and recovery of copper
metal (Maarof et al., 2017).

The polarization of cathode that leads to the low current efficiency can be avoided
by pulsed current and reactor geometry. The recovery of copper from real jewelry
wastewater using pulsed electrodeposition was studied by Carpanedo de Morais Nepel et
al. The process was optimized, and a 33.6% copper removal from a real wastewater (430
mg L"') with a deposition efficiency of 84.4% in 30 minutes using fast galvanic pulse,
current application time of 1 ms, 190 mA, 70 rpm, and 37 °C. Varying parameters such as
initial solution pH, current density, electrode distance, and electrolysis time also showed.
that removal of copper can be shifted from formation of crystalline oxides to crystalline
copper in its metallic form (Carpanedo de Morais Nepel et al., 2020). From 20°C to 40°C,
the experimental data described a pseudo-first order irreversible rate equation. The same
data also fit the Arrhenius equation where increase in temperature favors the reaction
kinetics (Nepel et al., 2020). The group of Jin et al. recovered copper from spent
hydrochloric acid solution by modifying the reactor geometry of electrodeposition to
alleviate the problem of low current efficiency and contaminated deposits. A cylinder
turbulent cell with large surface area cathode was employed in the experimental set-up
since it has been proven that mass transport has a significant effect for copper
electrodeposition in HCI media. Copper recovery of 93.6% was observed in the study with
89.4% current efficiency. The absence of CuCl solid confirmed the avoidance of the low

efficiency chloride-mediated pathway. Uniform and fine powder could be obtained easily

from the cathode. (W. Jin et al., 2017). Ning et al. employed facile jet electrodeposition
method for the removal and recovery of copper ions from dilute copper concentration
wastewater. The difference between the conventional and jet electrodeposition can be seen
in Fig 4. The wastewater feed from the nozzle anode was impinged to the cathode surface
at a rate of 3 m s"', resulting to an applied current density of 12 A dm”. This operation
ensured a copper recovery of more than 97.4% with current efficiency of 77.2%. In
comparison to 6 A dm? current density and 76.3% current efficiency observed from
conventional electrodeposition process, these figures presented in this study proved the
high rate and efficiency of the jet electrodeposition setup employed (Ning et al., 2019).
The porosity of the carbon electrode can be improved through proper activation and
decoration. Jin and Hu reported the copper removal by CDI process using zinc sulfide-
decorated carbon felt electrode since it is suitable for use in HCI electrolytes. Upon the
addition of ZnS to the carbon felt, it exhibited nanoporous structure with improved
electrochemical capacitance, larger surface area, and enhanced wettability. Copper
removal governed by electrostatic interactions in this experiment at low voltage of -0.2 V
revealed a removal capacity of 27.4 mg g which is 52% better than FeS-decorated and
128% higher than pristine carbon felts. Systematic runs were also performed to validate
electrosorption selectivity of copper in the presence of CrCl3 and natural organic matter
(NOM). Results showed that copper ions removal capacities weren't that affected under
the influence of these compounds proving that ZnS-decorated carbon felt possesses great

selectivity towards copper during the CDI (W. Jin & Hu, 2019). A promising method of

production of activated carbon (AC) for capacitive deionization process was proposed by
Wu et al. The authors synthesized activated carbon from cation-exchange resin by
introducing zinc chloride (ZnCl2) through ion exchange followed by heat treatment and
carbon dioxide (CO2) activation. This fabricated AC was then applied to the electrodes to
be used in CDI set up where it is evaluated for the removal of copper ions in water. The
heat treatment and CO? activation helped in tuning the pore structures of the AC in terms
of ion adsorption and transport. The resulting electrode exhibited a copper adsorption
capacity of 77.8 mg g" at 1.2 V which is superior to the commercial AC. The
electrosorption of copper ions also followed pseudo-first order kinetics and monolayer
adsorption isotherm is well fitted with Langmuir model (Wu et al., 2021).

Industrial wastewater effluents with high total dissolved solid are deemed to be
harder to be treated by CDI due to the competition between the target metallic ions and the
high concentration of sodium ions. To answer this problem, Zhang et al. (Xudong Zhang
et al., 2020) studied the application of flow electrode capacitive deionization (FCDI) in
treating salty influents containing copper and sodium ions. The use of cation exchange
membrane promotes the transport of divalent Cu** than Na‘ to the adsorption chamber for
the capture by the flow electrode. (Xudong Zhang et al., 2020). The study revealed that
separation was achieved and more evident in the short-circuited closed cycle (SCC) mode
where copper ions were selectively deposited in the carbon particles in the electrode while
the sodium ions remained distributed in the electrolyte. Additionally, the increment in

applied voltage increases the copper removal efficiency while maintaining the copper ions

stored in the electrode. At optimum conditions, 94% copper removal efficiency was
retained. Industrial wastewater containing metal contaminants at low concentration has
been difficult to treat even by well-established technology due to low efficiency, secondary
pollution, and difficult enrichment. Zhao et al. developed a novel capacitive deionization-
electrodeionization (CDI/EDI) system to treat dilute copper wastewater (Fig. 6) was
fabricated through coordination mechanism of electromigration, electroadsorption, and ion
exchange. In the anode chamber, copper was removed by ion exchange and
electromigration while SO,” was removed via electrode adsorption. In contrast, copper
was removed due to electrode adsorption in the cathode chamber, while SO.” removal was
achieved through ion-exchange and electromigration. The results showed an exemplary
performance of the proposed setup where percent copper removal was 95.7% for the first
cycle and 87.6% during the second cycle at the optimum conditions of applying 1.5 mA
direct current for 1.5 minutes (Zhao et al., 2019).
2.2.3 Chemical Precipitation

Chemical precipitation is commonly adopted to treat heavy metals from industrial
wastewater due to its simplicity and easy automation. In a typical precipitation process,
chemical precipitant agents react with heavy metal ions to form sparingly soluble solids
which can be further separated through coagulation, flocculation, and sedimentation (L. K.
Wang et al., 2005; Zamboulis et al., 2004), The sparingly soluble salt of copper includes
copper hydroxide (Cu(OH)2), tenorite (CuO), paratacamite (CuzCI(OH)s), brochantite

(CusSO«(OH)s), and malachite (CuzCO3(OH)z) and so on (Baltpurvins et al. 1996). Table

2 summarizes the solubility products (Ksp) of the copper salts. For precipitation reaction

to take place, the solution must be supersaturated, i.e., the activity product must surpass

the corresponding Ksp. Depending on the degree of supersaturation, the precipitation
process can proceed through homogeneous nucleation, heterogeneous nucleation, and
crystal growth.

Table 2. Solid phase solubility product constants of some copper-containing precipitates
(Baltpurvins et al., 1996; Bayon et al., 2019; Sugimoto et al., 1998; Sylva, 1976; Yoder et

al, 2010)
Mineral name Chemical formula TogKsp
Tenorite ‘CuO -20.38
Copper Hydroxide Cu(OH): -19.30
Paratacamite CurCI(OH)s 34.66
Brochantite CusSO«(OH)s -68.66
Malachite Cu2COx(OH)2 -34,00
Azurite Cux(COs)(OH)2 -45.80
Gerhardtite Cuz(NO3)(OH)s -36.09
Libethenite Cu2PO,OH -28.00
Copper sulfide CuS -35.40

The precipitate of copper depends on the constitute of the wastewater. Wen et al.
studied the effect of anions (sulfate, nitrate, and chloride ions) on the precipitation of
copper using activated calcium carbonate. In this process, the hydroxide ion was released
from the dissolution of calcite, enabling the precipitation of copper-containing minerals.
The anion dominates the mineral phase of the product, being posnjakite
(Cus(SOs)(OH)s-(H20)), gerhardtite (Cu2(NO3)(OH)s) and copper chloride (CuxC(OH)s)
when sulfate, nitrate and chloride ions are present, respectively. The different solubility of

the mineral phases led to the various removal efficiency. Among the three anions, it was

found out that sulfate-containing wastewater obtained 99% copper removal with
CaCO3/Cu molar ratio of 1:1 while nitrate and chloride ions gave 20% and 30% copper
removal, respectively (T. Wen et al., 2019). The addition of certain concentration of
selected metals can improve copper removal efficiency via the formation of layered
doubled hydroxides. Bai et al. studied the removal of copper ions from electroplating
wastewater by co-precipitation process. Among the tested metal ions, the Mg”*-AP*
mixture gave the most effective removal with 0.2 mg L"! effluent copper concentration for
Mg”*/AP* molar ratio of 3. The co-precipitate — CugAln(OH): 16CO3-4H20 from Mg?*-AP*
mixture revealed characteristics representing a typical structure of LDHs. The obtained Cu-
Mg-Al LDHs coprecipitate was tested for the adsorption of iodide, featuring an adsorption
capacity of 41.23 mg g"! (Bai et al., 2016).

The removal of copper by precipitation is hampered when wastewater contains
chelating ligands. The solution to mitigate complexed copper includes the destruction of
organic ligand and the precipitation of copper sulfide. Qin et al. adopted the iron reduction-
coprecipitation method to remove chemical oxygen demand (COD) and the complexed
hexavalent chromium, nickel, and copper. Optimum reaction time for copper removal was
20 minutes. Further increase in reaction time will make the copper metal reduced at the
cathode. After the iron reduction-coprecipitation method, removal efficiency of 99.94%
was tallied (Qin et al., 2018). Zhang et al. prepared various pyrrhotite crystals (FeS) for the
precipitation of copper sulfide. Due to the higher solubility of FeS than CuS, HS" ion was

provided by the dissolution of FeS and then CuS was precipitated on FeS surface.

Compared to the hexagonal FeS, the monoclinic pyrrhotite was more effective in copper
sulfide precipitation because of the greater proportion of vacancies in crystal structure. The
process works well on concentrated acidic copper wastewater, reducing copper level from
2015 to 81 mg L"! at sulfide to copper molar ratio of 3.0 (Xingfei Zhang et al., 2020) .
Effluent of copper pyrometallurgy plants contains high concentration of sulfates
and heavy metals, rendering the difficulty to reuse. In the experiment of Balladares et al.,
batch and continuous neutralization processes were employed by the addition of lime as
pH-modifying agent, focusing on not only copper removal but also the precipitation of
quality gypsum (CaSOs), which can be used as flux during smelting operations. Batch tests
were done in order to produce clean gypsum from the liquid wastewater effluent. The group
performed neutralization of wastewater first at different pH (1.0, 1.5, 2.0, 2.5) to prevent
precipitation of other elements present. After achieving the target pH, filtering of the pulp,
and washing of cake was done next. During this step, the effect of amount of washing water
to the quality of gypsum obtained was determined. Using the proposed series circuit
method, at pH 1-2 with minimum of four washers, clean gypsum was produced which
complies to current regulations of hazardous solid waste (Balladares et al., 2018).

2.3. Copper Wastewater Treatment using Fluidized Bed (Homogeneous)
Crystallization Technology

The fluidized-bed crystallization (FBC) and  fluidized-bed homogeneous
crystallization (FBHC) were developed to circumvent the mass production of sludge in

conventional precipitation process (de Luna et al., 2020). This technology is the

combination of two-unit processes: crystallization and fluidization. In order to fully
understand the merit of this novel approach in treating wastewater streams, their individual
operation must be well established first.

Fluidized-bed reactors are the result of the combination of the two most common
continuous flow reactors: the packed bed and the stirred tank. In this system, a fluid (either
liquid or gas) passes through a particulated solid maintaining it continuously suspended
due to the fluid flow velocity. It is important to note that the velocity of the fluid must be
just enough to suspend the particles but not too strong that it will carry the particles with
them as they exit the vessel. When small particles are suspended in an upward-flowin
stream of fluid, the solid behave as though it were a fluid, which actually helps a chemical
reaction through improved mass transport. The performance of fluidized bed is affected by
two main variables, the fluid velocity and solid dispersion physical properties (Grace et al.,
2020)..

Ina fluidized bed, three stages could be clearly differentiated. The first stage, so-
called (i) packed bed reactor, appears when the fluid flow too slow, making the solid
particles not displaced, and remains the base of the reactor. By the increase of the fluid
velocity, it is possible to reach the next stage where the solid starts to be displaced by the
fluid force in balance with the solid material weight, which could be considered the
inflexion point that indicates the minimum velocity to start the fluidization process, being
defined as (ii) the incipient fluidization stage. The last stage corresponds to the (iii)

fluidized-bed reactor itself, which is attained when the minimum fluid velocity defined by

stage (ii) is surpassed. Under a fluidized-bed stage, the solid particles of the reactor bed
start to expand through the vessel. Additionally, at high fluid velocities the particles remain
in constant agitation and swirl around through the fluidized bed avoiding their
agglomeration, which can clog the entire reactor (Gui et al., 2022).

As mentioned before, fluidization of the solid particles can be attained once the
fluid velocity surpasses the minimum fluidization velocity (Um#). The best methods for
predicting Umr are based on the fact that minimum fluidization requires that the weight-
minus-buoyancy of the particles be counterbalanced by drag exerted by the fluid at the
transition from packed bed flow to fluidization. In a fixed bed, the drag is proportional to
the pressure drop through the bed. This pressure drop through a fixed bed can be described
by the Ergun equation shown in the equation (5). Additionally, at minimum fluidization,
the pressure drop across the bed is equal to the bed weight per unit area as presented in
equation (6). Combination of these two equations result to expression where Umris defined
as function of various parameters including particle diameter and sphericity, solution and

particle density, and bed voidage among others.

2 2
AP U, 1-e, Umy? 1 = Em
= 150 mst ( Ens) +1,75°ome sot
Ling (bdy) Emp ody Ey

On the other hand, the degree of supersaturation can be manipulated in order to

remove heavy metals such as copper through crystallization. Supersaturation reflects the

(6)

(J)

concentration gradient of crystal formation and precipitation in the supersaturated solution.
The degree of supersaturation is related to the concentration of the solution and the
solubility product of the precipitated crystals. Crystallization is driven by kinetics and
thermodynamics. Divalent metals such as copper can be crystallized using various anions
in the form of metal carbonate, sulfate, or oxide. Metal ions are hydrolyzed to form
hydroxide species as shown below. These equations show that the solubility of metal

hydroxide depends significantly on pH (Benjamin, 2015).

M?* + HO @ M(OH)* +H* By 12)
M?* + 2H,0 © M(OH)3 + 2H* Be (8)
M** + 3H,0 © M(OH); + 3H+ Bs 9)
M?* + 2H20 © M(OH)ae) + 2H* Ksp (10)

Aside from kinetics, crystallization is also driven by thermodynamics.
Thermodynamically speaking, at supersaturation, where crystallization starts to happen,
the difference between the chemical potential of the crystals and the solution must be less
than zero. Unfortunately, it is extremely difficult to measure quantities related to chemical
potential such as the solute activity coefficient at supersaturated conditions because the
system is not at an equilibrium state. For this reason, this definition is not immediately
useful, and must make simplifying assumptions to estimate the true supersaturation of a
solution. These assumptions gave the following expressions (11) to (13). The equation (11)
shows the approximation for the dimensionless chemical potential difference. Furthermore,

alternative supersaturation units are reflected by the other equations (12) and (13) since it

is often convenient to make simplifications and express supersaturation in a dimensional

form such as concentration difference and ratio (Myerson et al., 2019).

oy

(12)
Sas (13)

The crystallization process is composed of formation and growth of several crystal
nuclei. During nucleation, new solid phases from a supersaturated mother liquor are
created. These nuclei are formed via several mechanisms. Nucleation in a clean,
homogeneous solution that results solely from coming together of molecular “clusters” is
known as primary homogeneous or activated nucleation. On the other hand, primary
heterogeneous nucleation happens when kinetics is aided by the presence of an existing
surface in the form of poorly defined “dust” or alien seeds. Further nucleation might happen
on the surface of the crystallizing material itself, which is called secondary nucleation. This
occurs generally at lower supersaturations compared to primary nucleation. Secondary
nucleation can occur by several mechanisms. Crystals in the form of needles are often
fragile and small parts of it might break, thus forming secondary nuclei. Evidence shows
that shear forces imposed on a crystal face by the solution flowing can be sufficient to
produce secondary nuclei from the surface. This is called shear nucleation. On the other
hand, the most encountered mechanism is the contact nucleation. Contact between growing

crystals and walls of container or even with other crystals result in contact nucleation. It is

now recognized that for materials with moderate to high solubility, the most significant
nucleation mechanism is contact nucleation (Myerson et al., 2019).

The key to FB(H)C process was to provide vast surface area of granular seeds to
facilitate heterogeneous nucleation and crystal growth but suppress homogeneous
nucleation. The fluidization of the granular medium improves the mass transport (Andalib
et al., 2014). To maintain the fluidized state of granular seeds, a sufficient superficial
velocity is required to drag the seeds upward. Additionally, control of chemical reagent
addition provides appropriate supersaturation for crystal formation. Pellets are also
discharged when the size is grown up to | to 2 mm in diameter and settled by gravity at the
bottom. Figure 2a shows a typical fluidized bed reactor flow diagram. FBC and FBHC
processes are distinguished from each other by the utilization of seed material. In FBC,
silica is often used as the seeds given its low cost and availability. In FBHC, the seed
material is the same as the major phase to by crystallized, i.e., homogeneous seed, which
improves the purity of the granules. Figure 2b shows the comparison of process mechanism
between FBC and FBHC. The product of crystallization with high purity can therefore be

utilized as feedstocks to promote resource recovery.

Table 3 at the end of this section summarizes the performance of the FBC and

FBHC studies discussed in this paper.

ry) fom,

cater

Effluent

Reaction

tt \ pent

Homozencousmucleation

Figure 2. (a) Illustrative design layout of fluidized bed reactor and (b) mechanism of
fluidized-bed crystallization (FBC) and fluidized-bed homogeneous crystallization
(FBHC). Reproduced based on (Bayon et al., 2019; C. S. Chen et al., 2015).

8€

a pea 0) «OHA *1HO)M9 %b6 %86 $9 %=nOKOD OOP
; (Ho’oa?nd) . - al
(610z “ley wodeg) © HE eneaeaT %L0'96 W665 S99 _avagg ——«00E
(ozoz (HO)#609)«ND) ie
r ouad OS ub9 6 Mmsz 161
Je 32 eunr] ap) ayanzy nee
or OHOH
(ozoz (@HO)(FOD)END)
4 oud LB %66 6 MMs 161
je 32 eB Lanz"
18 39 Bun] 2p) ayunzy pea
(ozoz *(HO)COO)END) y sz
syereuny ap) OHS eae “b8 %S56 Gets 161
610¢ “Ie (f00% (Ho)énD) 7 st
eeurnemienoq) Had 496 a no
(Stoz“1e1 BunyD) =a 189 %s9 L  $0=8M oo
“re te ro Dad OD ‘HORI %06 %66 8 = Z=NDOPd 06
(%) (18m)
seoussejy poyay. ronposg rerowas — yd 8°S°Poneuzouo09
feyow [a0 1OW reniuy

‘paowias saddoo sof anbruyoa) uoywzyjoistuo Buidojdua suaysks masaffiq “¢ 91901


The factors that affect the FBC of copper includes pH, hydraulics, and property of
seeds. Chung et al. found out that crystal growth and aggregation of copper sulfide crystals
increased using calcium-coated sands as seed material to reduce the electrostatic energy
barrier. CuS crystallization was found out to be dependent on the static bed height of seed
material, recirculation rate, and seed type in the FBR. Under optimal conditions, at least
95% of the initial Cu?* (100 mg Cu* L*}) was successfully transformed to CuS crystals
within 120 minutes of operation (Chung et al., 2015). Mahasti et al. employed fluidized
bed crystallization process in order to simultaneously remove copper and ferrous ion from
wastewater using silica as seed material. The recovered solid was determined to be as
binary metal-oxide (Fell10.66Cul0.33@SiOz). Noted that copper was recovered as Cu(1)
species rather than Cu(II) species due to the reduction of copper by the green rust (LDHs
of Fe(III) and Fe(II). At optimum conditions of pH = 8, Fe/Cu molar ratio of 2, and total
metal concetration of 3 mM, the FBC was able to remove 99% of total iron and copper
(Mahasti et al., 2022).

Several groups have adopted FBHC process to recover copper from wastewater and
produce granules with high purity. Basic copper carbonates, such as malachite
(CuxCOx(OH)2) and azurite (Cus(COs)2(OH)2), are the major products to be crystalized in
FBHC. Lertratwattana et al. studied several operational parameters for optimizing FBHC
to achieve maximum removal and recovery of copper from metallurgy industry effluents.
From the speciation distribution of carbonic acid species at different pH, it was deduced

that operation pH must range from 6 to 8 only to ensure selective recovery of copper as


malachite. The authors proposed to conduct FBHC in two stages at various pH to prepare
homogeneous seeds efficiently: (1) operation at pH 6.5 or 7 for six days to produce and
retain the fines in the reactor; (2) operation at higher pH (~9) to enhance the crystal growth
on fine seeds (Lertratwattana et al., 2019). de Luna et. al demonstrated the removal of
copper by FBHC of azurite from electroless copper plating spent rinse water. The presence
of ligands such as EDTA and formaldehyde could interfere the crystallization efficiency.
At higher EDTA concentrations, copper removal and granulations decreased due to the
complexation of copper with EDTA, which decreased the available free copper ion for
granule formation. On the other hand, varying formaldehyde concentration did not alter the
performance of FBHC significantly, in which copper removal of 99% and crystallization
ratio of 90% were achieved in a 24-h run. Lastly, when both EDTA and CH20 were present,
94% copper removal and 84% granulation were obtained (de Luna et al., 2020). The study
of Quimada et. al optimized several operating conditions of the removal of copper and
nickel from synthetic printed circuit board wastewater via (FBHG) as granular basic metal
carbonates. The effluent’s pH was influential to the removal rate of metals. Results showed
that varying operating pH favored copper granules formation more than nickel granules.
Molar ratio (MR) between precipitant and metal was also studied. Increasing MR increases
metal removal since at low MR, no precipitation occurs due to low supply of carbonates
and hydroxide ions. Increasing MR also favors spontaneous nucleation. After
characterization of granules formed, they were found out to be hollow and finer and not

agglomerated enough which is might be due to mixture of copper and nickel ions (Quimada


et al., 2022). In addition to basic copper carbonate, Bayon et. al explored the capability of
FBHC in removing copper and phosphate as libethenite (Cu2(POs)OH). An optimum pH
is necessary to ensure maximum removal of copper and phosphate through precipitation of
insoluble salts. Copper crystallization drastically decreased from pH 4.5 to 6.5. However
an increase in copper crystallization was observed above pH 6.5 which is due to the
elevated solubility attributed to the predominance of Cu(OH)«" ion (Bayon et al., 2019).

Employing FBHC in treating multiple metal systems has also been reported. The
study of Quimada et. al optimized several operating conditions of the removal of copper
and nickel from synthetic printed circuit board wastewater via (FBHG) as granular basic
metal carbonates. The effluent’s pH was influential to the removal of metals. Results
showed that varying operating pH favored copper granules formation more than nickel
granules. (Quimada et al., 2022). Bimetallic system containing copper and cobalt was
reclaimed as metal carbonate granules using FBHC by Anotai et al. For the mixed metals
of 10.5 mM Co and 10.5 mM Cu* synthetic wastewater, the optimum conditions were
at pH 8.5 and a [CO3*}:[M?*] molar ratio of 2.0 yielding maximum granulation and
removal efficiencies of 96.0 % and 97.8 % for Co™ and 97.8 % and 99.8 % for Cu,
respectively (Anotai et al., 2021).

One advantage of using fluidized bed homogenous crystallization over the

conventional precipitation processes is the minimal production of sludge. Instead, it

produces crystallized granules of high purity that can be utilized further. For example, the

recovered CuO and FeOOH particles from study of Mahasti et al can be applied to catalyze


a visible light-assisted photo-Fenton reaction (Mahasti et al., 2022). Malachite
(CuxCO3(OH)2) recovered from FBHC processes can also be further use as mineral
pigment in the paint industry (Haldar, 2017). On the other hand, libethenite (Cus(POx)OH)
electro and photochemical properties were studied by Li et al due to its good photocatalytic
activity. Libethenite as found to be active for electrochemical water oxidation, as confirmed
by quantitative O2 measurements (Li et al., 2014).

2.4 Research Gap and Future Perspectives: Copper recovery using
FBHC

Fluidized-bed crystallization is a preferred method for treating concentrated copper
wastewater due to its ability to rectify the issue of sludge production and offer potential
metal recovery as insoluble salts. However, this technology requires careful operation at
an appropriate degree of supersaturation, which can be challenging. Fluctuations in copper
concentration within the feedwater can lead to a decrease in treatment efficiency. The
presence of chelating agents may compromise copper removal, but this can be addressed
through organics pretreatment or the formation of copper sulfide with low solubility.

Recent studies have focused on using homogeneous seeds in fluidized-bed
crystallization to enhance the purity of the recovered granules. Maintaining a high
crystallization ratio while minimizing sludge formation relies on precise control of
supersaturation through pH adjustment and precipitant dosage. To improve the operation
of fluidized-bed crystallization, it is crucial to establish standardized protocols for

producing homogeneous seeds. Furthermore, future investigations should verify the effects


of chelating agents and multiple heavy metals on precipitation and crystallization

processes.


3. Methodology

3.1 Chemicals

Cupric chloride dihydrate (CuCl22H20, 98% w/w) and ferrous sulfate
heptahydrate (FeSOs-7H20, 98.6% w/w) were purchased form Hongyao Chemical
Instruments. Sodium carbonate (Na2COs, 99.5% w/w), used as precipitating agent was
provided by Union Chemical Works LTD. Acid and base buffer solutions prepared from
concentrated nitric acid (HNOs, 69% v/v) and sodium hydroxide pellets (NaOH, 95%
wiw), respectively, were utilized to regulate the solution pH. All solutions were prepared
using ultrapure water with a resistivity greater than 18.2 MQ cm at 25 °C, obtained from
the Millipore Milli-Q system.
3.2 Fluidized bed homogeneous crystallization reactor set-up

Figure 3 illustrates the schematic of the fluidized-bed reactor used for FBHC
treatment. The reactor with effective volume of 513.5 mL is consisted of a glass column
divided into two sections with different diameters. The lower section, designated as the
reaction region, had a diameter of 2 cm and a length of 80 cm, while the upper section,
known as the effluent region, had a diameter of 4 cm and a length of 20 cm. The sudden
expansion in diameter resulted in a reduction of the upflow velocity due to the increased
cross-sectional area. Consequently, larger particles settled back to the reaction region,

promoting enhancing mixing and particle growth.


Peristaltic pumps (ChromTech YZ25) were carefully calibrated and utilized to
introduce the synthetic wastewater into the reactor and recirculate a portion of the effluent
solution back into the reactor. To ensure the fluidization imposed in this, the up-flow
solution (introduced and recirculated) in the reactor should be at least equal to the minimum
fluid velocity (Um) where the fluid flow balances the gravitational force of the particles,
maintaining this bed of solids in fluidized state (Grace et al., 2020). This Unr is typically
calculated using the combination of Erqun equation shown in (5) and pressure drop
relationship at fluidization shown in (6) resulting to expression in (14). Several

approximations were studied to simplify this expression. Wen and Wu proposed that


qaand ae = 11(C. Y. Wen & Yu, 1966). From this estimation, the dependence
mf

Fy

beng =
of Une with minimum fluidization bed voidage, enr , and particle sphericity, $ were

eliminated and equation was simplified to equation (15) where Ar is the Archimedes

number (16) which describes the ratio of gravity to viscous forces. In this set of equations,

values of constant parameters were lifted from similar study: particle density (pp) = 2.41
mg L"; solution density (p1) = 1.0 mg L"; solution viscosity (y) = 1 cP; particle diameter
(mm) = 0.425; and acceleration due to gravity (g) = 9.81 m s"? (Mahasti et al., 2022). From

equation (15), Umr for this study was calculated to be 5.44 m hl,


U, 1-«, Ump? 1 = Em;
mp ( Ens) eas Pele f

(bdy)° Eng dp Emy

eee -
Uns = aa [V@3. 7? + 0.04084r) 33.7| (15)

(0 — Pf)(1 - emp)g = 150 (14)

are tele ppd (16)

In order to support the production of crystallization bed during the reaction, glass
beads (diameter=0.5 cm) are placed at the bottom of the fluidized bed reactor at the height
of 4cm. This arrangement also facilitated the regulation of solution flow within the

reaction region. Moreover, effluent pH was controlled and monitored by using a pH/ORP

transmitter/controller (Suntex TS-130 Portable meter) with a sensitivity of + 0.05.


[cu*lo Effluent
[Cu], je
=x B Region
@=4em
5 ffluent H/ORP
& cffluen pH/ORt
ba] pH controller
reflux é is
a
finestudge
coarseslucge | Region
Metastable (Particle Growth)
‘Heterogeneous Nucleation
§ (Nuclei growth)
3 (Particle Fluldized Zone)
o=2cm
Homogeneous Nucleation
a
Copper and | Input pump
iron Tanke
(metal)
\. Refluxpump

Figure 3. Ilustrative design layout of fluidized bed homogeneous crystallization reactor
3.3, Experimental procedures

Several experimental variables were investigated in this study to assess their impact
‘on the performance of the FBHC process. These conditions were established based on

preliminary reports (Lertratwattana et al., 2019). The precipitant to metal molar ratio

COs?

(

-) was varied within the range of 0.75-2.0 to examine its influence on the process.


The pH was evaluated from 5.0 up to 9.0. Furthermore, inlet flow rate of the synthetic
‘wastewater was varied from 5 up to 25 mL min’! to investigate the effects of different
surface loading and hydraulic characteristic. Additionally, the presence of iron ions in a
copper synthetic wastewater (with concentrations ranging from 3.15 to 9.44 mM Cu?*) was
explored using 0.36-1.07 mM Fe”* to assess its interference with FBHC performance in
terms of copper removal, crystallization ratio, and copper salt recovery.

The synthetic copper-iron wastewater and the crystallization reagent solutions were
prepared based on the concentrations of the actual electroplating wastewaters and usual
Fenton process. Both solutions were then pumped into the reactor at an equal rate set for a
specific experimental run (Qn=Qpp:) While the recirculation flow rate was varied between
10-50 mL min‘! (Q,). It is important to note that FBHC process doesn’t employ external
use of alien seeds that aid crystallization process. With this, it is necessary to have a
preliminary stage during the initial days of operation wherein creation of a homogeneous
seed bed is of utmost importance. Initially, the high supersaturation (Qr = 0) in the reactor
was kept for the formation of small nuclei. This stage was carried out until the copper and
iron precipitates grew to a size that was big and strong enough to avoid getting carried
away from the reactor by the fluid up velocity. Acid and base buffer solutions were used
to control the pH of the solution which is necessary for the precipitation of the desired
metal. An 11.16 M NaOH solution was prepared dissolving the appropriate mass of sodium
hydroxide pellets to high-purity water. Similarly, a 9.45 M HNOs solution was prepared

by adding the required volume of concentrated nitric acid to high-purity water. Effluent pH

£037-
cut

(pH) and the


molar ratio were maintained at specific value, depending on a particular

operation. Table 4 provides a comprehensive summary of all the relevant constant and

varying operational variables for each respective part of the study, addressing specific

objectives outlined in this research.

Table 4. Operational conditions for evaluating the impact of varying copper and iron

€037-
Cu

concentrations,

molar ratios, metal and precipitant inlet flow rates, and effluent pH

on copper removal efficiency, crystallization ratio, and crystal growth.

I. Evaluating the impact of varying copper and iron concentrations on copper removal

efficiency, crystallization ratio, and crystal growth

Varying Parameters Constant Parameters

[Cu] (mM) [Fe?*] (mM) pHe 65

3.15 0.36 Qu (mL min“) 15

4.72 0.54 HRT (min) 17.12

63 0.72 Qe(mL min“) 20-120

7.87 0.9 al 15

: i Cuzt “

9:44 1.07 Operating time (ART) 505

Il Investigating the effects of different molar ratios (MR) of precipitant to metal

Cut®

Ms
(2 ) on copper removal, crystallization, and the resulting size distribution of

recovered crystals

Varying Parameters Constant Parameters
Ss molar ratio [Cu], [Fe] (mM) | 6.30, 0.72
0.75 pHe 65
1.00 Qu (mL min“) 15
1.25 HRT (min) 17.12
1.50 Qe (mL min“) 20-120
2.00 Operating time (HRT) 505

Ill. Analyzing the effects of varying metal and precipitant inlet flow rates (Qm and
and the resulting size distribution of

Qppt) on copper removal, crystallization,

recovered crystals

Varying Parameters

Constant Parameters



Qm (mL min”) / HRT (min) / Operating time

(HR [Cu?*] (mM) 6.30
5751.35 / 168 [Fe] (mM) 0.72
10 /25.68/ 336 pHe 65
c037=

15/17.12/505 15
rand

207 12.847 673 Q (mL min) 20-120

25 /10.27/ 841
IV. Exploring the effects of different reactor effluent pH (pH) on copper removal,
crystallization, and the resulting size distribution of recovered crystals

Varying Parameters Constant Parameters

Effluent pH (pH.) [Cu] (mM) 630
5.0 [Fe*] (mM) 0.72
6.0 Qn (mL min“) 15
65 HRT (min) 17.12
7.0 (mE min“) 20-120
8.0 C05 15

cuz,

90 Operating time (ART) 505

All experimental runs were conducted at room temperature and pressure (25 °C, 1
atm) and the fluidized bed was operated continuously for six (6) days, equivalent to
approximately 505 hydraulic retention times (1 HRT = 17.12 min) per run. This operating
time was determined based on a preliminary experiment, where both the percentage of
copper removal and the crystallization process reached a constant value after six days.
Additionally, stable precipitates were consistently recovered after this duration.

At the end of each operation, two samples of twenty (20) mL each were taken from
the reactor’s effluent region and collected in a sampling tube for copper concentration
analysis. The first sample was filtered through a 0.45 um microfilter membrane (GHP,
PALL™), Both filtered and unfiltered samples were treated with acid using 0.5 mL of

concentrated HNO3 (69% v/v) solution to terminate further precipitation reactions


(American Public Health Association et al., 2023). The filtered sample was analyzed for
the dissolved (soluble) copper concentration, denoted as [Cu’*]p, while the unfiltered
sample provided the total copper concentration, denoted as [Cu?*}r, in the effluent
(Udomkitthaweewat et al., 2019).

On the other hand, the recovered crystals were subjected to a thorough drying
process to eliminate any excess moisture after each operation. The crystals were placed in
a circulatory oven from Hung Yao Instruments Co. and maintained at a temperature of
65°C for 24 hours, ensuring complete drying (Mahasti et al., 2022). Once the recovered
particles were completely dried, they underwent sieving analysis to determine the product
size distribution, providing valuable insights into the particle sizes achieved after each
experimental run.

3.4 Instruments and analytical procedures
3.4.1 Effluent analysis

The performance of the fluidized bed homogenous crystallization reactor was
evaluated in terms of the metal ion removal and crystallization ratio. The copper ion
concentration in the effluent region was analyzed, allowing calculation of the removal
percentage (% Cu Removal) and the crystallization percentage (% Cu Crystallization)

using equations (17) and (18), respectively:

(Cu?*]>(Qe)
= Be) 17
% Cu Removal fe.0) a7)
2+
% Cu Granulation = 1 — G4 }r(Qe) (18)

Cu?*]o(Qm)


where [Cu]p refers to the initial copper ion concentration in the original solution,
{Cu?*]p is the dissolved (soluble) copper ion concentration, [Cu?*], is the total copper
ion concentration, Q, is the effective volumetric flow rate of effluent (equivalent to Qn +
Qopi), and Q,, is the volumetric flow rate of metal wastewater into the reactor. Both
[Cu?*]p and [Cu?*], were analyzed at the end of each specified operating time. The
concentration of dissolved and total metal ions in the effluent region was determined using
a flame atomic absorption spectrometer (FAAS Perkin Elmer Analyst 100).
3.4.2. Product size analysis

Tyler sieves, which are commonly used for particle size classification, were
employed in the sieving analysis to determine the size distribution of the recovered crystals.
After undergoing overnight drying, the dried crystals were sieved using specific Tyler
sieves that corresponded to the designated particle sizes. In this research, Tyler mesh
numbers 18, 25, and 40 were used for the sieving analysis, corresponding to sieve openings
equal to 1 mm, 0.710 mm, and 0.425 mm, respectively (ASTM Sieve Chart and TYLER
Equivalents, n.d.). To facilitate the size-based separation of particles, the dried crystals
were initially and carefully placed on Tyler sieve 18 and subjected to mechanical shaking.
The retained particles on each sieve were then weighed to determine the proportion of
crystals in each size fraction. This sieving analysis provided precise information on the size
distribution of the recovered crystals by utilizing Tyler sieves tailored to each specific
particle size range, thereby aiding in the comprehensive characterization of the

crystallization process.


3.4.3 Product analysis and characterization

Selected dried crystals were subjected to comprehensive analyses and
characterization techniques to gain a better understanding of the reaction mechanism
undergone by the recovered particles. The surface morphology and elemental composition
were determined by the scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM, Japan JEOL JSM-7800F)
and energy dispersive spectrometry (EDS, Japan JEOL JSM-7800F), respectively (Girao
et al., 2017). The identification of the crystalline structure of recovered solids was carried
out using a high-resolution X-ray diffractometer (HR XRD Bruker D8 DISCOVER). The
obtained peaks were then compared with the integrated available data on the RRUFF
Project website, which includes Raman spectra, X-ray diffraction and chemistry data for
selected minerals (The RUFF Project Team, 2023). Moreover, X-ray photoelectron
spectroscopy (XPS, Thermo ESCALAB 250X1) was employed to further analyze the
surface properties of the precipitates, utilizing the data from binding energies of

photoelectrons emitted during X-ray excitation (Baer et al., 2019).


4, Results and Discussion

4.1 Effect of effluent pH on copper removal, crystallization, and salt
recovery

Precipitation and crystallization processes are driven by several key factors such as
supersaturation, nucleation, and crystal growth (Abdel-Aal et al., 2004). The core principle
of the technology studied in this research revolves around controlling supersaturation,
which can be achieved through the manipulation of various parameters, such as the pH of
the fluidized reaction solution (Gui et al., 2022). By exploring different solution pH levels,
it is possible to determine the optimal range that drives the system toward a state of
supersaturation, crucial for efficient nucleation and crystallization of insoluble precipitates
(Udomkitthaweewat et al., 2019).

In this part of the study, the effects of different effluent pH (pHe) values ranging
from 5.0 - 9.0 on copper removal, crystallization, and copper salt recovery were explored.
The simulated wastewater had initial concentrations of 6.30 mM copper and 0.72 mM iron
and was introduced into the fluidized bed reactor at a rate of 15 mL min’. Simultaneously,
the carbonate precipitant was fed at the same rate, maintaining a CO3* to Cu** molar ratio
of 1.5. A portion of the effluent was also recirculated back to the bottom of the reactor to
control the level of supersaturation in the reaction region, promoting crystal growth. The
continuous operation lasted for 505 hydraulic retention times (HRTs), with each HRT
corresponding to 17.12 minutes. The experimental results for this section are presented in

Figure 4.


100 100,
cy
tJ cy
g J
1 0 o
i ot
| “|
? Fy
o 2»
30 °
30 60 6s 19 xo 90
tte

1.00 mm>O20710mm E20.710 mm>O20425 mm EIO<0428 mm —-~Y6Cu Removal —H-%4 Cu Crysalization

Figure 4, Effluent pH (pHe) dependence of % copper removal and crystallization, and
product size distribution of recovered crystals after continuous FBHC operation of 505
ARTs (1 HRT = 17.12 min) with [Cu2+]0 = 6.30 mM, [Fe2+]0 = 0.72 mM, CO32-
/Cu2+ MR = 1.5, and Qm = 15 mL min-1.

Figure 4 illustrates a steady increase in the percentage of copper removal (from
74% to 95%) and copper crystallization (ftom 72% to 91%) as the effluent pH increased
from 5.0 to 7.0. Subsequently, a slight decrease in the percentage of removal (from 95% to
93%) was observed with a further increase in effluent pH to 8.0 and 9.0. In contrast, the
percentage of crystallization plateaued at 91% when the effluent pH was increased from
7.0 to 9.0. Furthermore, bigger crystals were recovered when the pHe was increased from
5.0 to 7.0 and while smaller crystals were collected upon increasing the effluent pH to 9.0.

Lastly, the attained percentage of copper removal is always higher than the percentage of


copper crystallization due to the formation of fine nuclei produced at high supersaturation
conditions that are not recoverable as pein which lowers the overall crystallization
efficiency (Caddarao et al., 2018). The difference between % copper removal and % copper
crystallization is related to the concentration of these fine soluble nuclei at the effluent
which were not able to grow during the process (Boonrattanakij et al., 2023).

To aid the explanation of the results presented in this section, the solubility concept
of pertinent metal ion and its hydroxo-complexes, as well as the theoretical solubility
diagrams of possible metal insoluble hydr(oxides) and carbonates must be introduced first.
Copper and iron, like other metals, reacts in aqueous solution to form free metal ionic
species, a variety of soluble complexes, and insoluble particles or precipitates, depending
on the several factors like pH (Cuppett et al., 2006). In this study, only cupric ions (Cu2*)
were considered since cuprous ions (Cu) are easily oxidized to Cu** by dissolved oxygen
and other oxidants in wastewater streams (Jeremias et al., 2023). On the other hand, both
ferrous (Fe**) and ferric (Fe**) ions were evaluated since studies show high possibility of
spontaneous oxidation of Fe”* to Fe** within the chosen pHe range in this research as shown
in Equation (28). In situations where there is absence of usual strong Fe** oxidants like
hydrogen peroxide (H202), its oxidation is highly dependent on solution pH and partial
pressure of dissolved oxygen (poz) (Pham & Waite, 2008). At room temperature and poz =
0.2 bar, the total ferrous ion oxidation occurs at a fast rate for pH > 6 and can occur in just

10 minutes, which is well within the HRT set in this study (17.2 min) (Mahastiet al., 2019).


All possible copper and iron hydrolysis and hydroxide precipitation reactions with

their respective reaction constants are listed and summarized in Table 5. The reaction

constants utilized in this study assumed that the activities of solid and liquid species are

equal to unity. Moreover, the activities of the ionic and aqueous species, indicated by

square brackets, are approximated equal to their actual concentrations since these solutions

are diluted (Caddarao et al., 2018). Note that dissociation constant for water (Kw) is 1.00 x

10" and is equivalent to the solubility product of hydronium (H*) and hydroxide (OH")

ions (Skoog et al., 2014).

Table 5. Summary of kinetic parameters of hydrolysis and formation reactions pertinent
in this study.

Reaction

Reaction constant (;, Ksp,)

Copper (II) hydrolysis and hydroxide
precipitation reactions (Quiton et al.,
2022)

Cu? + HzO 2 CuOH* + Ht Bou, = SPM) = 10-7479)
Cur + 220 & CuCOM)2(aqy + 2H — Bey, = AMAT — yo9m163% (20)
Cu2* + 3H,0q + Cu(OH)5 + 3H* Beus = coger 10-7 (aly
Cu?* + 4H20q) = Cu(OH)Z + 4H* Bou, = euoie Ie I< 49-396 (22)
Cu(OH)a¢s) & Cu?* + 20H~ Kspey, = (Cu?*][OH-}? = 10-293? (23)
Iron (II) hydrolysis and hydroxide

precipitation reactions (Furcaas et al.,

2022)

Fe? + H,Oq = Fe(OH)* + Ht Brews = poo = 10-43 (24)
Fe? +2H,0qy = Fe(OH)acaq) + 2H* — Brewin, = GPE = 10°25 (25)

(Fe2*)


Fe?* + 3H,0q) = Fe(OH); + 3H* Brettns = ‘ecceumoee = 10732587 (26)
Sf

Fe? + 2H,0q = Fe(OH)a¢s) + 2H* — Keren, = eal = 1071227 7

Iron (11) oxidation to iron (III) (Mahasti et

al,, 2019)

4Fe®* + 0, + Hz0q > 4Fe(OH)** (28)

Iron (Ill) hydrolysis and hydroxide

precipitation reactions (Furcas et al.,

2022)

Fe + Hq) Fe(OH) +H* Brean, = EOREIHI = 19-22 29)

Fe* + 2H,0qo Fe(OH) +2H* Brgy, = FECBELME = 19-875 (20)

Fe3* + 3H,0q) « Fe(OH)s¢aq)+3H* — Brey, = RUE = 10-28 (31)

Fee +4H,0q) % Fe(OH)g+4H* — Brean, = CREMT — 19-246 (32)

Fe* + 3H20q @ Fe(OH) +3H* — Ks Prep, = gS = 10735 (33)

From these set of equations presented in Table 5, material balance can be performed

to determine respective total metal concentration as sum of their individual metal ionic
species and hydroxo complexes, assuming these are the only solution composition. As

summarized in


Table 6, these material balance equations (34), (36), and (38) of total metal
concentration can then be rewritten strictly in terms of the concentration of free metal ion,
the stability constants, and the H* (or OH’) concentration (Benjamin, 2015). For the ease
of discussion, ame, was introduced in material balance equation, resulting from factoring
‘out common terms, and became function of [H*] and reaction constants only. This factor
also pertains to the fraction of total metal concentration present as its dissolved metal cation
species. Additionally, the ideal solubility of the total metal in the solution ({Me]z) at
equilibrium during precipitation reaction should depend on the solubility products (Kspi)
and ame, Which are functions of pH (equations (35), (37), and (39)). Lastly, these methods
allow generation of theoretical solubility diagrams for the metal hydroxides showing the
relationship of the equilibrium concentration of the metal at different pH as shown in
Figure 5.

Table 6. Summary of total metal material balance equation and its solubility relationship
with pH and reaction constants.

Metal Material balance and metal solubility as function of pH and Ksp;

(Cur = (Cu?*] + (Cu(OH)*] + [CuCOH),] + [Cu(OH)3] + [CuCOH)§-]

= +] Peuy Beu; Beus Bous
Copper = lou] (14+ Ft + aR + feb tee (4)
aD. ala]
é =

(35)



[Fe()lr = [Fe?*] + [Fe(OH)*] + [Fe(OH),] + [Fe(OH)5]
= (re? (1-4 Besta 4. Bata Seton)

a ory oe wep (6)
_ le
Iron (11): =)
= tat?
(Fear _ KsPpeans tFeun 67)
(Fea = [Fe] + [Fe(OH)**} + Fe(OH + [Fe(OH] + [Fe(OH)a]
= “el ret setliNs , Bret
= Ure2e) (1+ ee + see Fie ae) G8)
Iron (Il):
[Fe(II] =“? _ G9)
7 Kspprecnya Fett

cum,
S) 0mm,

— wom,

ree) {Fao1n
== fFeoIMo] — [FOI

—[eworns] — (Cuore.
~~ -[Feomn

<= (62) [owon
ams oun

Figure 5. Theoretical cuprous, ferrous, and ferric ions speciation into their respective
hydroxo complexes in pure water for [CuJT = 6.30 mM and [Fe]T = 0.72 mM, and


theoretical solubility diagram for spernitiite Cu(OH)2, Fe(OH)2, and ferrihydrite
Fe(OH)3 at different pH.

Figure 5 shows the solubility of metal cations and their complexes at different pH
as controlled by the total solubility of copper and iron set in this study ({Cu]r = 6.30 mM
and [Fe}r = 0.72 mM). In general, insoluble metal precipitation occurs inside the solid
curve, especially starting at the points where the curve approaches minimum. In this
manner, low solubility of precipitates of concern is ensured which it increases the
likelihood of reaching the supersaturated state necessary for crystallization to happen
(Cuppett et al., 2006; Furcas et al., 2022; Wieland et al., 2023). The solubility curve of the
metal hydroxides presented in Figure 5 predicts which pH regions insoluble Cu(OH)2.
Fe(OH), and Fe(OH); may tend to precipitate. The thermodynamic equilibria of
precipitation of these co-existing metal ions Cu’*, Fe”*, and Fe™* suggest the complex
panorama in regards with their separation. Note that starting pH > 4.5, at least two out of
the three insoluble hydroxides begin to precipitate out during the operation set in this study.
This confirms that separation by selective precipitation as a function of pH should not be
expected. Co-precipitation should be explored to better understand synergistic effects of
both metal concentration ratio exert on the granulation process.

Carbonate precipitation was also employed in this research. Carbonate as
precipitant was sourced from the deprotonation of carbonic acid as shown in equations (40)
and (41). Similar approach on material balance discussed earlier was applied to determine

the total carbonate in the solution. This also allows expressing the concentration of the


carbonate anion [CO3*] (equation (42)) as a function of the total carbonate concentration
and pH (Sawyer et al., 2003). This expression was used to generate the solubility diagrams
of metal carbonates expected in this study (to be discussed in the next part of this section).
Additionally, generation of logC vs pH of the carbonic acid deprotonation can allow one
to predict which pH range to operate for the maximum production of CO; which is
necessary for the carbonate precipitation. From Figure 6, the pH of the precipitant tank in
this study was maintained to be at least 10.33. Lastly, the possible exchange of acidic
carbon dioxide gas in the precipitant solution with the surroundings was neglected since
the rate of exchange is not enough to maintain gas/liquid equilibrium, producing negligible
effect on the alkalinity when it enters or exits solution (Benjamin, 2015).

HCO3 2 H*+HCO,~ Ka = aeerine = 107637 (40)

ies
HCO3” # Ht + C05?- Kg = Melleaa

972033 (al)

(CO3]7 = [CO3"] + [HCO] + [H2CO3]

aa KaxKaz:

= (co? }(1+41+*) (42)



eu

Figure 6. Deprotonation and speciation of carbonic acid (H2CO3) into bicarbonate
(HCO3") and carbonate (CO32-) ions at different solution pH.

Given the presence of multiple soluble metal, hydroxides, and carbonates in the
system, it is expected that multiple metal-hydr(oxides) and -carbonates simultaneously
precipitate out and crystallize. Eventually, [Me]r reaches equilibrium with these
hydr(oxides) and carbonates at different pH and with [COs]r at the background.

Table 7 lists all possible hydro(oxide) and carbonate precipitation carried out in this
experiment with their respective solubility Ksp; (Anotai et al., 2021; Furcas et al., 2022;
Mahasti et al., 2022; Quiton et al., 2022). From these Kspi expressions, [Me]r can be
expressed as function of the solubility constants and [COs]r, at varying pH. Setting [COs]

to 9.45mM, which is the actual carbonate concentration in the precipitant tank, theoretical


solubility diagrams (log [Me]r vs pH) were plotted for the expected precipitates (Figure 7)

to help evaluate and explain the results observed in this section.

Table 7. Summary of metal hydr(oxide) and carbonate precipitation reaction and its
respective metal solubility relationship with pH.

Chemical an :
formula ra solubility Reaction Reaction constant, Kspi
(mineral name) 7 SOMBDINLY expression
Cu(OH)2 Cu(OH)aig) = Cu?* + 20H~ Kesey, = (Cu?*][OH-}? = 10-3? (23)
(Spertiniite) Cu)y = pao (35)
CuCOa¢5) = Cu* + COZ Kspeus = (Cu?*][CO3-] = 10-7 (43)
CuCO; — __KsPeur
Culr = ceracoatcOslr a
Cu;C03(OM)aqy = 2Cu®* + COR + 20H- Keres = (Eu PICOFTON-F = 10" (45)
Cu2CO3(OH)2 k 2
(Malachite = (__*Sfaus ___P 46
Gfalachive) Culr (qaethtore) sa)
‘Cus(COs)a(OH)ayy = 3Cu* + 2C0F- + 20H 47)
Cus(COs)x(OH)2 k 2
i = SPeus 48)
(azurite) Culp = ox teas (48)
Fe®* + 2H,0) * Fe(OH)2q)+2H* — Ksppeay, = os = 107227 (27)
Fe(OH): ___ wp
Fen = ns en
FeCOx5) = Fe’* + CO}- Kereauns = Fe**N{COF"] = 107°" (49)
FeCOs (siderite) KsPreana 50)
FeCl) \r = seranacoqlCOale ee
+ = + = HHP _ 49-3:
Fe(OH)s Fe + 3H20q) * FeOW)a)+3H* Keppra, = feeaey = 10° 33)
A) wtp
ferril trite) =
(ferrihydrite) Fe(III) |p KP reams tFeun (39)
; tae
(hematite =
(hematite) Fer = a5 ps eeatnn : (52)
«-Fe0OH Fe + 2HOy =~ FROM +3H” — Keppaiing = Ea = 10H (53)
+
(goethite) [Fe(II], = “4 (54)

KsP reins Fe!)



2 3 4 s 6 7 8 9 oo 2 Bo
rit

Figure 7. Copper- and iron-hydr(oxides) and -carbonates theoretical solubility diagrams

Going back to the results in Figure 4, the steady increase on both copper removal
and crystallization ratio, as well as collection of bigger particles as per the product size
distribution, that were observed from pHe 5.0 to 7.0 can be attributed to the decreasing
solubility of both copper and iron ions and formation of their respective stable precipitates
with increasing pH. As predicted in the solubility diagram from Figure 7, it is feasible that
the major production of stable copper carbonate polymorphs such as malachite and azurite
started at around pH = 6.5-7.0. (de Luna et al., 2020; Lertratwattana et al., 2019). This
copper-carbonate polymorph production extends until pH 9, together with spertiniite,
Cu(OH)>s, precipitation at pH range 6.5-12.0 (Cuppett et al., 2006). This is the reason why

93% copper removal and 91% copper crystallization values remained constant within pHe


range 7.0-9.0. The preferential spertiniite formation at alkaline region also explains why
smaller precipitates were obtained at pHe 8.0-9.0 (Devamani & Alagar, 2013).

Multiple ferrous and ferric insoluble hydr(oxides) and carbonate have high
tendency to be produced within pHe 5.0-9.0. Ferrihydrite, Fe(OH)3, together with stable
alpha-ferric oxides, hematite (a-Fex0s) and goethite (a-FeOOH), have low solubility and
precipitate out within the pH range of operation set in this study. While siderite, FeCOs,
might occur at neutral to slightly basic solution, Fe(OH) only precipitates out at very basic
solution (pH>10) which makes it less likely to form in this study (Furcas et al., 2022;
Wieland et al., 2023). Similar study of Lertratwattana et al., where treatment of simulated
pure copper-containing wastewater effluent using FBHC, reported a 98% copper
crystallization at pHe 6.5-7.0 which is higher than the optimum crystallization ratio (91%)
at the same effluent pH obtained in this study (Lertratwattana et al., 2019). The co-
precipitation of copper and iron metals in this study possibly impeded the crystallization
of copper due to competition with iron species for available hydroxide and carbonate ions
for the expected precipitation and crystallization reactions (Pratiwi et al., 2021).

The crystals obtained at effluent pH 5.0, 7.0, and 9.0 were subjected to X-ray
diffraction (XRD) analysis in order to identify crystalline structure of recovered solids and
verify the presence of the copper and iron-containing precipitates at this pHe. Raw XRD
peaks were compared with the available data from literature and on the RRUFF Project
website. Across the operating pH range, copper carbonate polymorphs, malachite and

azurite, exhibited dominant peaks that are apparent in the XRD patterns obtained in this


study as shown in Figure 8 (left). Malachite’s, CuzCO3(OH)2, major peaks is at 26 = 14.9,
17.8, 24.0, 30.0, 31.2, 32.0, 35.5, 42.2 (G. rong Wang et al., 2020) while azurite,
Cus(COs)2(OH)s, exhibited peaks at 20 = 24.0, 31.2, 36.2, 38.8, 41.5, 57.8 (Hu et al., 2022).
On the other hand, spertiniite’s, Cu(OH)z, major peaks at 20 = 38.8, 54.7, 56.4, 62.8 were
only apparent at pHe 7.0 and 9.0 which also suggests its low solubility at neutral to basic
region as predicted by its theoretical solubility diagram (Devamani & Alagar, 2013). For
the iron-containing precipitates, XRD analyses show that the major diffraction peaks of all
possible ferric hydr(oxides) listed in this study were identified in Figure 8 (right). Apparent
ferrihydrite, Fe(OH)s, diffraction peaks which occurred in this study’s diffraction pattern
were at 20 = 62.7 (H. Chen et al., 2021). For hematite a-FezOs (goethite) and (a-FeOOH),
peaks occurred at 28 = 39.0, 41.2, 58.0 and at 26 = 42.3, 44.0, 51.0, 65.5, respectively
(Gonzélez et al., 2000; Schimanke & Martin, 2000). Moreover, siderite’s, FeCOs, major
peaks (20 = 38.5, 42.3. 46.0) were evident at pHe 7.0 and 9.0 only (Rakshit et al., 2008).
These results were parallel with the theoretical solubility diagrams of copper- and iron-

(hydr)oxides and -carbonates.


Intensity

Figure 8, Copper (left) and iron (right) XRD analyses of recovered crystals at pHe 5.0,
7.0, and 9.0.

The same recovered crystals were also subjected to X-ray photoelectron
spectroscopy (XPS) was employed to further analyze the surface properties of the
precipitates analyses and to confirm the presence of the insoluble precipitates predicted by
the theoretical solubility diagrams and identified from XRD analyses, as well as to estimate
how much of this respective metal hydr(oxide) and carbonate constitute the crystals.
Relevant peak binding energies of these precipitates were collated from the NIST X-ray
Photoelectron Spectroscopy Database, Handbook of Monochromatic XPS Spectra
(Volume 1 and 2) and other available literature (H. Chen et al., 2021; Hu et al., 2022;
Naumkin et al., 2012; Vincent Crist, 1999, 2005; C. Zhang et al., 2015). As shown in Figure
9(a, ¢, and e), copper carbonate polymorphs malachite and azurite were recovered at all
pH. considered in the analyses, especially at pHe 7.0 where they constitute almost 2/3 of

the total copper recovered. On the other hand, preferential precipitation of spertiniite at


basic conditions (pHe = 9.0) were also verified where it comprised around 65%. On the
other hand, XPS analyses also supported the identification of iron-hydr(oxides) and -
carbonate from the XRD. Ferrihydrite, hematite, and goethite’s respective binding energies
were apparent at all pHe considered while siderite only occurred when effluent pH is at
least 7.0. Their respective approximated composition with respect to the total iron

recovered varied at different pHe as depicted in Figure 9(b, d, and f).

Rawintensity

Raw intensity

Raw intensity


Row nensiy
extgen
mera copper “
z
a. Cast pt 50 H Feat plt,S0
957 oh os oh a Gi or oa ot ol or oe ts 167 TeV 7a 7 Fo 7s We 1 We 75 Toe
BEI) BEI)
Raw iensiy ‘
—Backgrount pees
Spertnite Soetie
2 See
.Cuat ptt, 70 : 4. Featptt,7.9
3 .
S37 Ge os ie Be Ga BH oho ks slo or ote ts Ne Te Ta Fa Ta a We Wer Wes
BE) BEL)
— Raw inensiy Row tens
‘Background: Seckpeund’
=== Femnysite
- Spetinite Gouite
Seere
H
e.Cuat pil, 90 Hy £. Feat pil, 9.0
716 715 ha 743 712TH THO 709 708707 706 705 704 709 702

9387 0b6 Gas 054 959 652 951 950 929 O28 O27 O26 62s
BE(eV)

BE(eV)

Figure 9. XPS analyses of recovered crystals with respect to copper (a, c, e) and iron (b,
d, f) at pHe 5.0, 7.0, and 9.0.

wal

4.2 Effect of CO;* to Cu’ molar ratio on copper removal,
crystallization, and salt recovery

Insoluble precipitates are formed by introducing corresponding precipitant in the
system. In this research, recovery of copper as copper carbonates was one of the objectives
to enable resource recovery and circular economy. With this, the effects of varying
carbonate (CO3*) to copper (Cu’*) molar ratios (MR) from 0.75 to 2.0 on copper removal,
crystallization, and copper salt recovery were investigated. This parameter is essential in
this study since it also drives the supersaturation state of the system which allows
nucleation and granulation process to proceed. The simulated wastewater had initial
concentrations of 6.30 mM copper and 0.72 mM iron and was introduced into the fluidized
bed reactor at a rate of 15 mL min‘. The effluent pH (pHe) was maintained at 6.5 which
was deemed optimum from the previous section. A part of the effluent was also recirculated
back to the bottom of the reactor to control the level of supersaturation in the reaction
region, promoting crystal growth. The continuous operation lasted for 505 hydraulic
retention times (HRTs), with each HRT corresponding to 17.12 minutes. Figure 10 presents

the trends corresponding to the effects on the reactor performance of different MR.

100 =
bead 80
i 70
§
2 50 4
i 0 “oF
. s
? x0
o 20
so °
075 100 12s 150 200

Molar Ratio (CO¥ Cu")

PS L0Omm>O20.710mm SSHOT0mm>O20425 mm IO<0425 mm —-4CuRemoval “B24 Cu Crystallization

Figure 10. Effects of CO32- to Cu2+ molar ratios on % copper removal and
crystallization, and product size distribution of recovered crystals after continuous
FBHC operation of 505 HRTs (IHRT = 17.12 min) with [Cu2+]O = 6.30 mM, [Fe2+]O
= 0.72 mM, pHe = 6.5, and Qm = 15 mL min-I.

Figure 10 demonstrates a continuous increase in the percentage of copper removal
(from 86% to 97%) and copper crystallization (from 79% to 95%) as the CO3* to Cu* MR.
was increased from 0.75 to 2.0. This trend is expected since as more carbonate ions were
added in the system, this drove the equilibrium of equations (43) and (49) towards the
formation of insoluble copper- and iron-carbonates. This is a clear demonstration of Le
Chatelier’s principle which states that once additional stress is introduced on a system in
equilibrium it will shift the equilibrium to counteract the disturbance (Kokes et al., 2014).

Additionally, these results can also be attributed to the increase in supersaturation with

B

increasing concentration of precipitant in the system. The low % Cu removal and
crystallization at MR = 0.75 is mainly due to the lack of excessive carbonate ions in the
system necessary for the copper carbonate precipitation. Ideally, at MR = 1.0, complete
reaction between copper and carbonate was expected since this satisfies the stochiometric
requirement for the reaction in equation (43) to go to completion. However, due to
incomplete mixing of the solutions inside the fluidized bed reactor, the system allowed
some copper ions not to react with the available carbonate in the solution and just be carried
away in the effluent (Udomkitthaweewat et al., 2019). Moreover, iron ions were also
present in the system which could’ve inhibited copper carbonate precipitation since at these
conditions in the reactor, iron could have scavenged for available carbonate for its own
carbonate precipitation shown in equation (49. For these reasons, continuous increase in
copper removal and crystallization ratio, and recovery of bigger granules were observed
even the carbonate was fed in excess with respect to its stoichiometric amount. The bigger
crystals obtained at higher MRs can be inferred that at these values, the available carbonate
ions are just enough to maintain the supersaturation at a level where crystal growth was
enhanced over homogeneous nucleation (Tai, 1999).

In this section, the carbonate to copper molar ratio of 1.5 was deemed optimum
even though MR = 2.0 gave the maximum removal and crystallization ratio. This choice
could be attributed to the fact that higher precipitant to metal molar ratios reflects higher
operating costs once this process is scaled up and applied to industry (Oncel et al., 2013).

Additionally, the values obtained between these two MR’s are almost identical especially


the % copper removal. Furthermore, the optimum 96 % copper removal and 90 % copper
crystallization at MR = 1.5 in this section was found out to be less than the optimum
performance (99 % copper removal, 95 % copper crystallization) reported by a similar
study where pure copper-containing wastewater was treated using FBHC (Lertratwattana
et al., 2019). This could be due to the presence of iron ions in this study which are
competing against the copper ions for available precipitant in the system.

4.3 Effect of metal and precipitant flow rates on copper removal,
crystallization, and salt recovery

A typical fluidized bed homogeneous crystallization reactor allows occurrence of
most of the reaction near the bottom where the feed was located. Since the feed streams
with reactants were introduced on the two opposite sides of the reactor, better mixing was
enabled by varying the upward velocity which is controlled by the inlet flow rates of the
wastewater and recirculation streams (Su et al., 2014). Hydrodynamic conditions such as
volumetric flow rate (Q) of streams fed into the FBHC reactor are important parameters
needed to be assessed with respect to reactor’s performance since this affects several
reaction kinetics and fluidization variables, as well as size and morphology of the crystals
produced via granulation (Karpinski & Wey, 2002). Varying metal flow rates also
translates to different hydraulic retention time (HRT), upflow velocity (U), and metal
cross-section loading (L), as shown in equations (55), (56), and (57), respectively.
According to these equations, the volumetric flow rate (Q) is directly proportional to U and

L while it is inversely proportional to HRT. Moreover, in these equations presented, Vr


pertains to effective volume of the reactor; Atow is the internal cross-section area of the

reaction region; [Cu]o denotes the ial concentration of copper in the wastewater tank;
and Qin, Qpp, and Q, are the metal wastewater, precipitant, and recirculation flow rates,

respectively.

Vr

HRT i ——-
(min Ont Om (55)
My _ Qm+ Qppe + Qr
u (2) = se tere er 56
Gh) iow ae
kg) _ OmfCulo
ae) ‘Atow on

Modifying the flow rates of metal and precipitant solutions from 5 to 25 mL min
' was set in this study to analyze its effects on copper removal, crystallization, and copper
salt recovery. The simulated wastewater had initial concentrations of 6.30 mM copper and
0.72 mM iron. A CO;* to Cu molar ratio of 1.5 and effluent pH (pHe) of 6.5 were
maintained in this part of the study as they were deemed optimum from the previous
sections. It is important to note that Qm is equal to Qppr in this study. A part of the effluent
was also recirculated back at a rate of 20 to $0 mL min depending on the operation’s
volumetric flow rate. The continuous operation lasted for 168 - 841 HRTs, dependent on
the set Qn (IHRT = 17.12mins). From setting the influent and recirculating volumetric
flow rate, their corresponding HRT, U, and L were calculated and summarized in Table 8.
Take note that the upflow velocity has two values, one without recirculation flow and the

other one with reflow, to consider the U during the initial days of operation where


preliminary stage of high supersaturation and production of small nuclei as the
homogenous seed were employed in the reactor. During this stage, no reflow was
introduced to allow these seeds to initially grow into size where they won’t be overflown
out of the reactor. Additionally, Figure 11 presents the results regarding the effects on the
reactor performance of different Qm.

Table 8. Calculated hydraulic retention time, upflow velocity, and copper cross-section
loading at different metal and recirculation volumetric flow rates.

U(mh"
Qn = Ore Qa HRT (min) ver
(mL min") (mL min") wor Won (ke-Cum?h})
(mh!) (cui)

5.00 10.0 51.35 191 3.82 038
10.0 20.0 25.68 3.82 764 0.76
15.0 30.0 17.12 5.73 11.46 115
20.0 40.0 12.84 7.64 15.28 1.53

25.0 50.0 10.27 9.55 19.10 1.91



100 i
%0
s 80
& 0
ia i
as
&
of
i
x0
© 2»

s 0 1s 2» 3
Q. (en mit)

S55 .00 mm > O 20.710 mm HH0.710 mm > O2 0425 mm SIO <0.425 men —A—ts Cu Removal ~H—%6 Cu Cryllization

Figure 11. Effects of influent flow rates (Qm) on % copper removal and crystallization,
and product size distribution of recovered crystals after continuous FBHC operation with
[Cu2+]0 = 6.30 mM, [Fe2+]0 = 0.72 mM, pHe = 6.5, and CO32-/Cu2+ MR = 1.5.

As shown in Figure 11, copper removal ratio was not generally affected by the
increasing volumetric flow rates of the reactants and has an average value of 96%. In
contrast, a steady decrease in percentage of copper crystallization (from 94% to 79%) was
‘observed as Qm was increased from 5.0 to 25.0 mL min’. This trend can be mainly
attributed to the decreasing hydraulic retention times once you increase the inlet flow rates
of the reactants. HRT defines the time the reactants spend inside the reactor to mix and
react (Grootscholten et al., 2013). With shorter HRTs, this would not allow the reactants

to completely react with each other and would reduce the collisions of the small nuclei

produced initially in the reaction which will not induce granulation. In return, theses nuclei


did not stay in their fluidized state in the reactor and were washed out as sludge in the
effluent (C. S. Chen et al., 2015).

A general trend with respect to the product size distribution at different Qn was also
apparent in this section. Bigger crystals were obtained at higher flow rates. This trend can
be attributed to the effects of different upflow velocities (U) and copper cross-section
loadings (L), which are both directly proportional to flow rates. In this study, U varies at
different operating days since the recirculation flow (Q,) was changing and is dependent
on Qn as shown in Table 8, making the degree of supersaturation at the bottom region of
the reactor a variable, too. The low U at lower Qm translates to lower mixing energy in the
reactor making small bed expansion, resulting to smaller effective surface area available
for granulation to process. In contrast, higher values of U induced larger bed expansion
increasing the length of mass transport path making more available reactive areas for
crystal growth (Priambodo et al., 2017). This mainly explains why smaller granules were
collected at low upflow velocity and bigger crystals were recovered at higher U.

The cross-section loading (L) is defined as the mass of copper that passes through
a cross-sectional unit area per unit time, which is adjusted by varying influent flow rate of
copper at its specific concentration. This is a critical factor ofa fluidized-bed system reactor
in the laboratory that is going to be scaled up to a pilot. A low cross-section loading is
tantamount to a low dilution factor at the bottom of the reactor and would not provide
enough fluidization for mass transfer as well. This impedes the precipitation and growth of

expected copper insoluble salts at this labile zone of the reactor. With this, increasing


copper cross-section loading at a specific copper concentration would increase the dilution
in the reactor, lowering the supersaturation at a levels where crystal growth is favored
against spontaneous and homogeneous nucleation which promotes formation of fines (C.
S. Chen et al., 2015; Le et al., 2022). This also supports the results obtained in this study
where bigger crystals recovery were possible at higher cross-section loading.

In determining the optimum Qm in this section, it is important to consider all reactor
performance indicators. A good copper removal and crystallization percentage of 95.6%
and 90.0%, respectively, as well as decent product size distribution, were recorded at Qm
= 15 mL min‘! and deemed optimum in this part of the study. Additionally, this influent
metal flow rate was the first flow rate among the set Qm which surpassed the estimated
minimum fluidization velocity (Umr= 5.44 m h’') in this study even though no recirculation
was introduced. This choice balances the high % copper crystallization but poor recovery
of bigger particles at low Qm and the low % copper crystallization but major recovery of
large particles at high Qn. Comparing with the 95% copper crystallization obtained at a
similar study of Lertratwattana et. al. where pure copper-containing wastewater was treated
using FBHC, the optimum data recorded in the present study was slightly inferior,
confirming the significant effects of the added iron ions in the metal wastewater tank.

4.4 Effect of varying copper and iron concentration on copper removal
and crystallization

In an industrial set-up, the metal concentrations of raw wastewater to be treated

varies depending on the manufacturing activities of each metal industry. It is also very


seldom to encounter wastewater containing only pure metals. With this, it is important to
establish the capacity of the fluidized bed homogeneous crystallization process with respect
to removal and recovery of heavy metals like copper from its wide range of concentration
at different industrial wastewater with possible presence of other heavy metals like iron
(Anotai et al., 2021; Boonrattanakij et al., 2023).

Comparative experimental runs at different initial copper and iron concentrations
which emulates a typical copper plating wastewater and incorporates the Fenton process
ranging from 3.15 mM to 9.44 mM and 0.36 mM to 1.07, respectively were studied in this
section. These set-ups were run under the optimized conditions obtained from the previous

sections: pHe of 6.5, CO3* to Cu* MR of 1.5, and metal and precipitant volumetric flow

rates of 15 mL min”. Figure 12 reveals how the presence of trace amounts of iron ions at
defined copper concentration affected the latter’s removal and crystallization ratio after
continuous treatment in an FBHC reactor for 505 hydraulic retention times, where one

HRT is around 17.12 minutes.


o
ws
%6
ss
ox 036 ost on 09 Los
(Fe}omMp
RISmMICu —A-AT2MMCH E-6IOMMCU “STAT mM CH Be 9.44 mt Co

ons 036 oss on 09 tos
(FJ

BASmM Ca -S-472mM Co -630mMMCU TAT MM CU HOA WAL CH

Figure 12. % Cu removal (top) and % Cu crystallization (bottom) at different copper and
iron concentration after continuous FBHC operation of 505 HRTs (1 HRT = 17.12 min)
with pHe = 6.5, CO32-/Cu2+ MR = 1.5, and Qm = 15 mL min-1.


It can be deduced from Figure 12 that addition of iron ions in this study didn’t
greatly affect the percentage copper removal at all copper concentrations defined in each
experimental run. % Cu removal reported in this section averaged at superior values
ranging from 94% to 98%, These could be attributed to the small magnitude of the iron
added in the wastewater wherein it could not significantly influence the removal capacity
of the FBHC process. In contrary, a definite trend can be observed with respect to copper
crystallization ratio at different amount of iron ions added in the simulated metal
wastewater tank, For a defined copper concentration from 3.15 mM to 7.87 mM, acommon
trend of decreasing % Cu crystallization was evident from 0 mM Fe* to 0.54 mM Fe”.
Moreover, further increasing the iron concentration from 0.54 mM to 1.07 mM resulted to
steady increase on copper crystallization.

This general trend can be attributed to several factors including competition for
active precipitation sites and precipitate composition. These affect the supersaturation state
of the system which is driving the initial nucleation and precipitation to happen (Tiangco
et al., 2019). As the iron concentration was initially increased, the competition between.
copper and iron embryos for active surface available for precipitation might have increased,
leading to a decrease in the copper crystallization ratio. However, at higher iron
concentrations, the competition between copper and iron for precipitation sites may
approach a certain “saturation” point, wherein larger and more stable crystals were
produced, which could possibly improve the copper crystallization ratio (Javed & Asselin,

2020). Additionally, composition of the precipitate formed during the crystallization


process can vary with the iron concentration. As the iron concentration was increased, iron
might have precipitate out first as hydr(oxide) and carbonate followed by copper insoluble
(Javed & Asselin, 2020). With this, the composition of the precipitate may shift towards
iron-containing compounds which could deter the copper crystallization ratio as the
presence of iron-containing compounds may interfere with the precipitation of copper.
However, at higher iron concentrations, the composition of the precipitate may shift now
towards more stable copper carbonates, which could improve the % copper crystallization
as shown in this study. It was also observed that at higher copper concentrations (9.44 mM
Cu), addition of iron ions set in this study was not enough to affect the high percentage of
copper crystallization averaged at 98%. Lastly, it is imperative to mention that in all the
considered copper and iron concentrations, copper was effectively removed from the
simulated wastewater solution and partly recovered as copper-iron crystals which can be
used in other applications (Pratiwi et al., 2021).
4.5 Product analysis and characterization

Under the several operating conditions, the recovered copper/iron-containing
crystals were subjected to comprehensive characterization processes as shown in section
4.1. To determine their crystalline composition, X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis (Figure
8) was conducted which allowed the identification of the primary copper constituent as
copper carbonate polymorphs namely malachite and azurite. Due to addition of trace
amounts of iron, hints of XRD peaks of expected iron insoluble including ferrihydrite,

goethite, hematite, and siderite, were also visible in the XRD pattern of the recovered


granules. Furthermore, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy analysis (Figure 9) showed that
at neutral conditions (pHe 6.5-7.0), the system favors the production of copper carbonate
minerals malachite and azurite which could be further processed to be used for other
industrial applications.

In addition to XRD and XPS analyses, the crystals recovered under optimum
conditions by FBHC process in this study under were further characterized to analyze the
morphology of the granules. The scanning electron micrograph of Figure 13b shows a
smooth and highly spheroidal morphology of the particles recovered from the reactor. This
is driven mainly by precipitation and crystallization under fluidization state inside the
reactor during their crystal growth at low to moderate level of supersaturation. Further
magnification of the surface of the crystals (Figure 13c and 13d) reveals composition of
aggregated fibrillary crystals. This suggests crystal growth might have undergone a three
stage mechanism consisting of (1) formation of nuclei, (2) aggregation of fine nuclei, and

(3) crystal growth (Lertratwattana et al., 2019).

Figure 13. Macroscopic image (a) of copper/iron containing granules recovered and
scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images (b, c, d) of the free-surface of spheroidal
granules obtained ar different magnifications.


5. Conclusion and Recommendations

The fluidized bed homogeneous crystallization process was carried out in this
research to determine the effects of trace amounts of iron ions found in copper-containing
wastewater stream after a Fenton pretreatment which destroys highly soluble Cu-EDTA
complexes in the immediate wastewater stream coming off a copper plating industry.
Several FBHC operating parameters including effluent pH, carbonate to copper molar ratio,
feed streams volumetric flow rates, and copper and iron initial concentrations were varied
to investigate their corresponding effects on copper removal and crystallization ratio, as
well as copper recovery as copper insoluble salts. In general, presence of iron ions deterred
the reactor’s performance with respect to copper as compared to previous study where
wastewater containing copper only was treated using FBHC.

The supersaturation of a system is mainly driven by the reaction pH as dictated by
speciation of copper and iron into their hydroxo complexes, as well as their hydr(oxide)
and carbonate precipitation which all dependent on pH as shown in their respective
equilibrium reactions. In this study, it was found out that great improvement on both copper
removal and crystallization ratio, as well as collection of bigger particles as per the product
size distribution, were observed by increasing the pHe 5.0 to 7.0 which can be attributed to
the decreasing solubility of both copper and iron ions and formation of their respective
stable precipitates with increasing pH as predicted in their theoretical solubility diagram.
Further increase to pHe 9.0 didn’t affect greatly the 93% copper removal and 91% copper

crystallization values. On the other hand, varying carbonate to copper molar ratio also


affect the reactor performance. Increasing MR resulted to increase on copper removal and
crystallization as well as recovery of bigger particles. This trend is expected since as more
carbonates were added in the system, this drives the equilibrium of precipitation reactions
towards the formation of insoluble copper- and iron-carbonates. This is a clear
demonstration of Le Chatelier’s principle which states that once additional stress is
introduced on a system in equilibrium it will shift the equilibrium to counteract the
disturbance.

Hydrodynamic conditions affect expected particle size and morphology of crystals
recovered after precipitation and crystallization reaction. One major parameter related to
hydrodynamics is the influent volumetric flow rate which was varied in this study. In
general, increasing the incoming volumetric flow rates of reactants decreases the amount
of reaction time they spend inside the system. This is the main reason why percentage of
copper crystallization diminished as the Qm was increased. On the other hand, bigger
particles were recovered at higher Qm due to faster upflow velocity and copper cross-
section loading which allowed the reactor to operate at a lower supersaturation which
favored crystal growth over nucleation. Lastly, effects of different iron concentrations at a
defined copper concentration were investigated as well. % Copper removal was not
significantly affected while % copper crystallization exhibited general trend when
increasing iron concentrations at all defined copper concentrations in this study. The

decreasing then increasing trend on copper crystallization ratio as more iron were


introduced in the system can be due to several reasons including competition on available
precipitation sites and precipitate compositions.

The recovered granules were found to resemble the major XRD peaks of copper
carbonate polymorphs (malachite and azurite). Weak peaks of iron hydr(oxide) minerals
were also observed. Furthermore, XPS analyses confirm the presence of these copper and
iron-containing compounds with majority of the copper recovery as copper carbonate
minerals. SEM analysis also confirmed three stage mechanism of granulation: formation

of nuclei, aggregation of fine nuclei, and crystal growth.

In conclusion, the FBHC process treatment proved successful in removing and
recovering copper, particularly in the presence of iron, from simulated wastewater. The
experimental and characterization findings presented in this study would greatly contribute
to the comprehensive understanding of the complex phenomenon of heavy metal co-
precipitation as well providing valuable insights on towards crystal growth mechanism. It
is recommended that the results of this laboratory-scale study to be validated serve as a
foundation for the development of a novel approach based on FBHC for the treatment of
wastewater containing copper and iron ions in industrial scale. Furthermore, extending the
investigation to encompass higher iron concentrations would enable a broader

understanding of its effects on both copper and iron removal and crystallization ratios.


References

2016 Wastewater Guidelines The Zero Discharge of Hazardous Chemicals Programme.
(2016). http://www.epa.sa.gov.au/xstd_files/Corporate/Public
consultation/wastewater_lagoons.pdf

Abdel-Aal, E. A., Rashad, M. M., & El-Shall, H. (2004). Crystallization of calcium
sulfate dihydrate at different supersaturation ratios and different free sulfate
concentrations. Crystal Research and Technology, 39(4), 313-321.
https://doi.org/10.1002/crat.200310188

Abdel Salam, O. E., Reiad, N. A., & ElShafei, M. M. (2011). A study of the removal
characteristics of heavy metals from wastewater by low-cost adsorbents. Journal
of Advanced Research, 2(4), 297-303. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jare.201 1.01.008

Abhinav K, V., Rao R, V. K., Karthik, P. S., & Singh, S. P. (2015). Copper conductive
inks: Synthesis and utilization in flexible electronics. RSC Advances, 5(79),
63985-64030. https://doi.org/10.1039/cSra08205f

Ahmad, M., Zhang, B., Wang, J., Xu, J. Manzoor, K., Ahmad, S., & Ikram, S. (2019).
New method for hydrogel synthesis from diphenylcarbazide chitosan for selective
copper removal. International Journal of Biological Macromolecules, 136, 189~
198. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2019.06.084

Al-Saydeh, S. A., El-Naas, M. H., & Zaidi, S. J. (2017). Copper removal from industrial
wastewater: A comprehensive review. Journal of Industrial and Engineering
Chemistry, 56, 35-44. https://doi.org/10.1016/j jiec.2017.07.026

American Public Health Association, American Water Works Association, & Water
Environment Federation. (2023). Standard Methods for the Examination of Water
and Wastewater (W. Lipps, E. Braun-Howland, & T. Baxter (Eds.); 24th ed.).
APHA Press.

Ameta, R., Chohadia, A. K., Jain, A., & Punjabi, P. B. (2018). Fenton and Photo-Fenton
Processes. In Advanced Oxidation Processes for Wastewater Treatment:
Emerging Green Chemical Technology. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-
810499-6.00003-6

Andalib, M., Elbeshbishy, E., Mustafa, N., Hafez, H., Nakhla, G., & Zhu, J. (2014).
Performance of an anaerobic fluidized bed bioreactor (AnFBR) for digestion of
primary municipal wastewater treatment biosolids and bioethanol thin stillage.
Renewable Energy, 71, 276-285. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2014.05.039

Anotai, J., Udomphan, T., Choi, A. E. S., & Lu, M. C. (2021). Fluidized-bed
homogeneous granulation process: Comparison of individual and mixed



precipitation of cobalt and copper. Journal of Environmental Chemical
Engineering, 9(6), 106644. https://doi.org/10.1016/j,jece.2021.106644

ASTM Sieve Chart and TYLER Equivalents (Issue ¢, p. 1000). (n.d.).
https:/www.mitest.com/PDF/astm_chart_wstyler.pdf

Azimi, A., Azari, A., Rezakazemi, M., & Ansarpour, M. (2017). Removal of Heavy
Metals from Industrial Wastewaters: A Review. ChemBioEng Reviews, 4(1), 37—
59. https://doi.org/10.1002/cben.201600010

Baer, D., Artyushkova, K., Brundle, C., Castle, J., Engelhard, M., Gaskell, K., Grant, J.,
Haasch, R., Linford, M., Powell, C., Shard, A., Sherwood, P., & Smentkowski, V.
(2019). Practical guides for x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy. Journal of Vacuum
Science & Technology A, 37(3), 031401.
https://doi.org/10.1116/1.5065501.Practical

Bai, D. K., Ying, Q. H., Wang, N., & Lin, J. H. (2016). Copper removal from
electroplating wastewater by coprecipitation of copper-based supramolecular
materials: Preparation and application study. Journal of Chemistry, 2016.
https://doi.org/10.1155/2016/5281561

Balladares, E., Jerez, O., Parada, F., Baltierra, L., Hernandez, C., Araneda, E., & Parra,
V. (2018). Neutralization and co-precipitation of heavy metals by lime addition to
effluent from acid plant in a copper smelter. Minerals Engineering, 122(October
2017), 122-129. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mineng,2018.03.028

Baltpurvins, K. A., Burns, R. C., & Lawrance, G. A. (1996). Heavy metals in wastewater:
Modelling the hydroxide precipitation of copper(II) from wastewater using lime
as the precipitant. Waste Management, 16(8), 717—725.
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0956-053X(97)00014-7

Barakat, M. A. (2011). New trends in removing heavy metals from industrial wastewater.
Arabian Journal of Chemistry, 4(4), 361-377.
https://doi.org/10.1016farabjc.2010.07.019

Bayon, L. L. E., Ballesteros, F. C., Garcia-Segura, S., & Lu, M. C. (2019). Water reuse
nexus with resource recovery: On the fluidized-bed homogeneous crystallization
of copper and phosphate from semiconductor wastewater. Journal of Cleaner
Production, 236, 117705. https://doi.org/10.1016/j,jclepro.2019.117705

Behra, R., & Krug, H. (2008). Nanoecotoxicology: Nanoparticles at large. Nature
Nanotechnology, 3(5), 253-254. https://doi.org/10.1038/nnano.2008.113
Ben-Ali, S., Jaouali, |., Souissi-Najar, S., & Ouedemi, A. (2017). Characterization and
adsorption capacity of raw pomegranate peel biosorbent for copper removal.
Journal of Cleaner Production, 142, 3809-3821.
https://doi.org/10.1016/ jclepro.2016.10.081


Benjamin, M. (2015). Water Chemistry (Second). Waveland Press, Inc.

Bilal, M., Shah, J. A., Ashfaq, T., Gardazi, S. M. H., Tahir, A. A., Pervez, A., Haroon,
H., & Mahmood, Q. (2013). Waste biomass adsorbents for copper removal from
industrial wastewater-A review. Journal of Hazardous Materials, 263, 322-333.
https://doi.org/10.1016/}jhazmat.2013.07.071

Boonrattanakij, N., Puangsuwan, S., Vilando, A. C., & Lu, M. C. (2023). Influence of
coexisting EDTA, citrate, and chloride ions on the recovery of copper and cobalt
from simulated wastewater using fluidized-bed homogeneous granulation process.
Process Safety and Environmental Protection, 172(January), 83-96.
https://doi.org/10.1016/).psep.2023.02.009

Caddarao, P. S., Garcia-Segura, S., Ballesteros, F.C., Huang, Y. H., & Lu, M. C. (2018).
Phosphorous recovery by means of fluidized bed homogeneous crystallization of
calcium phosphate. Influence of operational variables and electrolytes on brushite
homogeneous crystallization. Journal of the Taiwan Institute of Chemical
Engineers, 83, 124-132. https://doi.org/10.1016/,jtice.2017.12.009

Caprarescu, S., Purcar, V., & Vaireanu, D. I. (2012). Separation of Copper Ions from
Synthetically Prepared Electroplating Wastewater at Different Operating
Conditions using Electrodialysis. Separation Science and Technology
(Philadelphia), 47(16), 2273-2280.
https://doi.org/10.1080/01496395.2012.669444

Carpanedo de Morais Nepel, T., Landers, R., Gurgel Adeodato Vieira, M., & Floréncio
de Almeida Neto, A. (2020). Metallic copper removal optimization from real
wastewater using pulsed electrodeposition. Journal of Hazardous Materials, 384.
https://doi.org/10.1016/ jhazmat.2019.121416

Chang, J. H., Ellis, A. V., Tung, C. H., & Huang, W. C. (2010). Copper cation transport
and scaling of ionic exchange membranes using electrodialysis under
electroconvection conditions. Journal of Membrane Science, 361(1-2), 56-62.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.memsci.2010.06.012

Chen, C. S., Shih, Y. J., & Huang, Y. H. (2015). Remediation of lead (Pb(II)) wastewater
through recovery of lead carbonate in a fluidized-bed homogeneous
crystallization (FBHC) system. Chemical Engineering Journal, 279, 120-128.
https://doi.org/10.101.6/j.cej.2015.05.013

Chen, H., Fan, Y., Fan, Z., Xu, H., Cui, D., Xue, C., & Zhang, W. (2021). Noble-metal-
free p-n heterojunction of iron(II) hydroxide and graphitic carbon nitride for
hydrogen evolution reaction. Ceramics International, 47(24), 35057-35066.
https://doi.org/10.1016/.ceramint.20211.09.047


Chung, J., Jeong, E., Choi, J. W., Yun, S. T., Maeng, S. K., & Hong, S. W. (2015).
Factors affecting crystallization of copper sulfide in fed-batch fluidized bed
reactor. Hydrometallurgy, 152, 107-112.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.hydromet.2014.12.014

Cossu, R., Ehrig, H.-J., & Muntoni, A. (2018). Physical—Chemical Leachate Treatment.
In Solid Waste Landfilling. Elsevier Inc. https://doi.org/10.1016/b978-0-12-
407721-8.00028-0

Cuppett, J. D., Duncan, S. E., & Dietrich, A. M. (2006). Evaluation of copper speciation
and water quality factors that affect aqueous copper tasting response. Chemical
Senses, 31(7), 689-697. https://doi.org/10.1093/chemse/bjl010

Davarnejad, R., & Panahi, P. (2016). Cu (II) removal from aqueous wastewaters by
adsorption on the modified Henna with Fe304 nanoparticles using response
surface methodology. Separation and Purification Technology, 158, 286-292.
https://doi.org/10.1016/.seppur.2015.12.018

Dave, P. N., & Chopda, L. V. (2014). Application of iron oxide nanomaterials for the
removal of heavy metals. Journal of Nanotechnology, 2014.
https://doi.org/10.1155/2014/398569

De Castro, M. L. F. A., Abad, M. L. B., Sumalinog, D. A. G., Abarea, R. R.M.,
Paoprasert, P., & de Luna, M. D. G. (2018). Adsorption of Methylene Blue dye
and Cu(II) ions on EDTA-modified bentonite: Isotherm, kinetic and
thermodynamic studies. Sustainable Environment Research, 28(5), 197-205.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.serj.2018.04.001

de Luna, M. D. G., Capito, J. A., Vilando, A. C., & Lu, M. C. (2020). Effect of EDTA
and CH20 on copper recovery from simulated electroless copper plating spent
rinse water by unseeded fluidized-bed granulation process. Separation and
Purification Technology, 253(July), 117460.
https://doi.org/10.1016/}.seppur.2020.117460

Deckert, C. A. (1995). Electroless copper plating. A review: Part I. Plating and Surface
Finishing, 82(3), 58-64.

Devamani, R. H. P., & Alagar, M. (2013). Synthesis and characterisation of Copper II
Hydroxide nano particles. Nano Biomedicine and Engineering, 5(3), 116-120.
https://doi.org/10.5101/nbe.v5i3.p} 16-120

Dib, A., & Makhloufi, L. (2004). Cementation treatment of copper in wastewater: Mass
transfer in a fixed bed of iron spheres. Chemical Engineering and Processing:
Process Intensification, 43(10), 1265-1273.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cep.2003.12.006


Ding, C., Cheng, W., Wang, X., Wu, Z. Y., Sun, Y., Chen, C., Wang, X., & Yu, S. H.
(2016). Competitive sorption of Pb(II), Cu(II) and Ni(II) on carbonaceous
nanofibers: A spectroscopic and modeling approach. Journal of Hazardous
Materials, 313(1i), 253-261. https://doi.org/10.1016/ jhazmat.2016.04.002

Donohue, J., Fawell, J., Ohanian, E., Giddings, M., Toft, P., Magara, Y.., & Jackson, P.
(2004). Copper in Drinking-water Background document for development of
WHO Guidelines for Drinking-water Quality (Vol. 68, Issue 1).
hutps://doi.org/10.1111/1467-8292.00035

Dou, J., Huang, Q., Huang, H., Gan, D., Chen, J., Deng, F., Wen, Y., Zhu, X., Zhang, X.,
& Wei, Y. (2019). Mussel-inspired preparation of layered double hydroxides

based polymer composites for removal of copper ions. Journal of Colloid and
Interface Science, 533, 416-427. https://doi.org/10.1016/j,jcis.2018.08.064

Escobar, C., Soto-Salazar, C., & Inés Toral, M. (2006). Optimization of the
electrocoagulation process for the removal of copper, lead and cadmium in natural
waters and simulated wastewater. Journal of Environmental Management, 81(4),
384-391. https://doi.org/10.1016/}jenvman.2005.11.012

Fukuda, M., & Yusheng, L. (2020). The World Copper Factbook. International Copper
Study Group, 63. http://www. icsg.org/

Furcas, F. E., Lothenbach, B., Isgor, O. B., Mundra, S., Zhang, Z., & Angst, U. M.
(2022). Solubility and speciation of iron in cementitious systems. Cement and
Concrete Research, 15](October), 106620.
https://doi.org/10.1016/.cemconres.2021.106620

Gadd, G., & Griffiths, A. (1978). Microorganisms and Heavy Metal Toxicity. Microbial
Ecology, 4(4), 303-317.

Garcia-Diaz, 1., Lopez, F. A., & Alguacil, F. J. (2018). Carbon nanofibers: A new
adsorbent for copper removal from wastewater. Metals, 8(11), 1-13.
https://doi.org/10.3390/met8 110914

Gavrilescu, M. (2004). Removal of heavy metals from the environment by biosorption.
Engineering in Life Sciences, 4(3), 219-232.
https://doi.org/10.1002/elsc.200420026

Ghaedi, M., Shokrollahi, A., Ahmadi, F., Rajabi, H. R., & Soylak, M. (2008). Cloud
point extraction for the determination of copper, nickel and cobalt ions in
environmental samples by flame atomic absorption spectrometry. Journal of
Hazardous Materials, 150(3), 533-540.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j jhazmat.2007.05.029



Ghorpade, A., & Ahammed, M. M. (2018). Water treatment sludge for removal of heavy
metals from electroplating wastewater. Environmental Engineering Research,
23(1), 92-98. https://doi.org/10.449 I/eer.2017.065

Giro, A. V., Caputo, G., & Ferro, M. C. (2017). Application of Scanning Electron
Microscopy-Energy Dispersive X-Ray Spectroscopy (SEM-EDS).
Comprehensive Analytical Chemistry, 75(November), 153-168.
https://doi.org/10.101 6/bs.coac.2016.10.002

Gonzalez, G., Sagarzazu, A., & Villalba, R. (2000). Study of the mechano-chemical
transformation of goethite to hematite by TEM and XRD. Materials Research
Bulletin, 35(14—15), 2295-2308. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0025-5408(00)00434-7

Grace, J., Bi, X., & Ellis, N. (2020). Essentials of Fluidization Technology. Wiley-VCH.

Grootscholten, T. I. M., Steinbusch, K. J. J., Hamelers, H. V.M., & Buisman, C. J. N.
(2013). Improving medium chain fatty acid productivity using chain elongation
by reducing the hydraulic retention time in an upflow anaerobic filter.
Bioresource Technology, 136, 735-738.
https://doi.org/10.1016/.biortech.2013.02.114

Guan, W., Zhang, B., Tian, S., & Zhao, X. (2018). The synergism between electro-
Fenton and electrocoagulation process to remove Cu-EDTA. Applied Catalysis B:
Environmental, 227(December 2017), 252-257.
https://doi.org/10.1016/ apcatb.2017.12.036

Guevara, H. P. R., Ballesteros, F. C., Vilando, A. C., de Luna, M. D. G., & Lu, M.C.
(2017). Recovery of oxalate from bauxite wastewater using fluidized-bed
homogeneous granulation process. Journal of Cleaner Production, 154, 130-138.
https://doi.org/10.1016/,jclepro.2017.03.172

Gui, L., Yang, H., Huang, H., Hu, C., Feng, Y., & Wang, X. (2022). Liquid solid
fluidized bed crystallization granulation technology: Development, applications,
properties, and prospects. Journal of Water Process Engineering, 45(November
2021), 102513. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jwpe.2021.102513

Gupta, V. K., & Ali, I. (2012). Environmental Water Advances in Treatment,
Remediation and Recycling (1st ed.). Elsevier 2012.
https://www sciencedirect.com/book/9780444593993/environmental-water

Haldar, S. K. (2017). Introduction. In Platinum-Nickel-Chromium Deposits.
https://doi.org/10.1016/0978-0-12-80204 1-8.00001-8

Han, Q., Gao, Y., Su, T., Qin, J., Wang, C., Qu, Z., & Wang, X. (2023). Journal of
Environmental Chemical Engineering Hydrometallurgy recovery of copper ,
aluminum and silver from spent solar panels. Journal of Environmental Chemical
Engineering, 11(1), 109236. https://doi.org/10.1016/j jece.2022.109236


Hidalgo vazquez, A.R.; Alfaro cuevas villanueva, R., Marquez Benavides, L., & Cortes
Martines, R: (2011). Cadmium and Lead Removal From Aqueous Solutions
Using Pine Sawdust As Biosorbent. Journal of Applied ..., 6(4), 447-462.
http://search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true&profile=ehost&scope=site&a
uthtype=crawler&jrnl=01262807&AN=70125356&h=26y TPmgfONUx8qzxB W5
AxflDc%2F7%2F7Xymo7zj6MOwRsSi 1 O00mTWBBuk fhCGESMGrqAFGQsA
waUgaRD%2B6K4Tm%2BQ%3D%3D&crl=c

Holt, P. K., Barton, G. W., & Mitchell, C. A. (2005). The future for electrocoagulation as
a localised water treatment technology. Chemosphere, 59(3), 355-367.
huips://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2004.10.023

Hu, B., Huang, L., Yang, B., Xie, X., Tong, X., Zhang, X., & Sun, X. (2022). Flotation
Performance and Adsorption Mechanism of a Novel Chelating Collector for
Azurite. Minerals, 12(4), 1-14. https://doi.org/10.3390/min12040441

Jain, C. K., Malik, D. S., & Yadav, A. K. (2016). Applicability of plant based biosorbents
in the removal of heavy metals: a review. Environmental Processes, 3(2), 495—
523. https://doi.org/10.1007/s407 10-016-0143-5

Javed, T., & Asselin, E. (2020). Fe(III) precipitation and copper loss from sulphate-
chloride solutions at 150°C: A statistical approach. Metals, 10(5).
https://doi.org/10.3390/met] 0050669

Jeremias, J. S. D., Lin, J.-Y., Dalida, M. L. P., & Lu, M.-C. (2023). Abatement
technologies for copper containing industrial wastewater effluents — A review.
Journal of Environmental Chemical Engineering, 11(2), 109336.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j jece.2023.109336

Jin, W., & Hu, M. (2019). High-Performance Capacitive Deionization of Copper Ions at
‘Nanoporous ZnS-Decorated Carbon Felt. Journal of The Electrochemical Society,
166(2), E29-E34, https://doi.org/10.1 149/2.1061902jes

Jin, W., Su, J., Zheng, S., & Lei, H. (2017). Controlled Electrodeposition of Uniform
Copper Powder from Hydrochloric Acid Solutions. Journal of The
Electrochemical Society, 164(12), D723-D728.
https://doi.org/10.1149/2.1491712jes

Jin, X., Xiang, Z., Liu, Q., Chen, Y., & Lu, F. (2017). Polyethyleneimine-bacterial
cellulose bioadsorbent for effective removal of copper and lead ions from aqueous
solution. Bioresource Technology, 244, 844-849.
https://doi.org/10.1016/.biortech.2017.08.072

Johnston, I. W., Narsilio, G. ., & Colls, S. (2011). Emerging geothermal energy
technologies. KSCE Journal of Civil Engineering, 15, 643-653.
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1007/s12205-01 1-0005-7



Kanamarlapudi, S. L. R. K., Chintalpudi, V. K., & Muddada, S. (2018). Application of
Biosorption for Removal of Heavy Metals from Wastewater. Biosorption.
https://doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.77315

Karim, N. (2018). Copper and Human Health- A Review. Journal of Bahria University
Medical and Dental College, 8(2), 117-122.
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.51985/JBUMDC2018046

Karpinski, P. H.. & Wey, J. S. (2002). 6 - Precipitation processes. In A. S. Myerson (Ed.),
Handbook of Industrial Crystallization (2nd ed., pp. 141-160). Butterworth-
Heinemann. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-075067012-8/50008-2

Kilany, A. Y., Nosier, S. A., Hussein, M., Abdel-Aziz, M. H., & Sedahmed, G. H.
(2020). Combined oil demulsification and copper removal from copper plating
plant effluents by electrocoagulation in a new cell design. Separation and
Purification Technology, 248(April), 117056.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.seppur.2020.117056

Kokes, H., Morcali, M. H., & Aca, E. (2014). Dissolution of copper and iron from
malachite ore and precipitation of copper sulfate pentahydrate by chemical
process. Engineering Science and Technology, an International Journal, 17(1),
39-44. https://doi.org/10.1016/},jestch.2014.03.002

Le, V.G., Luu, T. A., Bui, N. T., Mofijur, M., Van, H. T., Lin, C., Tran, H. T., Bahari,
M.B., Vu, C. T., & Huang, Y. H. (2022). Fluidized-bed homogeneous
granulation for potassium and phosphorus recovery: K-struvite release kinetics
and economic analysis. Journal of the Taiwan Institute of Chemical Engineers,
139(September), 104494, https://doi.org/10.1016/ jtice.2022.104494

Lee, C. G., Lee, S., Park, J. A., Park, C., Lee, S. J., Kim, S. B., An, B., Yun, S. T., Lee, S.
H., & Choi, J. W. (2017). Removal of copper, nickel and chromium mixtures
from metal plating wastewater by adsorption with modified carbon foam.
Chemosphere, 166, 203-211. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2016.09.093

Lertratwattana, K., Kemacheevakul, P., Garcia-Segura, S., & Lu, M. C. (2019). Recovery
of copper salts by fluidized-bed homogeneous granulation process: Hit
selectivity on malachite crystallization. Hydrometallurgy, 186(April), 66-72.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.hydromet.2019.03.015

Li, M., Cheng, Q., Wittman, R. M., Peng, X., & Chan, C. K. (2014). Electrochemical and
Photoelectrochemical Properties of the Copper Hydroxyphosphate Mineral
Libethenite. ChemElectroChem, 1(3), 663-672.
https://doi.org/10.1002/cele.201300046

Lin, J. Y., Mahasti, N. N.N., & Huang, Y. H. (2021). Recent advances in adsorption and
coagulation for boron removal from wastewater: A comprehensive review.



Journal of Hazardous Materials, 407(November 2020), 124401.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j,jhazmat.2020.124401

Lin, Y.M., & Yen, S. C. (2001). Effects of additives and chelating agents on electroless
copper plating. Applied Surface Science, 178-4), 116-126.
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0169-4332(01)00306-3

Linder, M. C. (1991). Introduction and Overview of Copper as an Element. Biochemistry
of Copper. https://doi.org/doi:10.1007/978-1-4757-9432-8_1

Maarof, H. I., Daud, W. M. A. W., & Aroua, M. K. D. (2017). Recent trends in removal
and recovery of heavy metals from wastewater by electrochemical technologies.
Reviews in Chemical Engineering, 33(4), 359-386. https://doi.org/10.1515/revce-
2016-0021

Magno, C. D., & Guzman, R. R. S. (2021). The Extractive Industries and Society Energy
and the viability of downstream integration : Cross-country evidence from the
copper industry. The Extractive Industries and Society, 8(3), 100947.
https://doi.org/10.1016/}.exis.2021.100947

Mahasti, N.N. N., Lin, J.-Y. L., Shih, Y.-J. S., & Huang, Y.-H. (2022). Simultaneous
recovery of Cu20 and FeOOH from wastewater contaminated with mixed metals
using fluidized-bed crystallization. Journal of Environmental Chemical
Engineering, 10(3). https://doi.org/nttps://doi.org/10.101 6 jece.2022.107357

Mahasti, N.N.N., Shih, Y. J., & Huang, Y. H. (2019). Removal of iron as oxyhydroxide
(FeOOH) from aqueous solution by fluidized-bed homogeneous crystallization.
Journal of the Taiwan Institute of Chemical Engineers, 96, 496-502.
https://doi.org/10.1016/jtice.2018,12.022

Malamis, S., Katsou, E., & Haralambous, K. J. (2011). Study of Ni(II), Cu(II), Pb(II), and
Zn(II) removal using sludge and minerals followed by MF/UF. Water, Air, and
Soil Pollution, 218(1-4), 81-92. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11270-010-0625-4

Mateen, Q. S., Khan, S. U., Islam, D. T., Khan, N. A., & Faroogi, I. H. (2020). Copper
(II) removal in a column reactor using electrocoagulation: Parametric
optimization by response surface methodology using central composite design.
Water Environment Research, 92(9), 1350-1362.
https://doi.org/10.1002/wer.1332

Mehdipoor, M. A., & Moosavirad, S. M. (2020). Effect of Holed Ferrum electrodes
(HFE) on the efficiency of the electrocoagulation process for copper recovery and
optimization of parameters, using RSM. Hydrometallurgy, 194, 105313.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.hydromet.2020.105313

Min, K. J., Kim, J. H., & Park, K. Y. (2021). Characteristics of heavy metal separation
and determination of limiting current density in a pilot-scale electrodialysis



process for plating wastewater treatment. Science of the Total Environment, 757,
143762. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.143762

Myerson, A. S., Erdemir, D., & Lee, A. (2019). Handbook of Industrial Crystallization
(3rd ed.). Cambridge University Press. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781 139026949

Nasef, M. M., & Giiven, O. (2012). Radiation-grafted copolymers for separation and
purification purposes: Status, challenges and future directions. Progress in
Polymer Science, 37(12), 1597~1656.
https://doi.org/10.1016/.progpolymsci.2012.07.004

Nasution, F. P. (2012). Fatigue analysis of copper conductor for o ff shore wind turbines
by experimental and FE method. 24(January), 271-280.
https://doi.org/10.1016/).egypro.2012.06.109

Naumkin, A., Kraut-Vass, A., Gaarenstroom, S., & Powell, C. (2012). NIST X-ray
Photoelectron Spectroscopy Database.
https://doi.org/http://dx.doi.org/10.18434/T4T88K

Nepel, T. C. de M., Costa, J.M., Gurgel Adeodato Vieira, M., & Almeida Neto, A. F. de.
(2020). Copper removal kinetic from electroplating industry wastewater using
pulsed electrodeposition technique. Environmental Technology (United
Kingdom), 0(0), 1-22. https://doi.org/10.1080/09593330.2020.1793005

Nikolié, I., Durovié, D., Tadié, M., Radmilovié, V. V., & Radmilovié, V. R. (2020).
Adsorption kinetics, equilibrium, and thermodynamics of Cu2+ on pristine and
alkali activated steel slag. Chemical Engineering Communications, 207(9), 1278—
1297. https://doi.org/10.1080/00986445.2019.1685986

Ning, D., Yang, C., & Wu, H. (2019). Ultrafast Cu2+ recovery from waste water by jet
electrodeposition. Separation and Purification Technology, 220(February), 217—
221. https://doi.org/10.101.6/j.seppur.2019.03.059

Oliveira, J. A., Cunha, F. A., & Ruotolo, L. A. M. (2019). Synthesis of zeolite from
sugarcane bagasse fly ash and its application as a low-cost adsorbent to remove
heavy metals. Journal of Cleaner Production, 229, 956-963.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j,jclepro.2019.05.069

Oncel, M. S., Muhcu, A., Demirbas, E., & Kobya, M. (2013). A comparative study of
chemical precipitation and electrocoagulation for treatment of coal acid drainage
wastewater. Journal of Environmental Chemical Engineering, I(4), 989-995.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j,jece.2013.08.008

Patel, K. P., Tank, S. K., Patel, K. M., & Patel, P. (2013). Removal of Cadmium and Zinc
Ions From Aqueous Solution By Using Two Type of Husks. APCBEE Procedia,
5, 141-144, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apcbee.2013.05.025


Peng, C., Chai, L. Y., Tang, C. J., Min, X. B., Ali, M., Song, Y. X., & Qi, W. M. (2017).
Feasibility and enhancement of copper and ammonia removal fiom wastewater
using struvite formation: a comparative research. Journal of Chemical Technology
and Biotechnology, 92(2), 325-333. https://doi.org/10.1002/jetb.5009

Pham, A.N., & Waite, T. D. (2008). Oxygenation of Fe(II) in natural waters revisited:
Kinetic modeling approaches, rate constant estimation and the importance of
various reaction pathways. Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta, 72(15), 3616—
3630. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gca.2008.05.032

Pietrzyk, S., & Tora, B. (2018). Trends in global copper mining — a review. JOP
Conference Series: Materials Science and Engineering, 0-10.
https://doi.org/10.1088/1757-899X/427/1/012002

Pirkanniemi, K., Metsdrinne, S., & Sillanpaa, M. (2007). Degradation of EDTA and
novel complexing agents in pulp and paper mill process and waste waters by
Fenton’s reagent. Journal of Hazardous Materials, 147(1-2), 556-561.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j,jhazmat.2007.01.050

Plohl, O., Fin3gar, M., Gyergyek, S., Ajdnik, U., Ban, I., & Zemljié, L. F. (2019).
Efficient copper removal from an aqueous anvironment using a novel and hybrid
nanoadsorbent based on derived-polyethyleneimine linked to silica magnetic
nanocomposites. Nanomaterials, 9(2). https://doi.org/10.3390/nano9020209

Pratiwi, J., Lin, J. Y., Mahasti, N.N.N., Shih, Y. J., & Huang, Y. H. (2021). Fluidized-
bed synthesis of iron-copper bimetallic catalyst (FellICul@SiO2) for
mineralization of benzoic acid in blue light-assisted Fenton process. Journal of
the Taiwan Institute of Chemical Engineers, 119, 60-69.
https://doi.org/10.1016/.,tice.2021.02.007

Priambodo, R., Shih, Y. J. & Huang, Y. H. (2017). Phosphorus recovery as ferrous
phosphate (vivianite) from wastewater produced in manufacture of thin film
transistor-liquid crystal displays (TFT-LCD) by a fluidized bed crystallizer
(FBC). RSC Advances, 7(65), 40819-40828. https://doi.org/10.1039/c7ra06308c

Qian, H.S., Yu, S.H., Luo, L. B., Gong, J. Y., Fei, L. F., & Liu, X. M. (2006). Synthesis
of uniform Te@carbon-rich composite nanocables with photoluminescence
properties and carbonaceous nanofibers by the hydrothermal carbonization of
glucose. Chemistry of Materials, 18(8), 2102-2108.
https://doi.org/10.1021/em052848y

Qin, X. Y., Chai, M. R., Ju, D. Y., & Hamamoto, O. (2018). Investigation of plating
wastewater treatment technology for chromium, nickel and copper. JOP
Conference Series: Earth and Environmental Science, 191(1).
https://doi.org/10.1088/1755-1315/191/1/012006



Quimada, N. E., De Luna, M.D. G., Vilando, A. C., & Lu, M. C. (2022). Competitive
effect of copper and nickel recovery with carbonate in the fluidized-bed
homogeneous granulation process. Environmental Science and Pollution
Research, 29(9), 12414-12426. https://doi.org/10.1007/s1 1356-021-14733-5

Quiton, K. G.N., Huang, Y. H., & Lu, M. C. (2022). Recovery of cobalt and copper from
single- and co-contaminated simulated electroplating wastewater via carbonate
and hydroxide precipitation. Sustainable Environment Research, 32(1).
hetps://doi.org/10.1 186/s42834-022-00140-z

Rajoria, S., Vashishtha, M., & Sangal, V. (2022). Treatment of electroplating industry
wastewater: a review on the various techniques. Environ Sci Pollut Res Int,
29(48), 72196~72246. https://doi.org/10.1007/s1 1356-022-18643-y

Rakshit, S., Matocha, C. J., & Coyne, M. S. (2008). Nitrite Reduction by Siderite. Soil
Science Society of America Journal, 72(4), 1070-1077.
https://doi.org/10.2136/sssaj2007.0296

Ribeiro, A. R., Nunes, O. C., Percira, M. F. R., & Silva, A. M. T. (2015). An overview on
the advanced oxidation processes applied for the treatment of water pollutants
defined in the recently launched Directive 2013/39/EU. Environment
International, 75, 33-51. https://doi.org/10.1016/.envint.2014.10.027

Sabela, M. I., Kunene, K., Kanchi, S., Xhakaza, N. M., Bathinapatla, A., Mdluli, P.,
Sharma, D., & Bisetty, K. (2019). Removal of copper (1!) from wastewater using
green vegetable waste derived activated carbon: An approach to equilibrium and
kinetic study. Arabian Journal of Chemistry, 12(8), 4331-4339.
https://doi.org/10.1016j.arabjc.2016.06.001

Salcedo, A. F. M., Ballesteros, F. C., Vilando, A. C., & Lu, M. C. (2016). Nickel
recovery from synthetic Watts bath electroplating wastewater by homogeneous
fluidized bed granulation process. Separation and Purification Technology, 169,
128-136. https://doi.org/10.1016/.seppur.2016.06.010

Saralli, M., & Yusheng, L. (2022). THE WORLD COPPER FACTBOOK 2022.
INTERNATIONAL COPPER STUDY GROUP.

Sawyer, C.N., McCarty, P. L., & Parkin, G. . (2003). Chemistry for Environmental
Engineering and Science (Fifth). McGraw Hill.

Sayato, Y. (1989). WHO Guidelines for Drinking-Water Quality. In Eisei kagaku (Vol.
35, Issue 5). https://doi.org/10.1248/jhs1956.35.307

Scarazzato, T., Panossian, Z., Ten6rio, J. A. S., Pérez-Herranz, V., & Espinosa, D.C. R.
(2017). A review of cleaner production in electroplating industries using
electrodialysis. Journal of Cleaner Production, 168, 1590-1602.
https://doi.org/10.1016/jclepro.2017.03.152



Scarazzato, Tatiana, Buzzi, D. C., Bernardes, A. M., & Romano Espinosa, D. C. (2015).
Treatment of wastewaters from cyanide-free plating process by electrodialysis.
Journal of Cleaner Production, 91, 241-250.
https://doi.org/10.1016/,jclepro.2014.12.046

Schimanke, G., & Martin, M. (2000). In situ XRD study of the phase transition of
nanocrystalline maghemite (y-Fe203) to hematite (a-Fe203). Solid State Ionics,
136(137), 1235-1240. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0167-2738(00)00593-2

Selby, D., Kelley, K. D., Hitzman, M. W., & Zieg, J. (2009). Scientific communications:
Re-Os sulfide (borite, chalcopyrite, and pyrite) systematics of the carbonate-
hosted copper deposits at ruby creek, southern brooks range, Alaska. Economic
Geology, 104(3), 437-444. https://doi.org/10.21 13/gsecongeo. 104.3.437

Selvin, P., Watanabe, S., & Ayala-Arenas, J. S. (2001). Thermoluminescence and
electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) studies of mineral chrysocolla (dioptase)..
Radiation Physics and Chemistry, 61(3~6), 531-533.
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0969-806X(01)00323-1

Singh, R., Gautam, N., Mishra, A., & Gupta, R. (2011), Heavy metals and living systems:
An overview. Indian Journal of Pharmacology, 43(3), 246-253.
https://doi.org/10.4103/0253-7613.81505

Sinyakova, E. F., & Kosyakov, V. 1. (2009). Experimental modeling of zonality of
copper-rich sulfide ores in copper-nickel deposits. Doklady Earth Sciences,
427(1), 787-792. https://doi.org/10.1134/S1028334X09050183

Skoog, D. A., West, D. M., Holler, F. J., & Crouch, S. . (2014). Fundamentals of
Analytical Chemistry (Ninth). Mary Finch.

Song, P., Yang, Z., Zeng, G., Yang, X., Xu, H., Wang, L., Xu, R., Xiong, W., & Ahmad,
K. (2017). Electrocoagulation treatment of arsenic in wastewaters: A
comprehensive review. In Chemical Engineering Journal (Vol. 317).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2017.02.086

Reano, R. L., Dalida, M. L. P., & Lu, M. C. (2014). Barium recovery by

crystallization in a fluidized-bed reactor: Effects of pH, Ba/P molar ratio and seed.

Chemosphere, 105, 100-105. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2014.01.005

Sugimoto, T., Chen, S., & Muramatsu, A. (1998). Synthesis of uniform particles of CdS,
ZnS, Pbs and CuS from concentrated solutions of the metal chelates. Colloids and
Surfaces A: Physicochemical and Engineering Aspects, 135(1-3), 207-226.
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0927-7757(97)00245-8

Sustainable Development Goal 6: Ensure access to water and sanitation for all. (n.4.)..

United Nations Sustainable Development.
https:/Awww-un.org/sustainabledevelopment/water-and-sanitation/#:~:

Su, C.

ext=Goal



6%3A Ensure access to water and sanitation for all&text=Access to safe
water%2C sanitation,in 2030 unless progress quadruples.

Sylva, R. N. (1976). The environmental chemistry of copper (II) in aquatic systems.
Water Research, 10(9), 789~792. https://doi.org/10.1016/0043-1354(76)90097-X

Taamneh, Y., & Sharadqah, S. (2017). The removal of heavy metals from aqueous
solution using natural Jordanian zeolite. Applied Water Science, 7(4), 2021-2028.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s13201-016-0382-7

Tai, C. Y. (1999). Crystal growth kinetics of two-step growth process in liquid fluidized-
bed crystallizers. Journal of Crystal Growth, 206(1-2), 109-118.
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0022-0248(99)00300-0

Teow, Y.H., Kam, L. M., & Mohammad, A. W. (2018). Synthesis of cellulose hydrogel
for copper (Il) ions adsorption. Journal of Environmental Chemical Engineering,
6(4), 4588-4597. https://doi.org/10.1016/j,jece.2018.07.010

The RUFF Project Team. (2023). RRUFF Project. RUFF: The Rock-Forming
Mineralogy Database. https://rruff.info/

Tiangco, K. A. A., de Luna, M. D. G., Vilando, A. C., & Lu, M. C. (2019), Removal and
recovery of calcium from aqueous solutions by fluidized-bed homogeneous
crystallization. Process Safety and Environmental Protection, 128, 307-315.
https://doi.org/10.1016/.psep.2019.06.007

Udomkitthaweewat, N., Anotai, J., Choi, A. E. S., & Lu, M. C. (2019). Removal of zine
based on a screw manufacturing plant wastewater by fluidized-bed homogeneous
granulation process. Journal of Cleaner Production, 230, 1276-1286.
https://doi.org/10.1016/,jclepro.2019.05.192

Vidu, R., Matei, E., Predescu, A. M., & Alhalaili, B. (2020). Removal of Heavy Metals
from Wastewaters : 1-37.

Vilando, A. C., Caparanga, A. R., Huang, Y. H., & Lu, M. C. (2017). Tohdite recovery
from water by fluidized-bed homogeneous granulation process. Desalination and
Water Treatment, 96(September), 224-230.
https://doi.org/10.5004/dwt.2017.21540

Vincent Crist, B. (1999). Handbooks of Monochromatic XPS Spectra Volume I - The
Elements and Native Oxides (Vol. 1). XPS Intemational, Inc. www.xpsdata.com

Vincent Crist, B. (2005). Handbooks of Monochromatic XPS Spectra Volume 2 -
Commercially Pure Binary Oxides and a few Common Carbonates and
Hydroxides (Vol. 2). XPS International, LLC. www.xpsdata.com


Vincent, M., Duval, R. E., Hartemann, P., & Engels-Deutsch, M. (2018). Contact killing
and antimicrobial properties of copper. Journal of Applied Microbiology, 124(5),
1032-1046. https://doi.org/10.111 I/jam.13681

Wan, S., Qiu, L., Li, Y., Sun, J., Gao, B., He, F., & Wan, W. (2020). Accelerated
antimony and copper removal by manganese oxide embedded in biochar with
enlarged pore structure. Chemical Engineering Journal, 402.
https://doi.org/10.1016/.ce}.2020.126021

Wang, G. rong, Yang, H. ying, Liu, Y. yuan, Tong, L. lin, & Auwalu, A. (2020). Study
on the mechanical activation of malachite and the leaching of complex copper ore
in the Luanshya mining area, Zambia. International Journal of Minerals,
Metallurgy and Materials, 27(3), 292-300. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12613-019-
1856-z

Wang, J., & Chen, C. (2009). Biosorbents for heavy metals removal and their future.
Biotechnology Advances, 27(2), 195-226.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biotechadv.2008.1 1.002

Wang, L., Fu, P., Ma, Y., Zhang, X., Zhang, Y., & Yang, X. (2022). Steel slag as a cost-
effective adsorbent for synergic removal of collectors, Cu(II) and Pb(II) ions from
flotation wastewaters. Minerals Engineering, 183.
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mineng.2022.107593

Wang, L. K., Hung, Y.-T., & Shammas, N. K. (2005). Physicochemical Treatment
Processes. Amsterdam University Press.
https://citations.springernature.com/book?doi=10.1385/159259820x

Wang, Q., Li, Y., Liu, Y., Ren, J., Zhang, Y., Qu, G., & Wang, T. (2021). Effective
removal of the heavy metal-organic complex Cu-EDTA from water by catalytic
persulfate oxidation: Performance and mechanisms. Journal of Cleaner
Production, 314(June), 128119. https://doi.org/10.1016/.jclepro.2021.128119

Wang, S., Xiao, K., Mo, Y., Yang, B., Vincent, T., Faur, C., & Guibal, E. (2020).
Selenium(VI) and copper(II) adsorption using polyethyleneimine-based resins:
Effect of glutaraldehyde crosslinking and storage condition. Journal of Hazardous
Materials, 386(Vi), 121637. https://doi.org/10.1016/j,jhazmat.2019.121637

Wen, C. Y., & Yu, Y. H. (1966). A generalized method for predicting the minimum
fluidization velocity. AIChE J, 12, 610-612.

Wen, T., Zhao, Y., Zhang, T., Xiong, B., Hu, H., Zhang, Q., & Song, S. (2019). Effect of
anions species on copper removal from wastewater by using mechanically
activated calcium carbonate. Chemosphere, 230, 127-135.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2019.04.213



Wieland, E., Miron, G. D., Ma, B., Geng, G., & Lothenbach, B, (2023). Speciation of
iron(II/III) at the iron-cement interface: a review. Materials and
Structures/Materiaux et Constructions, 56(2). https://doi.org/10.1617/s11527-
023-02115-x

Williams, O., Clark, I., Gomes, R. L., Perehinec, T., Hobman, J. L., Stekel, D. J., Hyde,
R., Dodds, C., & Lester, E. (2019). Removal of copper from cattle footbath
wastewater with layered double hydroxide adsorbents as a route to antimicrobial
resistance mitigation on dairy farms. Science of the Total Environment, 655,
1139-1149. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2018.11.330

Wu, S., Yan, P., Yang, W., Zhou, J., Wang, H., Che, L., & Zhu, P, (2021). ZnC12 enabled
synthesis of activated carbons from ion-exchange resin for efficient removal of
Cu2+ ions from water via capacitive deionization. Chemosphere, 264, 128557.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2020.128557

Yang, Facui, Sun, S., Chen, X., Chang, Y., Zha, F., & Lei, Z. (2016). Mg-Al layered
double hydroxides modified clay adsorbents for efficient removal of Pb2+, Cu2+
and Ni2+ from water. Applied Clay Science, 123, 134-140.
https://doi.org/10.1016/.clay.2016.01.026

Yang, Fan, Zhang, S., Li, H., Li, S., Cheng, K., Li, J. S., & Tsang, D. C. W. (2018). Corn
straw-derived biochar impregnated with A-FeOOH nanorods for highly effective
copper removal. Chemical Engineering Journal, 348, 191-201.
https://doi.org/10.1016/.cej.2018.04.161

Yang, S., Ren, X., Zhao, G., Shi, W., Montavon, G., Grambow, B., & Wang, X. (2015).
Competitive sorption and selective sequence of Cu(II) and Ni(II) on
montmorillonite: Batch, modeling, EPR and XAS studies. Geochimica et
Cosmochimica Acta, 166, 129-145. https://doi.org/10.1016/}.gca.2015.06.020

Yoder, C. H., Bushong, E., Liu, X., Weidner, V., McWilliams, P., Martin, K., Lorgunpai,
J., Haller, J., & Schaeffer, R. W. (2010). The synthesis and solubility of the
copper hydroxyl nitrates: gerhardtite, rouaite and likasite. Mineralogical
Magazine, 74(3), 433-440. https://doi.org/10.1180/minmag.2010.074.3.433

Zamboulis, D., Pataroudi, S. I., Zouboulis, A. I., & Matis, K. A. (2004). The application
of sorptive flotation for the removal of metal ions. Desalination, 162(1—3), 159—
168. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0011-9164(04)00039-6

Zhang, C., Liu, W., Chen, D., Huang, J., Yu, X., Huang, X., & Fang, Y. (2015). One Step
Hydrothermal Synthesis of FeCO3 Cubes for High Performance Lithium-ion
Battery Anodes. Electrochimica Acta, 182, 559-564.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.electacta.2015.09.137


Zhang, Xingfei, Tian, J., Hu, Y., Han, H., Luo, X., Sun, W., Yue, T., Wang, L., Cao, X.,
& Zhou, H. (2020). Selective sulfide precipitation of copper ions from arsenic
wastewater using monoclinic pyrrhotite. Science of the Total Environment,
705(xxxx), 135816. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2019.135816

Zhang, Xudong, Yang, F., Ma, J., & Liang, P. (2020). Effective removal and selective
capture of copper from salty solution in flow electrode capacitive deionization.
Environmental Science: Water Research and Technology, 6(2), 341-350.
https:/doi.org/10.1039/c9ew00467j

Zhao, C., Zhang, L., Ge, R., Zhang, A., Zhang, C., & Chen, X. (2019). Treatment of low-
level Cu(II) wastewater and regeneration through a novel capacitive deionization-
electrodeionization (CDI-EDI) technology. Chemosphere, 217, 163-772.
https://doi.org/10.1016/.chemosphere.2018.11.071

Zhou, Y., Liu, X., Xiang, Y., Wang, P., Zhang, J., Zhang, F., Wei, J., Luo, L., Lei, M., &
Tang, L. (2017). Modification of biochar derived from sawdust and its application
in removal of tetracycline and copper from aqueous solution: Adsorption
mechanism and modelling. Bioresource Technology, 245, 266-273.
https://doi.org/10.1016/.biortech.2017.08.178

Zidan, T. A., Abdelhamid, A. E., & Zaki, E. G. (2020). N-Aminorhodanine modified
chitosan hydrogel for antibacterial and copper ions removal from aqueous
solutions. International Journal of Biological Macromolecules, 158, 32-42.
https://doi.org/10.1016/;.ijbiomac.2020.04.180

