Responses of Rice Genotypes Contrasting in Salinity Tolerance to Salt Stress at Reproductive Stage

MARIA ELISA B. GERONA

UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES LOS BAÑOS

Master of Science in Botany

DECEMBER 2016

ABSTRACT

Salinity is a major abiotic stress affecting plant growth and productivity. Rice
cultivars exhibit variable responses to salinity depending on the developmental stage they
have been exposed. In this study, physiological changes in leaves and developing panicles
of six rice (Oryza sativa L.) cultivars (IR68652-3B-8-1, Sadri, CSR28, IR67075-2B-5-2
including the sensitive-check Rc222 and the tolerant-check Pokkali) contrasting in salt
tolerance were evaluated in greenhouse experiment under salt stress. Phenotypic responses
were assessed at seedling and reproductive stages using a visual scoring system. Vegetative
and reproductive parts were collected at four developmental stages (booting, flowering,
milk stage and mature grain stages) and analyzed for changes in concentrations of Na⁺ and
K⁺, chlorophyll, malondialdehyde (MDA), ascorbate and proline and also for pollen
viability, grain yield, and yield components. The results showed that IR686 and Sadri were
sensitive while CSR28 and IR670 were moderately tolerant to salt stress (EC = 10 dS m⁻¹)
at the seedling stage. During the reproductive stage, Sadri was more sensitive to salt stress
than IR686, while CSR28 and IR670 remained moderately tolerant. Under salt stress and at all developmental stages, IR670 and Pokkali showed lower Na⁺/K⁺ ratio, lower reduction in chlorophyll concentration, lower MDA, higher concentrations of reduced ascorbate,
higher proline accumulation, and lower percentage reduction in pollen viability than salt-
sensitive cultivars. The higher levels of reduced ascorbate indicate an efficient reactive
oxygen species scavenging machinery, which is important to overcome salinity-induced
oxidative stress. These data indicate that salt-tolerance in rice cultivars used in this study
is associated with lower Na⁺/K⁺ ratio, smaller reductions in chlorophyll concentration,
ascorbate concentration, pollen viability and yield components, and lower MDA
concentration but enhanced proline accumulation in vegetative and reproductive parts in
comparison with salt-sensitive ones. Salt stress substantially reduced yield components,
which is more evident in Rc222, IR686 and Sadri. Physiological measurements, pollen
viability analysis and yield components revealed that Sadri, which was previously reported as moderately tolerant at seedling stage is sensitive to salt stress at reproductive stage.

INTRODUCTION

Salinity is one of the most serious constraints for crop production worldwide (Wang
et al. 2001; Munns and Tester 2008; Deinlein et al. 2014) that reduce plant growth and crop
productivity (Ismail et al. 2007). More than 800 million hectares of land throughout the
world are salt-affected (including both saline and sodic soils), equating to more than 6% of
the world’s total land area. Salt stress in a portion of these lands is due to natural causes
such as accumulation of salts over long periods of time in arid and semi-arid zones due to
weathering of parental rocks releasing salts of various types, and accumulated deposition
of oceanic salts carried by wind and rain. For instance, in Iran, Pakistan, Egypt, and
Argentina, out of the total land area of 162.2, 77.1, 99.5, and 237.7 million hectares, about
23.8, 10, 8.7, and 33.1 million hectares are, respectively, affected by excess salt (FAO
2008). In arable soils, salt accumulation is derived from irrigation water that contains trace
amounts of sodium chloride (NaCl), low rainfall, high evaporation, and poor water
management (Arzani 2008). Soil salinization is causing an estimated loss of three hectares
of arable land every minute (FAO 2008).

Saline soils are characterized by excess of sodium ions with dominant anions of
chloride and sulfate resulting in higher electrical conductivity (EC > 4 dS m"). The
detrimental effect of salinity on plant growth and production are associated with low water
potential of the root medium since increased soil salt concentrations decrease the ability of
the plant to take up water. Toxic effects of ions, mainly Na* and CI’, negatively affect
growth by impairing metabolic processes and nutritional imbalance caused by reduced

nutrient uptake and/or transport to the shoot (Arzani 2008; Munns and Tester 2008;

Deinlein et al. 2014; Roy et al. 2014). The water deficit effect imposed by salt accumulation
hinders plants’ normal metabolic processes. Stress-induced cellular and metabolic changes
result in enhanced accumulation of toxic compounds in cells including reactive oxygen
species (ROS). The ROS-scavenging systems such as superoxide dismutase and the
predominant ascorbate peroxidase is seen as critical components in salinity tolerance,
together with low molecular mass antioxidants like ascorbate (AsA) (Moradi and Ismail
2007; Kanawapee et al. 2013; Chunthaburee et al. 2015). Over the last two decades, it has
been established that abscisic acid (ABA) plays an important role in integrating plant
responses to drought and salt stresses. This hormone is a vital cellular signal that mediates
the expression of a number of salt and water-deficit responsive genes and thus, plays an
important role in physiological and metabolic regulations to survive in stressful conditions

(Zhang et al. 2006; Saeedipour 2011).

Plants vary greatly in their tolerance to salinity. Of the cereal crops, rice (Oryza
sativa) is the most sensitive (Munns and Tester 2008). Many studies reported that rice is
tolerant during germination, becomes sensitive at early seedling stage, gains tolerance at
vegetative stage and becomes sensitive at reproductive stage (Hakim et al. 2010; Palao et
al. 2013). Most rice varieties exhibit variable reactions to salinity depending on the
developmental stage at which they have been exposed (Kanawapee et al. 2013; Wankhade
and Sanz 2013; Chunthaburee et al. 2015). It has been reported, however, that the capacity
of the rice plant to survive in saline environments at the vegetative stage is not actually
correlated with its reproductive-stage tolerance (Moradi et al. 2003; Singh and Flowers

2010). Salinity has in fact independent effects at these two critical stages, and tolerance at

the seedling stage is not necessarily associated with tolerance at the reproductive stage
(Palao et al. 2013). The reproductive stage seems to be more relevant for grain yield
because it is within this stage that fertilization and formation of grains occurs
(Mohammadi-Nejad et al. 2010; Palao et al. 2013). Sensitivity of rice to salt at flowering
is particularly important since crop yield depends on the size and number of seed set.
Hence, to study the relative responses of rice genotypes to salinity stress and to select
potential cultivars for breeding, it is vital to assess its performance in the reproductive

stage.

Despite numerous studies conducted on salinity tolerance at seedling stage
(Dionisio-Sese and Tobita 1998, 2000; Hakim et al. 2010; Chunthaburee et al. 2015; Emon
et al. 2015) very few studies were conducted to assess responses of rice to salt stress at the
reproductive stage (Zeng et al. 2002; Moradi et al. 2003; Moradi and Ismail 2007;

Kanawapee et al. 2013).

Objectives of the Study

Most rice varieties exhibit variable reactions to salinity depending on the

developmental stage at which they have been exposed to saline conditions. A number of

studies have focused on screening for salt tolerance at seedling stage, but only few studies

focused on reproductive stage tolerance of salt stress. This study aims to evaluate the

responses of a set of rice genotypes contrasting in salinity tolerance at seedling stage for

their responses to salinity tolerance at reproductive stage and for traits associated with

tolerance. Specifically, this study aims to:

determine the salinity-induced changes in Na*/K* ratio and chlorophyll
concentration in vegetative and reproductive parts of rice cultivars at reproductive
stage;

evaluate the effect of salinity on malondialdehyde concentration as a metabolic
marker for oxidative stress in flag leaf and developing panicles;

investigate the level of ascorbate as antioxidant against ROS in flag leaf and
developing panicles at reproductive stage;

determine the salinity-induced changes in proline concentration as compatible
solute in flag leaf and developing panicles at reproductive stage; and

evaluate the effect of salinity on pollen viability and on panicle growth and

development.

Time and Place of Study

This study was conducted at the International Rice Research Institute (IRRI), Los
Bajios, Laguna, Philippines from October 2015 to July 2016. Six rice cultivars contrasting
in salinity tolerance were evaluated at seedling and reproductive stages in a greenhouse
experiment (NG-01-02). Samples were analyzed at the Plant Physiology Laboratory, Crop

and Environmental Sciences Division.

REVIEW OF LITERATURE

Occurrence of Salinity

Salinity is one of the major abiotic stresses limiting the growth and productivity of
agricultural crops with adverse effects on germination, plant vigor and crop yield (Zeng et
al. 2002; Hakim et al. 2010; Chunthaburee et al. 2015). It is a soil condition characterized
by high concentration of soluble salts (Munns and Tester 2008). Salt tolerance is usually
characterized in terms of the stage of plant growth over a range of electrical conductivity
or EC levels, Electrical conductivity is the ability of a solution to transmit electrical current
(Wentz 2001). According to the USDA Salinity Laboratory, saline soils can be defined as
having an EC of 4 dS m'! (4 dS m'! = 40 mM NaCl) or more. For rice, EC of beyond ~ 4
dS m’' is considered moderately saline, while an EC of more than 8 dS m"' is highly saline
(Singh et al. 2010a). Table 1 categorizes salinity into general ranges from non-saline to

very strongly saline conditions. These values are used for plant selection in saline soils.

Table 1. Soil salinity rating and electrical conductivity values (Wentz 2001).

NON- WEAKLY MODERATELY STRONGLY VERY

SALINE SALINE SALINE SALINE — STRONGLY
SOIL DEPTH asm) (4S m") (dS m") (dS m") SALINE
(dS m')
0-60 cm <2 2-4 4-8 8-16 >16

60-120 cm <4 4-8 8-16 16-24 >24



As early as 2400-1700 B.C., written accounts of salt lands were recorded in the
Tigris-Euphrates alluvial plains of lraq (Jacobsen and Adams 1958). Soil salinization
occurs practically in all climatic regions and can be found at different altitudes (Rengasamy
2006; Qureshi and Al-Falahi 2015). Salt-affected land areas (including both saline and
sodic soils) reached over 800 million hectares throughout the world, equating to more than
6% of the world’s total land area (FAO 2008). Severe cases of saline soils occur in arid
and semiarid regions. These include Iran, Pakistan, Egypt, and Argentina, respectively,
with total land area of 162.2, 77.1, 99.5, and 237.7 million hectares, and about 14.67%,
12.97%, 8.7%, and 13.92% are salt-affected (Arzani 2008; Qureshi and Al-Falahi 2015).
In humid regions of Southeast Asia, yields of large portions of lands are very low and some
lands are left uncultivated due to salinity problems. In the Northeastern region of Thailand
where rainfed rice fields are dominant, salinity affects approximately three million
hectares, representing 70% of the total area in the region (Clermont-Dauphin et al. 2010).
In addition to saline soils in inlands, an inward flow of saltwater to river water is being
caused by the low water flow from high river catchments, as in Vietnam’s Mekong River
Delta, the country’s rice bowl, which is imposing danger to rice paddies and food security
of the country (Redfern et al. 2012). In Malaysia and Myanmar, seawater intrusion is the
major constraints for rice production in coastal zones (Mutert and Fairhurst 2002).

A distinction can be made between primary and secondary salinization processes.
Primary salinization involves salt accumulation through natural processes due to high salt
content of the parent material or in groundwater. On the other hand, secondary salinization
is caused by human interventions such as inappropriate irrigation practices, e.g. with salt-

rich irrigation water and/or insufficient drainage (Rengasamy 2014).


Under natural conditions, dominant sources of salt are rainfall-induced mineral
weathering of parental rocks as it releases soluble salts of many types such as chlorides of
sodium, calcium, and magnesium, and to a lesser extent, sulfates and carbonates
(Rengasamy 2006). Salts may originate also from inorganic fertilizers and soil amendments
like gypsum, composts and manures. Other causes of accumulation of salts are the
deposition of oceanic salts carried in wind and rain and seawater intrusion to aquifers.
Rainwater contains 6-50 mg kg" of NaCl, with concentrations decrease with distance from
the coast. Rain containing 10 mg kg”! of NaCl would deposit 10 kg ha’! of salt for each
millimeter of rainfall per year (Munns and Tester 2008). In the Australian continent,
deposition of salts carried in wind and rain is the major cause of salinity. On the other hand,
Mediterranean regions are facing salt stress problems due to seawater intrusion
(Rengasamy 2006; Qureshi and Al-Falahi 2015).

Apart from natural causes of salinity, poor water management, like irrigation
combined with poor drainage, dramatically exacerbates and accelerates soil salinity. All
soils and irrigation water, whether from canals, rivers or underground pumping, contain
various concentrations of salts, and salts are common and necessary components of soil. In
fact, nitrates and potassium salts are essential plant nutrients (Taiz et al. 2015). Irrigation
water contains calcium (Ca**), magnesium (Mg”*), and sodium (Na*) ions. Evaporation
and transpiration remove pure water (as vapor) from soil and these processes result in the
concentration of solutes in the soil, specifically Ca?* and Mg?*, which precipitate into
carbonates, while Na’ is left in the soil resulting in increase in Na* concentrations. When
the accumulated salts are not flushed out to the drainage system, salts can quickly reach

levels that are injurious to salt-sensitive species (Taiz et al. 2015). In the Philippines, the

worsening climate change events led to difficulties in sustaining rice production in some
areas. Since most farmers cannot rely on the seasonal rainfall to irrigate their paddy fields
anymore, farmers have opted to pump groundwater onto the field — about 5, 000 liters are
needed for one kilogram of rice (Redfern et al. 2012). In the context of salinity, poor
irrigation practices ‘imports’ large quantities of new salts to the soil that were usually not

there before.

Major Effects of Soil Salinity on Plants

Soil salinity is a serious factor severely affecting crop production, limiting the
capacity of agriculture to sustain the burgeoning human population increase (Munns and
Tester 2008; Munns et al. 2010). The deleterious effects of salinity on plants are associated
with low water potential of the root medium that causes a water deficit within the plants,
toxic effects of ions — mainly Na‘ and CI’, and nutritional imbalances caused by reduced
nutrient uptake and/or transport to the shoot (Arzani 2008).

In arable lands with soil salinity problems, the increasing Na* concentrations often
exceed those of most macronutrients by one or two orders of magnitude, and by even more
in the case of micronutrients. High Na* concentrations in the soil solution may depress
nutrient-ion activities and produce extreme ratios of Na*/Ca”* or Na*/K* (Hossain et al.
2013; Adem et al. 2014; Emon et al. 2015). Increase in cations and their salts, NaCl in
particular, generates an external osmotic potential that can prevent or reduce the influx of

water into the root. Increased soil salt concentrations decrease the ability of plant to take

up water, which is similar to drought conditions and is additionally compounded by the
presence of Na* ions (Deinlein et al. 2014).

In clay soils, improper management of salinity may damage soil structure and
causes soil degradation. In particular, the action of Na* ions, when they occupy the cation
exchange complex of clay particles, cause soil aggregates to break down, increase bulk
density, make the soil more compact and decrease total porosity, thereby making the soil
less fit for crop growth (Chinnusamy et al. 2005).

Adverse effects of salinity on plant is linked to ion cytotoxicity (mainly Na*, Cl’
and SO,”) and osmotic stress. Ion cytotoxicity is caused by replacement of K* by Na* in
biochemical reactions, conformational changes in macromolecular structures and loss of
functions of proteins as Na* and CI ions penetrate the hydration shells and interfere with
noncovalent interactions between amino acids. Metabolic imbalances caused by ion
toxicity, osmotic stress and nutritional deficiency under salinity also lead to oxidative stress
(Zhu 2001; Kanawapee et al. 2013; Gupta and Huang 2014).

Plants vary greatly in their tolerance to salinity as reflected in their different growth
responses. Halophytes are the flora adapted for growth on saline soils of coastal and arid
regions and survive salinity in excess of 300-400 mM. These plants have evolved specific
mechanisms of salt tolerance developed during their phylogenetic adaptation. These plants
can be either obligate or facultative. Obligate halophytes are characterized by low
morphological and taxonomic diversity with relative growth rates increasing up to 50% of
seawater salinity, while facultative halophytes are found in less saline habitats along the
border between saline and non-saline lands and characterized by broader diversity, which

enables them to cope with saline and non-saline conditions (Parida and Das 2005).

ll

Of the cereal crops, rice is considered the most sensitive, and barley (Hordeum
vulgare) as the most tolerant (Gupta and Huang 2014). In the field, rice will die before
maturity, while wheat (Triticum aestivum), a moderately salt-tolerant crop will produce a
reduced yield when exposed to about 10 dS m'!. Even barley dies after extended periods of
saline concentrations higher than 250 mM NaCl. Durum wheat (Triticum turgidum ssp.
durum) is less salt tolerant than bread wheat, as are maize (Zea mays) and sorghum
(Sorghum bicolor). One of the most tolerant species of the monocots is the tall wheatgrass
(Thinopyrum ponticum syn. Agropyron elongatum), a halophytic relative of wheat (Munns
et al. 2006; Munns and Tester 2008).

In dicotyledonous species, the degree of variation in salinity tolerance is even more
pronounced compared to monocotyledonous species. Arabidopsis thaliana, for example, is
more sensitive when compared with cereals. Some legumes, such as peas and field beans,
are even more sensitive than rice. Alfalfa (Medicago sativa) is very tolerant, almost
comparable to tall wheatgrass. Alfalfa can lower salinity of water-tables that have reached
the surface, and restore saline land for agricultural use. Useful forage species for saline
lands include halophytes, like saltbush (Atriplex spp.), that achieves optimum growth at
salinities greater than that of seawater. Saltbushes can restore saline lands for animal
production (Munns et al. 2006; Gupta and Huang 2014).

Plant growth is affected by salinity via distinct processes, which are associated
either with the accumulation of salt in the shoot, or are independent of shoot salt
accumulation (Roy et al. 2014). This is due to the difficulty in extracting water from the
soil and the toxic effect of high concentrations of salts within the plant itself. Munns and

Tester (2008) proposed a two-phase model describing the response of plant to salinity

stress. They suggested that the reduction in shoot growth occurs in two phases: a rapid
response to the increase in external osmotic pressure, and a slower response due to the
accumulation of Na* in leaves.

During Phase 1, osmotic phase, which starts immediately after the salt
concentration around the roots increases to a threshold level making it harder for roots to
extract water, the rate of shoot growth falls significantly. Dissolved solutes in the rooting
zone generate a low (more negative) osmotic potential that lowers the soil water potential.
The general water balance of plants is thus affected because leaves need to develop an even
lower water potential to maintain a “downhill” gradient of water potential between the soil
and the leaves (Taiz et al. 2015). For most plants, the threshold level is about 40 mM NaCl
or less for sensitive plants like rice and Arabidopsis. This phase can be experimentally
distinguished by measuring the effects immediately (within minutes to a few days) upon
addition of salt, before there has been time for salt to accumulate in the shoot. Because of
their rapid onset, these effects are clearly independent of the accumulation of salts in the
shoot. The two immediate responses to this effect are stomatal closure, with concomitant
increase in leaf temperature (Sirault et al. 2009), and inhibition of shoot elongation
(Rajendran et al. 2009). In this phase, the rate at which growing leaves expand is reduced,
new leaves emerge more slowly or remain quiescent, so fewer branches or lateral shoots
form (Munns and Tester 2008).

The effect and responses of plants to dissolved solutes in soils and soil water deficit
are the same. The total amount of water available is the major difference between the low
water potential environments caused by salinity versus soil desiccation. During soil

desiccation, a finite amount of water can be obtained from the soil profile by the plant,

causing ever decreasing water potentials. In most saline environments, a large (essentially
unlimited) amount of water at a constant, low water potential is available (Taiz et al. 2015).

Different effects of salt stress were observed in cereals and dicotyledonous species.
In cereals, significant reduction in the number of tillers have been reported (Chen et al.
2007), while in dicots, the major effect is the dramatic curtailing of the size of individual
leaves or the numbers of branches. Interestingly, shoot growth is more sensitive than root
growth because a reduction in leaf area development relative to root growth would decrease
the water use by the plant, thereby allowing it to conserve soil moisture and prevent salt
concentration in the soil. Reduction in shoot growth due to salinity is commonly expressed
by reduced shoot biomass (Emon et al. 2015), reduced leaf area and stunted shoots (Zeng
et al. 2003; Wankhade et al. 2013).

In the second phase of plant responses to salinity, termed as ‘ionic phase’ of salt
toxicity, a slower onset of growth inhibition takes place over several days to weeks. Salt
accumulates to toxic concentrations in older leaves causing premature senescence. In
particular, Na* accumulates in the leaf blade after being deposited in the transpiration
stream, rather than in roots. In contrast to younger leaves, older leaves, which no longer
expands, exhibit Na* toxicity due to ion accumulation since the salt that arrives in them are
no longer diluted (Carillo et al. 2011). If the rate at which older leaves die is greater than
the rate at which new leaves are produced, the photosynthetic capacity of the plant will no
longer be able to supply the carbohydrate requirement of the young leaves, which further
reduces their growth rate (Munns and Tester 2008).

For most species, Na* appears to reach a toxic concentration before Cl does, and

so most studies have concentrated on Na* exclusion and the control of Na* transport within

the plant. To date, most experimental work on salinity tolerance in cereals has focused on
Na* exclusion due in part to its ease in measurement. However, for some dicotyledonous
species, like soybean, citrus, and grapevine, Cl’ is considered to be the more toxic ion
compared to Na’. This time, Na* exclusion is withheld in the woody roots and stems such
that trace amounts reaches the leaves and K* becomes the major cation (Rajendran et al.
2009; Adem et al. 2014).

In terms of photosynthetic responses, several studies report reductions in
chlorophyll content. The application of chlorophyll fluorescence measurements has been
demonstrated by Moradi and Ismail (2007) and revealed that non-photochemical
quenching increase whereas the electron transport rate decrease under salt stress.
Wankhade et al. (2013) reported damages to the photosynthetic apparatus that can be
associated with its loss of chlorophyll (Chl) and to a decrease in the maximum potential
efficiency of PSII (F//Fm), affecting negatively the net CO: assimilation rate. Chlorophyll
contents were also observed to decline in the rice cultivars Bomba and Bahia at vegetative

and reproductive stages (Wankhade et al. 2013).

Plant Salt Tolerance Mechanisms

Rice is one of the most important staple foods for more than half of the world’s
population (IRRI 2006). Among the cereals, rice is the most sensitive while barley shows
a greater degree of tolerance (Gupta and Huang 2014). The detrimental effects of salt on

plants are a consequence of both water scarcity resulting in osmotic stress and the excess

of sodium ions on critical biochemical processes (Munns and Tester 2008; Deinlein et al.
2014).

In general, plants have evolved several mechanisms to tolerate the effects of salinity
stress. These mechanisms can be classified into three: (1) tolerance to osmotic stress —
which is regulated by long distance signals that reduce shoot growth and is triggered before
shoot Na* accumulations; (2) ion exclusion — where Na‘ and CI transport processes in
roots reduce the accumulation of toxic concentrations of these ions within leaves; and (3)
tissue tolerance — where high salt concentrations are found in leaves but
compartmentalization of ions at the cellular and intracellular levels help avoid toxic

concentrations within the cytoplasm (Munns and Tester 2008; Roy et al. 2014).

Osmotic Tolerance

The growth of salt-stressed plants is mostly limited by the osmotic effect of salinity.
High concentrations of salts in the soil disturb the capacity of roots to extract water (Carillo
et al. 2011). This increase in soil salinity causes leaf cells to lose water, but this loss of cell
volume and turgor is transient. Within hours, cells regain their original volume and turgor.
However, days of salinity stress lead to reductions in cell elongation and cell division
resulting in slower leaf appearance and smaller final size (Munns and Tester 2008). In
addition, when the accumulation of salts reach toxic levels, old leaves that export
photosynthates to younger leaves die, and the younger leaves undergo reduction of growth,

while production of new leaves slowed down (Gupta and Huang 2014).


Observed changes in plant growth include inhibition of lateral shoot development,
apoptosis in root meristematic cells, early flowering, reduced number of florets, and
premature senescence of older leaves (Asch et al. 1999; Wang et al. 2001; Rao et al. 2008;
Yazdani and Mahdieh 2012). Not only does the osmotic stress reduce these aspects of plant
growth, it also decreases stomatal conductance as observed in durum wheat after one to
three days of exposure to 150 mM NaCl and hence, presumed to be a reliable indicator of
decreases in photosynthesis (Rahnama et al. 2010).

Long-distance signaling to the shoots from the roots is associated with the rapid
inhibition of growth. The signaling to the shoot from the roots is mediated by abscisic acid
(ABA). ABA as an intracellular signal that mediates the expression of numerous water
deficit responsive genes, and also acts as an intercellular signal regulating water relation of
the whole plant (Zhang et al. 2006). Reactive oxygen species (ROS) waves (Mittler et al.
2011) and Ca** waves (Deinlein et al. 2014) are seen also as part of the salt stress response

network in plant root cells.

Salt Exclusion

Mostly NaCl is the dominant form of salt present in soils and Na* appears to reach
a toxic concentration before Cl’ does in most species, hence several studies have focused
on Na* exclusion and the regulation of its transport within the plant (Shabala and Cuin
2008; Rajendran et al. 2009; Biswas et al. 2015). Na* exclusion by roots ensures that Na*

does not accumulate to toxic concentrations within leaf blades. In cereal crops like rice,

durum wheat, bread wheat and barley, Na’ exclusion from leaves (Genc et al. 2007; James
et al. 2011; Adem et al. 2014) is a key feature for salinity tolerance.

The high affinity potassium transporter (HKT) gene family and the salt overly
sensitive (SOS) pathway have both been implicated in having important roles in regulating
Na’ transport within a plant. Molecular studies in Arabidopsis sos mutants led to the
identification of a plasma membrane Na‘/H' antiporter, SOS1, that functions in sodium
extrusion from root epidermal cells under saline conditions (Chinnusamy et al. 2005). Shi
and Zhu (2002) reported that overexpression of a plasma membrane Na‘/H* antiporter gene
improves salt tolerance in A. thaliana. Upregulation of SOS1 transcript levels upon NaCl
treatment were observed in transgenic plants and these plants were found to accumulate
less Na* in the xylem transpiration stream and in the shoot. Manipulation of the expression
of these genes has been frequently reported to alter accumulation of Na* in the shoot.
However, to date the application of this knowledge has not been successful in generating

salt tolerant crops for field use (Roy et al. 2014).

Tissue Tolerance

The main mechanisms contributing to shoot tissue tolerance can be categorized into
three: intracellular compartmentation of Na* or accumulation of Na’ in the vacuole to avoid
toxic concentrations in the cytoplasm, synthesis of compatible solutes, and production of
ROS scavenging system (Munns and Tester 2008; Gupta and Huang 2014; Roy et al. 2014).

Other than physiological responses, anatomical adaptations have evolved in halophytes.

Salt-induced increase in cell size due to increases in vacuole volume (succulence) and the
excretion of Na* and Cl by salt glands (modified trichomes) or bladders (modified
epidermal cells) are examples of halophytes’ adaptations to saline conditions (Flowers and
Colmer 2015). Irrespective of their nature, both glycophytes and halophytes cannot tolerate
high salt concentration in their cytoplasm. Hence, the excess salt is either transported to
the vacuole or sequestered in older tissues, which eventually are sacrificed, thereby
protecting active plant organs from salinity stress (Gupta and Huang 2014).

Partitioning of Na* into vacuoles is a mechanism to keep Na* concentration low to
about 10-20 mM in the cytoplasm. The concentration at which Na* becomes toxic is not
well defined. Results of vital studies have reported that concentrations at about 100 mM
can start to inhibit the activities of most enzymes (Munns and Tester 2008). Na*
sequestration into the vacuole is highly dependent on the tonoplast-localized Na*/H*
exchanger | (NHX1). Sodium compartmentation is also associated with the action of V-
type H*-ATPase and H*-PPase. These phosphatases generate the necessary proton gradient
required for the activity of Na*/H* antiporter. Constitutive overexpression of ALNHX1 and
its orthologs in A. thaliana and other plant species, such as tomato (Solanum lycopersicum)
and rice (O. sativa), resulted in increased plant salinity tolerance (Roy et al. 2014).
Overexpression of AtNHX1 in tomato increases vacuolar K*, as well as K* transport from
root to shoot, which is beneficial because enhanced K*/Na* ratios reduce Na* stress (Leidi
et al. 2010). The tonoplast antiporter NHX1 gene is induced by both salinity and ABA in
Arabidopsis (Shi and Zhu 2002) and rice (Fukuda et al. 1999). However, in a recent study

of Biswas et al. (2015), the effect of the vacuolar Na*/H* antiporter transgene in a rice

landrace and a commercial rice cultivar, after its insertion by crossing, were significantly
less tolerant than its transgenic parent at both seedling and reproductive stages.

Another reported mechanism of salt tolerance is the synthesis of compatible solutes.
Compatible solutes or osmolytes refer to small molecules that are water soluble and
uniformly neutral with respect to the perturbation of cellular functions, even when present
at high concentrations (Hopkins and Hiiner 2008; Taiz et al. 2015). They comprise
nitrogen-containing compounds such as amino acids, amines and betaines, and also organic
acids, sugars, and polyols. If Na* and Cl are sequestered in the vacuole of a cell, organic
solutes that are compatible with metabolic activity even at high concentrations must
accumulate in the cytosol and organelles to balance the osmotic pressure of the ions in the
vacuole. Known osmolytes include glycinebetaine and trehalose that act as
osmoprotectants by stabilizing quaternary structures of proteins and highly ordered states
of membranes. Mannitol serves as a free-radical scavenger. It also stabilizes subcellular
structures and act as a buffering system in cellular redox potential under stress. Molecular
studies reveal that salt stress induces the synthesis of proline, while its catabolism is
enhanced during recovery (Carillo et al. 2008). During the latter phase, proline acts as an
essential signaling molecule and has been proposed to be associated in the regulation of
cell proliferation, cell death and expression of stress recovery genes. Proline plays a crucial
role in osmotic adjustment. Other suggestions for its function are that it acts as ROS
scavenger, redox buffer, or molecular chaperone stabilizing proteins and membrane
structures under stress conditions (Ashraf and Foolad 2007; Szabados and Savouré 2010).
Another osmolyte, glycinebetaine, acts to balance the osmotic potential of intracellular ions

under salinity. In addition, it is involved in protecting major enzymes and membrane

structures and has been reported to have a central role in maintaining the activities of ROS
scavenging systems (Ashraf and Foolad 2007).

The water deficit effect imposed by saline conditions alters plants’ normal
metabolic processes. Stress-induced cellular and metabolic changes result in enhanced
accumulation of toxic compounds in cells that includes ROS. Subcellular organelles like
chloroplast and mitochondria are the major generators of ROS in plants. Formation of ROS
such as superoxide (O2"~), hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), and hydroxyl radical (OH") can be
through electrons that leaked out from electron transport chains and react with O2 in normal
aerobic metabolism (Hasanuzzaman et al. 2012). The reversal of electron spin of oxygen,
induced by energy transfer from triplet state chlorophyll is considered as a generator of
another non-radical ROS, singlet oxygen ('O2) (Edreva 2005). ROS are highly disruptive
causing alterations of macromolecules such as polyunsaturated fatty acids in membrane
lipids, proteins and deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA). To prevent these damages, plants have
evolved a complex antioxidant system to counter the harmful effects of ROS. Upregulation
of antioxidant and glyoxalase systems provides protection against NaCl-induced oxidative
damage in plants (Edreva 2005; Hoque et al. 2008). The ascorbate-glutathione cycle is the
major defense system against ROS in chloroplasts. It leads to scavenging of H2O2, which
is finally detoxified to H2O and O2 without producing another ROS. Superoxide dismutase
scavenges O2"~, resulting in the formation of H2O2, which is further scavenged by catalase
and a variety of peroxidases. Catalase catalyzes the decomposition of hydrogen peroxide

to water and oxygen.


Screening Rice for Salinity Tolerance

Rice cultivars vary greatly in their response to salinity (Biswas et al. 2015;
Chunthaburee et al. 2015; Emon et al. 2015). Assessment of this genetic diversity within a
crop species, therefore, provides a practical means for screening and for breeding improved
salt-tolerant cultivars (Arzani 2008).

Breeding rice for salinity tolerance has been difficult as it requires reliable
screening techniques for identifying potential parents for breeding programs. The speed of
the screening methods has great bearing to keep pace with the large amount of breeding
materials generated. Faster screening method is required for the identification of potential

parents and for selection during breeding.

Screening Techniques

Screening under Field Conditions

Arguments have been raised about discrepancies between results of studies
conducted under saline field conditions and those conducted under controlled conditions.
Field screening is considered the most ideal method in selecting adapted and tolerant
genotypes because salt tolerance is a complex phenomenon. However, a number of
researchers have argued on its heterogeneity and degree of control of salinity. Field
conditions are faced with high spatial and temporal variability problems. It is difficult to

assess due to stress heterogeneity, variations in chemical and physical soil properties,

temperature, relative humidity, and solar radiation (Gregorio et al. 1997; Munns et al. 2006;
Arzani 2008), hence, screening large number of genotypes under field conditions is
difficult.

Singh et al. (2010a) suggested ways to minimize experimental error in screening
under field conditions. Extensive field testing for soil salinity gradient is proposed by
screening genotypes using two to five rows, 6-20 m long, with space planting. This allows
maximum possible exposure of all genotypes to varying soil sodicity conditions and
therefore, reduces the effect of spatial variability. To achieve the appropriate blocking
design with a sufficient number of replications, the layout for such a test involving many
genotypes generally follows an incomplete block design, alpha lattice or augmented design
in which a set of check varieties is replicated many times. This increases the potential
number of test varieties, thus allowing the screening of a large number of genotypes at the

same time.

Screening under Controlled Conditions

To address the problem of soil heterogeneity and spatial variability, screening under
controlled conditions has been suggested to be more effective (Arzani 2008). The level of
control over environmental factors varies depending upon the type of control set-up.
Evaluation of salt-tolerant genotypes can be done either in microplots or pots and trays
placed inside a greenhouse.

Microplots are likened to mini-fields in dug-out concrete tanks filled with prepared

or natural soil transported from affected areas and with varying amounts of desired salinity

and sodicity. Microplots are filled with artificially prepared soil that is uniform throughout
the profile. Desired levels of salinity and sodicity are maintained in the same manner with
that of field conditions minus soil heterogeneity. These microplots are used to screen
mostly early segregating populations and also stabilized populations in addition to genetic
studies (Singh et al. 2010a)

Morpho-genetic and physiological studies use pots placed in greenhouse during
screening rice cultivars for salinity tolerance to observe individual responses (Wankhade
et al. 2013; Emon et al. 2015). This method is ideal for more precise studies of individual
plant under constant stress. Plastic pots used in screening at vegetative and reproductive
stages measure 15 cm in height with 11 cm in diameter to be filled with pre-fertilized soil
(N:P:K 50:25:25 mg kg") or sand culture (Gregorio et al. 1997; Zeng et al. 2003;
Mohammadi-Nejad et al. 2010; Singh et al. 2010a).

Hydroponic nutrient solution technique is also used in screening rice cultivars for
salinity tolerance at seedling, vegetative and reproductive stages. Stocks of nutrient
solutions are made based on modified Yoshida culture solution. These nutrient solutions
are added with NaCl to obtain the desired electric conductivities. At seedling stage,
seedling floats placed in trays filled with salinized nutrient solutions are used to grow the
test entries and check varieties. Phenotypic responses are observed after 7, 14 and 21 days

of salt stress (Gregorio et al. 1997; Singh et al. 2010a).


Screening Criteria

The effect of salt stress on rice plant is dependent on the growth stage at which they
have been exposed to salt stress. Hence, the screening criteria and techniques to be used in

evaluation would depend on the plant growth stage in addition to the research objectives.

Germination and Early Seedling Stage Parameters

Identification of sensitive and tolerant rice cultivars at early developmental stages
is necessary to achieve successful crop production in saline environment. Hakim et al.
(2010) used final germination percentage (FGP), speed of germination (SG), germination
energy percentage (GE%), plumule and radical length, and plumule and radical dry weight
to evaluate the effect of salt stress on germination and early seedling growth of 12 different
rice varieties. On the other hand, Zeng and Shannon (2000) considered seedling survival
rate, calculated as the percentage of live seedlings from germinated plants, as a reliable
criterion. Yazdani and Mahdieh (2012) employed sophisticated techniques like TUNEL
assay and DNA gel electrophoresis in studying the mode of cell death and morphology of
roots in salt-sensitive and salt-tolerant rice cultivars. Studies have also been conducted on
rice that found higher soil exchangeable sodium percentage (ESP) and salinity to delay or

reduce germination (Singh et al. 2010a).


Salt Injury

At IRRI, a modified standard evaluation score system is being used for evaluating
visual salt injury at seedling stage. This system aims to distinguish sensitive from the
tolerant and the moderately tolerant genotypes. The test entries are scored as 1, 3, 5, 7, and
9 with 1 as normal growth, no leaf symptoms and 9 with all plants almost dead or dying

(Gregorio et al. 1997).

Physiological and Photosynthetic Parameters

In crop plants, it has been suggested that physiological mechanisms or characters
conferring tolerance are better criteria in selecting donors for breeding purposes (Noble
and Rogers 1992). Several studies have also focused on the response of photosynthetic
apparatus to salinity stress (Dionisio-Sese and Tobita 2000; Moradi and Ismail 2007;
Wankhade and Sanz 2013).

Many physiological parameters have been used as reliable screening criteria. To
date, Na*/K* content is the widely used physiological parameter in cereal studies (Dionisio-
Sese and Tobita 2000; Moradi and Ismail 2007; Hussain et al. 2013; Adem et al. 2014;
Chunthaburee et al. 2015). Zeng et al. (2003) also suggested to use Na*-Ca”* selectivity as
selection criterion in screening for salt tolerance. In addition, synthesis of osmolytes such
as proline in response to salt stress has been assessed (Vaidyanathan et al. 2003; Demiral

and Turkan 2005; Chunthaburee et al. 2015).


Under salinity stressed conditions, since ROS are formed, ROS scavenging systems
are measured in sensitive and tolerant rice cultivars. Activities of peroxidases, catalase and
superoxide dismutase were upregulated, and concentrations of reduced ascorbate and
glutathione increased in tolerant cultivars under salt stress (Dionisio-Sese and Tobita 1998;
Moradi and Ismail 2007; El-Shabrawi et al. 2010; Chunthaburee et al. 2015), in addition to
polyphenols and flavonoids (Hussain et al. 2013). Correlation study by Kanawapee et al.
(2013) between salt tolerance and lipid peroxidation found malondialdehyde
measurements as an effective indicator of cellular oxidative damage.

Salinity decreases photosynthetic responses in rice cultivars. The application of
chlorophyll fluorescence measurements, net photosynthetic rate in terms of CO2
assimilation (umol CO2 m” s"), stomatal conductance, yield of photosystem II (PSII),
anthocyanin and chlorophyll concentrations have been widely used (Dionisio-Sese and

Tobita 1998; Moradi and Ismail 2007; Morales et al. 2012).

Agronomic Parameters

Evaluation of salt tolerance in rice genotypes at reproductive stage use agronomic
parameters as it is seen as the first step towards the genetic improvement of crops (Zeng et
al. 2002). Under both normal (control) and salinized conditions, measured traits are days
to flowering, days to maturity, number of effective tillers/plant, number of filled grains,
number of unfilled grains, total dry matter (g), percent fertility and grain yield (g)

(Mohammadi-Nejad et al. 2010; Rubell et al. 2014). Other studies include spikelet number

per panicle, fertility (percentage of filled spikelets) (Zeng et al. 2002; Palao et al. 2013)

spikelet sterility and 1000-grain weight (Clermont-Dauphin et al. 2010).

Growth Parameters

Salt stress has been found to severely affect plant growth. Root and shoot biomass
are the two best-measured parameters (Hussain et al. 2013; Emon et al. 2015). Some salt-
stress studies also include leaf area index (LAI), calculated as the total leaf area per plant
(excluding fallen leaves) divided by its ground area in a sand tank, and differences in length
of both root and shoot under normal and salinized treatments (Morales et al. 2012; Emon

et al. 2015).

Morpho-anatomical Parameters

Visual damage on plants is also used as criterion for assessment of tolerance.
Chlorosis and leaf rolling were observed by Zeng et al. (2002) and Kanawapee et al. (2013).
Concomitantly, area of bulliform and epidermal cells as well as changes in the diameter of
xylem element vessels were seen as responses to NaCl stress and the latter appears
distinctively associated with sensitivity.

To date, in spite of several reports from extensive studies on salt stress effects on
rice, only a few salt-resistant varieties were released (Gregorio et al. 2002). This is probably

because of the following limitations: (1) variability in phenotypic responses of rice plants

at different growth stages; (2) complicated physiological mechanisms; (3) limited
knowledge of the genetics of salinity tolerance; and (4) lack of reliable and reproducible

techniques for identifying salt tolerant crops (Singh and Flowers 2010).

MATERIALS AND METHODS

The experiment was carried out at the International Rice Research Institute (IRRI)
for the entire duration of crop growth. Six rice cultivars contrasting in tolerance to salt
stress were used for this investigation. These include IR67075-2B-5-2 and IR68652-3B-8-
1, abbreviated as IR670 and IR686, which are breeding lines reported with 1% and 90%
reduction in grain yield, respectively, under salt stress (EC = 6) (Moradi et al. 2003);
CSR28, a Na‘-excluding variety (Singh et al. 2010b); and ‘Sadri’, an Iranian cultivar with
moderate tolerance to saline conditions (Mohammadi-Nejad et al. 2008). Two check
varieties were used, IRRI 154 (NSIC Rc222), a sensitive genotype at seedling, vegetative,
and reproductive stages and hence suggested as positive control under salinity experiments
(Emon et al. 2015) and Pokkali, a salt-tolerant landrace from India (Gregorio et al. 1997;
Nakhoda et al. 2012). The experiments at both seedling and reproductive stages were
conducted in a greenhouse using a randomized complete block design with three

replications.

Plant Material Handling and Salinization at Seedling Stage

Seeds were incubated in a convection oven set at 50°C for five days to break
dormancy. The seeds were then germinated in petri dishes lined with moistened filter
papers at 30°C for 48 h in an incubator. Pre-germinated seeds were sown in fabricated
styrofoam seedling float with dimensions of 28 x 32 x 1.25 cm having 100 holes (10 x 10)

with nylon net bottom. Two seeds were sown per hole, with ten holes per entry. The


radicles of the pre-germinated seeds were inserted carefully through the nylon mesh. The
seedling floats were first suspended in distilled water for three days, after which a nutrient
solution (Yoshida et al. 1976) was used for the next 21 d. The tray was filled up with
nutrient solution up to the nylon net bottom of styrofoam. Figure 1 shows screening of six

rice cultivars for salinity tolerance at seedling stage.

@S2eeeeeoee
@aaeaeeer®
OSGaeeeeese

s
Ss
®
@
e
@
e

(@@@eeeooeen

Figure 1. Screening of six rice cultivars for salinity tolerance at seedling stage.
(A-B) Seedling floats: top and bottom views; (C) Seedling set-up; (D) Test entries
after 21 d of salinization.


Six days after sowing, salinization was started by adding NaCl to the nutrient
medium. Two levels of salinity were introduced corresponding to electrical conductivities
(EC) of 10 and 12 dS m', which are equivalent to about 100 and 120 mM NaCl,
respectively. To prevent osmotic shock, salinity was initially introduced with EC of 5 and
6 dS m", then increased to 10 and 12 dS m’', respectively, after three days. Nutrient
solution without NaCl (0 dS m’') served as the control. Entries were grown simultaneously
with two check varieties: IRRI 154 (NSIC Rc222) as sensitive cultivar and Pokkali as
tolerant. The pH of the solution was monitored daily and maintained at 5.0 by adding either
NaOH or HCI. It was also replaced every seven days to maintain its corresponding EC. The
rapid screening method developed by Gregorio et al. (1997) was used in assessing the
phenotypic responses of genotypes to salt stress. Entries were scored as 1, 3, 5, 7, and 9
with 1 as normal growth, no leaf symptoms and 9 with almost all plants dead or dying
(Table 2). All entries were evaluated for salt stress symptoms after 14 and 21 d of

salinization.

Table 2. Modified standard evaluation score (SES) of visual salt injury (Gregorio et al.

1997).
SCORE OBSERVATION TOLERANCE

1 Normal growth, no leaf symptoms Highly tolerant

3 Nearly normal growth, but leaf tips or few Tolerant
leaves whitish and rolled

5 Growth severely retarded; most leaves rolled; | Moderately tolerant
only a few are elongating

7 Complete cessation of growth; most leaves Sensitive

dry; some plants dying
9 Almost all plants dead or dying Highly sensitive



Plant Material Handling and Salinization at Reproductive Stage

Preparation for the screening of test entries for salinity tolerance at reproductive
stage was patterned according to the procedure described by Gregorio et al. (1997). One

liter plastic pots filled with fertilized soil (50 N, 25 P and 25 K mg kg’') Maahas clay soil

Figure 2. Screening of six rice cultivars for salinity tolerance at reproductive stage.
(A) EC meter: (B) Plastic pots filled with fertilized soil; (C-D) Reproductive
stage set-up.

(43% clay, 44% silt and 13% sand) were used for seeding. These pots were kept in concrete
tanks. Tap water was added to fill the tanks to about soil level. Figure 2 shows the screening
of six rice cultivars for salinity tolerance at reproductive stage.

A randomized complete block design was used with three replications. In each
replication, five pots for each cultivar were prepared. Five pre-germinated seeds were sown
in each pot with water level maintained at 3 cm below soil surface. Two weeks after
seeding, seedlings were thinned to four per pot and water level was raised to about 1-2 cm
above soil surface. When seedlings were 28 d old, water was siphoned out and drained
from the concrete tanks for 12 h, then flooded with either tap water (control) or saline
solution. Saline water solution was prepared using NaC] to adjust the EC to an initial 5 dS
m''. After three days, the EC was raised to 10 dS m"! using NaCl, and kept at this level
until harvesting. The treatment without NaCl (0 dS m’') served as the control set-up.
Salinity was monitored regularly and adjusted when necessary using NaC] and tap water.
Using four primary tillers, rice cultivars were scored for flag leaf symptoms every two

weeks after the start of salinization (Table 2).


Plant Samplings

Vegetative and reproductive parts were sampled at four different developmental
stages separately for each cultivar according to their duration:

a) Booting stage — the panicle is apparently enveloped within the sheath of the flag
leaf;

b) Flowering stage — the florets open with the anthers protruding from the flower
glumes;

c) Milk stage ~ the spikelets contain a milky sap, early grain filling stage; and

d) Mature grain stage — the individual grain is mature, fully developed, hard, and has

turned yellow.

Sodium and Potassium Measurements

The Na* and K* concentrations in vegetative (flag leaf/first leaf, second leaf, third
leaf and corresponding leaf sheaths) and reproductive parts (panicle main stalk and
branches with spikelets) of rice cultivars were measured at the four different developmental
stages listed above. Three randomly selected pots for each cultivar were sampled for ion
analysis. After dissecting the different parts, all samples were washed with deionized water
and dried with paper towels prior to bagging in labelled envelopes. Samples were oven-
dried for three days at 70°C and weighed before digestion. Sodium and potassium analysis
were determined following the method described by Moradi and Ismail (2007). Dried

samples were cut into approximately 0.25 cm. Twenty milligrams of the dried sample was

transferred to a 15 mL tube containing 10 mL of 0.1 N acetic acid, and heated in a water
bath at 85°C for two hours. The extracted tissue was cooled at room temperature left
overnight, and then filtered using Whatman filter paper # 1. An aliquot of 1 mL filtrate was
transferred to a new 15 mL tube with 9 mL nanopure H20, and then vortexed at maximum
speed for 10 s. Sodium and potassium concentrations were measured using an atomic
absorption spectrometer (PerkinElmer, MA, USA). Sodium and potassium concentrations

were calculated using the following formula:

=e (Na*] x Total volume (L) x Dilution factor
Molecular weight of Na*

+ 1 =
mmol [Na*] kg™* d.wt. Actual wt. of sample (kg)

[=2 [K*] x Total volume (L) x Dilution factor]
Molecular weight of K*
Actual wt. of sample (kg)

mmol [K*] kg™! d.wt.=

Chlorophyll Concentration Measurements

Chlorophyll determination of the first leaf, second leaf and third leaf at the four
developmental stages was made in semi-darkness using the spectral determination
procedure of Moradi and Ismail (2007). Samples for chlorophyll analysis were harvested
from the same plant used for sodium and potassium measurements. After dissecting out the
leaf blades, all samples were washed in deionized water and dried with paper towel prior
to wrapping with labelled aluminum foil. Samples were immediately frozen in liquid Nz

and stored in -80°C until processed. Prior to assay, all samples were freeze-dried for 72 h

at -88°C. Dried samples were cut into approximately 0.5 cm and a 10 mg subsample was
transferred into a new tube. For chlorophyll extraction, 95% (v/v) ethanol in water was
used in a ratio of 1.0 mg dry leaf material to 1 mL 95% (v/v) ethanol and incubated
overnight in a dark cabinet. A 200 pl aliquot of extracted chlorophyll was loaded into the
microplate well for spectral readings using UV spectrophotometer SPECTROstar Nano
microplate reader (BMG Labtech, Ortenberg, Germany) with 95% ethanol as blank. The
concentrations for Chl a (ca) and Chl 6 (co) were calculated with the following equations
(Lichtenthaler and Buschmann 2001), where Age4.1 and Ag4g.¢ represent absorbance at

664.1 and 648.6 nm, respectively.

ug
cap = 13.36 Ages — 5.19 Agane

ug
CD = 27.43 Agage — 8.12 Ages

Lipid Peroxidation

Lipid peroxidation was determined by measuring the amount of malondialdehyde
(MDA) formation based on the method of Hodges et al. (1999) with slight modifications.
Flag leaf and developing panicles were collected at four different developmental stages,
snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and then kept at -80°C until measurements. Samples were
ground to fine powder using pre-chilled mortar and pestle and a subsample of 0.2 g was
transferred to 2 mL microcentrifuge tube. The fine powder was homogenized with 2 mL

ice-cold 50 mM potassium phosphate buffer (pH 7.0), vortexed at maximum speed for four

seconds, and centrifuged at 4°C for 30 min at 22 000 g. Solutions (0.5 mL) with or without
thiobarbituric acid (+TBA or -TBA, respectively) were added to a screw-capped glass tube
containing 0.5 mL plant extract. The -TBA solution contained 50% (w/v) trichloroacetic
acid (TCA) and 0.01% butylated hydroxytoluene. The +TBA solution has the same
chemicals as -TBA solution plus 0.5% (w/v) TBA. The reaction mixture was heated at
95°C for 25 min and cooled quickly by placing in an ice bath. Solutions were transferred
to Eppendorf tubes and centrifuged at 4°C for 10 min at 10 000 g. A 200 pl aliquot was
loaded into the microplate well. Absorbance readings were taken using UV
spectrophotometer SPECTROstar Nano microplate reader (BMG Labtech, Ortenberg,
Germany). The absorbance of the supernatant was determined at 440, 532, and 600 nm.

Malondialdehyde equivalents were calculated as follows:

[Assaceyraa 7~ Acooc+)ra] - [Assa(-yrea oo Agoo(-)rBa] =A
[Assocsyrea — Acooc+yrea] * 0.0571 = B

G—8)

MDA (nmol mL“1) = 157000

seya0l 10°

Determination of Ascorbate Concentration

The ascorbate (AsA) concentration in leaf and developing panicles was measured
based on the method of Shigeoka et al. (1979) using subsamples from the same leaf and

panicles used for MDA measurements. About 0.2 g of fine powder was homogenized with

ice-cold 6% trichloroacetic acid (TCA), vortexed at maximum speed for 4 s, and
centrifuged at 4°C for 20 min at 24 000 g. Prior to assay, ascorbic acid standards of 0-200
ppm in 6% TCA were prepared. Two assays were done at the same time for each sample:
total ascorbate (total AsA) and oxidized ascorbate (oxidized AsA) assay. A 200 pl of either
6% TCA (blank), standards (0-200 ppm) or sample was transferred to a 2 mL
microcentrifuge tube and added with 100 x! 3 mM 2,6-dichloroindophenol (DCIP) except
for the oxidized AsA tube which was added with 100 yl sterile distilled H2O. All tubes
were incubated for 30 min and added with 200 pl of 1% thiourea in 6% TCA. A 200 pl of
10 mM 2,4-dinitrophenylhydrazine (DNPH) was pipetted in all tubes excluding the blank
tube which was added with 200 pl of 20% sulfuric acid (H2SOs). All assay tubes were
heated at 50°C for one hour and cooled quickly in an ice bath to stop the reaction. A 500
pl of 85% H2SOs was added to all tubes and another 200 p11 20% H2SOs was pipetted to all
tubes except for the blank tube that was added with 200 11 10 mM DNPH. A 200 I sample,
standard, or blank reaction solution from the assay tube was loaded to a microplate and
absorbance was read at 520 nm against the blank using UV spectrophotometer
SPECTROstar Nano microplate reader (BMG Labtech, Ortenberg, Germany). Ascorbate
concentrations were calculated as follows:

™9 Total AsA

MW of L — ascorbic acid * V°l-of extractant (mL)

Actual wt. of sample (g)

Total AsA (nmol g™' f.wt.) = x 1000


8 oxidized AsA ENCE)
xVol. of extractant (ml
Oxidized AsA (nmol g-! f. wt.) = W#elesonicaca ooaerreree'
( go" fwt) ‘Actual wt. of sample (g) x 1000

Reduced AsA (nmol g™! f.wt.) = Total AsA — Oxidized AsA

Proline Measurements

Proline concentration was quantified following the modified method of Bates et al.
(1973) using subsamples from the same leaf and panicles used for ascorbate measurements.
Proline standards of 0-80 ppm were prepared. About 0.2 g of fine powder was
homogenized with 1 mL of 3% sulfosalicylic acid. The homogenized sample was
centrifuged at 5 000 g for 10 min. In a separate tube, a reaction mixture was prepared by
adding 200 yl of glacial acetic acid and 200 pl of acidic ninhydrin. A 200 yl aliquot from
the supernatant of plant extract was added to the reaction mixture. The mixture was
incubated at 96°C for 60 min and was stopped quickly by placing the sample in an ice bath
for five minutes. A 400 1] of toluene was added to the reaction mixture and was vortexed
at maximum speed for 20 s. The tube was left on the bench for five minutes to allow the
separation of the organic and water phases. A 200 pl aliquot was removed from the organic
phase and transferred into a microplate well. The absorbance was determined at 520 nm
with UV spectrophotometer SPECTROstar Nano microplate reader (BMG Labtech,
Ortenberg, Germany) using toluene as reference. Proline concentration was calculated

using the formula:


™I proline of tol (mb)
—— x Vol.of toluene (mL) x5
Proline (umol g~ f.wt.) = LL eT

Actual wt. of sample (g)

Pollen Viability Analysis

To determine pollen viability, the potassium iodide method of Sarhadi et al. (2012)
was used. Three panicles from each cultivar in saline and control conditions were collected
randomly with five unopened spikelets during heading stage. The collected spikelets were
placed in screw-capped vials with 70% ethanol and stored at 4°C. Three out of five
spikelets per sampled panicle was used for analysis. Each spikelet was dissected to expose
the anthers using forceps and dissecting needle. Anthers were removed by pulling the
lemma from the palea. Exposed anthers were crushed thoroughly to release the pollen and
stained with 1% potassium iodide solution to distinguish fertile from sterile pollen based
on three random fields of microscopic vision. Fresh mount of slides were viewed under
Zeiss Axioplan 2 imaging microscope and Axiovision software. Pollen grains stained black
were considered viable, and those staining yellow or light were counted as sterile pollens.
Pollen viability was calculated by dividing the number of fertile pollen grains by the total

number of pollen grains, and presented as percentage:

no. of fertile pollen
total number of pollen observed *

% pollen viability = 100


Panicle Length, Panicles per Plant, and Filled
and Unfilled Grains per Panicle

Panicle length (cm), panicles per plant, and filled and unfilled grains per panicle
were recorded at final harvest. Panicle length determines the number of grains it can hold,
and consequently rice yield. Hence it is an essential trait measured in yield-related research
(Huang et al. 2013). In measuring panicle length, panicles from each plant were laid down
on a flat surface and measured using a ruler (cm). Panicle length is the measurement from
the panicle base (neck node) to the tip of the topmost grain. During the final harvest, the
number of filled and unfilled grains per panicle was determined. Grains were threshed from
panicles. Filled grains were manually separated from unfilled grains. Filled grain is defined

as fertile grain including ripened and unripe grains, and unfilled grain as sterile grains.

Statistical Analysis

Statistical analysis was performed for each parameter studied based on a
randomized complete block design model with three replications. All means of data
obtained were tested for significant difference using ANOVA. A Fisher’s Least
Significance Difference (LSD) was performed at 0.05 significance level to determine
specific pairwise differences. Associations among characters were examined by Pearson
correlation analysis. Data analyses was performed using Statistical Tool for Agricultural

Research (STAR version 2.0.1 2014).

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Rice genotypes were classified into five groups based on their visual symptoms to
salt toxicity. Entries were scored from | as highly tolerant, to 9 as highly sensitive. Two
cultivars, Pokkali and Rc222, are commonly used as salt-tolerant and sensitive checks,
respectively. Rice genotypes showed different reactions to salinity stress at seedling and
reproductive stages. SES scoring after 21 d of salinization at the seedling stage showed that
at EC of 10 dS m", only one cultivar (Pokkali) was tolerant, which was the tolerant check.
IR686 and Sadri were moderately sensitive and both CSR28 and IR670 were classified as
moderately tolerant. When salt stress was increased to 12 dS m“', Rc222 ranked as highly
sensitive while CSR28, IR670 and Pokkali were classified as moderately tolerant. IR670
showed the same tolerance as the tolerant check, Pokkali at EC of 12 dS m”!. On the other

hand, Sadri exhibited higher susceptibility than IR686 (Table 3).

Table 3. SES scores during seedling stage of different rice cultivars at different salinity
levels. Plants were designated score of 1 (normal growth, no leaf symptoms) to
9 (plants dead or dying). Scoring was done after 21 d of salinization.

SES SCORE
CULTIVAR Seedling Stage
EC 10 EC 12
NSIC Re222 7 9
IR68652-3B-8-1 5.7 6
Sadri 5.7 17
CSR28 47 5.3
1R67075-2B-5-2 47 5.3

Pokkali 3.3 5.3


At reproductive stage, SES scores of all genotypes increased with longer days of
exposure to salt stress (EC=10 dS m’!) (Fig. 3). After 42 d of salinity exposure, Re222,
IR686 and Sadri exhibited slight susceptibility to salinity with SES scores of 5.7, 5.7 and
6.1, respectively. The results also demonstrated that CSR28 and [R670 were moderately
tolerant with salinity scores of 5.3 and 5.2, respectively, while Pokkali as the most tolerant

(SES score=5).

RC222
—m- IR686
~*~ SADRI
—— CSR28
—®-— IR670
—t- POK

SES score at 10 dS m!

14 28 42
Days after salinization

Figure 3. Changes in SES scores of six rice cultivars at reproductive stage under EC of 10 dS m"'.
Plants were designated score of 1 (normal growth, no leaf symptoms) to 9 (plants dead
or dying). Scoring was done at 14, 28, and 42 d after salinization. Values are means
from three replications and bars indicate standard errors.


Jon Concentrations

Salinity imposed during the reproductive stage induced changes in the Na*/K*
ratios in both vegetative and reproductive parts. Due to higher accumulation of sodium
(Table 4) and reduction in potassium (Table 5) concentrations, Na*/K* ratios of vegetative
and reproductive parts were noted to increase among all rice genotypes under salt stress
(Table 6). In the leaves of salt-treated plants, Na*/K* ratio was highest in the third leaf and
was lowest in the flag leaf at all developmental stages. At booting stage, sodium
concentration in leaves of salt-sensitive cultivars Rc222, IR686 and Sadri were
significantly higher and Na*/K* ratio substantially increased from 0.11, 0.10 and 0.10 to
1.45, 0.89 and 1.98, respectively (13, 9 and 19-folds) under salt stress, whereas CSR28,
IR670 and Pokkali demonstrated lesser reduction of 10-, 14- and 11-folds. Under salt
stress, Na*/K* ratio in second leaf was lowest in Pokkali and highest in Sadri. In the oldest
leaf, similar trend was observed in which Sadri increased by about 27-fold, while Pokkali
demonstrated a smaller increase (11-fold). Comparison of Na*/K* ratios in the vegetative
parts revealed that leaf blades have lower Na‘/K* ratio than leaf sheaths. In leaf sheaths of
salt-treated plants, Na*/K* ratio was highest in the third leaf sheath and was lowest in the
first leaf sheath. In reproductive parts, Na*/K* ratios were noted to increase among all rice
cultivars under salt stress. Significant changes in Na*/K* ratios of panicle stalk and
branches with spikelets were observed under salt stress relative to the level in the control.
When exposed to 10 dS m"', panicle main stalks have higher Na*/K* ratios than in branches

with spikelets in all cultivars with more pronounced increase in Rc222, IR686 and Sadri.

Table 4. Na” K" ratio of vegetative and reproductive parts of six rice cultivars exposed to 10 dS m"

measured at booting. flowering. milk stage and mature grain stages.


RATIO
iL 30 28 PS BS
CY mS an ACHING LEC TsS ALG ads A Cima S i MLO MNS ACHES AGiGaas
Re. OM 128 O11 17S 012 TS Or 14S O11 1-78 010° 218 010 116 0.09 101
IR6S6 0.10 1.93 0.11 230 O11 3.02 010 214 O11 249 0.10 3.04 0.11 168 0.06 0.89
Sadi 0.10 1.98 0.10 2.71 0.10 3.71 0.11 227 0.11 286 0.10 4.03 0.16 1.90 0.10 1.39
CSR28 0.10 1.01 0.07 101 0.09 1.08 0.10 1.01 0.11 1.08 0.09 1.16 009 0.97 0.03 0.88
IR670 0.05. 0.68 0.05 0.73 00S 0.77 00S 0.71 00S 0.77 0.05 091 007 063 0.10 0.10
Pokkali 0.08 0.64 0.04 066 006 0.71 0.06 0.68 0.06 0.67 0.06 149 0.06 063 0.13 0.32
Mean 0.09 1.28 0.08 153 009 188 0.09 137 009 1.60 0.09 214 010 116 0.08 1.10
LsD
Saliniy(s) 0.23 os 0.49 0.33 0.70 083 0.29 022
Cultvanc) 0.74 Las 17 0.90 139 124 oss 0.68
Sx 0.12 0.48 0.28 0.40 0.20 0.46 0.36 0.09
CarkeSinigs CaN Suir Cons MGM NASSUANC RS RICHIE'S ibe ClaniSiaa Coens
RoaQ22 “Ol 169 O11 184 O11 218 O12 182 O11 200 O12 228 O10 164 O41 LSI
IR6S6 0.102.300.1257 O11 288 010 249 O11 2.73 O11 321 010 1.72 O44 165
Sadi «0.10 «2.38 0.11 322 0.10 3.92 010 281 0.11 3.49 0.10 4.09 0.15 2.02 0.19 202
ep CSR28 0.10 1.02 O11 10S O10 1.14 0.10 104 O11 1.14 0.10 149 009 1.01 0.11 0.88
E IR670 0.05 0.69 0.05 0.76 00S 082 008 072 00S 081 0.06 086 007 068 0.07 065
Z Pokkali 0.06 0.66 0.06 067 0.06 0.72 0.07 0.66 0.06 0.69 0.07 0.79 0.06 0.64 0.08 0.43
E Mean 0.09 1.28 0.09 1.71 0.09 1.66 0.09 166 0.09 1.83 0.09 196 009 1.28 0.11 1.63
LSD oo
Saliniy(S) (0.28 088 0.39 0.63 0.87 061 0.56 028
Cultvatc) 0.84 133 1.06 1.39 1.33 140 119 082
sxc 0.38 0.30 02 0.76 0.20 02s 0.10 042
(Cina 9 ain GEES CINE CLANS aig Cl RS ANC NES nals Comes MnO Mae SLAC LENS
Ro2d22 O11 1.73 O11 187 O12 248 O12 1.79 O11 191 O13 262 013 1.73 O11 168
IR6S6 —O.ML-«2.53. 0.10 269 0.12 3.81 0.10 266 0.11 2.73 O14 3.88 0.14 2.20 0.10 1.67
Sadi «0.10 3.64. 0.10 -3.7S 0.10 4.05 0.10 3.68 0.10 3.94 0.21 440 021 331 0.16 266
CSR2E 0.10 1.04 0.10 109 O11 1.16 0.10 1.08 010 1.19 0.12 1.78 O12 1.03 0.10 1.02
IR670 0.03. 0.78 0.08 082 00S 0.86 0.06 0.76 00S 0.83 0.07 086 007 0.72 0.07 0.67
Z Pokkali 0.06 0.71 0.06 0.75 0.07 0.80 0.07 072 0.07 0.75 0.07 0.80 007 0.66 0.08 0.6%
Mean 0.09 1.74 0.09 183 009 2.19 009 178 009 189 012 239 0.12 161 0.10 139
LSD gos
Saliniy(S) 0.48 0.86 oss 0.62 oss 156 0.89 0.89
Cultvarc) 1.18 1.32 136 137 136 284 143 143
sxc 0.29 0.38 O71 0.69 0.29 3 0.59 029
Caw Sia, CSG. iS Ce Sic C au S gn Corn Saal Caves a Gann S
Re222 0.12 1.77 0.12. 267 O12 3.63 0.12 201 0.12 268 0.13 4.60 0.13 0.12 1.92
IR6S6 0.13. -2.63 0.11290 0.12 3.90 OL O11 3.08 0.12 417 0.18 O18 2.13
Sadi 0.10 4.04 0.10 442 0.12 4.63 0.10 4.13 0.10 449 0.41 4.89 0.28 21 282
ES CSR2I8 0.10 1.05 0.10 109 0.10 1.29 O11 1.06 O11 1.26 0.11 146 0.12 Ol 131
E,1R670 0.08 0.80 00S 084 00S 1.09 005 080 00S 097 00S 112 007 0.10 0.70
S pokkali 0.06 0.72 0.06 0.77 007 092 0.07 073 007 086 0.07 1.00 0.08 0.09 0.66
S Mean 009 183 009 241 010 258 009 192 009 222 0.10 287 0.13 013159
LSD ooo
Salinity’) 0.43 0.67 1.89 0.87 0.67 193
Cultiwatc) 1.08 149 3.68 131 149 3.78

panicle main stalk, BS-branches with spikelets, C-control condition, S-saline condition (EC=10 dS m')



At flowering stage, measuring the same parameters revealed that Na*/K* ratios in
vegetative and reproductive parts were essentially similar to those observed at booting
stage. Na‘/K* ratios of both parts were markedly affected by salinity. A significant increase
was noted in leaf blades in response to salinity with highest increase in Rc222, while
Pokkali did not show this pronounced increase. Two breeding lines, IR686 and IR670
showed great variance in the increase of Na*/K* ratio in flag leaves, with IR686 having
higher ratio under saline condition. In a similar way, salt-sensitive cultivars Rc222, IR686,
and Sadri showed higher Na*/K* ratio in the third leaf. In rice cultivars subjected to an EC
of 10 dS m"', Na*/K* ratios in leaf sheaths were significantly increased relative to that in
control. All leaf sheaths showed higher ratio when compared to their respective leaf blades.
Similar trend was observed in reproductive parts, where Na*/K* ratios in panicle main stalk

were higher than branches with spikelets under salt stress.

At milk stage, greater reduction in Na*/K* ratios of vegetative and reproductive
parts was noted in stressed condition. Out of the six cultivars subjected to salt stress, three
showed > 1.5 in Na*/K* ratio in the flag leaf. These were Rc222, IR686 and Sadri. The
same cultivars showed greater increase in the second leaf and third leaf. On the other hand,
1R670 and Pokkali showed a ratio < 0.7 on the same parts. There was significant difference
in Na*/K* ratio in leaf sheaths in response to salinity. Sadri demonstrated the highest
Na’/K* ratio in all the leaf sheaths sampled when grown in salt stress. In contrast, IR670
and Pokkali showed comparably the same low response. Sadri showed the highest increase

in both the Na*/K* ratios of branches with spikelets and panicle main stalk.


At mature grain stage, Na*/K* ratios of vegetative and reproductive parts increased
significantly under saline condition. Under salinity, however, Na*/K* ratios of all tissues
sampled for CSR28, IR670, and Pokkali showed lesser increase. By contrast, significantly
higher increase in Na‘/K* ratios of vegetative and reproductive parts were observed for salt
sensitive cultivars. Na*/K* content in the leaves of salt sensitive cultivar Sadri was greatly
increased by about 29-, 38- and 40-folds for flag leaf, second leaf and third leaf,
respectively, but only by 13-, 14- and 16-folds for the breeding line IR670. In leaf sheaths,
similar trend of increase in Na*/K* ratios was observed for all cultivars, with greater
increase in older leaf sheaths than in younger ones and with drastic increase in salt sensitive
cultivars compared to CSR28, IR670 and Pokkali. Similar responses were observed in
reproductive parts such that branches with spikelets have lower Na*/K* ratios compared to
the panicle main stalk. This decline in ratio was more strongly evident in salt-sensitive

cultivars.

Salinity affects plant growth through osmotic effect of the salt in soil and
accumulation of salt to toxic concentrations in plant tissue. The major form of salt present
in soil is NaCl (Gupta and Huang 2014). For most species, Na* appears to accumulate in
toxic concentrations before Cl does. Potassium is also an essential cation in plant systems,
being necessary for physiological and biochemical functions like transpiration,
photosynthesis and translocation of photosynthates and activation of more than 60
enzymes. Because Na‘ is similar to K*, and many K* transporters do not discriminate
sufficiently between these cations, excess external Na* not only impairs K* acquisition but

also leads to accumulation of Na* in plant cells, and as Na* is toxic to cells, this is

undesirable. Ion homeostasis during salinity stress requires maintenance of stable K*
acquisition and distribution to counterbalance the toxic effects of Na* accumulation.
Present results on the analysis of Na*/K* ratios of leaves of rice cultivars differing in salt
tolerance agree with the view that there is strong correlation between salt exclusion and
salt tolerance (Munns et al. 2006). In this study, Na* concentration significantly increased
in both vegetative and reproductive parts under salt stress. Due to the higher accumulation
of sodium and the reduction in potassium uptake, the Na*/K* ratio increased in vegetative
and reproductive parts of rice cultivars under salinity stress. However, the degree of
accumulation was not the same in all tissues. Older leaves have higher Na*/K* ratio than
in younger leaves under salt stress. The salt-sensitive cultivars, Rc222, IR686 and Sadri
showed significant increase in Na*/K* ratio in leaves primarily due to enhanced Na*
accumulation, whereas the breeding line IR670 and the salt-tolerant cultivar Pokkali

showed less sodium accumulation.

Sodium accumulated to a much greater extent in older leaves than in younger
leaves, which is consistent with the results obtained by Mitsuya et al. (2002). The higher
Na’ content in older leaves may result from enhanced accumulation in older leaves which
are not anymore expanding and so no longer diluting the salt arriving in them as younger
leaves do (Munns and Tester 2008). Under salt stress, Na* concentration was higher in leaf
sheath than in leaf blades resulting in higher Na*/K* ratios of leaf sheaths than in leaf
blades. In durum wheat, genotypic differences in Na* transport depends on the differences
in the capacity of the leaf sheath to extract and sequester Na* as it entered the leaf

(Davenport 2005). The low Na*/K** ratio in IR670 and Pokkali may be due to the higher

capacity to exclude Na* and sequester this ion before it enters the leaf. This variation in the
degree of accumulation in the different parts of vegetative tissue can be explained partly
by the formation of parenchyma tissues with large vacuoles in between the lysigenous
intercellular spaces in the leaf sheath and decrease in size as the distance from the base
increased (Mitsuya et al. 2002). Molecular studies of model plants identified membrane
transporters such as HKTI (HIGH- AFFINITY K* TRANSPORTER!), SOS] (SALT
OVERLY SENSITIVE!) and NHX (Na°/H* EXCHANGER) as crucial determinants in
maintaining low cytoplasmic Na* concentrations in plant cells. Tonoplast-localized NHXs
are essential for Na* sequestration in the vacuole whereas HKT1 and SOS1 controls net
flux across the plasma membrane (Schroeder et al. 2013; Deinlein et al. 2014; Mickelbart
et al. 2015). Therefore, the higher Na* concentration in the leaf sheath than in the parts
high up the plant might be a result of exclusion of sodium moving into younger tissue
through activities of antiporters that withdraw sodium out of the xylem vessels during
transport up the plant. Genotypic variation of Na*/K* ratios of leaf sheaths and leaf blades
may have brought about the differential responses that were observed in the concentrations
of malondialdehyde, reduced and total ascorbate, and proline as well as panicle

development in this study.

In general, the sodium concentrations found in the panicle were about an order of
magnitude lower than those commonly found in leaves and leaf sheaths (Asch et al. 1999;
Saeedipour 2014). But since the reproductive processes during spikelet development are
extremely sensitive to sodium, even small changes in sodium concentration can severely

affect the developing reproductive organs (Abdullah et al. 2001). Two different pathways

of uptake into the panicle exist for sodium, one is independent of transpiration and the other
one is driven by panicle transpiration (Asch et al. 1999). In wheat and barley, the control
of salt transport to the reproductive apex is exerted by the loading of the phloem (Munns
and Rawson 1999). Previous work by Munns et al. (1986) had shown that the phloem in
salt stressed barley is able to exclude Na* and CI to a large extent, while keeping K*
concentrations high. In this study, Na*/K’ ratios in the reproductive parts of rice cultivars
were lower than those found in leaf blades and sheaths under salt stress. These results are
in line with the work of Abdullah et al. (2001) showing that sodium accumulation in rice
cultivars decrease progressively while moving up towards the reproductive apex. This

could be due to the composition of phloem sap, which is rich in K* and low in Na’*.

Chlorophyll Concentration

The chlorophyll concentration of flag leaf, second leaf and third leaf was measured
as an index of metabolic status and leaf health, partly for its ease of measurement and
because standard evaluation scoring for salt toxicity is based on visual symptoms.
Chlorophyll a and b concentrations were affected similarly by salt stress. Figure 4 shows
the variation in chlorophyll a and 6 concentrations in six rice cultivars under control and
saline conditions (EC=10) at booting stage. Chlorophyll concentration was reduced in all
sampled leaves in response to salinity. This decline in chlorophyll concentration was
significantly evident in the third leaf. A 31% and 43% reduction in chlorophyll a and 6,
respectively, was found in the third leaf of the salt sensitive genotype Rc222, whereas

breeding line R670 demonstrated lesser reduction (10% and 11%,

D. First leaf

4, A. First f'

=

B. ~~ leaf 4 E. Second leaf

n

ion

|

C. Third leat 4. F. Third leaf
I i I

centration

tin an On Oe

RC222 IR6S6 SADRI CSR28 IR670 POK
Cultivars

RC222 IR6S6 SADRI CSR28 IR670 POK
Cultivars

Figure 4. Salinity-induced changes in chlorophyll a and b concentrations of (A, D) first leaf, (B, E) second
leaf, and (C. F) third leaf of six rice cultivars at booting stage. Data are mean values of three replicates and
vertical bars indicate LSDg 95.

respectively). In flag leaves, a reduction of >50% in chlorophyll a and 5 concentrations
were recorded for IR686. Conversely, IR670 and Pokkali exhibited lower reduction. Figure
5 shows the variation in chlorophyll a and 5 concentrations in six rice cultivars under
control and saline conditions (EC=10) at flowering stage. Both chlorophyll pigments,
chlorophyll a and b, decreased when exposed to salinity stress. In salt treated rice cultivars,
chlorophyll concentrations were lower in older leaves than in younger leaves. The
chlorophyll a concentration in the flag leaf of salt-sensitive cultivars Rc222 and IR686
decreased by 75 and 59%, whereas IR670 and Pokkali exhibited lower reduction of 25%

and 27%, respectively. The concentrations of chlorophyll a and 5 were also similarly

4, A First leaf 4, D. First leaf
I 5) Ei
g
Laan
8 an
EXER
=a
Lo}
4, B. Second leaf 4, E. Second leaf
g I 3 I
5 Be?
5 Be
3 at?
g 83
ei
a8
Lo}
0 0
4, Third leaf 4, F:Third leaf
5 g
23 23
Eg, gS,
a? B22}
gs es
320 = Po
a = RC222 IR686 SADRI CSR28 IR670 POK a af RC222 IR686 SADRI CSR28 IR670 POK
Cultivars Cultivars

Figure 5. Salinity-induced changes in chlorophyll a and b concentrations of (A, D) first leaf, (B, E) second
leaf, and (C, F) third leaf of six rice cultivars at flowering stage. Data are mean values of three replicates
and vertical bars indicate LSD qs.

affected at milk stage in all rice cultivars (Fig. 6). The reduction in chlorophyll a and 6 in
the flag leaf in salt-stressed R222 was 80% and 86%, while that in IR670 was only 12%
and 14%, respectively. Similarly, significant differences in chlorophyll concentrations
were also observed in second and third leaves between control and salinized conditions. A
marked difference in chlorophyll concentrations were noted for all cultivars in response to
salinity at mature grain stage (Fig. 7). Flag leaves of salt-sensitive cultivars Rc222, IR686
and Sadri showed pronounced reduction in chlorophyll a and b concentrations, while there

was lesser reduction in CSR28, IR670 and Pokkali.

4, A First leaf

B. Second leaf

au
i
4, ©. Third leaf

I

g
&

Fr

G

RC222 IR6S6 SADRI CSR28 IR670 POK

D. First leaf

4, E.Second leaf

ion

I

4, F. Third leaf

ue

&
s
a
G

RC222 IR6S6 SADRI CSR2S IR670 POK

Figure 6. Salinity-induced changes in chlorophyll a and b concentrations of (A, D) first leaf, (B, E) second
leaf and (C. F) third leaf of six rice cultivars at milk grain stage. Data are mean values of three replicates

and vertical bars indicate LSDp 95.

Salinity caused chlorophyll a and b concentrations to decrease in older leaves than

in younger leaves at all developmental stages. Considering that chlorophyll a is the main

photosynthetic pigment, the reduction in chlorophyll concentrations observed in these

studies could probably be one of the main reasons for the reports on reduced function of

photosynthetic apparatus in rice (Dionisio-Sese and Tobita 2000; Moradi and Ismail 2007;

Morales et al. 2012) in rice. The structural integrity of the chloroplast is a premise of

photosynthetic capacity in plants. Degradation of chlorophyll has been reported as an

indicator of salt stress in mustard (Mittal et al. 2012), sugarcane (Cha-um et al. 2012) and


A First leaf a5 , D.Firstleaf

|

Control
I BECIO

2.5 - B. Second leaf

F. Third leaf
if

C. Third leaf

I
2 |

RC222 IR6S6 SADRI CSR28 R670 POK
Cultivars

RC222 IR6S6 SADRI CSR28 IR670 POK
Cultivars

(mg gf. wt)

Figure 7. Salinity-induced changes in chlorophyll a and b concentrations of (A, D) first leaf, (B. E) second
leaf and (C. F) third leaf of six rice cultivars at mature grain stage. Data are mean values of three
replicates and vertical bars indicate LSDp 95.

in rice cultivars (Saeedipour 2014). In addition, ultrastructural study of Mitsuya et al.
(2002) in the foliar structure of rice subjected to salt stress treatment revealed that the
plasma membrane in salt-stressed plant was detached from the cell wall at several points
indicating plasmolysis that might be due to the excess Na* accumulation. In barley,
genotypic differences in chloroplast disintegration were observed with considerable
reduction in grana and stroma thylakoids, altered orientation of the grana, swelling of
thylakoids and distortion of grana lamellae (Zahra et al. 2014). These reports indicate that
changes in the ultrastructure of cells, especially the photosynthetic apparatus, are cellular

damages caused by excessive Na* accumulation. Moreover, it was suggested that the

structure of thylakoids and grana stacking is dependent on ion homeostasis in chloroplast.
High concentrations of Na* and CI" could be injurious to thylakoid membranes. The present
results showed that chlorophyll a and 5 concentrations in older leaves decreased more
rapidly than the younger leaves under salt stress in all cultivars across sampling stages,
with more reduction in the salt-sensitive genotypes than in the tolerant breeding line IR670
and tolerant check Pokkali. Also, chlorophyll concentrations paralleled changes in SES
scores by exhibiting lower chlorophyll concentrations with increasing days of exposure to
stress. This variation in the extent of reduction in chlorophyll a and b concentrations may
be due to the distinct Na*/K* ratios in the different vegetative parts of rice varieties.
Vegetative parts with high Na‘/K* ratios may be subjected to ultrastructural damages that
can account for higher reduction in chlorophyll concentrations. The ability of the breeding
line IR670 and tolerant check Pokkali to exhibit lesser reduction in chlorophyll
concentrations is an important mechanism contributing to salinity tolerance to these
genotypes, which could result in higher photosynthetic capacity even under salt stress in

comparison with sensitive rice cultivars.

Effects of Salinity on Malondialdehyde
and Ascorbate Concentrations

Measurement of MDA as a secondary product of oxidation of polyunsaturated fatty
acids has generally been accepted as means of assessing oxidative stress. In this study,
MDA concentration was measured in flag leaves and developing panicles of the six rice

cultivars at booting, flowering, milk stage and mature grain stages. Figure 8 shows


so pA 7
$40
<< 30
Q bw
25 20
E10

RC222 IR686 SADRI CSR28 IR670 POK RC222 IR686 SADRI CSR28 IR670 POK
1500 -B 800 ¢ S
3 I 3 ao | I
$2 1000 $a
<5 2s
ge tad
& Ss soo es
be é| 2200 |
0 0
C222 IR6S6 SADRICSR28 IR670 POK RC222 IR6S6 SADRICSR2S IR670 POK

H

Reduced AsA
(amol g* f. wt)
of 8 s °8
Reduced AsA
(amol g" f. wt.)
2s 88 &
“

RC222 IR6S6 SADRICSR28 IR670 POK RC222 IR6S6 SADRICSR28 IR670 POK

y=0.005x + 6.3459
2735"

y=-0.0158x + 8.9138 to pt
fi 1 = 0.4896"

0 100 200 300 0 50 «100 150-200-250
Reduced AsA (nmol gi f. wt.) Reduced AsA (nmol gi! f. wt.)
1s -E y=-0.0113x + 10.849 in y=0.0014x + 6.3045
z . = -0.7057* r 28
= *,
<u
ou
=
E
0 200 © 400» 600800 0 200 © 400» 600800
Total AsA (nmol gi! f. wt.) Total AsA (nmol g'' f. wt.)

Figure 8. Concentrations of (A) malondialdehyde (MDA), (B) total and (C) reduced ascorbate in the flag leaf
and developing panicles (F, G, H) of six rice cultivars under control and salinized conditions at
booting stage. Correlations of MDA with (D) reduced AsA and with (E) total AsA in the flag leaf
and developing panicles (1, J). Data are mean values of three replicates and vertical bars indicate
LSDopos. *, ** significant at P<0.05 and 0.01. ns, not significant.

concentrations of MDA, total and reduced ascorbate in the flag leaves and developing
panicles of rice cultivars under control and salinized conditions at booting stage.
Correlations of MDA with reduced AsA and with total AsA are also shown. There was
marked difference in MDA concentration in rice leaves in response to salinity. MDA in
flag leaves increased in all cultivars under salt stress. The salt-sensitive cultivars Rc222,
IR686 and Sadri together with CSR28 showed significant changes in MDA level, but no
significant changes were apparent in the breeding line IR670 and Pokkali. This suggests
that the extent of damage by lipid peroxidation in Rce222, IR686, Sadri and CSR28 was
significantly higher when exposed to 10 dS m’!. Consequently, IR670 and Pokkali showed
no significant damage in lipid peroxidation. In developing panicles, the level of MDA
increased in rice cultivars under salt stress. The level of MDA increased in Rc222 and
IR686, and to greater extent in CSR28. However, the observed increase in MDA in
developing panicles in all cultivars is not significant. This indicates that the damage of lipid
peroxidation in all cultivars was not significant at booting stage. Total AsA of flag leaves
decreased in all rice cultivars under salt stress. Total AsA decreased significantly in salt-
sensitive cultivars IR686, Sadri and to greater extent in the sensitive check variety Rc222
under salt stress. On the other hand, CSR28, [R670 and Pokkali showed no significant
differences in MDA level. The total AsA measured in the developing panicles decreased
in all rice cultivars under salt stress. This decline in total ASA was more evident in salt
sensitive cultivars Rc222, IR686 and Sadri. Consequently, CSR28, IR670 and Pokkali did
not exhibit this pronounced decrease. In terms of reduced AsA in flag leaves and
developing panicles, significant differences were observed between treatments in all rice

cultivars, with more effects on the salt-sensitive cultivars. MDA measured in flag leaves at


so pA is pF = Control
x
40 3 I @ECIO
S10
°

MDA
(nmol g" f. wt.
su 8
MDA
(nmol g* f. wt.)

°

RC222 IR686 SADRICSR28 IR670 POK RC222 IR6S6 SADRICSR28 IR670 POK
1300 ¢ B 900  &
2 I 5
ge 1000 3 = 600
i) ze
ss oe
&% 500 & 2 300
2 s
0 0
RC222 IR686 SADRICSR2S IR670 POK RC222 IROS6 SADRICSR28 IR670 POK
600 ¢ © soo , H
$3 | gp I
2a 400 Su 300
gu Be 100
as & = 100
tC) )
RC222 IR6S6 SADRICSR2S IR670 POK RC222 IR6S6 SADRICSR2S IR670 POK
y = -0,1369x + 39.392
3 70 fe PE aisie® > O191x ~ 9.2631
3 EB
<3 <i
we 35 g Ea
a a
Zo 2
0 100 200 300 0 50 100 180. 200-250
Reduced AsA (nmol g" f. wt.) Reduced AsA (nmol g" f. wt.)
E y = -0.021x + 40.751 J
Pi) ees Tree ei sess =? y=-0.0091x ~ 10.512
=e Zs 4 r= -0.5430*
A c4 oe
A= 35} Az, ke
go ele e ge ‘ a te
0 as
g LY > $ £
So s
0 $00 1000-1800 2000 0 200 400 600
Total AsA (nmol g! f. wt.) Total AsA (amol g" f. wt.)

Figure 9. Concentrations of (A) malondialdehyde (MDA), (B) total and (C) reduced ascorbate in the flag
leaf and developing panicles (F, G, H) of six rice cultivars under control and salinized conditions
at flowering stage. Correlations of MDA with (D) reduced AsA and with (E) total AsA in the
flag leaf and developing panicles (I, J). Data are mean values of three replicates and vertical bars
indicate LSD gos. *, ** significant at P<0.05 and 0.01.

booting stage correlated with total AsA and with reduced AsA. There was a moderate
negative correlation between MDA and reduced AsA (r= -0.49) and strong negative
correlation between MDA and total AsA (r = -0.70). Conversely, MDA measured in
developing panicles at booting stage from rice cultivars subjected to salt stress showed
weak positive correlation with total (r = 0.23) and reduced (r = 0.22) AsA.

Figure 9 shows the concentrations of MDA, total and reduced ascorbate in the flag
leaf and developing panicles of rice cultivars under control and salinized conditions at
flowering stage. Correlations of MDA with reduced AsA and with total AsA in these
tissues are also showed. MDA concentration in flag leaves of rice cultivars subjected to
salt stress was similarly affected. MDA increased in all cultivars subjected to salinity stress.
The MDA concentration observed in the flag leaves of sensitive check Rce222 significantly
increased from 8.5 to 22.8 (2.6-fold) under salt stress, but increased only slightly in the
tolerant IR670 and Pokkali (1.1- and 1.6-folds, respectively). This indicates that the extent
of lipid peroxidation in Rc222 was significantly higher under salt stress than in IR670 and
Pokkali. Similar increases in MDA level were observed in flag leaves of IR686 and Sadri,

where it increased by 4.2 and 3.1, respectively.

MDA in developing panicles sampled at flowering stage increased in all cultivars.
It was evident that MDA in CSR28, IR670 and Pokkali increased slightly by 1.5-, 1.6- and
1.4-folds, respectively. In contrast, higher MDA was noted in the salt-sensitive cultivars
Re222 and Sadri (3.4- and 3.2-folds, respectively). These results suggests that lipid
peroxidation in developing panicles in Rc222 and Sadri was significantly higher when

subjected to 10 dS m'!. Total AsA in flag leaves at flowering stage decreased significantly

in Re222, IR686, Sadri and CSR28. Conversely, a slight decline was observed in [R670
and Pokkali. The highest percentage reduction relative to that under control condition was
noted in IR686, followed by Sadri, in which total AsA decreased by about 67% and 66%,
respectively. Lower percentage reduction in total AsA of flag leaves were observed in
IR670 and Pokkali, in which it decreased by only 1% and 6%, respectively, under salinity
stress. Similar trends were observed in the developing panicles at flowering stage, where
total AsA decreased in all rice cultivars. This decline in total AsA was more strongly
evident in the salt sensitive cultivars Rc222, IR686 and Sadri. On the other hand, slight
reductions were observed in CSR28, IR670 and Pokkali. The lowest percentage reduction
in total AsA in developing panicles was observed in Pokkali, followed by IR670, in which
it decreased by only 36% and 27%, respectively. A marked decrease in reduced AsA in
flag leaves was observed in all cultivars. Under control conditions, reduced AsA was
highest in the flag leaf of IR670 and was lowest in Sadri. However, under salt stress,
reduced AsA decreased significantly in all cultivars except for Pokkali. When measured in
the developing panicle, the reduced AsA significantly decreased under salt stress, with
higher reductions in salt sensitive cultivars Rc222, IR686 and Sadri. A strong negative
correlation was observed between MDA and total AsA (r= -0.62) and between MDA and
reduced AsA (r = -0.61) measured in the flag leaves at an EC of 10 dS m™. On the other
hand, the MDA measured in developing panicles of rice cultivars subjected to salt stress
showed moderate and negative correlation with the total AsA (r = -0.54) and with reduced

ASA (r= -0.54).

MDA

(nmol g" f. wt.)

Total AsA
(nmol g" f. wt.)

Reduced AsA

MDA

(nmol g* f. wt.)

MDA

(nmol g" £. wt)

(amol g" f. wt.)

RC222 IR686 SADRI CSR28 IR670 POK

1500 , B

suiull

RC222 IR6S6 SADRICSR28 IR670 POK

600 ©

tlh

RC222 IR6S6 SADRICSR2S IR670 POK

70 -D
.
as +
ee
A ote °
gg ee ee
0 80 100 180. 200380
Reduced AsA (nmol gf. wt)
E y=-00154x + 36.676
bag A! 59948
.
as } mee
+ ie .
°
© S00 1000 1800 2000-2500

Total AsA (nmol g" f. wt.)

MDA
(amol g" f. wt.)

Total ASA
(amol gt f. wt

Reduced AsA

(amo! g" £. wt)

MDA

(nmol g" f. wt.)

MDA

(nmol g" f. wt.)

$00






C) 100


RC222 IR6S6 SADRI CSR28 IR670 POK
G

RC222 IR6S6 SADRICSR28 IR670 POK

H

RC222 IR6S6 SADRICSR2S IR670 POK

y= -O.0111x= 9.1174
r=-0.6081°*

200 300
Reduced AsA (nmol g" f. wt.)


y= -0.0076x = 10.31
ry 1=-0.6282"*

o 200
Total AsA (nmol g" f. wt.)

400 600 800

Figure 10. Concentrations of (A) malondialdehyde (MDA), (B) total and (C) reduced ascorbate in the flag
leaf and developing panicles (F, G, H) of six rice cultivars under control and salinized conditions
at milk stage. Correlations of MDA with (D) reduced AsA anid with (E) total AsA in the flag leaf
and developing panicles (I, J). Data are the mean values of three replicates and vertical bars
indicate LSD 99s. *. ** significant at P<0.05 and 0.01.


Figure 10 shows the concentrations of MDA, total and reduced ascorbate in the flag

leaf and developing panicles of rice cultivars under control and salinized conditions at milk
stage. Correlations of MDA with reduced AsA and with total AsA are also shown. Salinity
induced changes in the level of MDA in flag leaves of rice cultivars when subjected tol10
dS m'. A highly significant increase was observed in MDA in flag leaves of all cultivars
except for IR670 and Pokkali. The two breeding lines IR686 and IR670 showed differential
increase in MDA level in flag leaves. At 10 dS m‘!, MDA in IR686 increased drastically
from 6.3 to 32 (8.4-fold), whereas in IR670, it showed only a slight increase (1 .3-fold).
This suggests that lipid peroxidation due to salinity was significantly higher in IR686. In
contrast, no significant changes in MDA in flag leaves of IR670 was observed, indicating
that lipid peroxidation damage was low even under salt stress. When measured in
developing panicles at the same developmental stage, MDA showed similar changes.
Under salt stress, Rc222 and Sadri showed marked increase in MDA production. The
highest increase relative to that under control conditions was in Rc222, in which MDA was
increased by about 59-fold, and the lowest increase was observed in Pokkali, in which it
increased by 1.4-fold. The total AsA in the flag leaves at milk stage decreased in all rice
cultivars under salt stress. The salt sensitive cultivars Rc222 and Sadri showed significant
decrease in total AsA. In contrast, IR670 demonstrated slight reduction in total AsA. The
lowest percentage reduction in total AsA was observed in IR670, followed by Pokkali,

where it only declined by 7% and 10%, respectively.

When measured in developing panicles at milk stage, total AsA decreased in all

rice cultivars under salt stress. Total AsA differ significantly in the panicles of the breeding

lines IR686 and IR670, where it decreased considerably in IR686, from 481 to 55, a 74%
decrease under salt stress, whereas in IR670 the reduction was much lower (30%). Reduced
AsA in flag leaves at milk stage declined under salinity. Under control conditions, reduced
AsA was highest in the flag leaf of IR670 and was lowest in Sadri, but when rice cultivars
were exposed to an EC of 10 dS m’!, reduced AsA decreased significantly in all cultivars.
The reduced AsA in developing panicles measured at milk stage declined in all cultivars.
This reduction was strongly evident in the salt sensitive cultivars Rc222, IR686 and Sadri.
A moderate negative correlation was observed between MDA and reduced AsA (r= -0.51),
and strong negative correlation between MDA and total AsA (r = -0.60) measured in the
flag leaves at an EC of 10 dS m"'. MDA measured in developing panicles of rice cultivars
subjected to salt stress showed strong negative correlation with total (r = -0.63) and with

reduced (r = -0.61) AsA.

Concentrations of MDA, total and reduced ascorbate in the flag leaf and developing
panicles in rice cultivars under control and salinized conditions were also measured at
mature grain stage (Fig. 11). A highly significant increase in MDA in the flag leaves in salt
sensitive cultivars Rc222, IR686 and Sadri was observed. The rice cultivars CSR28, IR670
and Pokkali showed smaller increase in MDA compared with the salt-sensitive cultivars.
It was observed that MDA in flag leaves of Rc222 increased by 5-fold, whereas the
breeding line IR670 exhibited lower increase of about 1.8-fold. Sadri also showed
pronounced increase in MDA, of about 3-fold. The tolerant check, Pokkali comparably
showed similar increase in MDA as that of IR670. Similar increase in MDA was observed

in the developing panicles measured at maturity. MDA in developing panicles increased in


sop A is pF aeara
Zo ] ej I ECIO
“ ; 10 F
<< 30 <2
at at
FZ 20 blho|
€ gst
£10 s
0 °
RC222 IRGS6 SADRI CSR2S IR670_POK RC222 IR6S6 SADRICSR28 IR670 POK
1so0 - B ms I
qj i t
$ & 1000
<: t
zh
SS soo
e&2s t
0 0
RC222 IR6S6 SADRICSR2S IR670_ POK RC222 IR6S6 SADRI CSR2S IR670 POK
600 -
$2 <3
22 400 I Che
HS as
3 B 200 Ze
ae ae
°
RC222 IR6S6 SADRICSR28 IR670 POK
50 7D 1341x + 35.416
-) " 0.744288
4 <
5 a
o 50 100 150, 200-250 0 100 200 300
Reduced AsA (nmol g? f. wt.) Reduced AsA (umol g" f. wt.)
yey y=-0.027x ~ 38.188 Eised y=-0.0113x~ 10,849
ee r= -0.7480°** : r= -0.7087¢*
‘f = 10
<3 <o
at at
bic oer)
2 z
s So
0 $00 1000 1500 0 200 400 600 $00
Total AsA (nmol g" f. wt.) Total AsA (nmol g" f. wt.)

Figure 11. Concentrations of (A) malondialdehyde (MDA), (B) total and (C) reduced ascorbate in the
flag leaf and developing panicles (F, G, H) of six rice cultivars under control and salinized
conditions at mature grain stage. Correlations of MDA with (D) reduced AsA and with (E)
total AsA in the flag leaf and developing panicles (1, J). Data are the mean values of three
replicates and vertical bars indicate LSDg os. *. * significant at P<0.05, 0.01, and 0.001,

respectively.


Rc222, IR686, Sadri and CSR28, but showed no significant change in IR670 and Pokkali.
This indicates that the extent of lipid peroxidation in IR670 and Pokkali is low even under
salt stress. Total AsA of flag leaves at mature grain stage decreased significantly in Re222,
Sadri, CSR28 and Pokkali under an EC of 10 dS m. When measured in developing
panicles, total AsA decreased in all rice cultivars under salt stress. However, CSR28, IR670
and Pokkali showed lower reduction in total AsA. Total AsA in IR686 drastically
decreased from 503 to 163, a 67% decrease under salt stress, whereas IR670 showed slight
reduction (29%). Measurements of reduced AsA in flag leaves at mature grain stage
showed reduction in reduced AsA under salt stress. Reduced AsA in flag leaves
significantly declined in all cultivars under salt stress, except for Pokkali. The highest
percentage reduction was observed in IR686 followed by Sadri with 91.4% and 91.1%
reductions, respectively. In contrast, the lowest percentage increase was observed in the
tolerant check Pokkali, followed by breeding line IR670, where it increased by about 28%
and 52%, respectively, under salinity stress. Similar decline in reduced AsA was also
observed in developing panicles. This reduction was more evident in the salt-sensitive
cultivars Rc222, IR686 and Sadri. A strong negative correlation was observed between
MDA and total AsA (r = -0.75), and in between MDA and reduced AsA (r = -0.74)
measured in the flag leaves at an EC of 10 dS m'!. On the other hand, the MDA
concentration measured in developing panicles of rice cultivars under salt stress showed

strong negative correlation with total AsA (r = -0.71), and with reduced AsA (r = -0.49).

In plants, ROS are always formed by the inevitable leakage of electrons unto O2

from the electron transport activities of chloroplasts, mitochondria and plasma membranes

or as a byproduct of various metabolic pathways localized in different cellular
compartments (Sharma et al. 2012). ROS play a dual role in response to abiotic stresses,
both as toxic by-products of stress metabolism and as signal transduction molecules.
Previous studies such as drought stress (Yang et al. 2015), heat stress (Harsh et al. 2016)
and salt stress (Oukarroum et al. 2015) reported that ROS production is elevated under
stressful conditions leading to oxidative damage if not scavenged by antioxidant systems.
This occurs when the reduction in PSII is much lower than the extent of reduction in
photosynthesis, such that electrons move unto O2 instead of being used in carbon
assimilation. When ROS generation exceed the capacity of the plants to scavenge them,
lipid peroxidation in biological membranes increases, thereby affecting metabolic and
physiological processes of the cell. MDA is one of the final products of oxidative
modification and is indicative for cell membrane damage affecting changes in intrinsic
properties of the membrane such as fluidity, ion transport, loss of enzyme activity and
protein cross linking. Thus, occurrence of MDA, an end product of the oxidation of
polyunsaturated fatty acids, is a useful index of lipid peroxidation. In the present study,
MDA production is increased in flag leaves across sampling stages, with the increase being
more marked in salt-sensitive genotypes than in tolerant IR670 and Pokkali.
Malondialdehyde production paralleled changes in Na‘/K* ratios by exhibiting higher
concentrations in leaves of salt-sensitive cultivars. In the present experiment, MDA
content of flag leaves in Rce222, IR686 and Sadri were enhanced significantly under salt
stress, suggesting that salt stress increased membrane permeability. The lower
concentration of lipid peroxidation of salt-tolerant cultivars relative to salt-sensitive

cultivars under salt stress suggests that it may have better protection against ROS. This

improved protection may reflect a more efficient antioxidant system as evident by higher
levels of reduced AsA. According to Qin et al. (2010), MDA content in rice cultivars
grown in non-flooded field were increasing as the developmental stages were advancing
from tillering, elongation, heading to grain-filling stages. Rice cultivars grown in non-
flooded field exhibited higher MDA levels than those in flooded field. Experimental
treatment of non-flooded field with straw-mulching resulted in a reduction in leaf MDA
and increase in yield. Recent report of Kanawapee et al. (2013) have shown that flag leaves
of salt-sensitive cultivars suffered more from lipid peroxidation under salt stress resulting
in higher MDA than the tolerant cultivars, and that MDA concentrations tend to increase
with age reaching the maximum in the flag leaves at harvest for rice cultivars grown in
saline fields. Chutipaijit et al. (2011) also reported higher increase in MDA concentrations
in seedlings of salt-sensitive genotypes. In this study, MDA concentrations in the
developing panicles were also reported to increase especially in salt sensitive cultivars.
Aside from chloroplast as source of ROS production, mitochondria as well generate
reactive oxygen species that can be damaging. Recent report of Li et al. (2015)
demonstrates that panicles of a cytoplasmic male-sterile rice line had noticeable higher
MDA content than those of maintainer line in different stages of microspore development.
The excess production and accumulation of MDA and the significant reduction in ROS-
scavenging enzymic activity coincided with the apoptosis of male cells in sterile panicles.

In response to oxidative damage brought about by ROS production under salt stress,
rice cultivars with high concentration of antioxidants have been reported to have greater
tolerance (Dionisio-Sese and Tobita 1998; Moradi and Ismail 2007). Ascorbic acid (AsA)

is an important metabolite with vital role as an antioxidant. AsA can directly scavenge ROS

through enzymes of the ascorbate-glutathione cycle involving the enzyme ascorbate
peroxidase, or non-enzymatically by reducing H2O> directly to water. Apart from its role
as an antioxidant, AsA acts as an electron donor for violaxanthin-epoxidase, an enzyme
involved in the xanthophyll cycle to dissipate excess excitation energy. Moreover, ASA
influences important enzymatic reactions as it is a co-factor of many metal-containing
enzymes (Edreva et al. 2005; Parida and Das 2005; Gupta and Huang 2014). In line with
these reports, the present study showed a strong negative correlation between foliar reduced
AsA concentration and lipid peroxidation at reproductive stage under salt stress, with
similar trend observed between reduced AsA concentration of developing panicles and
lipid peroxidation. The current data clearly support the important role of AsA in reducing

membrane damage during salinity stress.

Effect of Salinity on Proline Accumulation

Proline concentration was measured using the flag leaf tissue and developing
panicles at different developmental stage to determine its association with salinity
tolerance. Figure 12 shows the changes in proline concentration in the flag leaf and
developing panicle at booting, flowering, milk stage and mature grain stages of rice
cultivars under control and salinized conditions. In this study, salt stress induced a marked
increase in proline concentration relative to the level in the control condition in all
developmental stages and for all rice cultivars. At booting stage, proline concentration in

the flag leaf significantly increased in Rc222, IR670 and Pokkali under salt stress. Under

control conditions, proline accumulation in flag leaves was highest in IR670 and lowest in
CSR28. Proline concentration of two breeding lines, IR686 and IR670, showed different
trends of increase under salt stress. Proline concentration in IR686 slightly increased from
0.4 to 8.5 (9-fold) under salt stress, but the increase was more noticeable in IR670, where
it increased from 0.7 to 16 (43-fold). Measuring the same response in developing panicles,
similar increase in proline concentration was observed under salt stress. The proline
concentration in developing panicles increased when subjected to an EC of 10 dS m", but
showed no significant changes in all rice cultivars. This indicates that salinity stress did
not affect the proline concentration in the developing panicles at booting stage.

At flowering stage, proline concentration was measured in flag leaves and
developing panicles in the rice cultivars under control and salinized conditions. It was
evident that proline concentration substantially increased in the flag leaves of IR670 and
Pokkali, where it increased from 0.5 to 18.6 and 0.5 to 18.9, respectively (34- and 36-fold
increase). The flag leaves of the salt-sensitive cultivars Rc222, IR686 and Sadri showed
slight increase in proline concentration with 7-, 6-, and 4-fold increase relative to that under
control conditions. On the other hand, flag leaves of CSR28 showed an 8-fold increase in
its proline concentration. Similarly, proline concentration in developing panicles measured
at the same developmental stage increased when subjected to salt stress, but in varying
degrees depending on the rice cultivar. Under control conditions, proline concentration was
highest in the developing panicles of IR670 and was lowest in Sadri. The highest
percentage increase relative to that under control conditions was exhibited in tolerant check

Pokkali, in which proline concentration increased by about 207%. In contrast, the lowest


A Flag leaf 2 2 E Panicle ican
| 3 BECIO
g
°
z
Oe
RC222 IR6S6 SADRI CSR28 IR670 POK RC222 IR6S SADRICSR2S$ IR67 POK
BOOTING STAGE

Proline concentrati
(uumol g” f. wt.)
ow FS & 8
wo
—

Proline concentré

RC222 IR686 SADRI CSR28 IR670 POK

RC222 IR6S SADRICSR28 IR67 POK

FLOWERING STAGE

Proline concentration
(jumol g-1 f. wt.)
ow 5 & 8B
°
Hw

s,-G

a
mm

¢ concentration
Lo! f. we.)
fs

a?

A
a 0
RC222 IR686 SADRI CSR28 IR670 POK RC222 IR6S SADRI CSRS IR67 POK
MILK STAGE
_ wD « of
a J I
e3” g34
220 BG
g- S22
gus 5
83 83
220 B20
3S —_RC2? IRGS6 SADRI CSR2S IR670 POK 5S C22 IRGS SADRICSR2S IR? POK
& Cultivars ie Qultivars
MATURE GRAIN STAGE

Figure 12. Proline concentration in the flag leaf (A-D) and developing panicle (E-H) at booting (A, E),
flowering (B, F), milk (C,G), and mature grain (D, H) stages of six rice cultivars under control
and salinized conditions. Data are mean values of three replicates and vertical bars indicate

LSDoas-

percentage increase was observed in the breeding line IR686, in which it increased by only

23% when subjected to 10 dS m"'.

At milk stage, proline concentration measured in flag leaves increase but to varying
extents depending on the cultivar. The observed increase in proline concentration in flag
leaves was more evident in IR670 and Pokkali, which showed 12- and 16-fold increase
relative to that under control conditions. Consequently, the salt sensitive cultivars Rc222,
IR686 and Sadri showed smaller increases of 1 1-, 5-, and 7-fold in their flag leaves’ proline
concentration. In addition, proline concentration in flag leaves of CSR28 exhibited a slight
increase from 0.4 to 3.6 (8-fold). When measured in the developing panicles at the same
developmental stage, the responses of proline concentration were similar to that in the flag
leaves, wherein it increased under salt stress condition. However, this observed increase in
proline concentration was strongly evident in IR670 and Pokkali, with lower

concentrations in the salt sensitive-cultivars Rc222, IR686 and Sadri.

At mature grain stage, proline concentration in flag leaves of six rice cultivars
similarly increased under salt stress, but showed no significant changes in Rc222, IR686,
Sadri and CSR28. Conversely, IR670 and Pokkali showed substantial increase in proline
concentration when subjected to an EC of 10 dS m''. Similar response was observed in
developing panicles, where proline concentration increased in all rice cultivars but to
varying extents depending on the rice cultivar. The increase was highest in IR670, about
255%, but lowest in IR686, in which proline concentration increased by only 111% under

salt stress.


Another well-known adaptive mechanism of most plants to cope with salinity stress

is the accumulation of compatible osmolytes. These are groups of chemically diverse
organic compounds that are uncharged, polar, and soluble in nature and do not interfere
with the cellular metabolism even at high concentrations. These mainly include proline
(Szabados and Savouré 2010), glycine betaine, sugars, and polyols (Gupta and Huang
2014). The accumulation of proline in the flag leaf and developing panicles were studied
to investigate its association with tolerance to salt stress. In our study, proline concentration
significantly increased in the flag leaves of breeding line IR670 and tolerant check Pokkali
at all stages, with smaller increase in the sensitive cultivars. Numerous studies reported
that proline plays an essential role in protecting the subcellular structures and in mediating
osmotic adjustment under stress conditions (Rao et al. 2008). Moreover, studies in proline
metabolism supported the findings in which proline biosynthesis is activated during
dehydration and its catabolism repressed, whereas rehydration triggers the opposite
response (Szabados and Savouré 2010). Our findings were consistent with Ghosh et al.
(2011), who reported that seedlings of tolerant cultivars Pokkali and Nona Bokra recorded
high values of proline content under salt stress. In addition, recent studies on exogenous
proline application suggests that it significantly improves tolerance to salt stress in salt-
sensitive rice by maintaining lower Na‘/K* ratio and enhancing proline accumulation and

antioxidant defense systems (Hasanuzzaman et al. 2012; Bhusan et al. 2016).

In this study, salt stress generally induces accumulation of proline in the developing
panicles at reproductive stage, with stronger induction in the developing panicles of IR670

and Pokkali. Proline appears to play a pivotal role in sexual reproduction of angiosperms.

Proline is the most abundant free amino acid in pollen and may constitute up to 70% of the
free amino acid pool in pollen grains of angiosperms. During microsporogenesis, the
tapetum layer supplies nutrients and metabolites including proline to the developing
microspores and plays an important role in pollen development (Mariani et al. 1990;
Paupiére et al. 2014; Biancucci et al. 2015). A recent study using proline-deficient mutant
of Arabidopsis revealed that male gametophytes carrying mutations are severely
compromised, indicating that proline is required for pollen development and transmission
(Mattioli et al. 2012). Given these roles of proline in pollen development, the observed
accumulation of proline in developing panicles may be due to its function as compatible

osmolyte protecting cells from dehydration, in addition to its role in pollen development.


Effect of Salinity on Pollen Viability

Pollen viability as an important component of fertility was evaluated to determine
its association with salinity tolerance using the iodine-potassium iodide method, wherein
the iodine solution stains starch to a dark purple color. Pollens that stain dark/black with
round shape were considered viable while sterile pollens appear lighter (yellow/light-red)
under the microscope. Figure 13 shows photographs of pollens stained with I2KI solution
sampled from six rice cultivars under control and saline conditions at heading stage. Pollen
viability test showed that the dyed starch granules of Rc222 and IR686 were significantly
reduced; the percentage of the former was 19%, and 23% in the latter. Sadri also showed a
significant reduction of 51% in pollen viability under salt stress. The highest percentage
decrease relative to that under control condition was observed in Rc222 and followed by
the breeding line IR686, in which pollen viability decreased by about 79% and 73%,
respectively. The tolerant genotypes CSR28, IR670 and Pokkali did not show this
pronounced reduction in pollen viability when exposed to an EC of 10 dS m”!. The pollen
viability of CSR28, IR670 and Pokkali slightly declined from 91% to 82%, 92% to 84%
and 96% to 94%, respectively (Fig. 14).

The reproductive stage of rice is one of the most sensitive growth stages to saline
conditions. It has been well established that salt stress at this stage has substantial effect on
grain yield. In this study, all rice cultivars showed reduction in pollen viability under salt
stress, but to a greater extent in salt-sensitive cultivars. This might be due to the ability of
the tolerant cultivars to exclude sodium more effectively at the root level, or is better at

partitioning sodium in leaf sheaths and older leaves as reflected in their lower Na*/K* ratio

Figure 13. Pollen grains
stained with I,KI solution.
Control (left) and saline
condition (right). Viable
pollens (black) and sterile
pollens (yellow or light
orange).

Bars = 20pm.



Pollen viability (%)
8 3

yp
B

RC22 IR6S6 SADRI CSR2S IR670 POK
Cultivars

Figure 14, Pollen viability (%) of six rice cultivars under control and salinized conditions. Data
are mean values of three replicates with three subsamples per replication and vertical
bar indicates LSD 95.

in the reproductive parts. Also, since proline is the major amino acid in tapetum supplying
nutrients to the developing microspores (Biancucci et al. 2015), the greater proline
accumulation in panicles of tolerant cultivars may likely contribute to better pollen
development which results in better pollen viability. Similarly, Sarhadi et al. (2012) have
shown that the viability of pollen is reduced more in salt-sensitive IR64 than the salt-
tolerant Cheriveruppu. Greater reduction in pollen viability under salt stress will result in

low seed-set and poor grain yield.


Effects of Salinity on Yield Components

Salinity induced changes in rice agronomic characters to varying extents depending
on the cultivar. Table 7 summarizes the different yield components measured at harvest in
six rice cultivars under control and saline conditions. Salt stress caused decrease in panicle
length in all rice cultivars. The highest percentage reduction relative to that under control
condition was observed in Rc222, in which panicle length decreased by about 33%, and
the lowest reduction was noted in IR670, in which it decreased by only 10% under salinity
stress. Percentage reduction in panicle length of IR686, Sadri and CSR28 ranged from 13-

30%. In contrast, panicle length of Pokkali was slightly reduced from 29 to 20 cm (20%

Table 5. Summary of yield components of six rice cultivars under control and saline conditions. Values are
means of 15 samples (#SE).

CONTROL SALT STRESS (EC = 10 dS m")
Panicle Panicles Filled ‘Unfilled Panicle Panicles ‘Filled. Unfilled Grain yield
CULTIVARS length(cm) plant’ grains grains length(cm) plant” grains grains (e)
panicle’ panicle” panicle’ panicle" _% reduction
R222 33,740.29 5.84043 5784091 4540.98 19540.70 4.14059 7.04024 4024041 85.2
IR686 22.8£0.69 6.74042 4624158 4.74187 1694031 3.14045 7.74065 48.0 41.26 86.2
Sadri 28.44£0.78 5340.28 3554023 4240.56 17020.15 234036 3.740.71 2834025 88.3
CSR28 2794045 4.14041 3974184 4341.79 1734072 3.94058 2122041 8.74055 29.2
1R670 23,840.55 6.24031 43.11.96 4240.94 1854059 5.14041 3422092 6.10.66 15.2
Pokkali 2954064 784055 4164065 4341.73 20.240.95 654088 25.140.29 11440.77 313

reduction). Salinity stress also decreased the number of panicles per plant. The salt-
sensitive cultivars Rc222, IR686 and Sadri exhibited greater percentage reductions in
number of panicles per plant, where it decreased by 29%, 53%, and 57%, respectively,

under salt stress. Lower reductions in number of panicles per plant were observed in

CSR28, IR670, and Pokkali. The number of panicles per plant was reduced by 17% in both
1R670 and Pokkali and only by 4% in CSR28. The number of filled and unfilled grains per
panicle were the most seriously affected yield components because of salt stress. Filled
grains per panicle varied from 35 to 57 under normal condition and from 3 to 34 under salt
stress. The breeding lines IR686 and IR670 showed variable responses where IR686
showed drastic reduction in filled grains per panicle, from 46 to 7 (an 83% reduction),
whereas IR670 showed a much smaller reduction of only 10% under salinity stress. The

Table 6. Correlation coefficients for the associations of pollen viability and yield components
at reproductive stage.

POLLEN FILLED GRAINS UNFILLED GRAINS GRAIN

VIABILITY (%) PANICLE PANICLE™ YIELD (g)
Pollen viability (%) 1.00
Filled grains panicle 0.79*** 1.00
Unfilled grains panicle’ -0.67*** -0.81°** 1.00
Grain yield (g) 0.80*** 0.86*** -0.748** 1.00

*** Correlation is significant at P<0.

highest percentage reduction in filled grains per panicle was shown by Sadri, in which it
decreased by about 89% under salt stress. Salinity stress resulted in substantial increase in
the number of unfilled grains per panicle, where it increased in the salt sensitive cultivars
Rc222, IR686 and Sadri, by 8-, 10-, and 6-fold, respectively, under salinity stress.
Conversely, CSR28, IR670 and Pokkali showed only 2-, 1-, and 2-fold increases in unfilled
grains per panicle, respectively. Correlation coefficients among yield components and

pollen viability at reproductive stage are presented in Table 8. Pollen viability showed

strong positive correlation with filled grains per panicle (r=0.79) and with grain yield

(r0.80), but negatively correlated with unfilled grains per panicle (r=-0.67).

Aside from physiological changes induced by salinity, development of the
reproductive part is also extremely sensitive to salt stress, as reflected in panicle
development. Rice cultivars differ in the ability to tolerate salt stress at reproductive stage,
and panicle growth and development is the most commonly used parameter in evaluating
salinity effect, especially for breeding purposes. The rice cultivars used in this study are
diverse. Two cultivars, Rc222 and Pokkali, are commonly used as salt-sensitive and salt-
tolerant checks, respectively. Two breeding lines, IR686 and IR670, were reported to
exhibit 90% and 1% reduction in grain yield, respectively, under salt stress (EC = 6 dS m™
') (Moradi et al. 2003). CSR28 is a Na*-excluding variety (Singh et al. 2010b) and ‘Sadri’
is an Iranian cultivar with moderate tolerance to saline conditions (Mohammadi-Nejad et
al. 2008). In general, all yield components, except for unfilled spikelets per plant, decreased
under salt stress, with the reduction being more evident in the sensitive genotypes Rc222,
IR686 and Sadri. Our results confirm the findings by Moradi et al. (2003), who first
reported contrasting responses for the two breeding lines IR686 and IR670. Similarly,
Dooki et al. (2006) suggested that Na* and K* concentrations in panicles and several other
yield components changed significantly in response to short-term salt stress. Photosynthate
transfer includes phloem unloading from the crease region to the endosperm cavity,
subsequent movement into the endosperm and finally conversion into starch as storage
material (Wang et al. 1995). Abdullah et al. (2001) demonstrated that starch synthetase, a

key enzyme involve in starch metabolism, is significantly inhibited in both primary and

secondary branches of the rice panicle due to higher accumulation of Na* and lower
concentration of K* in floral parts. The pronounced increase in unfilled spikelets per
panicle in Rc222 and IR686 may be due to the reduction in pollen viability as reported
here, and limited carbohydrate translocation to the panicles (Abdullah et al. 2001), as an
effect of accumulation of more sodium and less potassium in floral parts. Moreover,
reduction in filled spikelets per panicle may also be attributed to lesser proline
accumulation in panicles leading to lower viable pollens, competition for carbohydrate
supply between vegetative growth and developing panicles and also among spikelets within

panicle (Zeng and Shannon 2000), as the source capacity decline under salt stress.

Salinity affects plant growth through osmotic effect and accumulation of salt to
toxic concentrations in plant tissue. Because Na* competes with K* for uptake sites in both
low-affinity (non-selective cation channels) and high-affinity transporters, excess Na* not
only impairs K* acquisition but leads to accumulation of Na* in plant cells, disrupting ion
homeostasis and interfering the vital roles of K*. Present results on the analysis of Na*/K*
ratios of leaves of rice cultivars differing in salt tolerance agree with the view that there is
strong correlation between salt exclusion and salt tolerance (Munns et al. 2006). The low
Na*/K* ratio in IR670 and Pokkali may be due to the higher capacity to exclude Na* and
sequester this ion before it enters the leaf. The variation in the degree of accumulation in
the different parts of vegetative tissue can be explained partly by the larger vacuoles in the
parenchyma cells of leaf sheath that decrease in size as the distance from the base increased
(Mitsuya et al. 2002) or might be a result of exclusion of sodium moving into younger

tissue, as well as recirculation of sodium back to roots and enhanced retrieval of Na* from

xylem stream to avoid accumulation of toxic concentrations in the cytoplasm through
activities of transporters that withdraw sodium out of the xylem vessels during transport
up the plant. Also, salinity caused total chlorophyll concentration to decrease in all sampled
leaves, the extent of reduction could be quite different, especially in relation to leaf positon
with higher reduction in older leaves than the younger leaves, and with more pronounced
reduction in the salt-sensitive cultivars Rc222, [R686 and Sadri. The variation in the extent
of reduction in total chlorophyll concentrations may be due to the distinct Na*/K* ratios in
leaves sampled at different position with older leaves likely subjected to severe
ultrastructural damages. The ability of the breeding line IR670 and tolerant check Pokkali
to exhibit lesser reduction in chlorophyll concentration is an important mechanism
contributing to salinity tolerance to these genotypes, which could result in higher
photosynthetic capacity even under salt stress in comparison with sensitive rice cultivars.
Among the six cultivars, IR670 and Pokkali showed lower MDA concentration in flag
leaves and developing panicles suggesting that it may have better protection against ROS.
Malondialdehyde production paralleled changes in Na*/K* ratios by exhibiting higher
MDA concentration in leaves of salt-sensitive cultivars. This improved protection may
reflect a more efficient antioxidant system as evident by higher levels of reduced AsA. The
greater proline accumulation in the developing panicles of IR670 and Pokkali may
contribute to tolerance specifically on pollen development, resulting in higher pollen

viability and thus, higher grain yield.

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION

Salinity is a major abiotic stress limiting plant growth and crop productivity.
Although considered as the most sensitive among all cereal crops, rice accessions exhibit
variable responses to salinity and large genetic diversity have been observed. Responses
also vary depending on the developmental stage at which genotypes are exposed, and
tolerance at seedling stage is not necessarily associated with tolerance at reproductive
stage. A number of studies on morphological, physiological and genetic responses to
salinity stress have been conducted and published on rice, but with focus on tolerance at
the seedling stage and only few studies evaluated tolerance at reproductive stage. Studies
on the reproductive stage seem to be more relevant for grain yield because it is within this
stage that fertilization and formation of the seed occurs. Moreover, this information is of
vital importance for breeders in selecting appropriate parental lines to develop salt-tolerant
cultivars.

This study evaluated the responses of six rice genotypes contrasting in salinity
tolerance to salt stress at seedling and reproductive stages in a greenhouse experiment.
These genotypes include IR670 and IR686, which are breeding lines reported with 1% and
90% reduction in grain yield, respectively, CSR28, a Na*- excluder; ‘Sadri’, an Iranian
cultivar previously reported with moderate tolerance to saline conditions; and two checks,
sensitive Rc222 and tolerant Pokkali. Two experiments were conducted, with salt stress
imposed during either seedling or reproductive stages. Standard visual evaluation scoring
was the only parameter assessed at seedling stage, while physiological responses in leaves

and developing panicles together with growth and yield were investigated at four

developmental stages during reproduction (booting, flowering, milk stage and mature grain
stages). Vegetative and reproductive parts were collected and analyzed for changes in
Na‘/K" ratio, chlorophyll, malondialdehyde, ascorbate, proline, pollen viability, and yield
components.

The results of the standard visual evaluation scoring revealed that IR686 and Sadri
were sensitive while CSR28 and IR670 were moderately tolerant at the seedling stage (EC
= 10 dS m''). When salt stress was increased to 12 dS m™!, Rc222 was highly sensitive
while CSR28, IR670 and Pokkali were moderately tolerant. During the reproductive stage,
Sadri was more sensitive to salt stress than IR686 while CSR28 and IR670 were moderately
tolerant. The results of this study showed that salinity induced substantial changes in
vegetative and reproductive parts’ Na*, K* and chlorophyll concentrations in the six rice
cultivars at reproductive stage. Under salt stress, the salt sensitive cultivars Rc222, IR686
and Sadri showed higher Na*/K* ratio in vegetative and reproductive parts across sampling
stages. These cultivars showed higher symptoms of oxidative damage, as demonstrated by
the higher concentrations of MDA and lower concentrations of reduced ascorbate, which
is required to detoxify ROS generated under salt stress condition. Higher Na*/K* ratio in
both vegetative and reproductive parts, coupled with higher concentration of MDA, low
reduced ascorbate concentration, and lesser capability of proline accumulation in flag
leaves and developing panicles are associated with sensitivity, thereby affecting panicle
growth and development in sensitive cultivars under salt stress and leading to decrease in
pollen viability. In general, sodium and potassium measurements in vegetative and
reproductive parts of rice cultivars subjected to an EC of 10 dS m’' revealed that Na*/K*

ratio decreased as you move towards the reproductive apex. The greater tolerance of the

known salt-tolerant landrace Pokkali and the breeding line IR670 seems to be associated
with greater capability to exclude Na‘, as reflected in lower Na*/K* ratio, lower
concentration of MDA under salt stress, and higher concentrations of reduced ascorbate.
This study also showed that greater proline accumulation in the developing panicles of
IR670 and Pokkali may contribute to tolerance specifically on pollen development,
resulting in higher pollen viability. All yield components, except for unfilled spikelets per
plant, were negatively impacted by salt stress, and the effects are more evident in the
sensitive Re222, IR686 and Sadri. Interestingly, Sadri was previously reported as
moderately tolerant at seedling stage, but here, it showed physiological and growth
responses similar to that of the salt sensitive cultivars. Moreover, CSR28, which is a salt
tolerant variety released for alkaline/sodic soils in north India, showed better tolerance
during the reproductive stage. The information generated in this study showed considerable
variation in tolerance during reproductive stage in rice that can be exploited for breeding

tolerant cultivars.

LITERATURE CITED

ABDULLAH Z, KHAN MA, FLOWERS TJ. 2001. Causes of sterility in seed set of rice
under salinity stress. Journal of Agronomy and Crop Science 187, 25-32.

ADEM GD, ROY SJ, ZHOU M, BOWMAN JP, SHABALA S. 2014. Evaluating
contribution of ionic, osmotic and oxidative stress components towards salinity
tolerance in barley. BMC Plant Biology 14, 1-13.

ARZANI A. 2008. Improving salinity tolerance in crop plants: a biotechnological view. Jn
Vitro Cellular and Developmental Biology - Plant 44, 373-383.

ASCH F, DINGKUHN M, WITTSTOCK C, DOERFFLING K. 1999. Sodium and
potassium uptake of rice panicles as affected by salinity and season in relation to
yield and yield components. Plant and Soil 207, 133-145.

ASHRAF M, FOOLAD MR. 2007. Roles of glycine betaine and proline in improving plant
abiotic stress resistance. Environmental and Experimental Botany 59, 206-216.

BHUSAN D, DAS DK, HOSSAIN M, MURATA Y, HOQUE MA. 2016. Improvement
of salt tolerance in rice (Oryza sativa L.) by increasing antioxidant defense systems
using exogenous application of proline. Australian Journal of Crop Science 10, 50-
56.

BATES LS, WALDREN RP, TEARE, ID. 1973. Rapid determination of free proline for
water-stress studies. Plant and Soil 39, 205-207.

BIANCUCCI M, MATTIOLIR, FORLANI G, FUNCK D, COSTANTINO P, TROVATO
M. 2015. Role of proline and GABA in sexual reproduction of angiosperms.
Frontiers in Plant Science 6, 1-11.

BISWAS S, RAZZAQUE S, ELIAS SM, AMIN USM, HAQUE T, ISLAM SMT, LISA
LA, NAZNIN F, RASUL NM, SERAJ ZI. 2015. Effect of the vacuolar Na*/H*
antiporter transgene in a rice landrace and a commercial rice cultivar after its
insertion by crossing. Acta Physiologiae Plantarum 37, 1-10.

CARILLO P, ANNUNZIATA MG, PONTECORVO G, FUGGI A, WOODROW P. 2011.
Salinity stress and salt tolerance. Abiotic Stress in Plants-Mechanisms and
Adaptations, 21-38.


CARILLO P, MASTROLONARDO G, NACCA F, PARISI D, VERLOTTA A, FUGGI
A. 2008. Nitrogen metabolism in durum wheat under salinity: accumulation of
proline and glycine betaine. Functional Plant Biology 35, 412-426.

CHA-UM S, CHUENCHAROEN S, MONGKOLSIRIWATANA C, ASHRAF M,
KIRDMANEE C. 2012. Screening sugarcane (Saccharum sp.) genotypes for salt
tolerance using multivariate cluster analysis. Plant Cell, Tissue and Organ Culture
(PCTOC) 110, 23-33.

CHEN Z, ZHOU M, NEWMAN IA, MENDHAM NJ, ZHANG G, SHABALA S. 2007.
Potassium and sodium relations in salinised barley tissues as a basis of differential
salt tolerance. Functional Plant Biology 34, 150-162.

CHINNUSAMY V, JAGENDORF A, ZHU J-K. 2005. Understanding and improving salt
tolerance in plants. Crop Science 45, 437-448.

CHUNTHABUREE S, DONGSANSUK A, SANITCHON J, PATTANAGUL W,
THEERAKULPISUT P. 2015. Physiological and biochemical parameters for
evaluation and clustering of rice cultivars differing in salt tolerance at seedling
stage. Saudi Journal of Biological Sciences 23, 467-477.

CHUTIPAIJIT S, CHA-UM S, SOMPORNPAILIN K. 2011. High contents of proline and
anthocyanin increase protective response to salinity in Oryza sativa L. spp. indica.
Australian Journal of Crop Science 5, 1191-1198.

CLERMONT-DAUPHIN C, SUWANNANG N, GRUNBERGER O, HAMMECKER C,
MAEGHT JL. 2010. Yield of rice under water and soil salinity risks in farmers’
fields in northeast Thailand. Field Crops Research 118, 289-296.

DAVENPORT R. 2005. Control of sodium transport in durum wheat. Plant Physiology
137, 807-818.

DEINLEIN U, STEPHAN AB, HORIE, T, LUO W, XU G, SCHROEDER JI. 2014. Plant
salt-tolerance mechanisms. Trends in Plant Science 19, 371-379.

DEMIRAL T, TURKAN I. 2005. Comparative lipid peroxidation, antioxidant defense
systems and proline content in roots of two rice cultivars differing in salt tolerance.
Environmental and Experimental Botany 53, 247-257.

DIONISIO-SESE ML, TOBITA S. 1998. Antioxidant responses of rice seedlings to
salinity stress. Plant Science 135, 1-9.


DIONISIO-SESE ML, TOBITA S. 2000. Effects of salinity on sodium content and
photosynthetic responses of rice seedlings differing in salt tolerance. Journal of
Plant Physiology 157, 54-58.

DOOKI AD, MAYER-POSNER FJ, ASKARI H, ZAIEE A, SALEKDEH GH. 2006.
Proteomic responses of rice young panicles to salinity. Proteomics 6, 6498-6507.

EDREVA A. 2005. Generation and scavenging of reactive oxygen species in chloroplasts:
a submolecular approach. Agriculture, Ecosystems & Environment 106, 119-133.

EL-SHABRAWI H, KUMAR B, KAUL T, REDDY MK, SINGLA-PAREEK SL,
SOPORY SK. 2010. Redox homeostasis, antioxidant defense, and methylglyoxal
detoxification as markers for salt tolerance in Pokkali rice. Protoplasma 245, 85—
96.

EMON RM, GREGORIO GB, NEVAME AYM, ISLAM MM, ISLAM MR, YE-YANG
F. 2015. Morpho-genetic screening of the promising rice genotypes under salinity
stress. Journal of Agricultural Science 7.

FAO. 2008. FAO Land and Plant Nutrition Management Service. Retrieved from
http://www. fao.org/ag/agl/agll/spush

FLOWERS TJ, COLMER TD. 2015. Plant salt tolerance: adaptations in halophytes.
Annals of Botany 115, 327-331.

FUKUDA A, NAKAMURA A, TANAKA Y. 1999. Molecular cloning and expression of
the Na*/H* exchanger gene in Oryza sativa. Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA)
- Gene Structure and Expression 1446, 149-155.

GENC Y, MCDONALD, GK, TESTER M. 2007. Reassessment of tissue Na*
concentration as a criterion for salinity tolerance in bread wheat. Plant, Cell and
Environment 30, 1486-1498.

GHOSH N, ADAK MK, GHOSH PD, GUPTA S, SEN GUPTA DN, MANDAL C. 2011.
Differential responses of two rice varieties to salt stress. Plant Biotechnology
Reports 5, 89-103.

GREGORIO GB, SENADHIRA D, MENDOZA RD. 1997. Screening rice for salinity
tolerance. International Rice Research Institute discussion paper series No. 22 (pp.
1-30).

GREGORIO GB, SENADHIRA D, MENDOZA RD, MANIGBAS NL, ROXAS JP,
GUERTA CQ. 2002. Progress in breeding for salinity tolerance and associated
abiotic stresses in rice. Field Crops Research 76, 91-101.


GUPTA B, HUANG B. 2014. Mechanism of salinity tolerance in plants: physiological,
biochemical, and molecular characterization. International Journal of Genomics
2014, 1-18.

HAKIM MA, JURAIMI AS, BEGUM M, HANAFI MM, ISMAIL MR, SELAMAT A.
2010. Effect of salt stress on germination and early seedling growth of rice (Oryza
sativa L.). African Journal of Biotechnology 9, 1911-1918.

HARSH A, SHARMA YK, JOSHI U, RAMPURIA S, SINGH G, KUMAR S, SHARMA
R. 2016. Effect of short-term heat stress on total sugars, proline and some
antioxidant enzymes in moth bean (Vigna aconitifolia). Annals of Agricultural
Sciences 61, 57-64.

HASANUZZAMAN M, HOSSAIN MA, DA SILVA JAT, FUJITA M. 2012. Plant
response and tolerance to abiotic oxidative stress: antioxidant defense is a key
factor, In: Venkateswarlu B, Shanker AK, Shanker C, Maheswari M (Eds.), Crop
Stress and Its Management: Perspectives and Strategies. Springer Netherlands,
Dordrecht, pp. 261-315.

HODGES DM, DELONG JM, FORNEY CF, PRANGE RK. 1999. Improving the
thiobarbituric acid-reactive-substances assay for estimating lipid peroxidation in
plant tissues containing anthocyanin and other interfering compounds. Planta 207,
604-611.

HOPKINS WG, HUNER NPA. 2008. Introduction to plant physiology, 4th ed. John Wiley
and Sons, Hoboken, NJ.

HOQUE MA, BANU MNA, NAKAMURA Y, SHIMOISHI Y, MURATA Y. 2008.
Proline and glycinebetaine enhance antioxidant defense and methylglyoxal
detoxification systems and reduce NaCl-induced damage in cultured tobacco cells.
Journal of Plant Physiology 165, 813-824.

HOSSAIN MA, ISMAIL MR, UDDIN MK, ISLAM MZ, ASHRAFUZZAMAN M. 2013.
Efficacy of ascorbate-glutathione cycle for scavenging H2O> in two contrasting rice
genotypes during salinity stress. Australian Journal of Crop Science 7, 1801.

HUANG C, YANG W, DUAN L, JIANG N, CHEN G, XIONG L, LIU Q. 2013. Rice
panicle length measuring system based on dual-camera imaging. Computers and
Electronics in Agriculture 98, 158-165.

HUSSAIN M, PARK H-W, FAROOQ M, JABRAN K, LEE D-J. 2013. Morphological
and physiological basis of salt resistance in different rice genotypes. International
Journal of Agriculture and Biology 15, 113-118.

IRRI. 2006. Bringing Hope, Improving Lives: Strategic Plan 2007-2015. Manila.


ISMAIL AM, HEUER S, THOMSON MJ, WISSUWA M. 2007. Genetic and genomic

approaches to develop rice germplasm for problem soils. Plant Molecular Biology
65, 547-570.

JACOBSEN T, ADAMS RM. 1958. Salt and silt in ancient Mesopotamian agriculture.
Science 128, 1251-1258.

JAMES RA, BLAKE C, BYRT CS, MUNNS R. 2011. Major genes for Na* exclusion,
Nax! and Nax2 (wheat HKT/;4 and HKT1,5), decrease Na* accumulation in bread
wheat leaves under saline and waterlogged conditions. Journal of Experimental
Botany 62, 2939-2947.

KANAWAPEE N, SANITCHON J, SRIHABAN P, THEERAKULPISUT P. 2013.
Physiological changes during development of rice (Oryza sativa L.) varieties
differing in salt tolerance under saline field condition. Plant and Soil 370, 89-101.

LEIDI EO, BARRAGAN V, RUBIO L, EL-HAMDAOUI A, RUIZ MT, CUBERO B,
FERNANDEZ JA, BRESSAN RA, HASEGAWA PM, QUINTERO FJ, PARDO
JM. 2010. The AtNHX1 exchanger mediates potassium compartmentation in
vacuoles of transgenic tomato. The Plant Journal 61, 495-506.

LETEY J. 2000. Soil salinity poses challenges for sustainable agriculture and wildlife.
California Agriculture 54, 43-48.

LI J, DAI X, LIL, JIAO Z, HUANG Q. 2015. Metabolism of reactive oxygen species in
cytoplasmic male sterility of rice by marking upmost pulvinus interval. Applied
Biochemistry and Biotechnology 175, 1263-1269.

LICHTENTHALER HK, BUSCHMANN C. 2001. Chlorophylls and carotenoids:
measurement and characterization by UV-VIS spectroscopy. In: Current Protocols
in Food Analytical Chemistry F4.3.1-F4.3.8, John Wiley and Sons Inc., USA.

MARIANI C, BEUCKELEER MD, TRUETTNER J, LEEMANS J, GOLDBERG RB.
1990. Induction of male sterility in plants by a chimaeric ribonuclease gene. Nature
347, 737-741.

MATTIOLI R, BIANCUCCI M, LONOCE C, COSTANTINO P, TROVATO M. 2012.
Proline is required for male gametophyte development in Arabidopsis. BMC Plant
Biology 12, 236.

MICKELBART, MV, HASEGAWA PM, BAILEY-SERRES J. 2015. Genetic
mechanisms of abiotic stress tolerance that translate to crop yield stability. Nature
Reviews Genetics 16, 1-15.


MITSUYA S, YANO K, KAWASAKI M, TANIGUCHI M, MIYAKE H. 2002.
Relationship between the distribution of Na* and the damages caused by salinity in
the leaves of rice seedlings grown under a saline condition. Plant Production
Science 5, 269-274.

MITTAL S, KUMARI N, SHARMA V. 2012. Differential response of salt stress on
Brassica juncea: Photosynthetic performance, pigment, proline, D1 and antioxidant
enzymes. Plant Physiology and Biochemistry 54, 17-26.

MITTLER R, VANDERAUWERA S, SUZUKI N, MILLER G, TOGNETTI VB,
VANDEPOELE K, GOLLERY M, SHULAEV V, VAN BREUSEGEM F. 2011.
ROS signaling: the new wave? Trends in Plant Science 16, 300-309.

MOHAMMADI-NEJAD G, ARZANI A, REZAI AM, SINGH RK, GREGORIO GB.
2008. Assessment of rice genotypes for salt tolerance using microsatellite markers
associated with the saltol QTL. African Journal of Biotechnology 730-736.

MOHAMMADI-NEJAD G, SINGH RK, ARZANI A, SABOURI H, GREGORIO GB,
REZAIE AM, 2010. Evaluation of salinity tolerance in rice genotypes.
International Journal of Plant Production 4, 199-208.

MORADI F, ISMAIL AM. 2007. Responses of photosynthesis, chlorophyll fluorescence
and ROS-scavenging systems to salt stress during seedling and reproductive stages
in rice. Annals of Botany 99, 1161-1173.

MORADI F, ISMAIL AM, GREGORIO GB, EGDANE JA. 2003. Salinity tolerance of
rice during reproductive development and association with tolerance at the seedling
stage. Indian Journal of Plant Physiology 276-287.

MORALES SG, TREJO-TELLEZ LI, GOMEZ MERINO FC, CALDANA C,
ESPINOSA-VICTORIA D, HERRERA CABRERA BE. 2012. Growth,
photosynthetic activity, and potassium and sodium concentration in rice plants
under salt stress. Acta Scientiarum. Agronomy 34.

MUNNS R, FISHER D, TONNET M. 1986. Na* and CI’ Transport in the phloem from
leaves of NaCl-treated barley. Australian Journal of Plant Physiology 13, 757-766.

MUNNS R, JAMES RA, LAUCHLI A. 2006. Approaches to increasing the salt tolerance
of wheat and other cereals. Journal of Experimental Botany 57, 1025-1043.

MUNNS R, RAWSON HM. 1999. Effect of salinity on salt accumulation and reproductive
development in the apical meristem of wheat and barley. Australian Journal of
Plant Physiology 26, 459.


MUNNS R, TESTER M. 2008. Mechanisms of salinity tolerance. Annual Review of Plant
Biology 59, 651-681.

MUNNS R, WALLACE PA, TEAKLE NL, COLMER TD. 2010. Measuring soluble ion
concentrations (Na*, K*, CI) in Salt-Treated Plants, In: Sunkar R, Plant Stress
Tolerance. Humana Press, Totowa, NJ, 371-382.

MUTERT E, FAIRHURST TH. 2002. Developments in rice production in Southeast Asia.
Better Crops International, 12-17.

NAKHODA B, LEUNG H, MENDIORO MS, MOHAMMADI-NEJAD G, ISMAIL AM.
2012. Isolation, characterization, and field evaluation of rice (Oryza sativa L., Var.
IR64) mutants with altered responses to salt stress. Field Crops Research 127, 191—
202.

NOBLE CL, ROGERS ME. 1992. Arguments for the use of physiological criteria for
improving the salt tolerance in crops. Plant and Soil 146, 99-107.

OUKARROUM A, BUSSOTTI F, GOLTSEV V, KALAJI HM. 2015. Correlation
between reactive oxygen species production and photochemistry of photosystems I
and II in Lemna gibba L. plants under salt stress. Environmental and Experimental
Botany 109, 80-88.

PALAO CDC, VINA CBD, GREGORIO GB, SINGH RK. 2013. A new phenotyping
technique for salinity tolerance at the reproductive stage in rice. Oryza 50, 199-
207.

PARIDA AK, DAS AB. 2005. Salt tolerance and salinity effects on plants: a review.
Ecotoxicology and Environmental Safety 60, 324-349.

PAUPIERE M, VAN HEUSDEN A, BOVY A. 2014. The metabolic basis of pollen
thermo-tolerance: perspectives for breeding. Metabolites 4, 889-920.

QIN J, WANG X, HU F, LI, H. 2010. Growth and physiological performance responses to
drought stress under non-flooded rice cultivation with straw mulching. Plant, Soil
and Environment 56, 51-59.

QURESHI AS, AL-FALAHI A. 2015. Extent, characterization and causes of soil salinity
in Central and Southern Iraq and possible reclamation strategies. International
Journal of Engineering Research and Applications 5, 84-94.

RAHNAMA A, JAMES RA, POUSTINI K, MUNNS R. 2010. Stomatal conductance as a
screen for osmotic stress tolerance in durum wheat growing in saline soil.
Functional Plant Biology 37, 255-263.


RAJENDRAN K, TESTER M, ROY SJ. 2009. Quantifying the three main components of
salinity tolerance in cereals. Plant, Cell and Environment 32, 237-249.

RAO PS, MISHRA B, GUPTA SR, RATHORE A. 2008. Reproductive stage tolerance to
salinity and alkalinity stresses in rice genotypes. Plant Breeding 127, 256-261.

REDFERN SK, AZZU N, BINAMIRA JS. 2012. Rice in Southeast Asia: facing risks and
vulnerabilities to respond to climate change. Building Resilience for Adaptation to
Climate Change in the Agriculture Sector 23, 295-314.

RENGASAMY P. 2006. World salinization with emphasis on Australia. Journal of
Experimental Botany 57, 1017-1023.

RENGASAMY P. 2014. Soil salinization. Oxford Bibliographies in Environmental
Science.

ROY SJ, NEGRAO S, TESTER M. 2014. Salt resistant crop plants. Current Opinion in
Biotechnology 26, 115-124.

RUBELL MH, LUTFUL H, MIRZA MI, ARIF HKB, ALAM MJ. 2014. Evaluation of rice
genotypes under salt stress at the seedling and reproductive stages using phenotypic
and molecular markers. Pakistan Journal of Botany 46, 423-432.

SAEEDIPOUR S. 2011. Salinity tolerance of rice lines related to endogenous abscisic acid
(ABA) level synthesis under stress. African Journal of Plant Science 5, 628-633.

SAEEDIPOUR S. 2014. The effect of salinity stress on ions distribution in panicle, flag
leaf and leaf sheaths of two rice (Oryza sativa L.) genotypes differing in salt
tolerance. International Journal of Biosciences (1JB) 269-275.

SARHADI E, BAZARGANI MM, SAJISE AG, ABDOLAHI S, VISPO NA, ARCETA
M, NEJAD GM, SINGH RK, SALEKDEH GH. 2012. Proteomic analysis of rice
anthers under salt stress. Plant Physiology and Biochemistry 58, 280-287.

SCHROEDER JI, DELHAIZE E, FROMMER WB, GUERINOT ML, HARRISON MJ,
HERRERA-ESTRELLA, L, HORIE T, KOCHIAN LV, MUNNS R, NISHIZAWA
NK, TSAY Y, SANDERS D. 2013. Using membrane transporters to improve crops
for sustainable food production. Nature 497, 60-66.

SHABALA S, CUIN TA. 2008. Potassium transport and plant salt tolerance. Physiologia
Plantarum 133, 651-669.

SHARMA P, JHA AB, DUBEY RS, PESSARAKLI M. 2012. Reactive oxygen species,
oxidative damage, and antioxidative defense mechanism in plants under stressful
conditions. Journal of Botany 2012, 1-26.


SHIH, ZHU J-K. 2002. Regulation of expression of the vacuolar Na*/H’* antiporter gene
AtNHX1 by salt stress and abscisic acid. Plant Molecular Biology 50, 543-550.

SHIGEOKA S, YOKOTA A, NAKANO Y, KITAOKA S. 1979. The effect of illumination
on the L-ascorbic acid content in Euglena gracilis z. Agricultural and Biological
Chemistry 43, 2053-2058.

SINGH RK, FLOWERS TJ. 2010. The physiology and molecular biology of the effects of
salinity on rice, In Handbook of Plant and Crop Stress. Taylor and Francis, Florida,
USA, 899-939.

SINGH RK, REDONA E, REFUERZO L. 2010a. Varietal improvement for abiotic stress
tolerance in crop plants: special reference to salinity in rice, In Abiotic Stress
Adaptation in Plants: Physiological, Molecular and Genomic Foundation.
Springer, Dordrecht, The Netherlands, 387-415.

SINGH S, GAUTAM RK, SINGH RK, DESHMUKH R, OJHA A. 2010b. Molecular
diversity in rice genotypes differing in physiological mechanisms of salt tolerance
through SSR and ISSR markers. International Journal of Applied Biology and
Pharmaceutical Technology, 550-560.

SIRAULT XRR, JAMES RA, FURBANK RT. 2009. A new screening method for osmotic
component of salinity tolerance in cereals using infrared thermography. Functional
Plant Biology 36, 970.

STAR, version 2.0.1 2014. Biometrics and Breeding Informatics, PBGB Division,
International Rice Research Insitute, Los Bafios, Laguna.

SZABADOS L, SAVOURE A. 2010. Proline: a multifunctional amino acid. Trends in
Plant Science 15, 89-97.

TAIZ L, ZEIGER E, M@LLER, IM, MURPHY AS. 2015. Plant physiology and
development. Sinauer Associates. Sunderland, Massachusetts.

VAIDYANATHAN H, SIVAKUMAR P, CHAKRABARTY R, THOMAS G. 2003.
Scavenging of reactive oxygen species in NaCl-stressed rice (Oryza sativa L.)—
differential response in salt-tolerant and sensitive varieties. Plant Science 165,
1411-1418.

WANG D, SHANNON MC, GRIEVE CM. 2001. Salinity reduces radiation absorption
and use efficiency in soybean. Field Crops Research 69, 267-277.

WANG HL, PATRICK JW, OFFLER CE, WANG X-D. 1995. The cellular pathway of
photosynthate transfer in the developing wheat grain III. A structural analysis and


physiological studies of the pathway from the endosperm cavity to the starchy
endosperm. Plant, Cell and Environment 18, 389-407.

WANKHADE SD, CORNEJO M-J, MATEU-ANDRES I, SANZ A. 2013. Morpho-
physiological variations in response to NaCl stress during vegetative and
reproductive development of rice. Acta Physiologiae Plantarum 35, 323-333.

WANKHADE SD, SANZ A. 2013. Chronic mild salinity affects source leaves physiology
and productivity parameters of rice plants (Oryza sativa L., cv. Taipei 309). Plant
and Soil 367, 663-672.

WENTZ D. 2001. Salt tolerance of plants. Practical Information for Alberta's
Agriculture Industry. Retrieved from
http://www 1 agric.gov.ab.ca/$department/deptdocs.nsf/all/agdex3303.

YANG L, FOUNTAIN J, WANG H, NI X, JI P, LEE R, KEMERAIT R, SCULLY B,
GUO B. 2015. Stress sensitivity is associated with differential accumulation of
reactive oxygen and nitrogen species in maize genotypes with contrasting levels of
drought tolerance. International Journal of Molecular Sciences 16, 24791-24819.

YAZDANI M, MAHDIEH M. 2012. Salt stress-induced programmed cell death in
meristematic cells of rice cultivars roots. International Journal of Bioscience,
Biochemistry and Bioinformatics, 40-43.

YOSHIDA S, FORNO DA, COCK JK, GOMEZ KA. 1976. Laboratory manual for
physiological studies of rice. International Rice Research Institute: Manila,
Philippines, 38.

ZAHRA J, NAZIM H, CAI S, HAN Y, WU D, ZHANG B, HAIDER SI, ZHANG G. 2014.
The influence of salinity on cell ultrastructures and photosynthetic apparatus of
barley genotypes differing in salt stress tolerance. Acta Physiologiae Plantarum 36,
1261-1269.

ZENG L, POSS JA, WILSON C, DRAZ A-SE, GREGORIO GB, GRIEVE CM. 2003.
Evaluation of salt tolerance in rice genotypes by physiological characters.
Euphytica 129, 281-292.

ZENG L, SHANNON MC. 2000. Salinity effects on seedling growth and yield components
of rice. Crop Science 40, 996.

ZENG L, SHANNON MC, GRIEVE CM. 2002. Evaluation of salt tolerance in rice
genotypes by multiple agronomic parameters. Euphytica 127, 235-245.


ZHANG J, JIA W, YANG J, ISMAIL AM. 2006. Role of ABA in integrating plant
responses to drought and salt stresses. Field Crops Research 97, 111-119.

ZHU J-K. 2001. Plant salt tolerance. Trends in Plant Science 6, 66-71.
