Evaluation of Handling Practices and Effect of Storage and Cooking Methods on the Residual Nitrite of Locally Produced Cured Meat Products

BLESSY HANNA T. MALINAO

UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES LOS BAÑOS

Master of Science in Animal Science

JUNE 2019

ABSTRACT

The study aimed to assess the level of wet market vendors’ awareness on handling
practices of local cured meat products including longganisa and tocino at selected areas
in Laguna. The residual nitrite contents of longganisa and tocino were determined
through spectrophotometric analysis, and results were evaluated in relation to the data
gathered from the survey. The lack of knowledge on proper meat handling and processing was reflected on
both the results of the survey and the analysis. Among the 43 collected samples, though
only 53% were declared to have added nitrite, 81% were found to contain nitrite. Wet
market longganisa samples contain 1-344 ppm residual nitrite, while tocino has 0-104.
Meanwhile, three branded samples, with 100% nitrite declaration, were found to have 4-
48 ppm nitrite for longganisa and 30-123 ppm for tocino. The data obtained also showed
that the products were generally within the standard limits set by BFAD (2006).
However, these values were less than the 80-140 ppm requirement for effective inhibition
of spoilage bacteria. The variability and low levels of residual nitrite were indicative of
the inconsistent product quality on those produced from the wet market, thus highlighting
the need for training. The effect of post-production conditions or pre-consumption processes, including,
storage time, condition, and cooking were also evaluated. Nitrite depletion during storage
was confirmed, and the degree of nitrite loss was greater in chilled storage condition than
in frozen. Results also showed that cooking lowered the residual nitrite of longganisa by
15% with pan-frying, 33% with boiling and frying, and 38% with extended pan-frying
methods.

Keywords: meat handling and processing, wet market, tocino, longganisa, residual nitrite, storage

CHAPTER I

INTRODUCTION

Meat is one of the most significant food commodities consumed by Filipinos. The
Philippines was ranked 6"" among Asian countries in terms of meat consumption for the
year 2016 (OECD, 2017). The Department of Trade and Industry highlighted that meat or
meat products make up around 4.4-5.0% of the total household expenditure for middle-
class families, which comprise 45.9% of all Filipino households (Angeles, 2015). A Food
Consumption Survey conducted by the Food and Nutrition Research Institute (FNRI)
reported that processed meat products, such as cured meat products, represented nearly
30% of meat intake in the year 2003.

Curing is the process of adding nitrite, as well as salt or sugar, to preserve and
enhance the color and flavor of meat (Devine and Dikeman, 2014). Aside from the
significant quality-related contributions, nitrite is important for its antimicrobial
effectiveness against pathogens, most importantly Clostridium botulinum, which causes
botulism (Keeton et al., 2009 & Tompkin, 2009 in King, 2016).

Despite the wide usage of this preservation method, the effect of nitrite on the
safety and health of consumers has been controversial due to the formation of compounds

called nitrosamines which are suspected of being carcinogenic (Sullivan, 2011). Aside

from that, elevated levels of nitrite in blood can trigger the oxidation of hemoglobin,
leading to methemoglobinemia (Kohn et al., 2002 & Titov, 2005 in Keszler et al., 2008).

In order to ensure the quality and safety of cured meat products for consumption,
residual nitrite levels in the finished products have been regulated to 134 ppm for
comminuted, and to 167 ppm for products in whole pieces or cuts. Most of the nitrites
added in the meat decrease through a series of NO reactions during manufacturing and
storage of cured meat products. The rate of nitrite loss depends on many factors such as
the temperature of the heat process, the pH of the product, the storage temperature, and
the addition of ascorbic acid or other reducing agents (EFSA, 2003 in Govari and Pexara,
2015).

Studies on nitrite and residual nitrite in processed meats are no longer new to the
scientific field where a wide array of information is readily available from international
journals and publications. However, local researches providing information on the
residual nitrite content of cured meat products particularly those sold in Philippine wet
markets are limited and have not yet been fully explored. The anonymity of this
information is also linked to the lack of available information on the level of training and
awareness that the wet market vendors have regarding meat handling and processing.
Furthermore, the effect of post-processing and pre-consumption, such as storage
(condition and time) and cooking in the residual nitrite level of local cured meat products

are not fully understood; thus this study.

Objectives of the Study

The general objective of the study is to evaluate the level of safety and quality of
commonly available cured meat products in Laguna province in terms of residual nitrite
content, and to evaluate the effect of some post-production conditions or processes on the
residual nitrite level.

The specific objectives of the study are:

1. To assess the level of knowledge of wet market vendors in terms of proper
handling/processing of meat products;

2. To determine the residual nitrite content of commonly sold cured meat products

(longganisa and tocino) at local markets in Laguna;

3. To determine and compare the residual nitrite level of longganisa using three
different cooking methods;

4, To determine the effect of storage period on the residual nitrite level of
longganisa; and

5. To determine the effect of chilled and frozen storage conditions on the residual

nitrite level of longganisa.

Scope and Lit

itations of the Study

The study focused on the evaluation of processing conditions in relation to the
residual nitrite level of longganisa and tocino products from the wet markets of Sta. Rosa,
Calamba, San Pablo, Sta. Cruz, and Siniloan in Laguna. Demographic profile,
production, and post-production practices were documented through survey
questionnaire. Branded samples analyzed were obtained randomly from a local
supermarket. The effect of storage time, storage temperature, and cooking method were
determined in the longganisa produced using a locally available curing salt. The residual
nitrite level was measured through colorimetric method using spectrophotometric
analysis.

The conclusion of the study was inclusive only of the data obtained from the
vendors interviewed, stores evaluated, available samples taken, locations covered, and
analysis conducted. The effect of other cured meat product components and properties on
the residual nitrite content of cured meat products was not analyzed and determined.

Direct health impacts related to the intake of cured meat products were not explored.

CHAPTER 2

REVIEW OF RELATED LITERATURE

Quality and Food Safety

Quality, as defined by ISO 9000:2015, is the degree to which a set of inherent
characteristics of a product fulfills requirements. Requirements could be (a) statutory and
regulatory, (b) set by the be organization/manufacturer, or (c) set by the
customer/consumer (ISO, 2015). It is the totality of characteristics of a product or service
that bears on its ability to satisfy stated or implied needs (ASQ, 2017). Food safety, on
the other hand, is the assurance that food will not cause harm to the consumer when it is
prepared and/or eaten according to its intended use. One of the specific concerns on food
hazards is the misuse of food additives (Codex Alimentarius Commission, 2011), such as

nitrite used in curing of meat products.

Meat Curing

Meat was first preserved with salt as curing agent in the saline deserts of “Hither,
Asia” and the coastal areas (Kutas, 2008). Meat curing was originally defined as the

addition of rock salt, sea salt, or mined salt to an unheated piece or small cuts of meat for

the sole purpose of preservation (Toldré, 2010). The technology of meat curing originated
during the third century BC, when Cato (234-149BC), an early Roman historian,
recorded careful instructions for the dry curing of hams, which include rubbing with salt,
overhauling with salt, rubbing with oil, smoking, and finally rubbing the ham again with
a mixture of oil and vinegar. This preservation method allowed for the carryover of meat
from time of plenty to time of scarcity that led to the flourishing of salted meats
production during the past centuries (Hui, 2012; Kutas, 2008; NPCS Board, 2012).
During the 19" century, it was noticed by the meat processors that specific salts are better
able to preserve meat, and to enhance and stabilize the product's red color than the
others. Investigations then led to the discovery that the “better” salts contain saltpeter
(KNOs) as an impurity, which was the precursor responsible for developing the
characteristic color and flavor in cured meat. It was further reported that nitrite, as
produced by the microbial reduction of nitrate, was responsible for the curing effect.
After conducting subsequent experiments, it was determined that the chemical basis for
the color of cured meats is the reaction of the nitric oxide (NO), derived from nitrite, and
hemoproteins present in the meat. These findings then led to the regulation of the use of
nitrite in meat curing, in 1925, by the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA)
(Shahidi et al., 2014; Toldra, 2010).

Curing is one of the oldest methods used for meat preservation introduced to the
Philippines by the Spaniards during the long colonization from 1500s to late 1800s when
the technology of refrigerated storage was still unavailable in the country (Azanza &

Rustia, 2004). The intentional addition of sodium nitrite and salt to meat is practiced in

modern-day meat curing. Cure accelerators, such as ascorbates or erythorbates, are also
incorporated. Other additives, such as sweeteners, phosphates/polyphosphates,
seasonings (e.g., spices and herbs), smoke, and other non-meat extenders, may also be
included in the curing mixture to impart characteristic properties to the end product
(Shahidi et al., 2014). The application of curing, aside from being a means of
preservation, is now done mainly to achieve a pink-red color as well as the typical flavor

and taste in processed meat products (Kutas, 2008).

Nitrate

Nitrate is currently being used at the least in cured meat products. It is a precursor
of nitrite in meat curing; but unlike nitrite, nitrate is comparatively stable in meat
products. The reaction takes place slowly through reduction by microbial enzymes
resulting in the release of nitrite over an extended period of time. The use of nitrate is
limited to products that require long curing and aging times, such as dry sausage and dry
cured products. It is much less toxic than nitrite and is commonly found in many foods

including fresh vegetables and drinking water (Mills, 2014).

Nitrite, in the form of sodium nitrite or potassium nitrite, is the key ingredient in

curing mixtures (Mills, 2014). Sodium nitrite, which is more commonly used in meat

curing, is the salt of a relatively weak acid and a strong base. It is a pale-yellow
crystalline substance that is readily water soluble, and the aqueous solutions of which are
highly ionized and slightly alkaline. According to Price and Schweigert (1987), as cited
by Hui (2012), the nitrite ion is a highly reactive ion that can serve as both a reducing and
an oxidizing agent. It is included in many processed meat products for the purpose of
stabilizing color and flavor development, inhibiting spore-forming microorganisms,
especially Clostridium botulinum, and retarding the progression of oxidative rancidity

(Hui, 2012; Mills, 2014).

Color fixation. Nitrite is a strong oxidizing agent and can cause pinking in non-
cured meat products at levels as low as 3-Smg nitrite/kg meat product. A strong and
stable curing color in cooked cured meat products is obtained at around 30-50 mg
nitrite/kg meat product (Feiner, 2006).

The mechanism of color fixation, as explained by Shahidi et al. (2014), starts
upon the dissociation of sodium nitrite (NaNOz) into sodium (Na’*) and nitrite (NOx),
which is the conjugate base of nitrous acid (HNOz). Depending on the pH of the solution,
an equilibrium can be established between the ionized salt and the unionized nitrous acid
given an acidic environment (pK.=3.4).

HNO? = H* + NO>

At the usual pH values of meat (5.5 — 6.5), the concentration of HNO: in cured
meat is very low (0.1- 1.0%); thus, the main reactive species in meat systems is
dinitrogen trioxide (N2O3).

2HNO2 = N203 + H20

In the presence of endogenous reducing groups or compounds in meat tissue —
such as cysteine, reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide, cytochromes, and quinones
— and reducing agents (HRd), such as ascorbic acid or ascorbate, nitric oxide (NO) is
formed from N2Os, as shown in equations below:

N203 + HRd = RdNO + HNO2
RdNO = Rd +NO

Figure I. Mechanism for the meat curing process (Killday et al., 1988).

The NO molecule is the reactive intermediate that has the ability to form very

stable complexes with metal ions, such as iron (Mills, 2014). This results in the binding


of NO with the iron atom present in meat pigment myoglobin, forming a red-colored
nitrosylmyoglobin [MbFe(II)NO]. On the other hand, when the myoglobin undergo
oxidation after the addition of nitrite to the meat, the oxidized pigment metmyoglobin
[MbFe (III)] is formed. This MbFe(III) can then react with NO to form an intermediate
pigment, nitrosylmetmyoglobin; and autoreduction of the latter by the endogenous and
exogenous reductants present in the postmortem muscle tissue forms nitrosylmyoglobin
(Figure 1). Moreover, if MbFe(II) is present in meat after addition of nitrite, it can also

react with NO to form MbFe(II)NO.

Figure 2. Possible curing reactions that result from the addition of nitrite to meat
(Bard and Townsed, 1978).


Stabilization of cured meat color occurs when the product is subjected to thermal
processing. Denaturation and separation of the globin moiety of nitrosylmyoglobin from
the iron atom takes place, which surrounds the heme moiety to form nitrosylhemochrome
or the cooked cured-meat pigment with a characteristic pink color. The formation of
cooked cured-meat pigment and its possible side reactions during the curing process and
subsequent storage is illustrated by Figure 2.

Nitrosylhemochrome is heat-stable, but the presence of light and oxygen may
cause discoloration of cured meat products. The occurrence of discoloration is prevented
by minimizing the product’s exposure to light and oxygen through the application of
proper packaging systems, such as translucent films and vacuum packaging, respectively.
Furthermore, mixing, massaging, and stuffing of cured meats must be performed under

vacuum to exclude oxygen (Mills, 2014 and Shahidi et al., 2014).

Flavor development. Flavor is an important sensory characteristic that
contributes to the overall acceptability of muscle foods (Pegg & Shahidi, 2000). Aside
from color fixation, nitrite also influences and is a major contributor towards the
development of the characteristic cured meat flavor (Hui, 2012; Mills, 2014). According
to Sindelar & Milkowski (2011), the association of cured meat flavor with nitrite was
first described by Brooks et al., (1940) by comparing pork cured in brines containing
different levels of nitrate and nitrite. It was cited from Gray et al. (1981) that the role of
nitrite on meat flavor is a complex stimulus that involve properties including aroma/odor,

texture, taste, and temperature (Sindelar & Milkowski, 2011).


According to Feiner (2006), the distinct cured flavor is brought about by reactions
between nitric oxide (NO) and numerous substances that are naturally present in meat,
such as aldehydes, alcohols, inosine and several sulphuric components, as well as
different carbonyl complexes that result from the presence of nitrite. Hui (2012) cited
several studies that aimed to elucidate the processes of flavor development. On one hand,
studies conducted by Sebranek & Cassens (1973) concluded that the flavor development
function of nitrite in cured meats has not been linked to any specific flavor components.
However, Wasserman & Talley (1972) stated that sodium nitrite alone is a very potent
flavor enhancer in cured meat; while salt, according to Rhee et al. (1983), is a catalyst for
increased fat oxidation and rancidity. There have been claims that salt is the major factor
responsible for the cured meat flavor, rather than nitrite or the absence of oxidative
rancidity. However, studies have already proved that salt pork and bacon have quite
different flavors, suggesting a positive role of nitrite in flavor formation. Bailey & Swain
(1973) conducted reviews on the interaction of nitrite and meat constituents influencing
flavor, but these were based on very limited literatures. The findings of Sofos et al.
(1979) show that most studies that have reported on the effect of nitrite on meat flavors
are related to sensory differences due to processing or pertained to chemical reactions
between nitrite and meat components. Wasserman (1974) presented a review of the two
previous studies, but a complete discussion of the role of nitrite on cured favor
development still cannot be derived due to the lack of sufficient information. Studies on
longissimus dorsi muscle by Cho & Bratzler (1970) and on frankfurters by Wasserman &

Talley (1972), reported that nitrite-containing products possessed a more intense cured


favor. Kemp et al. (1975) reported improved color and sensory properties in packages of
sliced dry-cured hams containing nitrate and/or nitrite. Lastly, it was reported by Hustad
et al. (1973) that as little as 25-50 g sodium nitrite/gram of meat was adequate to give
the typical color and flavor of cured meats in wieners.

Sindelar & Milkowski (2011) and Shahidi et al. (2014), along with most of other
researchers, suggested that the main process involved in modifying the volatile profile of
cooked cured meat products may be brought about by the antioxidative role of nitrite in
the retardation of unsaturated fatty acids breakdown and the formation of secondary lipid
oxidation products. These reactions suppress the formation of oxidation products,
allowing the unique flavor associated with cured products to be revealed. Shahidi et al.
(2014) also stated that salt, having the highest amount in most curing processes, plays a
vital role in determining overall flavor of cured meats. Furthermore, smoking and added
seasonings and sugar (especially in fried bacon) also participate in determining the
characteristic flavor of different cured meat product. Around 30-SOmg nitrite/kg meat are

required for the development of the typical curing flavor (Feiner, 2006).

Bacterial inhibition. Another essential role of nitrite in cured meat products is its
bacteriostatic and bactericidal nature that retards and inhibits the growth of
microorganisms, with varying degrees of effectiveness on certain bacteria. For instance,
nitrite is not generally considered to be effective for controlling gram-negative enteric
pathogens such as Salmonella and Escherichia coli (Tompkin, 2005 in Sindelar &
Milkowski, 2011). It acts as a preservative against the growth of pathogenic bacteria such

as Staphylococcus aureus and most importantly Clostridium botulinum. However, nitrite


has relatively little impact against Micrococcus spp., Lactobacillus spp., and
Enterococcus spp. (Feiner, 2006). The broad antimicrobial effects and specific inhibitory
mechanisms of nitrite are still not well-understood and are still being researched. Despite
this, it has been identified that nitrite’s effectiveness as an antimicrobial is dependent on
several factors including residual nitrite level, pH, salt concentration, reductants present,
iron content, and others (Milkowski et al., 2010; Tompkin, 2005, in Sindelar &
Milkowski, 2011). Sindelar & Milkowski (2012) also cited Roberts (1975) and Allaker et
al. (2001) stating that nitrite inhibits bacteria more effectively at low pH, which suggests
that the antimicrobial action of nitrite is associated with the generation of nitric oxide or
nitrous acid. However, the tolerance to nitric oxide of bacteria varies from acting as a
metabolite for some to being toxic for others (Moller & Skibsted, 2002). Since it has also
been suggested that the presence of nitrous acid contributes to the antibacterial impact of
nitrite, it is therefore likely that nitrite reactions related to the development of cured meat
color are also important for the antimicrobial properties attributed to nitrite.

The influence of nitrite against potential food-poisoning bacteria is one of the
major reasons why it is still permitted as an additive despite nitrite’s ill effects, since a
ban on nitrite would most probably increase the number of severe cases of food
poisoning. A concentration of 80-140 mg nitrite/kg of meat product effectively inhibits
the growth of spoilage bacteria especially in those products subjected to high temperature
treatments such as those that are canned and retorted (Feiner, 2006). Clostridium
botulinum is the most widely recognized target microorganism associated with nitrite

application in processed meats. This microorganism is a potent anaerobic bacteria that is


capable of growing heat resistant-spores and producing the deadly botulinum neurotoxin,
which causes botulism. Several mechanisms for the effective growth inhibition by NO*
have been considered, suggesting that the heme protein in C. botulinum displays
sensitivity to NO at a femto-molar level and may be the ultimate target during nitrite
inhibition of this pathogenic bacteria (Skibsted, 2011). Hui (2012) enumerated the
possible mechanism(s) by which nitrite inhibits C. botulinum as suggested by various
research efforts. These include (a) the formation of an inhibitory substance from nitrite
and other meat components, (b) nitrite or intermediates acting as an oxidant or reductant
on intracellular enzymes or nucleic acids, (c) the restriction of iron or other metals
essential to C. botulinum by nitrite, resulting in the interference with the organism's
metabolism or biological repair system, and (d) the reaction of nitrite with cell
membranes to limit metabolic exchanges or substrate transport. The following results
from studies were also cited by Hui (2012): (1) it is possible that more than one
mechanism exists in a complex biological system such as meat (Sofos et al., 1979); (2)
metal-sequestering agents such as ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) enhance the
inhibitory activity of nitrite whereas excess iron caused decreased inhibition (Tompkin,
1978); (3) nitrite, probably via NO, reacts with the iron of ferredoxin in germinated
bacterial cells (Woods et al. (1981); and (4) the conversion of extracellular iron, which is
essential to C. botulinum, to an unavailable form after reaction with NO (Tompkin,
1978).

Models of predicting bacterial growth showed that nitrites also contribute to the

protection from other food-borne pathogens, such as Listeria monocytogenes, E. coli


O157:H7, S. aureus, and Bacillus cereus, by reducing their growth rates (Sindelar &

Milkowski, 2011).

Lipid oxidation prevention: Antioxidant. The ability to effectively delay the
development of oxidative rancidity is another significant role of nitrite in cured meat
products (Sindelar & Milkowski, 2011). Even with the presence of salt, which is
prooxidant in many biological systems, their combination when added to meat decreased
lipid oxidation (Skibsted, 2011). Lipid oxidation is regarded as the primary reason for the
deterioration of quality in meat products, resulting in the development of rancidity and
subsequent warmed-over flavors (Vasavada &Cornforth, 2005; Yun et al., 1987, in
Sindelar & Milkowski, 2011). Off-flavors, such as warmed-over flavors, are formed
when cooking fresh meat, where a number of physical and chemical changes take place
leading to accelerated oxidation of unsaturated fatty acids. The oxidation pathway is, in
part, initiated by the iron released from myoglobin and perpetuated by continuous
formation of free radicals from the oxidized fatty acids (Mills, 2014). The rate and degree
of lipid oxidation, according to Shahidi (1998), is related to the levels of unsaturated fats
present in the meat as well as temperature, time, oxygen exposure, the removal of
oxygen, and the addition of antioxidants and/or reducing agents (Sindelar & Milkowski,

2011).

According to Hui (2012), the effect of nitrite on retarding the development of
rancidity is probably due to the same reaction that is responsible for color development.

Two mechanisms cooperate to limit lipid oxidation which is based on the action of nitric


oxide (NO). The first mechanism involves the heme compounds of muscle containing
iron ions that catalyze lipid oxidation reactions. When nitrite, in the form of NO, reacts to
form cured pigments; iron is retained and stabilized in the heme, usually in the reduced
(Fe?*) form. This renders it unavailable as a catalyst for lipid oxidation, preventing the
“warmed-over” flavor in cured meats (Price & Schweigert, 1987, in Hui, 2012). The
second mechanism involves the reaction of NO with the free radicals to produce a non-
reactive product and to effectively stop the oxidation chain reaction. NO binding to
myoglobin and hemoglobin during the formation of cured meat color does not give O2 the
chance to bind to both myoglobin and hemoglobin, reducing oxidation of the said
pigments (Feiner, 2006). These important functions help cured meat products maintain
their desirable flavor even during extended storage and delay the development of
rancidity (Mills, 2014). According to Feiner (2006), around 20-60mg nitrite/kg meat is

needed for nitrite to act as an indirect antioxidant.

The amount of nitrite added as raw ingredient in meat products varies depending
on the manufacturer in accordance with the standards set by each country. When nitrite is
added to meat, it reacts with various components; and reactions are speeded up by
heating and other processes during the manufacturing. When the manufacturing process
is complete, only about 10—20% of the originally added nitrite is analytically detectable.

This nitrite remaining in the product is called residual nitrite (Cassens, 1998).

Residual Nitrite Regulation

Several studies and efforts were done for the discovery and use of alternatives,
and none has been found yet to be as effective as nitrite with regards to its properties
(Sullivan, 2011). Thus, the level of application of this food additive was regulated to
prevent excessive usage which increases health risk hazards. Standard maximum level of
nitrite in comminuted cured meat products as set by BFAD-DOH (2006) is 134 ppm,
while Codex 192-1995 (2016) recommends a maximum of 80 ppm in finished products.
Meat products in whole pieces or cuts should have 416 ppm for non-heat treated cured
meat products and 167 ppm for frozen processed meat products (BFAD, 2006). The
United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) established regulatory limits for the
incoming sodium nitrite at 120 ppm in bacon, 200 ppm for dry-cured bacon, 156 ppm
maximum for comminuted products, 200 ppm maximum in brine-cured or injected
products, and up to 625 ppm in dry-cured meat products (Sullivan, 2013). In 2015, the
International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) and World Health Organization
(WHO) reiterated that the usage of these additives should be kept minimal and applied in

levels within the standards to ensure the safety of consumers.

Nitrite toxicity. Despite the advantages of using nitrite in meat curing and
preservation, nitrite can be a toxic material with a lethal dose for humans of 22-23 mg
per kg of body weight (Mills, 2014). The current acceptable daily intakes (ADIs) for

nitrite, set by the European Commission’s former Scientific Committee for Food (SCF)


in 1997, and by the Joint FAO/WHO Expert Committee on Food Additives (JECFA) in
2002, are 0.06 and 0.07 ppm body weight/day, respectively.

Methemoglobinemia is the most common nitrite poisoning that may occur after
ingestion of food containing high levels of nitrates or nitrites. This takes place when the
heme iron in the hemoglobin has been oxidized from the ferrous to ferric form, making it
incapable of carrying oxygen. This interferes with the ability of the remaining normal
hemoglobin molecules to bind with oxygen, resulting in tissue hypoxia and possible
death (Orgeron et al., 1957 and Dinneen et al., in Chan, 1996). Furthermore, the effect of
nitrite consumption exceeding the ADI was illustrated by Moneret-Vautrin et al. (1980),
as cited by Branen et al. (2002), through an oral challenge test with 30 mg of sodium
nitrite/person that caused urticaria, intestinal disorders, or headache. The same finding
has been confirmed by others, including Henderson & Raskin (1972), who observed that
headaches were provoked eight out of thirteen times after the ingestion of sodium nitrite
though drinking odorless and tasteless solutions containing 10 mg or less of sodium
nitrite or solutions identical in appearance containing 10 mg of the food additive. It may
cause cellular anoxia and inhibit the protective enzymatic activities of the intestinal
mucosa, which may lead to increased permeability of the mucosa to other antigens. In
addition, sodium nitrite may in one way or another enhance the effect of histamine
present in many foods (Branen et al., 2002). Therefore, the amount of nitrite is kept to
200 mg per kg or less in most cured meat products to essentially eliminate any risk of
toxicity with the consumption of cured meats. Aside from its direct toxicity, nitrite might

react with certain amino acids to produce carcinogenic nitrosamines (Mills, 2014).


During the 1970s, in the United States, a discussion arose about the formation of
nitrosamines in cured meat products, especially in fried bacon. Fiddler et al. (1978), as
cited by Toldré (2010), showed that bacon and its cookout on frying contained

considerable amounts of nitrosopyrrolidine.

Nitrosamine formation. Nitrosamines, which are formed during a reaction of
nitrite with secondary amines or N-substituted amides, have been found to be
carcinogenic (Bauer, 2014). Only the secondary amines form stable nitrosamines, since
the primary amines are immediately degraded to alcohol and nitrogen; while the tertiary
amines cannot react (Toldra, 2010). They are formed exogenously, during commercial
product manufacture and during preparation in the household; and endogenously in the
human body, particularly in the stomach where acidity favors the reaction. The most
carcinogenic nitrosamine is nitrosodimethylamine (NDMA); while in meat products,
nitrosopiperidine (NPIP) and nitrosopyrrolidine (NPYR) are important. The amines
corresponding to these substances are cadaverine and putrescine, respectively, which can
either be formed during fermentation or are originally present as part of the polyamine
pool in meat (Bauer, 2014).

Exogenously, the formation of nitrosamines in meat and meat products is a
complex process, with several factors and substances influencing the nitrosation reaction.
The nitrosamine concentration in meat products depends on the residual nitrite
concentration, presence of nitrosation catalysts and inhibitors, cooking method, cooking
temperature and time, storage conditions, and presence of microorganisms, which are

able to reduce nitrate to nitrite and promote degradation of proteins to amines and amino


acids (Nollet & Toldra, 2009). The formation of these compounds in the cured meat
product is favored under acidic conditions (pH <5.5) and high temperatures. The pH must
be low enough to produce NO’, or metal ions must be engaged to form NO*. Thus, the
formation of nitrosamines is unlikely or negligible in emulsion-type cured products and
cooked sausages because their pH values are >5.7, as well as in fresh meat raw material
(or early post-mortem frozen meat) in which secondary amines are present in very low
amounts. During aging and fermentation, amines will be formed. In low-pH raw sausages
or raw hams, where pH remains at <5.5 for a longer period of time, the long fermentation
and presence of secondary amines permit the formation of nitrosamines, nonetheless the
concentrations of nitrite are in the range of 1-2 jg/kg. The prerequisites for the sequence

of reactions for the formation of nitrosamines to occur is shown in Figure 3.

NaNO; +H > HNO: + Na”
HNO; +H’ > NO’ +H,0
2HNO: > N:O; + H:0
N:0; > NO + NO;
No +M> > NO'+M
primary amine RNH; + NO” > RNH-N=O+H" > ROH-N:
secondary amine R:NIL_ + NO” > R:N-N=O+H
tertiary amine RN + NO+ > no nitrosamine formation

Figure 3. Chemical reactions leading to possible nitrosamine formation; M/M+ are
transition metal ions (like Fe2+/Fe3+ and others).


On the other hand, when cured meat products are subjected to high temperature
conditions (>130°C), such as in the case of fried bacon, grilled cured sausage, and pizza
toppings, formation of nitrosamines can also take place. Some of the volatile
nitrosamines, which are the main carcinogenic, may evaporate from the cooked meat
product because of high temperatures. However, these products still have the potential for
higher concentrations of nitrosamines than any other meat products, also because of the
concentration of nitrites present (Honikel, 2014; Toldra, 2010). Nitrosamines occur only
in small amounts and they are easily avoidable by proper frying, grilling, and pizza
baking; and by including reducing agents such as ascorbate to prevent the formation of
nitrosamines that deplete residual nitrite before reaching high temperatures during frying
or cooking (Honikel, 2014; Mills, 2014; Toldra, 2010). The occurrence can also be
minimized by using a lower ingoing nitrite level (Honikel, 2014).

Endogenously, the conditions that favor luminal generation of nitrosamines from
ingested nitrate and nitrite are maximal at the most proximal cardia region of the acidic
stomach, where there is optimum pH for formation of most nitrosamines (between pH 1
and 3) (Bauer, 2014; Bryan et al., 2012). Ingested nitrate is excreted in the saliva and
reduced to nitrite through oral bacteria. Consequently, once a product containing nitrite or
nitrate is ingested; the nitrite then reacts readily with nitrosatable compounds especially
secondary amines and alkyl amides, under acidic conditions in the stomach, to generate
the N-nitroso compounds (nitrosamines). The nitrosation reactions can be inhibited by the
presence of vitamin C or other antioxidants. Some epidemiological studies have assessed

the risk of cancer in people who had high intake of nitrite or nitrate and low intake of


vitamin C, a dietary pattern that could result in increased endogenous formation of N-

nitroso compounds (Grosse et al., 2006; Usinger et al., 2016).

Residual Nitrite Testing Methodologies

There are a number of methods that can be used in determining concentrations of
curing agents. Nitrite and nitrate anions can be detected by high-performance liquid
chromatography (HPLC), by ion-exchange chromatography method, and by
isotachophoresis. Nitrite can also be determined titrimetrically using permanganate, but
the most common method being used to determine the curing agents in meat products is
the measurement of nitrite after a colorimetric reaction and of nitrate after reduction to
nitrite (Honikel, 2014). Nollet & Toldra (2009) described the procedure as a two-step

process: (1) nitrite extraction and (2) spectrometric analysis.

Extraction procedure. The extraction stage generally involves the dispersion of
meat sample in hot water. This process is important since meat products contain various
compounds (ascorbic acid, fat, protein, sodium chloride, etc.) that can interfere with
nitrite measurement. A number of procedures can be applied to clean up the extracts prior
to the actual determination. These are referred to as the clarification stages, which include
fat and protein precipitation, filtration, etc., by using different compounds or solvents
(Carrez or borax reagents, zinc sulfate or potassium ferrocyanide, acetonitrile, and others)
or pretreatment cartridges to remove sample matrix interferences. Another possible

procedure is to separate the fat by centrifugation and rapid cooling followed by in-line


dialysis to remove protein and remaining fat. The choice of a specific procedure to clean

up an extract prior to determination will depend on the analytical method to be used.

Spectrometric methods. The quantitative determination of residual nitrite in meat
products using colorimetric assay is based on the Griess diazotization reaction, which
involves the formation of azo dye produced by coupling a diazonium salt with an
aromatic amine or phenol. The diazo compound is formed when nitrite (aqueous extract
from meat) reacts with sulfanilamide and the coupling agent N-(1-naphtyl)
ethylenediamine-2HCl. The color that develops is measured spectrophotometrically (540
nm). This method is described in many national standards, such as ISO (1975), AOAC

(1990), and Germany L 08.0014 §64 LFBG (2006).

Other colorimetric reactions used to determine nitrites and nitrates in meat
product are (1) based on the reduction of phosphomolybdic acid to phosphomolybdenum
blue complex by sodium sulfide, which is oxidized by the addition of nitrite, causing a
reduction in the intensity of the blue color and a reduction in the absorbance measured at
814 nm; and (2) based on the catalytic effect of nitrite on the oxidation of methyl red by
bromate, and the absorbance is measured at 520 nm. A spectrofluorimetric method has

also been developed for nitrite determination in meat systems (Nollet and Toldra, 2009).

CHAPTER 3

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Time and Place of Study

The study was conducted from March to October 2018, at five local wet markets
in the Province of Laguna; at the Animal Product Science and Technology Division,
Institute of Animal Science; and at the Food Chemistry Laboratory, Institute of Food
Science, College of Agriculture and Food Science, University of the Philippines Los

Baitos, College, Laguna.

Study I — Processed Meat Handling Practices in selected Wet Markets of Laguna

Wet Market Vendor Survey

The wet market vendors’ level of awareness in terms of proper handling during
processing of meat products, particularly cured meats, was assessed through a
surveyfinterview. Available vendors from whom the cured meat product samples were
purchased, were interviewed using the “Wet Market Vendor and Product Survey Form”.

The questionnaire is divided into seven sections: (1) Personal Information, (2) Pre-


processing Conditions, (3) Processing of Tocino and Longganisa, (4) Post-Processing

Handling and Storage, (5) Processing Area Cleaning Activities, (6) Market-related, and
(7) Others (product shelf life; challenges encountered). A “Store and Personnel Condition
Checklist” was also filled-up by the researcher at the time of store visit. The checklist has
four sections: (1) Personnel, (2) Store Facilities, (3) Tools/equipment, and (4)
Environment.

Survey confidentiality agreement (APPENDIX A) was signed by each of the

respondents prior to the interview.

Collection of Samples

Two types of cured meat products were considered in this study: tocino and
longganisa. Samples from the wet market, of about 250 g to 500 g each, were purchased
from each of the surveyed vendors of each public wet market at Sta. Rosa City, Calamba
City, San Pablo City, Sta. Cruz, and Siniloan, Laguna. On the other hand, three
commercially available branded samples for each product type were purchased from the
supermarket. A total of 49 samples were collected, consisting of wet market tocino
(n=20) and longganisa (n=23); and commercial tocino (n=3) and longganisa (n=3).
Collected samples were sent to the laboratory for analysis, maintaining chilled conditions

by placing in an ice chest or cooler during transit.


Determination of Residual

rite Content of Cured Meat Samples

The residual nitrite content of the cured meat samples, reported in ppm, was
determined based on the principle of Griess reaction using International Organization for
Standardization (ISO) 2918:1975 standard for Meat and meat products - Determination of
nitrite content (Reference method) and AOAC Official Method 973.31 — Nitrites in
Cured Meat (Colorimetric Method), a Codex-Adopted-AOAC Method. The general
procedures for reagent and sample preparation, analysis, and expression of result are

described in Appendix B.

Statistical Analysis

The residual nitrite profile of cured meat products was analyzed using descriptive
statistics, and computed values were reported in values of frequency/percentage and

range.


Study Il - Effect of Storage Period, Storage Condition, and Cooking Method on
Residual Nitrite of Cured Longganisa

Experimental Treatments and Design

Study 2 was divided into three parts. The first part (Experiment A) was a
Correlation and Regression study of residual nitrite analyzed as a function of time,
examined weekly throughout a 6-week storage period. The second part (Experiment B)
was a two-factor factorial experiment in Repeated Measures Design conducted using
storage condition (chilled and frozen) as factor 1 and storage period (Day 4, and Day 7)
as a fixed factor 2. Lastly, the third part (Experiment C) was carried out as a one-factor
experiment in Completely Randomized Design (CRD) with three levels of treatment
(Pan-Frying, Extended Pan-Frying, Boiling and Frying,) applied. All experiments were

done in three replications.

Pork Longganisa Production

Pork longganisa was produced using the formulation listed in Table 1. Lean meat
materials were purchased from the meat shop of the Institute of Animal Science, UPLB,
while the backfat was purchased from a local supermarket. The mixture was made from
Jean pork meat and backfat in proportion of 60:40, and other ingredients as listed in Table

1. Three batches of longganisa, with approximately 2.5 kg each, were prepared to serve


as samples for the study. Figure 2 shows the process for pork longganisa production.
After curing, the samples were packed by at least 250 g each in separate polybags to
serve as sample(s) of each identified sampling point for the whole duration of study. The
samples were labelled accordingly and heat-sealed ensuring that no excessive amount of

air is trapped inside.

Table 1. One kilogram formulation for pork longganisa (Bueno, 2016).

RAW MATERIAL INGREDIENT QUANTITY

Meat Lean 600g
Backfat 400g

Non-meat Salt 15g
Sugar 80g
Curing Salt sg
Monosodium glutamate lg
Black pepper 4g
Phosphate Sg
Powdered Skimmed Milk 30g
Fresh Garlic (minced) 50g
Pineapple Juice 30 ml
Vinegar 10 ml
Water 50 ml

* Based on RUL (recommended usage level) set by supplier

Chill the lean meat and backfat

Cut the lean meat to about 2cm cubes and

grind through a coarse plate grinder

Cut the chilled backfat into about 1/4 cm

‘cubes and grind through a coarse plate
grinder

Mix the lean and fat portion thoroughly

Prepare/weigh the curing ingredients and
spices based on formulation

Dissolve the curing salt in small amount of
water and mix thoroughly with the lean.
and fat

Dissolve the remaining dry ingredients in
the liquid ingredients
Pour the ingredient mixture into the lean
and fat mixture

Blend the mixture thoroughly by hand or

pass again through the coarse plate grinder
for complete mixing

Stuff the sausage mixture in natural or
synthetic casing

Link the sausage at an interval of about
four to six (4-6) cm

Store the stuffed sausage in chiller (0-4°C),
and cure for 1-2 days

Figure 1. Process flow for the production of pork longganisa (Bueno, 2016).



Storage of Cured Longganisa and Sample Collection

The packed samples were stored in refrigerator and/or freezer based on the

storage condition(s) required for each experiment, as shown in Figure 2.

Batch 1, 2 and 3

Figure 2. Storage condition and sample pull-out guide

Chilled samples were stored in a refrigerator, while frozen samples were stored in a

chest-type freezer. Samples were pulled out from the storage according to each


experiment’s sampling point (Table 2). Storage temperature, product temperature and pH

were monitored for experiment A and B samples every sampling day, prior to analysis.

Table 2. Cured pork longganisa sample distribution

EXPERIMENT/ANALYSIS SAMPLING POINT NUMBEROF TOTAL
(time after curing,d) SAMPLES SAMPLES
(packs per batch) __(packs)

Experiment A 4,7, 14, 21, 28, 35 1 15
(Effect of Storage Time) and 42

Experiment B 4and7 2 12
(Effect of Storage Condition

and Time)

Experiment C 1 4 12

(Effect of Cooking Method)

Cooking Procedure for Cured Longganisa

Three methods of household cooking were used: pan-frying (Treatment A),
toasting or extended pan-frying (Treatment B), and boiling and frying (Treatment C).
Around 250 g from each batch were cooked for each method. Treatment A was done in a
Teflon-coated pan at 82.2°C fryer setting. The pan was preheated for 30 seconds with 100
mL cooking oil, and the samples were fried until 71.1°C to <93.3°C intemal meat

temperature (IMT) was achieved. Treatment B was done using the same procedure as


treatment A, but with extended cooking time until 98.9°C to 104.4°C IMT was reached.
Treatment C was done in a stainless steel cooking pot with a 1:2 (v/iw) water to meat
sample ratio. Boiling was done for 13-15 minutes at medium heat electric stove setting
until the water dried out. Ninety milliliters of cooking oil was added, and the samples
were fried for an additional 3-5 minutes until an IMT of 71.1°C to <93.3°C was achieved,
All the produced 3 batches of longganisa were cooked, and IMTs were measured using

Tetsto 106 digital food thermometer, Testo SE & Co. KGaA.

Determination of Residual Nitrite Content of
Cooked Pork Longganisa

The residual nitrite content of the cured meat samples was determined using the
same method in Study I (ISO 2918:1975 and AOAC 973.31). The cooked meat samples
were also prepared and analyzed the following day after cooking, similar to Study I. On
the other hand, samples pulled out from the storage at set sampling days were analyzed
within the same day of sampling. Furthermore, the same procedures as that of Study I
were also followed from the preparation of reagents, color development and

measurement, preparation of standard calibration curve, up to the expression of results.


Statistical Analysis

Statistical methods were performed with reference to Gomez and Gomez (1984).
The data obtained from Experiment A were subjected to Correlation and Regression
analysis to determine the relationship between storage time and residual nitrite, and
storage time and pH. One-way Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) was used to determine
effect of storage time on residual nitrite and pH, and statistical difference among sample
means across the 6-week storage period was identified using Tukey’s HSD test. The data
from Experiment B were subjected to two-way ANOVA to determine the interaction
between the storage condition and storage period (time), and significant difference of
mean residual nitrite content among the two storage conditions applied and storage
period. Statistical difference among sample means across the 7-day storage period was
identified using Least Significant Difference Test (LSD). Lastly, the data obtained from
Experiment C were subjected to one-way Analysis of Variance (ANOVA), and statistical
difference in the residual nitrite content among the three cooking methods applied was
identified using Least Significant Difference Test (LSD). The analyses were carried out
at 95% confidence level using Statistical Analysis System (SAS) Version 9.1 (SAS

Institute Inc., Cary, NC, USA).

CHAPTER 4

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Study I — Processed Meat Handling Practices in selected Wet Markets of Laguna

Demographic Profile of the Wet Market Vendors

A total of 29 wet market vendors from the public wet markets of Calamba, San
Pablo, Siniloan, Sta. Cruz, and Sta. Rosa, Laguna were interviewed. Summarized in
Table 3 is the demographic profile of the respondents, which includes area, gender, age,
educational attainment, number of years in business, attendance to formal training on
meat handling and processing, and background/resource person on longganisa and
tocino-making. The respondents interviewed represent the total number of available
vendors selling longganisa and/or tocino per area at the time of survey. San Pablo City
had the highest number of respondents, 38% of the total. While 48% were already more
than 20 years in business, and 59% have attained College level in their education, results
of the interview revealed that none had a formal training on meat handling and
processing. Majority of the vendors, with 15 respondents (52%), acquired their

knowledge on tocino and/or longganisa-making from a family member, who in turn had


inherited the recipe or formulation as well. Eight (28%) were self-taught, and the

remaining 6 (21%) were taught either by a friend or a colleague.

Production Profile and Process Highlights of
Longganisa and Tocino

The process from longganisa- and tocino-making to selling in the wet markets is
illustrated in Figure 3. The general process starts from the procurement of meat and non-
meat raw materials. Meat materials commonly used in making the products are leftovers
or unsold meat, and processing of the products are done within the store premises of each
vendor. Other sources include newly-slaughtered meat and meat bought from other
vendors in the wet market and meat shop. The unsold raw meat is either unwashed or
washed with water prior to or after cutting, or prior to storage. Meat materials stored in
freezer are processed the following day, after thawing. The meat and fat are cut into
portions for grinding and into thin slices for longganisa and tocino, respectively. On the
other hand, non-meat raw materials are procured primarily from the wet market on the
day of processing, in retail quantities (sachet, repacked, <Ikg, in bottles, by kilograms).
The raw materials are weighed then mixed by hand in a stainless steel or plastic basin
until ingredients are completely/equally mixed. The mixture is either staged temporarily
to allow absorption of other ingredients, then placed in casing (for longganisa products),
stored in available cold storage or displayed directly for selling. Details and other

relevant information per process step are summarized in Table 4.


Table 3. Demographic profile of survey respondents

PROFILE CATEGORY NUMBER OF PERCENTAGE
RESPONDENTS
Target ‘Actual
(n=29)
Area Calamba 6 5 1%
San Pablo 7 n 38%
Siniloan 6 6 21%
Sta, Cruz 5 5 1%
Sta. Rosa 3 2 ™%
Gender
Male 10 34%
Female 19 66%
Age 20-40 7 24%
41-60 20 69%
>60 2 M%
Educational College level : 7 59%
attainment” Highschool level - ul 38%
Elementary level : 1 3%
Number of years in 1-10 8 28%
business 11-20 1 24%
>20 4 48%

Attendance to formal Attended - -

training None 29 100%
Background/Resource _ Family-recipe 15 52%
person on longganisa _Self-taught 8 28%
and tocino-making Others" 6 21%

ooo
‘includes graduate and undergraduate

“Resource person: Friend, Neighbor, Colleague


yoyreW 19M UT SULMoRINUBUT OUTDO} pu esIULTTUO] JO MOY ssad0Ig “¢ 2INTIy

esos pjoo ut pasos
“onsejd wi poyoed

spakeidsip 1ON +

used ut payoeg «

‘a8eio1s poo ui pasos

“onsejd ut poyoed
aesors 1P9K0|d5Ip ON «
joo aiquireae ‘on i paoe|d +
ur pasors pur eq ‘Suny «

onsejd ut payed + puey Aq Surxipy+

(yeuondo)

uonewnsg +
suet Surmey + ayes Sune
= ‘Buyzaaay. soddoge
Buysiony [PUBIC ‘Suryse A+ aeBng+ Wey UZOI] >
. wou punoin«

qos
SunyBiom Sopeuy « sino way

Table 4. Processing and handling practices of longganisa and tocino in wet market.

PARTICULARS

REMARKS


FREQUENCY,

Procurement of
Raw Materials
Meat

‘Non-meat

Preparation of
Meat Material

Longganisa

Tocino

Source
Basic Ingredients
Other

Ingredients:
Longganisa

Tocino

Washing,
Cutting, Freezing

Water source

Newly-slaughtered

Newly-slaughtered and/or meat leftovers
Meat leftovers

Bought from wet market

Newly-slaughtered
Newly-slaughtered and/or meat leftovers
Bought from meat shop or wet market

Wet market, Supermarket, Supplier

Salt, Sugar, Pepper, Curing Salt (optional)

MSG, Accord (Phosphate), Garlic,
Seasoning, Soy sauce, Worcestershire
sauce, BBQ Marinade, Hot sauce,
Skimmed Milk, Breadcrumbs, Pineapple
Juice

MSG, Food Color, Seasoning, Garlic,
Calamansi, Soy sauce, Softdrinks,
Pineapple Juice, Tenderizer, Water

Washed with running water prior to
slicing

Washed with running water prior to
slicing and grinding

Washed with water in basin prior to
slicing and grinding

Washed with water in basin after cutting
Washed with water in basin prior to
storage

Washed with water in basin and rubbed
with salt prior to storage

‘Not washed prior to cutting and storage

Own faucet

‘Common faucet

Poso/ Deep well

Common faucet/Purified water

Han


Table 4. Continued...


PARTICULARS REMARKS FREQUENCY
Storage available Chest-type freezer (in store, in house) 14,1
for raw meat Chest-type freezer/styro (in store) 1
materials Upright freezer (in store, in house) 1,3
Chiller (in store) 1
Thawing Air thawed 20
procedure
Soaked in water 1
Grinding Meat cuts are ground in store using meat
erinder
Weighing of Meat Analog, Digital Weighing Scale
Raw Materials
Non-Meat Analog weighing scale and estimation 7
Digital weighing scale 7
Digital weighing scale and tablespoon 2
Digital weighing scale and estimation. 8
Estimation” 5
Mixing of Raw Procedure Dry ingredients dissolved in wet
Materials ingredients
Manual mixing (by hand) of meat and
non-meat products
Container used Plastic basin
Stainless stee! basin
Staging/Curing Curing/Marinating None 4
time <1 hour 6
T hour 5
1-3 hours 2
| day I
Overnight 1
Container used _ Plastic basin without cover 2
Plastic or stainless steel basin without 1
cover
Stainless steel basin without cover 18
Stainless steel basin covered with plastic 7

Stainless steel basin covered with plastic
basin

“By bottle, by cup, by scoop, per pack, per piece, manual estimation (no measurement)

Table 4. Continued...


PARTICULARS REMARKS FREQUENCY.
Stuffing Manually stuffed in hog casing using 24
(longganisa) funnel
Holding Area Directly displayed 4
Table 10
Under the table 1
Chiller/Refrigerator 4
Displaying/Selling Longganisa Hung 20
Hung and placed on tray without cover 1
Not displayed, stored in freezer, packed 2
in plastic in % or 1 kg,
N/A, by order 1
Tocino Plastic basin without cover 3
Stainless steel basin or tray without 8
cover
Stainless steel basin covered with 3
plastic
Packed in plastic 4 or 4 kg, placed on 3
tray
Not displayed, stored in freezer, packed 3
in plastic in % or Ys kg
N/A, by order 1
Storing of unsold Storage available Chest-type freezer (in store, in house) 18,1
products Chest-type freezer/styro (in store) 1
Chest-type cooler (in store) 1
Chest-type chiller (in store) 1
Upright freezer (in store, in house) 3,3
Packaging material Plastic bag 29
Processing Longganisa 10-40 kg for | day sales 6
volume 10-100 kg for 2 days ~ 1 week sales 7
Tocino 6-50 kg for | day sales 1s
5-20 kg for 2 days ~ 1 week sales 6


Table 4. Continued...


PARTICULARS REMARKS FREQUENCY
Sales volume _Longganisa 3-40 kg/day
Tocino 3-50 kg/day
Shelf life Longganisa 3-4 days 4
1 week 5
> | week 4
No idea n
Tocino 1-4 days 4
1 week 4
> | week 2
No idea in

Table 5 shows the distribution of products sold per area, Out of the 29

respondents, 8, 5, and 16 vendors are selling longganisa, tocino, and both products,

respectively.

Table 5. Distribution of longganisa and tocino products sold per area

AREA NUMBER OF RESPONDENTS
Longganisa Tocino Longanisa and
Tocino

Calamba 2 - 3
San Pablo 1 1 9
Siniloan 3 . 3

Sta. Cruz . 4 1
Sta. Rosa 2 . ;

Total 8 5 16


Curing Salt Declaration and Residual
Longganisa and Tocino

itrite Profile of

Curing salt is one of the major ingredients in longganisa and tocino as it is
important for the development of cured meat flavor and color, and for the preservation of
meat products both as an antimicrobial and antioxidant. Results of the survey revealed
that 18 (62%) out of the 29 respondents have declared curing salt usage in their
longganisa and/or tocino products. The presence of curing salt in the unbranded
longganisa and tocino products sold by the interviewed vendors from the wet market and
3 branded commercial longganisa and tocino from the supermarket validated the

ingredient declaration of vendors and commercial brands, as shown in Table 6.

Table 6. Validation of nitrite declaration in longganisa and tocino products.

LONGGANISA TOCINO’ TOTAL

Wet Market Number of products, N 24 21 45
With declaration 18 8 26

Samples analyzed, n 23 20 4B

Nitrite-positive samples 2B 12 35

Branded Number of products, N
With declaration
Samples analyzed, n
Nitrite-positive samples

aaaa


Twenty-six (58%) out of the total 45 products from the wet markets have curing
salt declaration. One hundred percent sampling from the wet market was not
accomplished, as some of the vendors were no longer selling the product at the time of
sample collection. Twenty-three out of the 24 unbranded longganisa, and 20 out of the 21
unbranded tocino products were sampled. Results show that among the 43 total samples,
35 (81%) products were positive for nitrite, with 23 (53%) having declaration and 12
(28%) without declaration (Table 7). On the other hand, all the 6 (100%) branded
products sampled from the commercial supermarket were found positive for nitrite,
confirming the sodium nitrite declaration in the ingredient list on their respective

packaging materials.

Table 7. Distribution of curing salt declaration on nitrite-positive tocino and
longganisa products.

PRODUCT SAMPLE, NO.OF DECLARATION
0 pus “Present None Not Sure”
Wet Market Longganisa 23 2B 7 5 1
Tocino 20 12 6 5 1
Total 43 35 23 10 2
% out of n 81% 53% 23% 5%
Commercial Longganisa 3 3 3 - -
Tocino 3 3 3 - -
Total 6 6 6 - -

% out of n 100% 100% - ~


Table 8. Residual nitrite of longganisa products.

‘AREA SAMPLE, RESIDUAL NITRITE, STANDARD LIMIT
a ppm (BFAD, 2006)

Food Cat. No. 08.3.1.1 Cured (including salted) non-heat treated processed comminuted meat,
poultry, and game products

Calamba 4 9-38 134 ppm’
San Pablo 9 1-14
Siniloan 6 1-75
Sta. Cruz 1 344"
Sta. Rosa 3 2-1
Wet market over-all 23 1-344

Food Cat. No. 08.3.3 Frozen processed comminuted meat, poultry, and game products
Branded 3 4-48 134 ppm’

“standard is based on general category 08.3 Processed comminuted meat, pouliry, and game products
** sample tested twice, reported value is from 2" analysis

The residual nitrite profile of the unbranded longganisa products ranges from 1 —
344 ppm, while the branded ranges from 4 — 48 ppm (Table 8). The residual nitrite levels
measured from the samples were compared to the standards set by BFAD-DOH as stated
in Bureau-Circular No. 2006-016 Updated List of Food Additives, in order to evaluate
the products’ quality and safety for consumption. Results showed that among the 23
longganisa products from the wet market, only one sample had a residual nitrite of 344
ppm, which exceeds the standard of 134 ppm NaNO> for Food Category 08.3.1.1. The
said product from the same vendor was sampled and tested twice to confirm the result

from the first analysis in order to obtain a conclusive result. The absorbance obtained


during the first analysis was unreadable by the spectrophotometer, indicating a high
nitrite concentration. On the other hand, all branded products were compliant with the

standard of 134 ppm for Food Category 08.3.3.

Table 9. Residual nitrite of tocino products.

“AREA SAMPLE,  RESIDUALNITRITE, STANDARD LIMIT
a ppm (BFAD, 2006)

Food Cat, No. 08.2.1.1 Cured (including salted) non-heat treated processed meat, poultry, and
game products in whole pieces or cuts

Calamba 3 4-35 416 ppm
San Pablo 10 0-24
Siniloan 2 3-104
Sta. Cruz 5 0-85

Wet market over-all 20 0-104

Food Cat, No. 08.2.3 Frozen processed meat, poultry, and game products in whole pieces or
cuts

Branded 3 30-123 167 ppm

On the other hand, results for both unbranded and branded tocino products
products show 100% compliance to standards of NaNOz maximum limit (Table 9). The
20 unbranded and 3 branded products have residual nitrite values ranging from 0 — 107
ppm, and from 30 - 123 ppm, respectively. These values were compliant to the maximum
limit of 416 ppm for Food Category 08.2 (unbranded) and 167 ppm for Food Category

08.2.3 (branded).


The unbranded products from each of the 5 wet markets showed variations, in
terms of the presence and amount of residual nitrite individually per area, and are highly
varied in general. The obtained results conform with the study of Solano, et al. (2011) on
longganisa and tocino products from selected markets of some major processed meat-
consuming cities (Las Pifias, Muntinlupa, Baguio, Bacolod, and Butuan), and provinces
(Bulacan, Iloilo, Southern Leyte, and Davao del Sur). Results of their study showed that
most test samples within the same sampling area were found to be highly variable with a
range of 6.0 — 323 ppm NO? in longganisa (n=29) and 7 — 399 ppm in tocino (n=25).
Among the 49 products (43 unbranded & 6 branded) sampled in this study, the
branded products exhibited a more consistent residual nitrite profile compared to the

unbranded. This is primarily because the branded products were produced in large-scale

manufacturing facilities wherein compliance with food processing standards are
implemented and monitored. The results are supported by the studies conducted by Alam
et al. (2016) on unbranded and branded tocino products in Mandaue City, and by Azanza
and Rustia (2004) on tocino products produced by micro- and small-scale meat
processors in Pampanga. Results of the former study present values of 8-10 ppm NO> in
unbranded and 0-150 ppm in branded products; while the latter present 0.76-12.00 ppm

from micro-scale (wet market) and 12.20-144.42 ppm from small-scale processors.


Processing Conditions, Personnel, and Environment Impact
on Quality and Residual Nitrite of Longganisa and Tocino

Several factors contribute to the high variability of unbranded products, in terms
of residual nitrite, which includes but may not be limited to, (1) personnel training, (2)
quality and characteristics of raw materials (meat and non-meat, i.e. curing salt) and (3)
processing conditions (condition and cleanliness of food contact surfaces, handling,
environment, storage).

Personnel training is important in the manufacturing of processed meat products,
as the products’ quality depends on the manner of handling and the conditions to which
the meat products were exposed from the procurement of raw materials up to selling and
storage. It was known that none of the vendors had undergone a formal training on meat
handling and processing. The lack of personnel awareness is evident on the observations
noted during the interview. Presented in Table 10 are the collated observations with
respect to key areas including Personnel, Facilities, Tools and Equipment, and
Environment from all 5 wet markets covered in the study. These observations were noted
‘on the basis of relevant sections stipulated in the Department of Agriculture. A.O. No. 5,
Series of 2012, also known as the Rules and Regulations on Hygienic Handling of Newly

Slaughtered Meat in Meat Markets.


Table 10. Personnel and store condition observations and regulatory requirements.
KEY ‘OBSERVATIONS RELEVANT SECTIONS OF
AREA D.A.A.O. NO. 5, S. 2012
Personnel No formal training attended 3.4. Meat handlers shall handle meat

13 out of 29 respondents claimed to
have Food Handler’s certificate (but not
on hand)

No ear and hair restraints

Bloody apron/clothes

Dirty, long, or polished fingernails

Wearing of jewelries and accessories
(earings, ring, necklace, watch)

Beard/moustache not neatly shaven

and meat products in a hygienic manner
and shall comply with the requirements

for personnel hygiene in the handling of
meat

3.5. They shall have a Certificate of
Attendance to a Training course on
Hygienic Handling of Meat in Meat
Markets, conducted by the NMISS or by
LGUs

3.6. They shall be licensed by the
LGU’s and shall possess an Annual
Health Certificate.

8.2 Meat handlers must take all
necessary steps to prevent the
contamination of meat by maintaining a
high degree of personal cleanliness that
include, but not
limited to, the following:
a. Taking a bath before going to
work;
b. Wearing clean apron and
haimet during work;
c. Keeping nails trimmed, clean
and without nail polish;
d. Not wearing of jewelries,
accessories, and perfumes;



Table 10. Continued...
KEY OBSERVATIONS, RELEVANT SECTIONS OF
AREA D.A. A.O. NO. 5, S. 2012
Facilities Cobwebs on beams; 6.1.4 Areas where the meat is handled
and sold shall be maintained in sanitary
Dilapidated and rusty beams; condition and in good repair at all times.
Cracks and crevices in flooring; 6.1.5 The sales and display areas shall
be kept orderly and free of clutter. Piling
Shared faucet is near the floor; of carcasses intended for later sale shall
not be allowed.
Rust stains and cracks in table tiles;
6.1.7 Meat showing signs of spoilage
Chipped-off granite table; shall be immediately removed from the
sales area, properly disposed and not
Carton used as table liner; further utilized for human consumption.
Controlling Authority shall ensure this.
Uncovered drainage gutter and trash
bin; 7.12 Proper drainage system should be
installed and maintained.
Unsegregated wastes;
7.13 Potable water should be made
Cleaning implements (rag, readily available.
broomstick) placed on table near
products;
Cluttered area;
Presence of fouV/off products in the
selling area;
Presence of foul odor in the area;
Sink/faucet not available per store
Tools and Worn-out knife handle; 6.2.3 The cutting area shall always be
Equipment maintained under good sanitary

Chipped-off wooden chopping board;

No sanitizing solution available;

conditions. Cutting tools such as knives,
chopping board, sharpener etc. shall at
all times be maintained in good sanitary
condition.



Table 10. Continued...

KEY AREA OBSERVATIONS RELEVANT SECTIONS OF
DA. A.O. NO. 5, S. 2012

Tools and Broomstick used for cleaning of 7.9 Cutting and chopping blocks for

Equipment chopping board meat shall be made of even,

impervious, non-fibrous, and easily
cleaned materials and free of cracks and
crevices.

7.10 Knives, tables, and meat hooks
should be thoroughly cleaned and
disinfected.

Environment Flies, cockroach, rodents, cats and/or 7.1 Stray animals must not be allowed
dog sightings; in any meat market.

Presence of smoker in the area; 7.2 Infestations of insects or rodents
must be reported immediately to the
Presence of fouV/off products in the Market Administrators/Master.

selling area;
7.3 The meat stall, its surroundings, and
Trash bag placed near products equipment or tools should be kept
clean, free of litter and odors, in good
Personal belongings and cleaning _repair and condition, and free from
implements placed on table near vermin at all times.
products

7.4 The meat stalls shall be free from
personal belongings, such as clothes,
footwear, blankets, tobacco, and other
forms of contaminants.

The observations listed in Table 10 imply a high probability of compromise in the
quality of raw meat material used in processing, thus in the quality of the processed meat

products as well. The most critical quality characteristic that defines spoilage of meat is


the microbial load. According to Vasuhandra, et al. (1999), as cited by Leistner & Gould
(2002), meat produced under tropical climatic conditions carries a high microbial load, as.
influenced by the manner of slaughtering and handling. Predominant microorganisms
favored in this condition are those of the mesophilic and thermophilic types. Microbial
contamination of fresh red meats occurs primarily on the surface, while the internal
portions of the intact meat are usually free from or low in contaminating spoilage or
pathogenic microorganisms. Both spoilage and potentially pathogenic bacteria are present
on the surface of the slaughter animal and in the intestinal tract at the time of slaughter.
Facilities and red meat become contaminated from these two sources during slaughter,
slicing, and processing (Kotula & Kotula, 2000). In developing countries, such as the
Philippines, meat is usually displayed for sale in open air without any covering which
enables bacteria to be transmitted by flies, other animals, and birds, resulting in
contamination. Other agents of contamination include food-contact surfaces, knives,
chopping board, and personnel. This leads to the rapid deterioration of fresh meat in
tropical climates, resulting in a very short shelf-life (Fellows and Hampton, 1992).
According to Lambert (1991), fresh meat has a shelf life of 1 day or less at ambient
storage temperatures (20-30°C).

Several studies in the Philippines were done to determine the load of
microorganisms present in fresh pork meat sold in the wet market. The National Meat
Inspection Services (NMIS) set a maximum limit of 110° CFU/g total plate count for
fresh meat. A study conducted by Pet, et al. (2017) reported an initial of 3.13x105 CFU/g

average aerobic plate count (APC) in fresh meat sold in Calamba, Laguna. The obtained


count was high, yet still within the standard. However, upon further exposure of the same
meat samples to ambient conditions, a bacterial growth rate of 8.16x10° CFU/g per hour
was determined, exceeding regulatory standards. In Cebu City, Yandung III, et al. (2016)
reported that fresh meat sampled between 7:00-10:00 am exhibited APC values
exceeding maximum limit, ranging from 1.1x10® to >5.9x10® CFU/g. Presence of
Escherichia coli at <0.3 to 15 MPN/g (vs. 500 MPN standard for chilled meat) were also
determined in 55% of the samples tested. Lastly, newly slaughtered meat samples from
San Juan City public wet market studied by Tejada, et al. (2013), exhibited APC values
ranging from 1x10* to 1x10° CFU/g within 0- to 8-hour period after slaughtering.
Presence of pathogens including Salmonella spp, S. aureus, E. coli and
Enterobacteriaceae were also detected, indicating that environmental condition, human
handling, and tools and utensils (e.g. clothing, knives, plant tools) are the major sources
of meat contamination in the wet market.

Meat leftovers, as previously mentioned, serve as the major source of raw
material used for longganisa- and tocino-making in the wet market, as declared by 19 out
of 29 respondents. Given the abovementioned data and observations, it can be inferred
that the microbial load present in raw meat is already high. Thus, it can be expected that
the load present in meat leftovers after an all-day exposure/display at the wet market
would exceed the maximum limit. The wet market vendors store meat leftovers either in
chest-type freezers, in upright freezers, or in household refrigerators with freezer
compartment or chiller. While the shelf life of meat can be extended at refrigeration

temperatures (<4°C), meat will still spoil, mainly due to the activities of aerobic,


psychrotrophic bacteria, unless additional control measures are taken to modify the
environmental storage conditions (Lambert, 1991). The washing of meat practiced by 10
vendors prior to storage or cutting, and by 1 vendor after cutting may also introduce
undesirable microorganisms. The potability of water used and the manner of washing is
critical given that the available sources of water existing in the wet market are common
or shared faucet and poso, while only some have their own faucet or are using purified
water. Five of the vendors perform washing by placing the meat in a basin with water; 3
were washing with running water; and 3 were rubbing salt onto the meat after washing in
a basin. The process of salting and freezing might lower the microbial population only to
a certain degree but chilling will not. Storage conditions in the wet market set-up are not
ideal. The repeated opening and closing of the storages and the high stacking density of
the products stored limit the circulation of cold air, thereby resulting in incomplete or
partial freezing of meat, especially those which are thick in volume. The conventional
slow-freezing process also causes structural damage and formation of large ice crystals
within the meat muscle, resulting in a high drip loss upon thawing. The usual process of
thawing frozen or partially-frozen meat practiced by the vendors is air thawing, where the
meat is left to thaw at ambient conditions in the store. The counter-top or ambient
thawing also increases the drip loss and is not recommended by the food codes and
regulation due to the risk of microbial spoilage, but almost 50% of vendors are still
favoring this thawing method due to simplicity. This method, though a rapid thawing
technique, favors potential growth of pathogens on the surface initially, then inside, as the

meat temperature rises into the danger zone (Akhtar, et al., 2013).


Given the quality of raw meat material and the conditions or environmental
factors present in the wet market, the inclusion of curing salt in meat products plays a
significant role, not only in the development of desirable flavor and color; but also, more
importantly in the preservation. A concentration of 80-140 ppm in meat product
effectively inhibits the growth of spoilage bacteria (Feiner, 2006), and the minimal

inhil

tory NO>2 level for spore outgrowth and toxin production for various groups of
Clostridium botulinum has been reported to vary within the range 50-300 ppm depending

on the pH of the food matrix (Szabo & Gibson, 1997 in Azanza & Rustia, 2004).

Table 11. Curing salt information declared by wet market vendors.

INFORMATION PARTICULARS FREQUENCY PERCENTAGE
(n=18)

Source Wet Market 16 89%
Supplier 1 6%
Wet Market or Supplier 1 6%
Quantity Kilo pack 9 50%
Purchased Repacked, <Ikg 7 38%
Repacked or Ikg, 1 6%
Kilo pack or in bulk (1 sack) 1 6%
Measurement Estimation 44%
28%

1%
N%

Table spoon

Rw ue

Improvised measuring spoon/tool


In order to ensure that the amount of curing salt introduced to the meat during
processing is sufficient to preserve the product and inhibit the growth of microorganisms,
the quality of curing salt used should be also determined. Presented in Table 11 are the
following: source of curing salt, quantity purchased, and means of measurement used
during meat processing by the wet market vendors.

Results of the survey present that 16 (89%) out of the 18 vendors purchase their
curing salt from the wet market. The concentration of the active curing agent sodium
nitrite in locally available curing salts are expected to be inconsistent. Some curing salts
existing in the wet market may still contain nitrate (NOs) aside from nitrite, while some
would have nitrite only. The utilization of nitrate results in slower and less predictable
curing of the meat. Furthermore, curing salts usually available to wet market vendors or
micro-scale processors come in retail packs prepared by other vendors who may lack the
necessary awareness about the functionalities and toxicities of the active agents in the
curing materials (Various authors, in Azanza & Rustia, 2004).

Despite the significant beneficial properties of curing salt, it was observed during
the interviews conducted in the wet market that most of the respondents perceive curing
salt as a preservative that is “bad for the health”. They were also unaware and have no
information on the recommended usage level of the curing salt that they have been
applying to their products, since most were bought in retail packs at <Ikg to 1kg from the
wet market. Each and all of the vendors follow their own formulation in longganisa- and
tocino-making, wherein fixed amount of raw materials are being used for a certain batch

quantity. According to them, meat ingredients (lean/fat) and basic non-meat ingredients,


such as salt and sugar, were measured with a weighing scale. However, for the curing
salt, quantification is done by majority through estimation. Results show that there were
only 5 vendors using digital weighing scale to measure the amount of curing salt during
preparation. The inclusion of curing salt in their curing mixture was quantified by
majority through estimation and improvised measuring spoon/tool, including bottle cap
and formula milk scoop. Typical practice of Filipino processors, especially wet market
vendors, would be to use either too minimally or excessively the food additives
considered “risky” by consumer and market reactions, as well as, through misconceptions
about the additives by the vendors themselves (Azanza & Rustia, 2004). Munzayac
(2000) also noted that nitrite is perceived by market vendors processing and selling cured
meat products as more of just a color, texture, and flavor enhancer for meat, rather than a
preserving agent. This holds true with the interviewed respondents, and these
observations highlight the importance of having proper training on meat handling and

processing, as none of them had attended any.


Study II - Effect of Storage Period, Storage Condition, and Cooking Method on
Residual Nitrite of Cured Longganisa

Initial Residual Nitrite of Longganisa

The longganisa in the study was produced by applying 0.5% curing salt mixture
per kilogram of raw meat material, equivalent to 292 ppm NaNO2, based on the
maximum recommended usage level declared by the supplier. The initial residual nitrite
of the product on Day 1 after termination of curing was 174 ppm, showing a 40.3%
percent reduction on the incoming nitrite. Similar observation was noted on the study of
Merino et al., (2016) on pork/beef and chicken meat products where 15-55% depletion
takes place at 24 hours after the addition of nitrite. Hill et al. (1973) cited that 20-25%
nitrite loss has been estimated to occur during mixing of curing salt and raw meat
materials. Sindelar & Milkowski (2011) also cited that the depletion takes place when
nitrite reacts or binds to the chemical components within the meat system, such as
proteins. Typical levels between 10 and 20% of the added nitrite remain after the
manufacturing process, which continue to decline during storage.

In using the maximum level of curing salt prescribed by the manufacturer, despite
the observed reduction in nitrite value, the initial residual nitrite of the longganisa was
29.9% higher than the 134 ppm standard set by BFAD for cured comminuted meat
products. The excessive usage of nitrates and nitrites impose immediate health risks,
especially to infants and young individuals, upon consumption of meat products with

high levels of the additives. Local incidences of NO2 poisoning in the Philippines due to


cured meat products has been reported by Dayrit, White, & Lapastora (1992) in Azanza
(2003), wherein children who had eaten tocino, in Metro Manila, containing nitrite levels
ranging from 400 to 1000 ppm NO> suffered food intoxication. Another case involved a
previously healthy child who had suffered from clinical features including vomiting,
abdominal cramps, cyanosis, tachycardia, and hypotension within one hour after eating
tocino containing 1398 ppm NO (Hatigan-Go et al., 1996). Azanza and Rustia (2003)
also cited reports from Grafil, Lopez et al., and Ugalde et al. (2002), involving 32 cases
of longganisa NO> poisoning in Quezon City, which include the unfortunate death of a 2-
year old child who had developed peripheral cyanosis within 30 minutes after
consumption of oriental pork sausage containing up to 9885 ppm NO2 and up to 2285

ppm NO3.

Effect of Storage Period

The residual nitrite of frozen longganisa during a 42-day storage period is
illustrated in Figure 4. Results show that the highest level of residual nitrite was observed
at Day 4 with 183 ppm. This level was significantly higher than the initial (174 ppm) and

with the rest of the samples from Day 7 (152 ppm) to 42 (125 ppm).


200 7 1838
ra 178
£
& 160
Z 120 st ge
E 1s
3 100
z %
4 7 4 21 28 38 2
Day

——— Initial residual nitrite (ppm)
rend line (Residual nitrite)

— Residual nitrite (ppm)

* “Means with different superscripts are significantly different (p<0.05).

Figure 4. Residual nitrite of longganisa during storage (n = 6)

Several studies already established that nitrite levels decrease over time during the
storage of cured meat products (Hill et al., 1973; Jantawat, Runglerdkriangkrai,
Thunpithayakul, & Sanguandeekul, 1993; Merino et al., 2016; Pérez-Rodriguez, Bosch-
Bosch, & Garcid-Mata, 1996; Pérez-Rodriguezt, Bosch-Bosch, & Garcia-Mata, 1997).
Similar observations were obtained in this study, and significant results of correlation and
regression analysis, at a = 0.05, on storage time and residual nitrite of longganisa are
presented in Table 12. The obtained Pearson Correlation coefficient of -0.8387 indicates
a strong negative linear relationship between storage time and residual nitrite, while the
estimated regression model implies that for every I day increase in storage, the residual
nitrite is expected to decrease by 1.17 ppm. Furthermore, the linear dependence
illustrated by the R? value denotes that 70.34% of the variation in residual nitrite level is

explained by the number of days in storage.


Table 12. Correlation and regression data for storage time and residual nitrite.

ANALYSIS SAS OUTPUT
Correlation Pearson Correlation Coefficient, r -0.8387
Significance of Correlation, p-value 0.0003
Regression _ Significance of Regression <.0001
Coefficient, p-value
Estimated Regression Model RNi = 170.82 - 1.174
Adequacy of the Regression Equation R?= 70.34%

The pH of longganisa throughout the storage period was also measured, as
illustrated in Figure 5. Significant increase compared to the initial pH of 5.86 was
observed from Day 7 to 21. The increase went up to 6.86, which then decreased on Day

28 until Day 42 with a final pH of 5.68.

710 6.86
690 6m
630 _
Bo 5.86
5 = 4
70 sce 5.78 568°
5.50
4 7 4 21 28 35 2
Day
Initial pH em pt + Trend line (pH)

* «Means with different superscripts are significantly different (p<0.05)

Figure 5. pH of longganisa during storage (n = 6)


Table 13. Correlation and regression data for storage time and pH.

ANALYSIS SAS OUTPUT
Correlation _Pearson Correlation Coefficient, r -0.45737
Significance of Correlation, p-value 0.0371
Regression _ Significance of Regression 0.0006
Coefficient, p-value
Estimated Regression Model pHi= 5.86 + 0.074 - 0.002?
Adequacy of the Regression Equation Adj. R? = 51.02%

As with residual nitrite, significant results on correlation and regression analysis
at a = 0.05, on storage time and pH of longganisa were obtained. The Pearson
Correlation coefficient of -0.45737 indicates a moderate negative linear relationship
between storage time and pH, while the estimated regression model implies that for every
1 day increase in storage, the pH of longganisa is expected to increase by 0.07.
Furthermore, the linear dependence was also determined and the adjusted (quadratic) R?
implies that 51.02% of the variation in pH level is explained by the number of days in
storage.

According to studies cited by Sofos (1981), such reactions involved in nitrite
depletion are pH dependent. In the 5.5 to 6.6 typical pH range of meat products, only a
small fraction of nitrite is present as nitrous acid, which has been considered, therefore, a

leak through which nitrite is depleted (Olsman and Krol, 1972).


£180 ~
fl
= 160
FA ce . ele
Zz “0 %» © ee
Zi «8
z
2 10
550 57 590 610 630 650 670 690710
pH

Figure 6, Scatter plot for pH and residual nitrite of longganisa (n = 6)

There is no significant correlation (no linear relationship) obtained between pH
and residual nitrite of the longganisa given the p-value of 0.5795 and Pearson coefficient
of 0.12827, as illustrated by Figure 6. Contrary to the non-significant results obtained, the
depletion of residual nitrite in longganisa through storage time in relation to pH could
still be characterized. Cassens et al., (1976) stated that at pH values equal to or higher
than 6.0, nitrite depletion follows a first order kinetics; while at lower pH values, the
order is between first and second, Product pH may also be important from the standpoint
of altering the rate of nitrite reaction with some meat components or making some site(s)
more available for reaction. Nitrite reacts with heme proteins (myoglobin, hemoglobin),
non-heme proteins, lipids, and carbohydrates. It can also be depleted by the formation of
nitrate, and nitrogen gases (Cassens et al., 1979 in Sofos, 1981).

Pérez-Rodriguezt et al. (1997) cited that during the first reaction of nitrite with the

muscle pigment, or the oxidation of Fe?" in myoglobin to Fe" in metmyoglobin;


production of nitrate through autocatalytic reaction takes place simultaneously. Results of
their study also showed that as nitrite depletes throughout the storage period of
commercial frankfurters, nitrate is being formed. Reports on nitrate formation in meat
products manufactured only with nitrite such as bacon (Herring 1973, Newmark et al.
1974, Goutefongea et al., 1977), in model systems (Lee et al., 1978), and also in
frankfurters prepared in the pilot plant (Perez-Rodriguez et al., 1996), were also
mentioned (Pérez-Rodriguezt et al., 1997). The conversion of nitrate from nitrite was not
explored in the longganisa, but the possibility of this reaction can also be considered a

factor for residual nitrite depletion during the storage period.
Effect of Storage Condition

The storage and product temperature of chilled and frozen longganisa on Day 4
and 7 were noted, as presented in Table 14. The residual nitrite and pH of longganisa are

summarized in Table 15 and trends are illustrated by Figures 7 and 8.

Table 14. Storage and product temperature of chilled and frozen longganisa.

CHILLED, °C FROZEN, °C
Storage Product Storage Product
DAY temperature temperature temperature temperature
4 9.0 14 <-17.0° -16.0
7 5.0 8.1 <-17.0° -16.0

st temperature read-out display of temperature measuring device

Table 15. —_ Residual nitrite and pH of chilled and frozen longganisa (means + SEM;


n=6)
CHILLED FROZEN
DAY Value % change Value % change
Residual nitrite, ppm
Initial 141° = S -
4 156 + 0° - 10.34 183 +28 -
7 132 42° -15.38 1523? -16.94
pH
Initial 5.86 + 0.01° - - -
4 5.96 + 0.01" 71 6.00 + 0.05? =
7 6.00 + 0.04" 0.67 6.14 + 0.05" 2.33

=<Means with different superscripts within the same column are significantly different (p<0.05)



100 +
T

Day

Chilled We Frozen

“Means with different superscripts within the same line are significantly different (p<0.05)

Figure 7. Residual nitrite of chilled and frozen longganisa (n= 6)


Results of the study show a decreasing trend in residual nitrite and increasing pH
during the storage period, similar to the 42-day findings. Change in residual nitrite level
was greater in chilled conditions, while change in pH was greater in frozen conditions.

During storage, cured meats deteriorate, firstly through discoloration, secondly
because of oxidative rancidity in the fat, and thirdly on account of microbial changes
(Lawrie, 2006). Salt has an accelerating effect on the oxidation of fat and as a result,
cured meats are more liable than fresh to spoil through oxidative rancidity (Lea, 1931 in
Lawrie, 2006). Microbial growth and deleterious chemical reactions are the two meat
spoilage factors addressed by lowering the meat temperature. Both factors slow down
considerably when temperature is lowered or when heat is removed from the meat.
Freezing refers to the lowering of temperatures below the freezing point of water (0°C),
while chilling refers to cooling of meat to above freezing temperatures (De Leon and
Gatchalian, 2016).

The decline in residual nitrite level was greater at higher temperatures, as
biochemical processes take place faster in chilled conditions than in frozen, While the
decreasing trend was consistent from the initial analysis to Day 7 in the chilled
longganisa, a 5-6% increase was noted in the frozen longganisa at Day 4 with 183 ppm
compared to the initial, which eventually decreased at Day 7. The higher level of residual
nitrite in frozen longganisa at Day 4 would indicate there is actually a greater amount of
residual nitrite than 174 ppm at Day 1 when the product is stored at frozen conditions.

The difference in the rates of reduction between the two conditions, however, was not


fully appreciated in the study as only 2 data points had been measured simultaneously

throughout the 7-day storage period.


zs 00
5.7
il
i J
Day

t= Chilled 1 —eFrozen

* “Means with different superscripts within the same line are significantly different (p<0.05)

Figure 8. pH of chilled and frozen longganisa (n = 6)

On the other hand, the significant increase in pH throughout the 7-day storage of
both chilled and frozen longganisa (Figure 8) showed a similar trend with the study
conducted by Nazir et al. (2013) on cured buffalo meat. Results of their study
demonstrated drastic increase in pH after up to 5 days and 10 days of curing the product
at 0°C and -5°C storage temperatures, respectively. A greater percentage increase
observed in the pH of frozen longganisa than the chilled also coincides with the greater
tate of pH increase in the cured buffalo meat stored at -5.0°C compared to 0°C. Aside

from the reported increase in pH, a subsequent continuous pH decrease was observed by


Nazir et al. (2013) until the products reached spoilage. According to Sofos (1981), pH of
cured meat products is expected to decrease with storage to an extent, depending on
several factors such as storage temperature. On the other hand, Kim et al. (2014) reported
continuous pH increase in dry-cured pork neck all throughout the 90-day storage at 10°C.

The data on effect of storage condition and time on residual nitrite (p-value
0.0824) and pH (p-value 0.2440) of longganisa showed that there is no interaction
between storage condition and storage time. Initial studies conducted by Rose and
Peterson (1953) concluded that a progressive destruction of nitrite, independent of
bacterial activity, was caused by the reducing systems in meat. They also noted increased
losses with decreased pH and increased temperature up to the temperature of protein
denaturation. The observed decrease in residual nitrite suggests that oxidation-reduction
reactions occurred to convert the nitrite to nitrous oxide.

The relationship or the characteristic of residual nitrite and pH in chilled and
frozen storage was not fully assessed given the 2 data points (Day 4 and 7) observed in
the study. A wider range of data could have been gathered; however, this was no longer
done since spoilage of samples would already have taken place at extended storage

period of chilled longganisa.


Effect of Cooking Methods

Most of the cured meat products in the Philippines are usually cooked prior to
consumption. The common practice of cooking longganisa involves the sequential
boiling of the product until the water has reduced, then followed immediately by frying
with or without additional oil until the surface of the meat product is brown to dark
brown in color or toasted. This method is generally preferred by Filipinos as they
perceive toasted meat, cured or non-cured, as more palatable or tastier. This is also
because of the common misconception that meat products need to be toasted to ensure
that they are cooked and safe for consumption.

The effect of cooking on the residual nitrite content of longganisa with the
following treatments are shown in Table 16: treatment A (pan-frying): 71.1°C to <93.3°C
internal meat temperature (IMT), treatment B (extended pan-frying or toasting): 98.9°C
to 104.4°C IMT, and treatment C (boiling and frying): 71.1°C to <93.3°C .

Raw longganisa has an average of 174 ppm residual nitrite, which is significantly
higher compared to all cooked samples (108 - 148 ppm at P < 0.05). Reduction of residual
nitrite in cured meat products by cooking was already established in various studies. This
observation was also noted in recent studies conducted on Cantonese sausage (Y. Li et al.,
2016), Swedish pork/beef sausage (Merino et al., 2016), and dry-cured sausages (L. Li,

Wang, Xu, & Zhou, 2012).


Table 16. Residual nitrite level of longganisa at different cooking methods (means +

SEM; n=6).
COOKING INTERNAL COOKING RESIDUAL PERCENT
METHOD MEAT TIME, NITRITE, _ NITRITE
TEMPERATURE, min ppm REDUCTION,
°C %
Raw - 1744+1°
Pan-frying 8043.2 1o+11 1482" 15
(A)
Extended 101 +06 15408 108 + 3° 38
pan-frying/
toasting
@)
Boiling and 8943.9 2040.6 H7£1° 3
frying
©

‘Means with different superscripts are significantly different (p<0.05)

The heat during the cooking process causes the protein in meat to denature,
resulting in shrinkage and moisture loss. Sarcoplasmic proteins lose their native structure
at 40-50°C (104-122°F) and myofibrillar proteins denature at 50-65°C (122-150°F). A
study shows that at 46°C, shift in the water populations takes place as illustrated using
nuclear magnetic resonance. Water within the myofibrils diminish, while water in the
intermyofibrillar space increase as intramolecular connections are substituted by
intermolecular binding; thus, decreasing the water-binding capacity and increasing the

pH of about ~ 0.3 pH unit. Similar changes occur in collagen at ~ 65-70°C (150-158°F);


and in between 80°C — 100°C (176-212°F), collagen slowly changes into gelatin.
Furthermore, breakdown of nitrite and binding of nitrite to proteins (SH-groups) is
promoted at high temperatures. Nitrite may also oxidize, and loss amounting to 40-50%
during heating may take place (Devine & Dikeman, 2014; Kinsman, Kotula, &
Breidenstein, 1994).

Results showed that treatment B had the greatest reduction with lowest residual
nitrite after cooking (38%, 108 + 7 ppm), followed by treatment C (33%, 117 + 3 ppm
reduction), and lastly by treatment A (15%, 148 + 6 ppm). The amount of nitrite
reduction was significantly higher in treatments B and C than treatment A (P < 0.05).

There are several factors that affect the extent of nitrite reduction in cured meats
during cooking, among which are time, temperature, and method. A study conducted by
Okayama, Fujii, & Yamanoue (1991) on pork sausages showed that cooking time had a
greater effect than cooking temperature on the percentage of nitrite decomposition.
Parallel observations were obtained in this study wherein significant decrease in residual
nitrite was noted in cooked longganisa for treatments B and C with cooking times of 15 +
0.8 min. and 20 + 0.6 min., respectively, as compared to treatment A with only 10 + 1.1
min. Cooking method is also another factor as elaborated by the studies conducted by L.
Li et al., (2012) and Y. Li et al., (2016). The former reported that residual nitrite in dry-
cured sausages was significantly reduced by cooking treatments in the following order:
boiling > microwaving > deep-frying > pan-frying. The latter, on the other hand,
concluded that boiling for 30 minutes facilitates ~ 18% removal of nitrite in Cantonese

sausage by dissolving the nitrite from the product into the water.


Boiling and frying are the two basic cooking methods, which both reduced the
residual nitrite level in longganisa in this study. As the nitrite dissolves into the water
during boiling, nitrous acid is formed; while liberation of hydrogen sulfide (H2S) from
sulphur-containing amino acids in the meat also takes place (Kinsman et al., 1994). A
study conducted by Grossi (2009) reported that HS acts as a co-factor of nitrous acid

which induces the release of nitric oxide.

+ (HS7/H,S)
HNO, TEEAS), s.no—A=, no
pHe7

Nitric oxide, in the form of gas, may dissipate during cooking which can
contribute to the lowering of residual nitrite level in the longganisa. Cassens et al. (1981)
also cited information suggesting that the detachment of the globin portion of the
myoglobin molecule during heating could lead to the formation of dinitrosylhemochrome
where two coordination positions of iron are occupied by NO, thereby reducing the
unreacted nitrite or residual nitrite in the system.

Liberation of carbonyl compounds also take place during cooking, and one
significant reaction that occurs in meat products during frying is Maillard browning. The
browning reaction develops not only through home cooking methods, but also during
industrial processing of foods. The dark brown color on the surface of toasted meat,
which makes it more appealing to consumers and Filipinos, is primarily because of the
Maillard reaction taking place at high temperatures of cooking. Maillard reaction
products (MRPs) are formed as a result of the reaction between protein and reducing

sugars upon heating. These products are responsible for the desired "burnt" meat flavor,


aroma volatiles, and browning of meat. However as heat is introduced, other changes in
the characteristics of cooked meat may also result from Maillard-type reactions, including
the production of bioactive compounds with both beneficial (i.e, compounds with
antioxidant properties) and toxic effects, loss of nutritional quality, and modification to
the product’s texture (Devine & Dikeman, 2014; Finot, 2003; Kinsman et al., 1994).

According to Alfawaz et al., (1994) and Bedinghaus and Ockerman (1995) as
cited by Benjakul et al., (2005) and Finot (2003), MRPs exhibit antioxidative activity in
meat products, which have been used to prevent lipid oxidation in many products. A
study involving the MRPs produced from porcine plasma protein (PPP) and reducing
sugars was done by Benjakul et al., (2005); and it was concluded that antioxidant activity
takes place via electron-donating and radical-scavenging mechanism. The increase in the
reducing power and antioxidative activity of MRPs is coincidental with the increase in
heating time, increase in browning, and the decrease in free amino groups.

Although the antioxidant activity was not measured in this study, the lowering of
residual nitrite levels may also be linked to the formation of MRPs in longganisa. It was
noted that the degree of browning between the two pan-frying methods (treatments A and
B) was greater in treatment B, where cooking time had been extended to reach the desired
toasted endpoint at higher IMT. These observations can be associated with the significant
reduction of residual nitrite in treatment B (37%; 101 + 0.6°C IMT) than A (15%; 80 +
3.2°C IMT), as greater degree of browning took place in the former. On the other hand,
the degree of reduction in treatment C (33%; 89 + 1.6°C IMT) can be attributed to both

longer cooking time and boiling process aside from frying. A similar pattem of residual


nitrite reduction was obtained in the study conducted by L. Li et al. (2012) wherein
boiling and deep-frying method had greater reduction than just pan-frying. According to
Finot (2003), the beneficial antioxidative effect can both inhibit nitrosamine formation
and reduce nitrosamine-induced carcinogenicity from the undesirable nitrosation of
Amadori compounds to mutagenic N-nitroso derivatives, which is also formed from the

Maillard reaction. The same study of L. Li et al. (2012) did not illustrate the extent of

inhibition; but it was reported that nitrosamine contents were highest in deep-fried,

followed by pan-fried, then by boiling.

CHAPTER 5

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION

Results of the profiling study revealed that the wet market vendors lack basic
knowledge in proper meat handling and processing. Proper meat handling practices were
not observed in the wet market, and basic process controls in accordance with
Department of Agriculture. A.O. No. 5, Series of 2012, Rules and Regulations on
Hygienic Handling of Newly Slaughtered Meat in Meat Markets were not in place.
Awareness about and declaration of curing salt usage by the vendors were inconsistent,
and results of validation revealed presence in 81% of the samples, with only 53% having
declaration. The product samples showed conformance to regulatory limits set by BFAD
(2006) on residual nitrite of the longganisa (134 ppm) and tocino (167 ppm) products
except for one longganisa sample (344 ppm) from the wet market. However, the
concentration of residual nitrite in both products had high variability; and levels were
insufficient to control the growth of pathogenic microorganisms — which is the primary
concern for products being sold at the wet market. The results obtained and the non-
conformance observed in the process and products highlights the vendors’ lack of
training, thus compromising quality and safety of the products.

The effect of post-processing or pre-consumption conditions and processes,

including storage and cooking, on longganisa were evaluated. Nitrite depletion during


storage at the rate of 1.17 ppm/day was determined on a 42-day storage period at frozen
conditions. The degree of nitrite loss was confirmed to be greater in chilled storage
condition than in frozen after a 7-day storage period, with final values of 132 ppm and
152 ppm residual nitrite, respectively. Cooking, on the other hand, lowered the residual
nitrite of longganisa depending on the method employed with the following noted
reductions: 15% through pan-frying, 38% through extended pan-frying, and 33% through

boiling then frying.


Recommendations

Government initiatives to ensure the level of food safety on processed meat
products produced in and sold at the wet market should be further implemented and
strengthened in the country. In light of the Food Safety Act of 2013, R.A. No. 10611,
production of processed meats in the wet market is strongly discouraged given the lapses
and possible risks in the current wet market set-up. Training on meat handling and
processing, with emphasis on the proper usage of curing salt, should be provided to the
vendors. Quality of the products could only be improved by implementing good
manufacturing practices or process controls such as cold chain management from the
procurement of raw meat materials up to the storage and selling of finished products.
Inspection and monitoring, as well as validation of process controls and finished product
quality, should be further enforced by respective agencies in order to completely assess
and identify the gaps in the wet markets, for the sole purpose of consumer protection
through continuous improvement.

The results gathered in this study suggest that branded cured meat products sold
in commercial supermarkets are of better quality, at a food safety standpoint, than those
produced and sold in wet markets, given the poor handling practices employed from pre-
processing up to post-processing.

Future studies may look into the microbiological profile to fully evaluate the
quality and safety of longganisa and tocino in relation with residual nitrite level.

Temperature of the product and storage temperature should also be monitored alongside


pH and residual nitrite starting from the time of curing termination up to the maximum
shelf-life of chilled and frozen longganisa, on a closer time interval than the 3-day
interval used in the study. Microbiological analysis could also be conducted to further
assess the relationship of nitrite and pH on the microbial load of the product. Lastly,
moisture content or the amount of cooking loss incurred, as well as the pH of the product
before and after cooking with different cooking methods should be measured. The actual
nitrosamines formed on local meat products after cooking should be studied to determine

the level of product safety at the point of consumption.

LITERATURE CITED

AKHTAR, S., M.I. KHAN and F. FAIZ. 2013 Effect of Thawing on Frozen Meat
Quality: A comprehensive Review. Pakistan Journal of Food Sciences (2013),
Volume 23, Issue 4, Page(s): 198-211, ISSN: 2226-5899

ALI, S., W. ZHANG, N. RAJPUT, M.A. KHAN, C. LI and G. ZHOU, Effect of multiple
freeze-thaw cycles on the quality of chicken breast meat, Food Chemistry,
Volume 173, 2015, Pages 808-814, ISSN 0308-8146,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2014.09.095.

ALLI, I. 2016. Food Quality Assurance: Principles and Practices. CRC Press, 19 Apr

ANGELES, J.P. 2015. Processed Meat Industry. Roadmap Localization & AEC Game
Plan. Retrieved from: http://industry. gov.ph/

ASSOCIATION OF OFFICIAL ANALYTICAL CHEMISTS (AOAC). 1990. Nitrites in
cured meat, colorimetric method. In K. Helrich (Ed.), Official methods of analysis
(15th ed... p. 938). Arlington VA, USA: Association of Official Analytical
Chemists (section 973.31).

AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR QUALITY (ASQ). 2017. Quality Resources - Quality
Glossary. Accessed on: https://asq.org/

AUSTRALIAN TRADE AND INVESTMENT COMMISSION. 2017. Food and
beverage to the Philippines. Accessed on: https://www.austrade.gov.au/

AZANZA, M.P.V. and A.S. RUSTIA. 2004. Residual nitrite levels in Philippine sweet
bacon, Food Control, Volume 15, Issue 5, 2004, Pages 385-389, ISSN 0956-7135

BARD, J. and W.E. TOWNSEND. 1978. Cured meats: Meat curing. In: Price, J.F.,
Schweigert, B.S. (Eds.), The Science of Meat and Meat Products, 2" Edition
Westport: Food and Nutrition Press, pp. 452-4

BASELER, L.J. 2009. “A comparison of residual nitrite and nitrate, lipid oxidation, cut-
surface color, and sensory and visual characteristics for nitrite-added and no-
nitrite- or - nitrate-added Canadian-style bacon.” Graduate Theses and
Dissertations. 10941. Retrieved from: http://lib.dr.iastate.edw/etd/10941

BAUER, F. 2014. Residues in Meat and Meat Products | Residues Associated with Meat
Production, Editor(s): Michael Dikeman, Carrick Devine, In Encyclopedia of


Meat Sciences (Second Edition), Academic Press, 2014, Current as of 29 July
2014, Pages 221-225, ISBN

BEDALE, W., J.J. SINDELAR and A.L. MILKOWSKI. 2016. Dietary nitrate and nitrite:
Benefits, risks, and evolving perceptions, Meat Science, Volume 120, 2016, Pages
85-92, ISSN 0309-1740

BRANEN, A.L., P.M. DAVIDSON, S. SALMINEN and J.H. THORNGATE, III. 2002.
Food Additives. Second Edition Revised and Expanded. Marcel Dekker, Inc. 270
Madison Avenue, New York. NY 10016

BRYAN, N.S., D.D. ALEXANDER, J.R. COUGHLIN, A.L. MILKOWSKI and P.
BOFFETTA. 2012. Ingested nitrate and nitrite and stomach cancer risk: An
updated review, Food and Chemical Toxicology, Vol. 50, Issue 10, 2012, Pages
3646-3665, ISSN 0278-6915

BUENO, C.M., 2016. Animal Science 131 Meat Processing Laboratory Manual. Institute
of Animal Science, College of Agriculture and Food Science, University of the
Philippines Los Bafios, College, Laguna

BUREU OF FOOD AND DRUGS-DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH (BFAD-DOH). 2006.
Bureau-Circular No. 2006-016. Updated List of Food Additives.

CALADES, M., R. CAPATOY, R.B. CENIZA, A.M.L. DIGAO, A. DOBLAS, R.
FRANCISCO, E. GANDARUZA, M. GARA, O. GARCIA and M.A. GIL. 2014.
A survey on the Nitrite levels of Longganisa sold in selective supermarkets and
wet markets within the city of Cebu. M.D. Thesis. Cebu Institute of Medicine.
Modified: October 25, 2018. Health Research and Development Information
Network. Herdin Record #: RO7-CIM-14070709591042 Accessed on:
http://www. herdin.ph/

CALLEJA, D.O. 2010. FNRI says nitrate and nitrite in processed meats expose Filipinos
to health risks. released October 6, 2010. Accessed on: http://balita.ph/

CANTWELL, M. and C. ELLIOT. 2017. Nitrates, Nitrites and Nitrosamines from
Processed Meat Intake and Colorectal Cancer Risk. Journal of Clinical Nutrition
& Dietetics. Vol 3. No. 4:27. ISSN 2472-1921. DOI: 10.4172/2472-1921.100061

CASSENS, R.G. 1998. Updates Session: Nitrite Issue. American Meat Science
Association. Reciprocal Meat Conference Proceedings, Vol. 51. Department of
Animal Sciences, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI 53706. Retrieved from:
hitp://www.meatscience.org/

CASSENS, R. G., IZUMI, K., LEE, M., M.L., G., & LOZANO, J. 1981. Reaction of
Meat Constituents with Nitrite. ACS Symposium Series; American Chemical Society,


289-301. https://doi.org/10.1021/bk-1981-0174.ch020

CHAN, T.Y.K. 1996. Minireview: Food-bome Nitrates and Nitrites as a cause of
Methemoglobinemia. Southeast Asian Journal of Tropical Medicine and Public
Health, Vol. 27, No. 1

CODEX ALIMENTARIUS COMMISSION. 1991. Joint FAO/WHO Food Standards
Programme Codex Alimentarius Commission Nineteenth Session Rome, 1-10
July 199, Report of the Fifteenth Session of the Codex Committee on Processed
Meat and Poultry Products, Copenhagen, 8-12 October 1990

CODEX ALIMENTARIUS COMMISSION. 2003. Assuring Food Safety and Quality:
Guidelines for Strengthening National Food Control Systems. Joint FAO/WHO.
Publication

CODEX ALIMENTARIUS COMMISSION. 2011. General Principles of Food Hygiene.
CAC/RCP 1-1969

CODEX ALIMENTARIUS COMMISSION. 2016. General Standard for Food Additives.
CODEX STAN 192-1995. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations. World Health Organization.

DAYRIT, M.M., M.E. WHITE, and M.N.S. LAPASTORA. 1992. Nitrite poisoning in
two children. Field epidemiological training program (FETP) scientific papers.
Department of Health, Manila, Philippines.

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH (DOH). 1971. Administrative Order No. 154 s 1971.
Regulation B-4 Definition and Standards of Identity of Foods, 4.14 Meat and
Meat Products, 4.14.01 Sausages.

DE LEON, S.Y, M.M GATCHALIAN and CO-AUTHORS. 2016. Introduction to Food
Technology. Volume 2. Merriam & Webster Bookstore, Inc. Metro Manila,
Philippines

DEVINE, C., and M. DIKEMAN. 2014. Encyclopedia of Meat Sciences (2nd ed.). 32
Jamestown Road, London NW1 7BY, UK 225: Elsevier Science. Academic Press.

DIKEMAN, M. and C. DEVINE. 2014. Encyclopedia of Meat Sciences. 2 Edition.
Academic Press

EUROPEAN FOOD SAFETY AUTHORITY. 2017. Nitrites and nitrates added to food.
Accessed on: https://www.efsa.europa.eu/


FEINER, G. 2006. Meat products handbook. Practical science and technology.
Woodhead Publishing Limited, Abington Hall, Abington Cambridge CBI 6AH,
England

FELLOWS, P. and A. HAMPTON. 1992. Small-scale food processing - A guide for
appropriate equipment. Intermediate Technology Publications. 103-105
Southampton Row, London WC1B 4HH, UK.

FINOT, P.A. 2003. BROWNING: Toxicology of Nonenzymatic Browning. In
Encyclopedia of Food Sciences and Nutrition (2nd ed., pp. 673-678). Academic
Press.

FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS (FAO).
2014. Animal Production and Health. Meat Quality.
http://www. fao.org/ag/againfo/themes/en/meat/quality_meat.html

GOMEZ, K.A. and A.A. GOMEZ. 1984. Statistical procedures for agricultural research
(2 ed.). John wiley and sons, NewYork, 680p

GOVARI, M.A. and A.I. PEXARAI. 2015. Nitrates and Nitrites in meat products.
Journal of the Hellenic Veterinary Medical Society, 66, 127-140.

GRAFIL, ILA. 2002. Personal communication on longganisa food poisoning at Quezon
City. Quezon City Active Surveillance Group, Local Epidemiology &
Surveillance Unit, Quezon City Health Department, Diliman, Quezon City,
Philippines.

GROSSE, Y., R. BAAN, K. STRAIF, B. SECRETAN, F.E. GHISSASSI and_V.
COGLIANO. 2006. Carcinogenicity of nitrate, nitrite, and cyanobacterial peptide
toxins. WHO International Agency for Research on Cancer Monograph Working
Group, Lancet Oncology, Vol. 7, pp. 628-629

GROSSI, L. 2009. Hydrogen sulfide induces nitric oxide release from nitrite. Bioorganic
and Medicinal Chemistry Letters, 19(21), 6092-6094.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bmcl.2009.09.030

HARTIGAN-GO, K.Y., N. GOROSTIZA, and N.P. CORTES-MARAMBA. 1996.
Nitrite poisoning after the ingestion of cured meat. Acta Medica Philippina, Vol.
32, pp. 6-9, Philippine Science and Technology Abstracts July - December 2012.
ISSN 0115- 8724.

HASHEIDER, P. 2016. The Complete Book of Pork Butchering, Smoking, Curing,
Sausage Making, and Cooking. Voyageur Press, Quarto Publishing Group, USA


HEINZ, G. and P. HAUTZINGER. 2002. Meat Processing Technology for Small- to
Medium-Scale Producers: Heat Treatment of Meat Products. RAP Publication
2007/20. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations Regional
Office for Asia and the Pacific. Bangkok.

HENDERSON, W.R. and N.H. RASKIN. 1972. "Hot-Dog" Headache: Individual
Susceptibility to Nitrite. The Lancet, Volume 300, Issue 7788, 1972, Pages 1162-
1163, ISSN 0140-6736

HILL, L. H., N. B. WEBB, MONGOL, N. D., and A.T. ADAMS. 1973. Changes in
Residual Nitrite in Sausage and Luncheon Meat Products During Storage. Journal of
Milk and Food Technology, 36(10), 515-519. https://doi.org/10.4315/0022-2747-
36.10.515

HONIKEL, K.O. 2014. Chemical Analysis for Specific Components | Curing Agents,
Editor(s): Michael Dikeman, Carrick Devine, Encyclopedia of Meat Sciences
(Second Edition), Academic Press, 2014, Current as of 29 July 2014, Pages 200-
205, ISBN 9780123847348

HUI, Y.H. 2012. Handbook of Meat and Meat Processing. 2" Ed. CRC Press. Taylor &
Francis Group. 6000 Broken Sound Parkway NW, Suite 300 Boca Raton, FL
33487-2742

INTERNATIONAL AGENCY FOR RESEARCH ON CANCER (IARC). 2015. IARC
Monographs evaluate consumption of red meat and processed meat. Oct. 26,
2015. Retrieved from: http://www. iarc.fr/en/media-
centre/pr/2015/pdf/pr240_E.pdf

INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR STANDARDIZATION (ISO). 1975. ISO
2918:1975 — Standard for Meat and meat products — Determination of nitrite
content. Switzerland

INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR STANDARDIZATION (ISO). 2015. ISO
9000:2015 — Quality management systems — Fundamentals and vocabulary

JANTAWAT, P., J. RUNGLERDKRIANGKRAI, C. THUNPITHAYAKUL, and R.
SANGUANDEEKUL. 1993. Effects of Initial Nitrite Level, Heating and Storage on
Residual Nitrite and Spoilage of Canned Ham Roll. Journal of Food Quality, 16(1).
1-11. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1745-4557.1993.tb00095.x

KEETON, J.T., N.B. WESLEY, W.N. OSBURN, M.D. HARDIM and N.S. BRYAN.
2009. A National Survey of the Nitrite/Nitrate Concentrations in Cured Meat
Products and Non- meat Foods Available at Retail. National Pork Board,
Research Report, Human Nutrition, NPB #08-124


KERRY, J., J. KERRY and D. LEDWARD. 2002. Meat processing: Improving quality.
CRC Press LLC. 2000 Corporate Blvd, NW. Boca Raton FL 33431

KESZLER, A., B. PIKNOVA, A.N. SCHECHTER, and N. HOGG. 2008. The Reaction
between Nitrite and Oxyhemoglobin: A Mechanistic Study. The Journal of
Biological Chemistry Vol. 283, No.15, pp. 9615~9622

KILLDAY, K.B., M.S. TEMPESTA, M.E. BAILEY and C.J. METRAL. 1988. Structural
characterization of nitrosylhemochromogen of cooked cured meat: Implications in
the meat curing reaction. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, Vol. 36,
pp.909-914

KIM, I. S., S.K. JIN, MR. YANG, D.U. AHN, J.H. PARK, and S.N. KANG. 2014.
Effect of packaging method and storage time on physicochemical characteristics of
dry-cured pork neck products at 10°C. Asian-Australasian Journal of Animal
Sciences, 27(11), 1623-1629. https://doi.org/10.5713/ajas.2013.13728

KING, A.M., K.A. GLASS, A.L. MILOWSKI, D.L. SEMAN and J.J. SINDELAR. 2016.
Modeling the Impact of Ingoing Sodium Nitrite, Sodium Ascorbate, and Residual
Nitrite Concentrations on Growth Parameters of Listeria monocytogenes in Cooked,
Cured Pork Sausage. Journal of Food Protection 2016 79:2, 184-193.
Attps://doi.org/10.43 15/0362-028X.JFP-15-322

KINSMAN, D.M., A.W. KOTULA, and B.C. BREIDENSTEIN. 1994. Muscle Foods:
Meat Poultry and Seafood Technology. (D. M. Kinsman, A. W. Kotula, & B. C.
Breidenstein, Eds.). Springer Science+Business Media.

KUTAS, R. 2008. Great Sausage Recipes and Meat Curing. 4" Edition. The Sausage
Maker, Inc., Buffalo, New York.

LEISTNER, L. and G.W. GOULD. 2002. Hurdle Technologies Combination Treatments
for Food Stability, Safety and Quality. Springer Science+Business Media New
York

LI, L., P. WANG, X. XU, and G. ZHOU. 2012. Influence of Various Cooking Methods
‘on the Concentrations of Volatile N-Nitrosamines and Biogenic Amines in Dry-
Cured Sausages. Journal of Food Science, 77(5). https://doi.org/10.1111/).1750-
3841.2012.02667.x

LI, Y., C. GAN, M. CHENG, W. CHEN, L. CAO, and T. ZHAO. 2016. Effects of
Cooking Process on the Content of Nitrite in Sausage. /nternational Journal of Food
Nutrition and Safety, 7(1), 52-60.


LOPEZ, E.B., E.M. ARRIOLA and E.D. SERRANO. 2002. Food poisoning longganisa
at Quezon City. Field epidemiological training program (FETP) scientific papers.
Department of Health, Manila, Philippines

MERINO, L., P.O. DARNERUD, F. TOLDRA, and N.G. ILBACK. 2016. Time-
dependent depletion of nitrite in pork/beef and chicken meat products and its effect
on nitrite intake estimation. Food Additives and Contaminants - Part A Chemistry,
Analysis, Control, Exposure and Risk Assessment, 33(2), 186-192.
https://doi.org/10.1080/19440049.2015.1125530

MILKOWSKI, A., K. HARSHA, J. GARG, R. COUGHLIN and N.S. BRYAN. 2010.
Nutritional epidemiology in the context of nitric oxide biology: A risk—benefit
evaluation for dietary nitrite and nitrate, Nitric Oxide, Volume 22, Issue 2, 2010,
Pages 110-119, ISSN 1089-8603

MILLS, E. 2014, Additives | Functional. Editor(s): Michael Dikeman, Carrick Devine,
Encyclopedia of Meat Sciences (Second Edition), Academic Press, 2014, Current
as of 29 July 2014, Pages 7-11 ISBN 9780123847348

NATIONAL MEAT INSPECTION SERVICE (NMIS). 2008. Memorandum Circular.
No. 09-2008-5. Series of 2008. Guidelines on the Assessment of Microbiological
Quality of Fresh, Chilled and Frozen Meat. Republic of the Philippines.
Department of Agriculture. National Meat Inspection Service.

NAZIR, S. S., S. MAQBOOL, K. BASHIR and J. NISSAR. 2013. Studies on Effect of
Curing and Antioxidant Treatments on Shelf Life of Buffalo Meat under
Refrigerated Conditions. JOSR Journal Of Environmental Science, Toxicology And
Food Technology, 5(3), 37-43. https://doi.org/10.9790/2402-0533743

NOLLET, L.M.L. and F. TOLDRA. 2009. Handbook of Processed Meats and Poultry
Analysis. Taylor & Francis Group, LLC. 6000 Broken Sound Parkway NW, Suite
300 Boca Raton, FL

NPCS BOARD. 2012. Modern Technology on Food Preservation. 2"! Ed. Asia Pacific
Business Press Inc. Kamla Nagar, Delhi, India

OKAYAMA, T., M. FUJII, and M. YAMANOUE. 1991. Effect of cooking temperature
on the percentage colour formation, nitrite decomposition and sarcoplasmic protein
denaturation in processed meat products. Meat Science, 30(1), 49-57.
https://doi.org/10.1016/0309-1740(91)90034-N

ORGANIZATION FOR ECONOMIC CO-OPERATION AND DEVELOPMENT
(OECD). 2017. Meat consumption (indicator). doi: 10.1787/fa290fd0-en
(Accessed on 06 December 2017)


ORGANIZATION FOR ECONOMIC CO-OPERATION AND DEVELOPMENT
(OECD). 2018. Meat consumption (indicator). doi: 10.1787/fa290fd0-en
(Accessed on 24 October 2018)

PEARSON, A.M. 1984. Processed Meats, Second Edition, AVI Publishing Company,
Inc. Westport, Connecticut

PEGG, R.B. and F. SHAHIDI. 2000. Nitrite Curing of Meat: The N-Nitrosamine
Problem and Nitrite Alternatives, Food & Nutrition Press, Inc., 6527 Main Street
Trumbull, Connecticut 06611 USA

PEL, P.G.A., L.R. BALDRIAS and D.D.R. BANDOY. 2017. Aerobic Plate Count, pH,
and Sensory Parameters of Thawed and Fresh Pork at a Public Market in
Calamba, Laguna, Philippines. Philippine Journal of Veterinary and Animal
Sciences. Vol. 43 No. 1, January — June 2017, pp. 51-58.

PEREZ-RODRIGUEZ, M.L., N. BOSCH-BOSCH and M. GARCIA-MATA. 1996.
Monitoring nitrite and nitrate residues in frankfurters during processing and storage.
Meat Science, 44(1—-2), 65-73. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0309-1740(96)00036-8

PEREZ-RODRIGUEZ, M.L., N. BOSCH-BOSCH and M. GARCIA-MATA. 1997.
Residual nitrite and nitrate levels of frankfurters along with their shelf- life. Food
Additives and Contaminants, 14(8), 803-808.
https://doi.org/10.1080/02652039709374591

PHILIPPINE INFORMATION AGENCY AND DOST-SIQUIJOR. 2014. DOST-FNRI
Warns Public on Unhealthy Foods. Official E-news Letter. Vol. 2 No. 18., June 1-
8, 2014

PHILIPPINE NEWS TODAY. 2013. Food firms now more aggressive on nutrition
inclusion in product development. September 29, 2013. Accessed on:
http://www. philippinestoday.neVarchives/8003

PHILIPPINE STATISTICS AUTHORITY (PSA). Various years. Family Income and
Expenditure Survey. Manila: PSA.

PNS ISO 2918:2014 Meat and meat products - Determination of nitrite content
(Reference method) (ISO published 1975) ICS 67.120.101

SHAHIDI, F., A.G.P. SAMARANAYAKA and R.B. PEGG. 2014. CURING | Brine
Curing of Meat, Editor(s): Michael Dikeman, Carrick Devine, Encyclopedia of
Meat Sciences (Second Edition), Academic Press, 2014, Current as of 29 July
2014, Pages 416-424, ISBN 9780123847348


SINDELAR, J.J. and A.L. MILKOWSKI. 2011. Sodium nitrite in processed meat and
poultry meats: a review of curing and examining the risk/benefit of its use.
American Meat Science Association White Paper Series, No. 3, November 2011

SINDELAR, J.J. and A.L. MILKOWSKI. 2012. Human safety controversies surrounding
nitrate and nitrite in the diet, Nitric Oxide, Vol. 26, Issue 4, 2012, Pages 259-266,
ISSN 1089-8603

SKIBSTED, L.H. 2011. Nitric oxide and quality and safety of muscle based foods. Nitric
Oxide, Volume 24, Issue 4, 2011, Pages 176-183, ISSN 1089-8603

SOFOS, J. N. 1981. Nitrite , Sorbate and pH Interaction in Cured Meat Products.
American Meat Science Association, 34(2658), 104-120.

SOLANO, L.S, M.A. UDARBE, R.H. ARIM, R.H., J. RANILLE, T.R. PORTUGAL and
M.V. CAPANZANA. 2011. Household daily nitrite consumption levels from some
commonly consumed processed meats in selected sites/areas in the Philippines.
Transactions of the National Academy of Science and Technology. Vol. 33, p. 207,
Abstr. Poster. Unpublished

SULLIVAN, G.A. 2011. Naturally cured meats: Quality, safety, and chemistry. lowa
State University. Graduate Theses and Dissertations. Paper 12208. Retrieved
from: http://lib.dr.iastate.edu/

SULLIVAN, G.A. 2013. A Comparison of Traditional and Altemative Meat Curing
Methods. American Meat Science Association

TEJADA, A.W., EM. SAN JUAN, J.M.SALES, A.S. RUSTIA, R.R. ELANO, A.C.
NATIVIDAD, A.R. CARISO, AND A.O. LUSTRE. 2013. Microbiological Risk
Assessment of Newly Slaughtered and Frozen Meat in Philippine Wet Markets.
Part 1. Comparison of the Growth and Survival of Selected Pathogens on Pork
Ham from Newly Slaughtered Carcass and on Frozen Pork Ham Under Ambient
Temperatures (~30°C). National Food Authority -Food Development Center, FTI
Complex Taguig Metro Manila; Department of Agriculture, Elliptical Circle,
Diliman , Quezon City. Accessed on: http://nmis.gov.ph/

TOLDRA, F. 2010. Handbook of Meat Processing. Blackwell Publishing. Clearance
Center, 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923

UGALDE, M.P.D., T.T. NOVERA, I.A. GRAFIL and L.N. Lizardo. (2002). Final report
on food poisoning outbreak in sitio veterans, Bagong Silangan and Payatas B
Quezon City. Quezon City Health Department, Quezon City, Metro Manila,
Philippines.


U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE FOOD SAFETY AND INSPECTION
SERVICE (FSIS). 2012. Safe Minimum Internal Temperature Chart. Accessed on
https://www. fsis.usda.gov/

USINGER, E.L., LARSON, E.M., NIEBUHR, S.E., FEDLER, C.A., PRUSA, KJ.,
DICKSON, J.S., TARTE, R. & SEBRANEK, J.G. 2016. Can supplemental nitrate
in cured meats be used as a means of increasing residual and dietary nitrate and
subsequent potential for physiological nitric oxide without affecting product
properties?, Meat Science, Vol. 121, 2016, Pages 324-332, ISSN 0309-1740

WARRISS, P.D. (2000). Meat Science. An Introductory Text. CABI Publishing

WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION (WHO). 2015. Q&A on the carcinogenicity of the
consumption of red meat and processed meat — October 2015. Retrieved from:
http://www.who.int/

WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION (WHO). 2015. Links between processed meat
and colorectal cancer Oct. 29, 2015. Accessed on: http://www.who.int

YANDUG III, Y.S., VENTURA D.C. JR., YBANEZ R.H.D., & YBANEZ AP. 2016.
Microbial plate count and detection of Escherichia coli in pork meat samples from
stalls in a public wet market in Cebu, Philippines. International Research Journal
of Interdisciplinary & Multidisciplinary Studies (IRJIMS). Volume-lI, Issue-lI,
March 2016, Page No. 65-72. ISSN: 2394-7969 (Online), ISSN: 2394-7950
(Print)

ZAMRIK, M.A. 2013. Determination of Nitrate and Nitrite Contents in Pepper
(Capsicum) and their Derived Products in Syrian Market. Department of
Pharmacology and Toxicology, Faculty of pharmacy, Damascus University,
Damascus, Syria. Int. J. Pharm. Sci. Rev. Res., 19(1), Mar — Apr 2013; n° 04, 16-20.
ISSN 0976-0
