Effects of light on behaviour, growth and survival of Stichopus cf. horrens juveniles

Rose Angeli V. Rioja

University of the Philippines Diliman

Master of Science in Marine Science

May 2019

Abstract

Stichopus cf. horrens is a high value sea cucumber species. It is known to be
nocturnal, negatively phototactic and positively thigmotactic based on short term
laboratory studies. This thesis examined the influence of light on the behaviour and
growth of post-settled juveniles (4-10 mm; 0 g; 62 days after fertilization) and 6-month
old juveniles (4.27 g to 19.41 g) for 30 days. Post-settled juveniles were exposed to 3
photoperiods (24L, 24D, and 12L:12D cycle), with either the presence or absence of an
artificial seagrass unit as shelter, while 6 month-old juveniles were subjected to
different light treatments (covered, exposed, half-covered) under a natural light-dark
cycle in aquaria with sediment. Absolute growth rate (AGR) and survival were
calculated. Younger juveniles fed predominantly during the day early in the experiment
(days 1 and 11), and then shifted to nighttime feeding later on (days 19 and 29). The
earliest to exhibit the shift were the juveniles exposed to light (24L and 12L:12D), while
the last were those in constant dark (24D). The shift in the diel feeding pattern occurred
even in the absence of a light and dark cycle, which indicates that nocturnal feeding is
developmentally determined or it develops as the juveniles grow older. This shift is an indication of endogenous and developmentally determined nocturnal feeding. Although post-settled juveniles fed equally on the jar’s surface and the shelters,
higher growth was observed in treatments with shelters. The shelters could have
provided additional substratum for the biofilm to grow and also minimized interaction
among conspecifics. Further, the younger juveniles in continuous dark treatments with shelter had the highest growth (0.46 cm/day + 0.04 SD) and survival (90%). Older juveniles in the half-exposed treatment hid at the comers of the shaded portion of the aquaria, usually with a conspecific, suggesting negative phototaxis and positive thigmotaxis. Positive thigmotaxis was also observed in the covered and
exposed treatments. Contrasting results were obtained for juvenile growth in the
covered and exposed treatments. Juveniles in the covered treatment had low growth
rates (-0.07 + 0.03 g/day) but 100% survival, while juveniles in the exposed treatment
had high growth (13.44 mg/g + 4.57 SD) but low survival (50%). The growth
differences might be due to variations in the abundance of food in the sediments
between the two treatments. The older juveniles were predominantly feeding at night
throughout the experiment, although some were still seen feeding during the day.
Results suggest that it is best to rear post-settled juveniles of Stichopus cf. horrens in
complete and continuous darkness and the older juveniles in low light conditions to
ensure greater survival. Addition of substrates for benthic algal growth, or other means of enrichment, can be explored to boost growth.

Chapter 1

General Introduction

1.1 Non-visual light detection and responses in echinoderms

Recent technologies have shown that non-visual marine organisms are still
capable of light detection through dermal photoreception (Kelley and Davies, 2016).
In echinoderms, opsin proteins involved in photoreception (Terakita, 2005) were found
in the cells of the tube feet, spines and epidermis of sea urchin, and cells of the spines
of brittle stars and starfish (Burke et al., 2006; Delroisse et al., 2016, 2014; Lesser et
al., 2011; Raible et al., 2006; Ullrich-Liter et al., 2013). Opsins were not found in the
temperate stichopodid sea cucumber Apostichopus japonicus, but nevertheless had an
up-regulated expression of genes for signal transduction (i.e. Thioredoxin) when reared
in the dark, together with movement-associated genes (i.e. dynactin subunit 5-like
isoform I and dynein light chain roadblock-type 2), suggesting a coordinated detection
and response to darkness (Zhang et al., 2018).

Light is an environmental factor that changes with depth and diurnal light cycle,
and it affects ecological functions of marine organisms. Animals change their
behaviours in response to daily light variations. For instance, some organisms shelter
during the day and emerge at night, a behaviour termed cryptic nocturnal behaviour
(Dong et al. 2011). This behaviour is common in echinoderms, and was often associated
with feeding (Hammond, 1982) and reduced predation risk (Dong et al., 2011).
Specifically, cryptic nocturnal behaviour has been observed in echinoids (Hammond,
1982; Hendler, 1984) and crinoids (Vail 1987). For holothuroids, the behaviour was
observed in Isostichopus badionotus Selenka, Holothuria mexicana Ludwig, H.

thomasi Pawson and Caycedo, Actinopyga agassizi Selenka, Euapta lapa Muller

(Hammond, 1982), Australostichopus mollis (Slater and Jeffs, 2010), Apostichopus
japonicus (Yang et al., 2015), Stichopus horrens (Purcell, Samyn, and Conand 2012),
and Stichopus cf. horrens (Edullantes 2014; Palomar-Abesamis, Juinio-Mefiez, and
Slater 2017).

Aside from cryptic nocturnal behaviour, echinoderms also exhibit other light
avoidance behaviours such as covering and negative phototaxis. Covering exhibited by
sea urchins is characterized by pulling and situating materials aborally (Adams, 2001;
Amato et al., 2008; Dumont et al., 2007; James, 2000; Kehas et al., 2005; Millott, 1955;
Ziegenhorn, 2016). Meanwhile, negative phototaxis or movement away from the light
source, often coupled with shade-seeking, is documented in echinoids (Adams, 2001;
Dong et al., 2011; Yoshida, 1962), ophiuroids (Hendler, 1984), and holothuroids (Dong

et al. 2010a; Palomar-Abesamis, Juinio-Mefiez, and Slater 2017).

1.2 Life cycle of Stichopus cf. horrens

Stichopus.cf. horrens (Stichopodidae) is a common tropical sea cucumber found
in the Indo-Pacific (Purcell et al. 2012). In the Philippines, phylogenetic analysis
showed 2 populations of S. cf. horrens, designated as clades A and B (Lizano, 2017).
Clade A adults were found in the crevices of rocks in the coral reef area hiding during
the day, and then becomes active at night (Edullantes, 2014). The adults spawn 3-5
nights after 3 lunar quarter both in the wild (Edullantes 2014; Rioja et al. unpub. data)
and in captivity (Rioja et al. unpub. data). The planktotrophic larval stage lasts up to 26
days (Marine Invertebrate Ecology Laboratory, UP Marine Science Institute;
Edullantes 2014) comparable to that of Jsostichopus fuscus in Ecuador (Mercier et al.,

2004), while shorter than S. horrens in China (~15 days, Hu et al., 2010).

The larvae would settle and metamorphose to juveniles, and would start to
develop pigmentation. The post-settled juveniles can suspension feed and graze on
surfaces. As the juveniles grow, they start to deposit feed. Juveniles were mostly found
in seagrass areas, in contrast to the adults found in reefs. Moreover, size at sexual

maturity is documented at 100g (Edullantes, 2014).

1.3 Behaviour of Stichopus cf. horrens juveniles

Clade A juveniles (35-145mm) were highly associated with seagrass beds
commonly found beneath seagrass canopies (Palomar-Abesamis, Abesamis, and
Juinio-Mefiez 2017). High affinity of juveniles to seagrass beds is believed to be due to
two things: (1) seagrass serving as refugia, and (2) availability and abundance of high
quality food (Palomar-Abesamis, Abesamis, and Juinio-Meiiez 2017).

Sheltering and burrowing behaviour of marine organisms are regulated by
extrinsic factors such as light exposure, salinity and temperature changes (Holothuria
scabra juveniles; (Mercier et al., 1999) and presence of predator (Evechinus
chloroticus; Spyksma, Taylor, and Shears 2017). In the case of S. cf. horrens, juveniles
were observed to be highly cryptic during the day (Palomar-Abesamis, Abesamis, and
Juinio-Meiiez 2017; Palomar-Abesamis, Juinio-Mefiez, and Slater 2017). In short-term
(48 hours) indoor manipulative experiment, juveniles had daytime inactivity associated
both to sheltering and positive thigmotaxis (Palomar-Abesamis, Juinio-Mefiez, and
Slater 2017). In the absence of shelters, juveniles moved to darker or shaded areas.
Based on these, both adult (Edullantes, 2014)and juvenile stages of S. cf. horrens
exhibit cryptic nocturnal behaviour, described as the animal emerging and becoming

active at night while sheltering and becoming immobile during the day. However,

animals may still change their daily rhythm with the variations in photoperiod (Dong
et al., 2011).

On the other hand, it is the endogenous clock that controls nocturnal feeding in
S. cf. horrens juveniles, as demonstrated in a short-term (48 hours) manipulative
experiment wherein hatchery-reared (21.4g + 13.1 SD) and wild (23.1g + 10.1 SD)
juveniles actively feed at night even under constant dark or constant light conditions
(Palomar-Abesamis, Juinio-Mefiez, and Slater 2017). Noctumal feeding even in
persistent dark conditions was also observed in Apostichopus japonicus juveniles(Dong
et al., 2011, 2010b), but there were instances wherecyclic diurnal activity became

absent under continuous darkness (Dong et al., 2010b).

1.4 Stichopus cf. horrens juvenile feeding

Stichopus.cf. horren sclade A juveniles in the wild feed on seagrass epiphytes,
as confirmed by isotopic analysis (Palomar-Abesamis, Abesamis, and Juinio-Meiiez
2017). Epiphytes are sessile microscopic algae attached to a host. It is a common
practice in sea cucumber culture to provide sea cucumber post-settled juveniles with
benthic diatoms and biofilm as food. For instance, indoor culture of post-settled
Isostichopus fuscus juveniles in Ecuador were provided with plexiglass plates rich in
biofilm as food (Mercier et al., 2012). Likewise, juveniles of the temperate stichopodid,
Apostichopus japonicus, are provided benthic diatoms on settlement plates and filtrate
of ground fresh Sargassum thunbergii (Yang et al., 2015). Outdoor culture of
Holothuria scabra involves rearing in a hapa nets where they can graze on the biofilm
that have attached to the nets (Gamboa et al., 2011; Juinio-Mefiez et al., 2012).

Aside from epiphytic algae, sediment detritus derived from seagrass may be

another valuable food source for S. cf. horrens juveniles (Palomar-Abesamis,

Abesamis, and Juinio-Mefiez 2017). Recent studies showed that the sea cucumber
Holothuria scabra can also feed on both the plant and heterotrophic bacterial
components of the substratum, or what is known as the periphyton (Lambio, 2017). The
periphyton collectively consists of detritus, micro- and macro-algae, bacteria, fungus,
protozoa, zooplankton and small invertebrates (Levy et al., 2017). It can be considered
an ecosystem where algal biomass interact with the heterotrophic bacteria and the
released dissolved organic carbon of the photosynthesizing algae can be utilized by the
bacteria (Rier and Stevenson, 2002). Rier and Stevenson (2002)showed that in a
periphyton ecosystem, bacterial and algal growth were positively correlated with each
other in set-ups with varying light intensities (ie. low and high), carbon source and
nutrient levels. This positive relationship was believed to be due to the algae utilizing
the associated polysaccharide matrix of the bacterial colony as a substratum for growth.
In the presence of light, algal growth and biomass increase, and this can provide
substantial food for the associated bacteria, zooplankton, and the organism being
cultured. The proliferation of zooplankton can also provide supplementary nutrition for
the cultured organisms (Baloi et al., 2013).

Photopigments can be extracted from the sediment to gain insights on the
amount of benthic algal biomass and detritus. Sediment chlorophyll a (Chl a) is a
measure of benthic algal biomass available for the juveniles, while phaeopigment
(Phaeo) is a measure of the amount of detritus (Palomar-Abesamis, Juinio-Mefiez, and
Slater 2017). A high Phae to Chl a ratio would indicate a large contribution of detritus
to organic matter in the sediments.

Sediment organic matter is an important food source for deposit-feeding
holothurians, wherein they consume large amount of sediment and assimilate the labile

components (Uthicke and Karez, 1999). Total organic matter content can be analysed

through a series of combustions (Loss-on-ignition method). The labile component of
the TOM can be easily broken down and absorbed, in contrast to the refractory organic

matter which degrades at a relatively slower rate.

1.5 Rationale and objectives

Sea cucumbers have long been utilized as luxury food items, leading to
exploitation and sharp decline in sea cucumber stocks. Sea cucumber culture is a
plausible means to augment fishery production and rebuild natural stocks (Juinio-
Meiiez et al., 2017). In the Philippines, culture of high value Holothuria scabra (Juinio-
Meiiez et al., 2017) is being optimized, and culture of another high value species, S. cf.
horrens is being explored. Stichopus cf. horrens is a major species in the sea cucumber
trade, nutraceutical and pharmaceutical industries, as food and source of natural
products (Choo, 2008).

The behaviour of juvenile holothurians is difficult to observe in the wild, leading
to a knowledge gap on the biology and ecology of S. cf. horrens. Survival of hatchery-
bred juveniles does not exceed 1% (Marine Invertebrate Ecology Laboratory, UP
Marine Science Institute), and maximising survival during culture is essential for both
culture and research purposes. Hence, long-term experiments based on the best
available ecological information is needed to assess juvenile growth and survival and
to address knowledge gaps about the biology and culture of the species.

This study aims to determine the direct impact of different light regimes on the
onset of nocturnal feeding, growth and survival of S. cf. horrens post-settled (47 days
post settlement, 0.24 cm to 1.14 cm; Chapter 2) and older juveniles (180 days post-
settlement, 4.27 g to 19.41 g; Chapter 3) (Fig 1.1). These two age groups vary in feeding

habit. Post-settled juveniles graze and suspension feed, while older and larger juveniles

can also deposit feed. Experiments were conducted on both juvenile age groups to
capture potential ontogenetic differences in behavioural responses to light. In addition,
only the experiment using older juveniles were provided sediment, to determine the
effect of light regimes on the sediment quality (i.e. organic matter content) and

periphyton quantity (i.e. abundance) in an aquarium set-up.

ey

Figure 1.1 Forty-seven days post-settlement juveniles before (A) and after the 30-day
experiment (B) (Chapter 2), the latter having spots in the tegument. Larger juveniles,
180 days post-settlement, were used in Chapter 3 (C)

Chapter 2
Effects of photoperiod and artificial shelter on feeding pattern, growth, and survival of

Stichopus cf. horrens post-settled juveniles

Abstract

Juveniles and adults of the sea cucumber Stichopus cf. horrens are reported to
be nocturnal. To gain insights on the onset of nocturnal behaviour during early
development, the effects of photoperiod and the presence of shelter on feeding activity,
growth and survival of post-settled juveniles (4-10 mm; 62 days after fertilization) were
investigated over a 30 day period. Juveniles were reared in 2-L jars either in the
presence (S) or absence (W) of artificial shelters under three light regimes: constant
light (24L), constant dark (24D) and 12-hour and 12-hour dark period (12L:12D). The
juveniles were fed daily with Jsochrysis galbana. Feeding activity was monitored every
three hours at days 1, 11, 19 and 29. Feeding of post-settled juveniles initially and
predominantly occurred during daytime and then shifted to nighttime. The shift to
noctumal feeding was observed earliest (day 11) for juveniles in the 24L and 12L:12D
treatments, and last (day 29) for juveniles in the constant dark treatment (24D). These
results demonstrate that the development of photosensitivity and intrinsic ontogenetic
shift to nocturnal feeding for S. cf. horrens is affected by exposure to light. Under
constant exposure to light without shelter (24L x W), a decrease in the number of
feeding juveniles and mass mortality were observed. Juveniles reared with shelters had
higher growth rates than those without shelters. The shelters could have reduced light
intensity and provided additional substrate for biofilm to grow on. Moreover, the

highest growth and survival were in 24D treatments either with or without shelter

suggesting that early juveniles still grow best in the dark despite not being strictly

nocturnal.

2.1 Introduction

Photoperiod is the duration of day length, and controls rhythmic activity pattern
in a wide array of marine organisms. It affects behaviour and growth of echinoderms
directly, and survival indirectly (Dong et al., 2011). Photoperiodic control of growth
and maturation have been adopted in aquaculture since growth and rapid maturation of
most juveniles showed relationships with photoperiod (Koueta and Boucaud-Camou,
2003). Light optimization has been used for culture conditions of several aquaculture
commodities, mostly fishes like Oreachromis niloticus (Nile Tilapia; El-Sayed &
Kawanna, 2004) and Leiocassis longisrostris (Chinese Longsnout Catfish; Han et al.
2005). In sea cucumbers, the effect of photoperiod and light intensity (Dong et al.
2011), as well as shelter (Dong et al. 2010; Han, Keesing, and Liu 2016; Yamaguchi,
Masuda, and Yamashita 2018) have been studied and optimised for the temperate
species Apostichopus japonicus.

Cryptic nocturnal behaviour is described as emerging at night and sheltering at
day, where animals change their behaviours daily with the daily light variation (Dong
et al. 2011). This behaviour is common in echinoderms, and was often associated with
feeding (Hammond, 1982)and reduces predation risk (Dong et al., 2011). Nocturnal
feeding has been observed in the wild for holothurians Isostichopus badionotus
Selenka, Holothuria mexicana Ludwig, H. thomasi Pawson and Caycedo, Actinopyga
agassizi Selenka, and Euapta lapa Muller (Hammond, 1982) and Australostichopus

mollis (Slater and Jeffs, 2010).


Sheltering behaviour has also been documented in holothurians in the wild,
specifically for Actinopyga mauritania (Graham and Battaglene, 2004), Holothuria
whitmaei (Shiell and Knott, 2008), and juvenile Stichopus horrens clade A (Palomar-
Abesamis, Juinio-Mefiez, and Slater 2017), and in the laboratory for Apostichopus
japonicus (Dong et al., 2011, 2010b). Sheltering of A. mauritania is associated with
less movement and higher percentage of sheltering during high tides. Meanwhile H.
whitmaei and A. japonicus exhibited temporal sheltering which is higher at morning
than afternoon for the former, and a diel sheltering pattern for the latter. Moreover, a
laboratory experiment on juvenile A. japonicus revealed sheltering behaviour during
the day, but may vary depending on the photoperiod experience (Dong et al., 2011).
Juvenile (21.4g + 13.1 SD) S. horrens clade A also showed a diel activity pattern
showing sheltering at day and emerging at night (Palomar-Abesamis, Juinio-Mefiez,
and Slater 2017), but unlike 4. japonicus, the effect of the presence of artificial shelters
at longer culture periods have not been explored yet for this species.

Stichopus cf. horrens is a high-value sea cucumber species found in the western
and Central Pacific (Purcell et al., 2012). In the Philippines, microsatellite analysis
showed 2 populations of Stichopus cf. horrens, designated as clade A and B (Lizano,
2017). Previous studies have shown that clade A S. cf. horrens are nocturnally active
for both adult (Edullantes, 2014), and juvenile stages (Chapter 3 of this thesis; Palomar-
Abesamis, Juinio-Mefiez, and Slater 2017). This species is currently being cultured in
an experimental scale in the Philippines using a model sea cucumber culture production
on Holothuria scabra in Bolinao, Northwestern Philippines (Juinio-Meiiez et al. 2017).
This involves culture of post-settled juveniles in the hatchery, and further transferring

them to ocean based nurseries.

Survival of settled juveniles is a critical phase in the life history of marine
organisms. In S. cf. horrens, survival of juveniles in captivity is low (<1 %, Marine
Invertebrate Ecology Laboratory, UP Marine Science Institute). It is necessary to
examine the aspects of the biology of the organism to infer on its ecology, and to further
optimise culture production.

The effect of light on growth and survival of the sub-adult and adult S. cf.
horrens stages have been investigated (Palomar-Abesamis, Abesamis, and Juinio-
Meiiez 2017; Palomar-Abesamis, Juinio-Mefiez, and Slater 2017) in relation to release
considerations for restocking or sea ranching. The effect of the presence of artificial
shelters in the form of artificial seagrass units (ASUs) was also assessed. Artificial
seagrass units (Gorospe, 2015) provide extra surface area to which the juveniles can
graze, and serves as a shelter. Meanwhile, information on early juvenile rearing
essential to improve the hatchery phase is lacking). This is the first study to examine
the effect of photoperiod, and importance of shelters, on post-settled S. cf horrens
juveniles. Specifically, this study determined the effect of three photoperiods (i.e. 24-
hour light, 24-hour dark, and 12-hour light-dark cycle) and presence of shelters on the

feeding pattern, growth and survival of post-settled juveniles.

2.2 Methodology

Stichopus cf. horrens broodstock were bought from traditional sea cucumber
gatherers in Anda, Pangasinan. The broodstock were identified as S. cf. horrens clade
A (Lizano, 2017), and were allowed to spawn spontaneously in the hatchery at the
University of the Philippines Marine Science Institute’s Bolinao Marine Laboratory.
Fertilised eggs from a pair of male and female spawners were maintained in fully-

covered tanks (1 ton). The succeeding larval stage was fed with Chaetoceros calcitrans.


Post-settled juveniles aged 2 months (47 days post-settlement) were then harvested and
used in the experiment. At this point, the naive juveniles weigh 0 grams, and so length
(cm) was used to facilitate measurement of growth rate. Juvenile lengths ranged from
0.24 cm to 1.14 cm. Overall average of length of the juveniles at the start of the
experiment was 0.56 cm + 0.16 SD.

The experiment was conducted in a temperature-controlled room. Fluorescent
lamps served as light source for set-ups with illumination, with an average illumination
of 713 Lux, and the water temperature was maintained at 28.3°C. The average
illumination was within the range of documented light intensities in the field under the
seagrass canopy, specifically 500-13000 Lux under a seagrass canopy (Palomar-
Abesamis, pers. comm.). Two strips of mesh net (1 x 5 inches) was used as an artificial
shelter unit (ASU). Each strip was folded in half, with the middle of each strip fixed to
a hard substrate made of two small stones and a chicken wire. In effect, there are four
horizontal strips in treatments with shelter (Fig 2.1, 2.2). The shelters were placed in
jars filled with 2-L UV-filtered seawater.

The photoperiod and shelter treatments were as follows: 12L:12D with ASU
(12L:12D x S), 12L:12D without ASU (12Lx12D x W), 24L with ASU (24L x S), 24L
without ASU (24L x W), 24D with ASU (24D x S), and 24D without ASU (24D x W)
(Fig. 2.2). Four replicate jars were used per treatment with each jar containing 10
juveniles. Seventy percent of the water volume was siphoned out and replaced with
UV filtered seawater every other day, during the moming (0800H to 0930H) when the
juveniles were still inactive. The juveniles were fed daily with 200 liters of Isochrysis
galbana. The experiment ran for a total of 30 days.

The feeding activity of juveniles was monitored on days 1, 11, 19 and 29, for

24 hours at 3 hour intervals starting from 08:00 AM, an hour after the light bulb was


turned on in treatment 12L:12D. During each 3 hour interval, the animals were scored
as either feeding or inactive. The juveniles were scored as active and feeding if there is
movement of tentacles to and from the oral region coupled with crawling movement.
The location of the juveniles was also recorded, whether they were found on the surface
of the jar or ASU.

After 30 days of rearing, the juveniles were harvested for the measurement of
absolute growth rates and survival per treatment. Absolute growth rate was calculated
by dividing the difference of final and initial lengths to 30 days. Survival was calculated
by dividing the number of survivors to the initial stocking density, then multiplied by

100%.

2.2.1 Analyses of data

The mean feeding and inactive hours were described using Moore’s Modified
Rayleigh Test, a built-in test of the Oriana ver. 4.0 software. Further, pairwise
comparisons of feeding and inactive periods within treatment and across treatments
were tested using Moore’s Paired Test. To further describe feeding pattern, the average
percentage of feeding juveniles were calculated separately for daytime (i.e. 06:00 AM
to 03:00 PM) and nighttime (i.e. 06:00 PM to 03:00 AM).

Significant differences in location when feeding and inactive within treatments
with ASU was analysed using Wilcoxon Match Pairs Test. The test was done for both
feeding and inactive juveniles. Absolute growth rate and survival of the juveniles were
tested for statistical significance using the non-parametric Kruskal-Wallis Test since
the data did not follow a normal distribution. Statistica software was used for both

Wilcoxon Match Pairs Test and Kruskal-Wallis Test.

2.3 Results

Results showed that on day 1, most of the juveniles actively feed during the day
regardless of treatment, resulting to an average daytime feeding hour in all treatments
(Fig 2.3). Overall, a relatively low number of feeding juveniles was observed
throughout the experiment, having only an average of 1-2 individuals feeding at any
given time in any of the treatments.

The average feeding hours in treatments 24L x W and 12L:12D x W shifted
towards night time starting day 11. However, mass mortality in the latter set-up was
documented on day 19, hence, excluded in the analysis for the succeeding days.
Treatments 24L x S and 12L:12D x W also shifted to nighttime feeding as documented
on day 19. The last to exhibit a shift to nocturnal feeding are the constantly dark
treatments 24D x W and 24DxS at day 29 (n.s., Moore’s Modified Rayleigh Test).
Within treatment tests showed that the juveniles did not significantly utilize the ASUs
either when feeding or inactive, regardless of time of day (i.e. day and night) (n.s.,
Wilcoxon Matched Pairs Test).

The average number of feeding juveniles was almost similar across treatments
for days 1 and day 11 (Fig 2.4). The number of feeding juveniles decreased in the
constantly lighted set-ups, from 1.36 + 0.69 feeding individuals (day 11) to 1 feeding
individual in 24L x W treatment (day 19), and from 1.31 + 0.47 (day 11) to 1.2 + 0.42
individuals (day 19) in 24L x S treatment (Fig 2.4). The low average number of feeding
juveniles particularly in the treatment 24L x W was due to the mass mortality in 2 out
of the 4 replicates. Remnants of dead individuals were observed on separate occasions
between days 11 and 19 of monitoring, and were removed prior to water replacement.

Henceforth, 24L x W was excluded in the analysis of growth and survival.


Survival was significantly lowest in constant light treatment with shelters at
15% (Kruskal-Wallis Test, H (4, N=20) = 11.51 p=0.02; Fig 2.5). Meanwhile, survival
was highest 24D x S (92.5%), and comparable to 24D x W (90%), 12L:12D x S (80%)
and 12L:12D x W (75%).

Absolute growth rate (AGR) was highest in juveniles reared in treatment 24D x
S (0.46 cm/day + 0.04 SD; Kruskal-Wallis Test, H (4, N=19) = 13.07 p=0.01; Fig 2.5).
Significantly lowest AGRs were documented in juveniles reared in treatment 12L:12D
x W (0.26 cm/day + 0.05 SD) and 24L x S (0.26 cm/day + 0.04 SD) (Kruskal-Wallis
Test, H (4, N=19) = 13.07 p=0.01). Meanwhile, AGR of treatments 24D x W (0.37
cm/day + 0.03 SD) was comparable to 12L:12D x S (0.32 cm/day + 0.07 SD) (Kruskal-

Wallis Test, H (4, N=19) = 13.07 p=0.01).

2.4 Discussion

This is the first study to examine feeding in post-settled naive juveniles of
Stichopus cf. horrens. Feeding occurs at any time of the day during this stage of
development (62 days after fertilization, 47 days post-settlement, 0.56 cm + 0.16 SD.).
This suggests that the juveniles of this age were not strictly nocturnal, unlike their larger
and presumably older hatchery-reared counterparts (21.4g + 13.1 SD; Palomar-
Abesamis, Juinio-Mefiez, and Slater 2017). This also suggests the post-settled juveniles
were not yet negatively photosensitive since they feed even when exposed to light.
Nevertheless, the number of juveniles feeding at day are of low frequency in all
treatments, hence, must be a result of other factors such as density or individual
variation, but cannot be fully addressed by the design of this study.

Notably, a shift from an average daytime feeding to nighttime feeding started

on day 11. The shift in the diel feeding pattern occurred even in the absence of light


and dark cycle which indicates that nocturnal feeding is developmentally determined,
that is, nocturnal feeding develops as the juveniles age. This may be delayed by non-
exposure to light but is intrinsically determined by an endogenous clock. The juveniles
in this experiment were not exposed to light even during spawning and larval stages,
and so the shift to nocturnal feeding must be set prior to the embryonic stage.

The daytime feeding at the start of the experiment suggests that photosensitivity
mechanisms may not yet be fully developed in a post-settled juvenile, hence it is not
yet negatively photosensitive, and the changes in behaviour might be due to differences
in expression patterns of genes related to photoreception. Developmental changes in
photosensitivity have already been documented in temperate sea cucumbers such as
Psolus chitonoides larvae, Cucumaria frondosa, and Holothiria scabra. Specifically,
vitellaria of P. chitonoides showed no distinct directional response to light, while the
subsequent pentactula stage showed negative phototaxis (Young and Chia, 1982).
Cucumaria frondosa, on the other hand, showed an increase in tolerance to light
intensity and flow rate (cm s “') with age, wherein 1 month old individuals can tolerate
25 lux and 5 cms’, while 6-, 12 and 20-month old individuals can tolerate >50 lux 10
cm s‘' (Gianasi et al., 2018). Responses to daily light cycle by H. scabra showed that
small individuals (10-40 mm) had a delayed onset of burrowing compared to medium
(>40-80 mm) and large (>80-144 mm) size classes, suggesting that the disparities
might be due to age and size-differences (Mercier et al., 1999).

Melanin production in the tegument serves as a protection to UV radiation and
made the juveniles, at least for Cucumaria frondosa, more tolerant to high light
intensities (Gianasi et al., 2018). This might not be the case for S. cf. horrens since the
post-settled juveniles in the 24L treatment experienced mass mortalities even when

their tegument started to develop pigmentation. Rather, pigmentation might have a


different function such increasing their survival in wild through matching with the
background or substrate, which included the seagrass detritus, macrolagae, sponges,
and sandy substrate (Palomar-Abesamis, Abesamis, and Juinio-Meziez 2017).
Nocturnal activity and feeding was observed at the latter part of the experiment,
even when exposed to constant light or constant dark. Nocturnal feeding was also
observed in Apostichopus japonicus juveniles exposed to constant dark, suggesting that
this is a phylogenetic carry-out of nocturnal feeding from holothurian ancestors (Dong
et al., 2010b; Hammond, 1982). Differential gene expression in A. japonicus (80- 130g)
showed that movement-associated genes (i.e. dynactin subunit 5-like isoform I and
dynein light chain roadblock-type 2) were overexpressed in dark conditions compared
with normal (100 lux) and strong light (2000 lux) environments (Zhang et al., 2018),

and might also be the case for S. cf. horrens juveniles making them more active at night.

Rearing post-settled S. cf. horrens juveniles in 24L (713 lux) without any shelter
is lethal, as reflected in the mass mortalities in this treatment. Continuous light at this
intensity could have also deterred feeding which resulted to mortality. Further, growth
was lowest in 24L with shelter, concordant to the results in Apostichopus japonicus
juveniles which had the lowest growth rate at 24-hour light (Chen et al., 2007).

The post-settled juveniles grew largest and had highest survival in the constantly
dark environment, indicating that the absence of light favors growth and survival of
post settled juveniles. There were greater number of juveniles feeding in this treatment
specifically on days 19 and 29, while lowest in the constantly lit set-up, indicating that
the former is more favorable for feeding. This result matches with the behaviour of
clade A S. cf. horrens, at least for older juveniles up to adults, documented to hide
during the day and emerge at night (Edullantes 2014; Palomar-Abesamis, Abesamis,

and Juinio-Mefiez 2017; Palomar-Abesamis, Juinio-Mefiez, and Slater 2017). Negative


phototaxis was also observed in the older juveniles of the species (Chapter 3 of this
thesis; Palomar-Abesamis, Juinio-Mefiez, and Slater 2017) suggesting their natural
aversion to light.

The juveniles were feeding equally on both the surfaces of the jar and the ASUs,
even in treatments that were under constant light. For this specific experiment, the jar
and ASU’s surfaces were equally utilized as grazing area. However, the relatively
higher AGRs in the treatments with shelter, compared to the unsheltered counterparts
(Fig 2.5), suggests that the shelter may have a positive effect on growth. Shelters could
have attenuated light, hence, minimizing the lethal effects of light. In addition, shelters
could have also provided additional grazing surfaces and thus lesser competition for
food or interference among the juveniles. Shelters could have also provided a substrate
for the growth of benthic diatoms, and so higher food abundance on the surface of the
shelter would positively influence juvenile growth rate. During monitoring, clumps of
benthic diatoms were observed trapped on the rough surface of the shelters, while there
was minimal benthic diatom settlement seen on the smooth surfaces of the glass jar.
Hence, the use of ASUs in this study is analogous to hard shelters (i.e. stone, bricks,
roof tiles) used in the culture of juvenile A. japonicus which also serves as substrates
for benthic microalgal growth (Han, Keesing, and Liu 2016).

Negative phototaxis, that is movement away from the light, is apparent in older
juveniles (Chapter 3 of this thesis; Palomar-Abesamis, Juinio-Meiiez, and Slater 2017),
but not in the post-settled one. The frequency of inactive juveniles observed on the
surface of the jar and ASUs were not significantly different in 24L nd 12L:12D
treatments, indicating that sheltering due to negative phototaxis is absent. This could

also be due to the not fully developed photosensitivity in this age group.


This study showed that nocturnal feeding in S. cf. horrens occurs during the
early juvenile stage and is related to the development of photosensitivity in response to
light. In the absence of light, the development of photosensitivity could be protracted,
as seen in the delayed shift to nocturnal feeding among juveniles in the constantly dark
treatment. This opens opportunities for studies on the development of life history-
related photosensitivity and circadian rhythm in a nocturnal and Indo-Pacific sea
cucumber species. Further, our results suggest that early juveniles are best reared in
constant darkness and with adequate food. Additional substrates that could increase
diatom growth and grazing area for the juveniles may also boost growth. Future studies
are warranted to optimize a light regime that can enhance microalgae and juvenile

growth, without hindering the development of photosensitivity in the animal.


Figure 2.1 Actual photo of the experimental unit. Jars (height = 24 cm, base diameter
= 13.5 cm) were filled with 2 liters of UV-filtered seawater. Blue mesh nets (1 x 5
inches) fixed to chicken wire (diameter = 6cm) and stones were used as shelters.


Vad wl
24L 12L:12D 24D

12L:12D x W

(n=10)

Without shelter
(W)

12L:12Dx S
(n=10)

With shelter
(S)

x 4 replicate jars (Duration: 30 days)

Figure 2.2 Diagram of the experimental design showing the photoperiod and shelter
treatments. The photoperiods were 24L, 12L:12D, and 24D, against shelter presence or
absence. Each treatment was replicated 4 times, and each replicate jar contained 10

juveniles (0.56 cm + 0.16 SD).


Treatments

Mi 2pxs Daaxs Wi 121:120xs
WB 240x w W 2axw 12L:12D x W
12:00 MN

06:00

PM 3 individuals

Ce

12:00 NN

Day 1

Figure 2.3 Twenty-four-hour clocks with the shaded portion indicating the period when
lights were tumed off in the 12L:12D treatment, corresponding to real nighttime hours.
Color-coded arrows were based on photoperiod (24D, 12L:12D, and 24L) and shelter
treatments (S = shelter present, W = shelter absent). Thick arrows indicate the average
feeding time per monitoring day and thin arrows represent the average number of
feeding juveniles per monitoring hour.


9 Day

= Night Day 1 h Day 11
9 24 hours

3 ; 3

1 j | 1

0 cic 0

4 j Day 19 4 Day 29

Average number of feeding juveniles

24D 12L:12D 24L
Treatment

Figure 2.4 Average number of juveniles feeding at day (white bars) and night (black
bars) on days 1, 11, 19 and 29. Gray bars indicate average number of feeding individuals
within 24 hours. In the x-axes are the photoperiod treatments (24D, 12L:12D, and 24L)
and shelter treatments (S = shelter present, W = shelter absent). Error bars represent
standard deviation from the mean.


a
ab

ab
b b
120 a a
a
a
80 J
60 @B
Sy Ww Ss Ww s w
24L

24D 12L:12D

cooeoo”o
= YO SO OD

(cm/day)

Absolute growth rate
oO

Survival %

Treatment

Figure 2.5 Absolute growth rates (AGR, cm/day) and survival (%) of the juveniles per
treatment after 30-day rearing. In the x-axes are the photoperiod treatments (24D,
12L:12D, and 24L) and shelter treatments (S = shelter present, W = shelter absent).
Error bars represent standard deviation from the mean. Letters denote statistically
significant differences (Kruskal-Wallis Test, p<0.05). Mass mortality occurred in two
out of four replicates of the 24LxW treatment (arrowhead), hence, excluded in the
statistical analyses.


Chapter 3

Shading effects on behaviour, growth and survival of Stichopus cf. horrens juveniles

Abstract

Stichopus cf. horrens is a high-value tropical sea cucumber species.
Understanding the effects of light intensity is essential to improve growth and survival
of cultured juveniles. This study examined the interactive effects of light intensity and
relative food availability in the sediment on S. cf. horrens juvenile feeding pattern,
absolute growth rates and survival. Three 6-month old juveniles (5.27 g to 19.41 g)
were reared in 6 replicate aquaria in different shading treatments (fully-covered, fully-
exposed, and half-exposed aquaria) under ambient light conditions for 30 days.
Juveniles in the fully-exposed treatment with high microalgal biomass (13.44 mg/g +
4.57 SD) had the highest growth rates (0.10 + 0.05 g/day) but also the highest mortality
(50%). In contrast, juveniles in the fully-covered treatment had the lowest growth (-
0.07 + 0.03 g/day), but the highest survival (100%). These indicate a trade-off between
growth associated with greater food and mortality risks due to light-induced stress.
Interestingly, the half-exposed treatment had comparable results to the fully-covered
set up. Juveniles in the half-exposed set-up initially did not stay at the shaded portion,
but eventuallyshowed a significant preference to stay in the shaded portion whenever
they were not feeding over the course of 30 days. However, the juveniles did not show
any preference between the shaded and exposed portions when actively feeding.
Juveniles were actively feeding and moving around the substrate during the night and
inactive during the day in all treatments. Further, there was a high incidence of 2 or
more juveniles together in the same corner of the aquaria when inactive, an indication

of aggregate-formation and positive thigmotaxis. This validates previous observations


ot larger juveniles being nocturnal feeders, controlled by an endogenous clock, and
having a strong thigmotactic response when inactive. The positive and negative effects
of light intensity on the feeding and sheltering behaviour of juveniles provide insights
on the light mediated behavioural development in this species. The results obtained
from the half-exposed treatment, in particular, are useful for further development of

nursery systems for S. cf. horrens.


3.1 Introduction

Stichopus cf. horrens, is a major species in the sea cucumber trade and in
nutraceutical and pharmaceutical industries, as delicacies and protein component to
traditional diets (Choo, 2008). Its taxonomic identification is confounded by
morphological variability with a closely related species Stichopus monotuberculatus
(Lizano, 2017). Phylogenetic analyses of populations in the Philippines revealed 2
lineages assigned as clades A and B. For this particular study, only the offspring of

Clade A individuals were used.

Stichopus cf. horrens clade A adults have been observed in crevices or under
the shade of rocks, and spawns 3-4 days after third lunar quarter (Edullantes 2014; Rioja
et al. unpub. data.), while juveniles are highly cryptic during the day, and laboratory
experiments showed avoidance to light exposure by hiding in shaded areas, indicative
of negative phototaxis (Palomar-Abesamis, Juinio-Meiiez, and Slater 2017). In short-
term manipulative laboratory experiments (48 hours), hatchery-reared (21.4g + 13.1
SD) and wild (23.1g + 10.1 SD) juveniles which were reared individually, actively fed
at night even under constant dark or constant light conditions (Palomar-Abesamis,
Juinio-Mefiez, and Slater 2017). These indicated that an endogenous clock controlled
juveniles nocturnal feeding. Nocturnal feeding was also reported for the temperate sea
cucumber stichopodid species Apostichopus japonicus (Dong et al., 2011) and
Australostichopus mollis (Slater and Jeffs, 2010). An endogenous clock controlling
nocturnal feeding was also documented in the brittle star Amphiura filiformis

(Rosenberg and Lundberg, 2004).

Sea cucumber culture is a plausible means to augment fishery production and
rebuild natural stocks (Juinio-Mefiez et al., 2017).In the Philippines, culture of high
value Holothuria scabra is being optimized, while the culture of Stichopus cf. horrens


is being explored. Developing and optimizing culture strategies should be based on the
biology of the culture organism and its response to controllable factors. Maximising
their survival during culture is essential for (1) cost-effective production, and (2) sea
ranching and restocking purposes wherein surviving animals can further contribute to
egg production natural building of stock (Battaglene 1999; Juinio-Mefiez, Evangelio,
and Miralao 2012; Palomar-Abesamis, Juinio-Mefiez, and Slater 2017; Purcell 1999).
Hence, longer-term experiments building on the best available ecological information

are needed to assess juvenile growth and survival in the hatchery.

Cryptic nocturnal behaviour is described as the emergence of an animal at night
and sheltering during the day and is thought to be an adaption to reduce predation risk.
Animals may change their nocturnal behaviour slightly, concurrent with daily
variations in light intensity and photoperiod, showing plasticity in behaviour (Dong et
al. 2011). Light, as an environmental factor that changes with depth and diurnal light

cycle, affects ecological functions of marine organisms.

For a species that is nocturnal and negatively phototactic, exposure to light is a
critical extrinsic factor that affects its growth and survival. This study aimed to
determine the direct impact of different light regimes on the feeding pattern, growth
and survival of S. cf. horrens juveniles (180 days post-settlement, 4.27 g to 19.41 g),
over 30 days and with conspecifics (3 juveniles per aquaria). Insights on the light
sensitivity of the juvenile stage is essential in the development of nursery systems for
this species. And since the juveniles are deposit feeders, the effect of light on relative
food abundance (i.e. Chl a and organic matter content) in the sediment were also
investigated. Three shading treatments were used: covered (C), exposed (E), and half-
covered (HC). Overall, the goal of this study was to examine the direct and indirect
effects of light intensity on juvenile S. cf. horrens behaviour, growth and survival.


It is hypothesized that rearing S. cf. horrens juveniles in a fully covered set-up
would minimize physiological stress on the animal and lead to higher survival.
However, low illumination is also expected to inhibit biofilm growth and lower food
availability within the animal’s microhabitat, thus leading to slower juvenile growth.
Conversely, a set-up fully-exposed to light and without shelter would promote biofilm
growth but lead to increased physiological stress on the animal. This may stunt juvenile
growth and increase mortality despite the availability of more food. A half-exposed set-
up is expected to be the optimal rearing condition for juvenile S. cf. horrens because of
the positive effects of light on biofilm proliferation and juvenile growth, and reduced

physiological stress from light due to the presence of shade.

3.2 Methodology

3.2.1 Juvenile production

Two lineages of Stichopus cf. horrens were documented in the Philippines,
designated as clades A and B (Lizano, 2017). For this experiment, Stichopus cf. horrens
broodstock were bought from traditional sea cucumber gatherers in Anda, Pangasinan.
The broodstock was maintained at U.P. Marine Science Institute Bolinao Marine
Laboratory’s outdoor hatchery and were sampled for lineage assignment. Restriction
Fragment Length Polymorphism was used to delineate the two lineages (UPMSI
Marine Molecular Ecology and Evolution Laboratory). All of the broodstock identified
as clade A were allowed to spawn 3-5 days after the third lunar quarter, following their
natural spawning periodicity (Edullantes 2014). Fertilised eggs from a pair of male and
female spawners were maintained in fully-covered tanks (1 ton). The succeeding larval

stage was fed with Chaetoceros calcitrans. The juveniles (~4 months old) were then


LUIGI . :
fatvested and initially reared in ocean-based cages for a month to boost growth, prior

Op a
to the transfer to the hatchery for the conduct of the experiment. In the hatchery, the
juveniles (4.27 g to 19.41 g) were maintained for 30 days in 60L bins provided with C.
muelleri and PVC pipes as shelters under ambient light conditions prior to the

experiment. By the time of the experiment, the juveniles were aged 180 days (6 months)

post-settlement.

3.2.2 Experimental set-up and design

Rectangular aquaria (4L) with 1.5 kg sediment (~2 cm thick) was used as
experimental units (Fig 3.1, 3.2). Sediments were collected from Cangaluyan, a site
documented to have juvenile S. cf. horrens (Palomar-Abesamis et al. 2017a). The
collected sediment was washed with freshwater and sundried for 2 days to remove
associated macrofauna. Prior to the experiment, aquaria were fully exposed to light and
conditioned for 2 days to allow biofilm growth. The shading treatments used were as
follows: covered (C), exposed (E) and half covered (HC). Two layers of fish net (mesh
size= 1x 1 mm) was used as cover for the aquaria in the covered and half-covered
treatments, while the exposed set-up had no cover (Fig 3.1, 3.2). No shelters were
provided in the treatment aquaria. Six replicate aquaria were used for each treatment
and each aquaria contained 3 juveniles (Fig 3.2). The juvenile sizes ranged from 4.3 g
to 19.4 g, and so were sorted prior to equal distribution of sizes to the aquaria. The
average biomass at the start of the experiment are as follows: 24.38g + 1.55 SD in
treatment C, 26.57 g + 5.25 SD in treatment E, and 24.31 g + 3.78 SD for treatment
HC. The set-up was maintained for 30 days with flow through seawater under ambient
natural light conditions in an outdoor hatchery. HOBO loggers were deployed in 1
aquaria per treatment for the measurement of light intensity and temperature.


Twenty four-hour monitoring of juvenile feeding and sheltering was done on
days 0, 5, 10 and 30, starting at 0800H and subsequently in 2-hour intervals for all
treatments. The juveniles were scored either as feeding and active, or inactive, adapted
from previous behavioural studies on S. cf. horrens (Palomar-Abesamis et al., 2017b).
Active and feeding is characterized by the movement of the tentacles to and from the
buccal region in a sweeping motion while crawling on the substrate. Inactivity is
described as the body of the juvenile being contracted and stationary. Flashlights

covered with red cellophane were used to facilitate monitoring at night.

To identify the location of the animals, a removable grid frame was placed on
top of each aquarium during monitoring (Fig 3.2B). The removable grid was divided to
eight grids, named A, B, C, D, E, F, G and H. For the half-covered set-up, grids A to E
correspond to the covered region, while grids E-H correspond to exposed region. The
number of juveniles with their corresponding activity per grid was recorded. For the
statistical analysis of locations of feeding and inactive juveniles in the half-exposed set-
up, the number of juveniles were pooled in grids A-D to represent the covered portion,
and E-H to represent the covered portion. On the other hand, the data was not pooled

for the description using shading matrices (Fig 3.4, 3.5).

The weight of each juvenile was measured at the start and end of the experiment
by placing a juvenile on petri dish atop a weighing scale. The juvenile was allowed to
release excess water for about 10 seconds and blotted on a paper towel prior to
weighing. Absolute growth rate (AGR) was calculated by subtracting the final weight
from the initial weight, and dividing the value by the number of experimental days (i.e.
30 days). Growth rate was expressed as grams per day (g/day). Biomass was obtained

by first summing up the total weight per replicate aquaria, then averaged per treatment.


Survival is the percentage of juveniles that survived up to the end of the experiment in

each aquaria.

3.2.3 Sediment analysis

Sediment samples were obtained prior to the experiment, and during the
experiment on days 1, 5, 10, 15, 20 and 30. Two samples weighing about 3 grams were
collected in each replicate aquarium of the covered and exposed treatments, done by
scraping the upper 1 cm of the sediment. For the half-exposed treatment, two samples
were collected in each of the covered and exposed areas. Samples were kept in dark
container and frozen in the laboratory until processing. One of the samples were
analysed for photopigments Chl a and Phaeo, and the remaining sample for the analysis

of sediment organic matter content.

Benthic microalgal biomass in the sediment samples was estimated through
pigment analysis following the method of Slater and Jeffs (2010), using acetone as
extraction solvent. Chl a and Phae concentrations were calculated using the

spectrophotometric equations of Lorenzen’s (Aminot and Rey, 2000):
Chla (mg/g) = [((AK6650 — 665a)v / V1]
Phae (ug/g) = [(AK((R x 665a) — 665c)v / V1)]

Where A = 11.4 ug, the inverse extinction coefficient for Chl a in 90% acetone;
R = 1.7, maximum absorbance ratio for 6650/665a without phaeopigment; K=2.43;
6650 and 665a are the absorbances before acidification and after acidification,
respectively; v=volume of acetone used in extraction in ml; V=dry sediment weight in
grams; l=cuvette path length in cm. The Phae/Chl a was then calculated to measure the
amount of detritus in the sample. The higher the Phae/Chl a ratio, the larger the

contribution of the detritus to the sediment organic matter.


Organic matter (OM) content was estimated using the loss on ignition method
(LOI) by Byers et al. (1978) and Luczack et al. (1997). Sediment samples were dried
in the oven for 2 weeks, then combusted in a muffle furnace at 250°C for 6 hours to
combust the labile organic matter. The samples were weighed and subjected to another
combustion at 500°C to remove the refractory organic matter. The LOlI2s50 or the labile
organic matter was calculated by first subtracting the final from initial sediment weight,
then divided by the initial sediment weight, and further multiplying by 100%. The same
was done for LOIsoo or refractory organic matter. Total organic matter content (TOM)

is the sum of LOIzs0 and LOIsoo.

3.2.4 Data analyses

Circular data on feeding and inactive periods were analysed and described using
built-in tests of the software Oriana version 4. Specifically, the mean feeding and
inactive hours were described using Moore’s Modified Rayleigh Test. Pairwise
comparison of average feeding and inactive hours were done using Moore’s Paired
Test. To further describe feeding pattern, the average percentage of feeding juveniles
were calculated separately for daytime (i.e. 06:00 AM to 03:00 PM) and nighttime (i.e.
06:00 PM to 03:00 AM). Significant differences in number of feeding and inactive
juveniles between the exposed and shaded portion of treatment HC was tested using
Mann-Whitney U Test. The test was done for both feeding and inactive juveniles.
Absolute growth rate and survival of the juveniles were tested for statistical significance
using the non-parametric Kruskal-Wallis Test since the data did not follow a normal
distribution. Statistica software was used to run both Mann-Whitney U Test and

Kruskal-Wallis Test.


Sediment Chl a, Phae/Chl a, labile organic matter, refractory organic matter and
total organic matter were averaged per sampling day for the covered and exposed
treatments. Mean values were obtained separately for the shaded and exposed areas of
the half-covered treatment. In effect, four data sets were subjected to analysis: covered,
exposed, half-covered shaded portion, and half-covered exposed portion. These
sediment data, together with the illumination and temperature data, were subjected to

Principal Component Analysis using Primer version 6.1.16

Variations in sediment parameters (i.e. TOM, Chl a, Phae/Chl a ) within
treatment was tested using Repeated Measures ANOVA, using Tukey’s HSD Test as
Post Hoc. In cases where the assumptions of sphericity were violated, non-parametric
Friedman ANOVA was used, with Wilcoxon Matched Pairs Test as Post Hoc. To
further gain insights on the effect of light intensity on food abundance, sediment
characteristics were pooled using monitoring days as replicates, but excluded the
measurements obtained prior to the experiment. The pooled data was subjected to One-
Way ANOVA, and in case normality was violated, non-parametric Kruskal-Wallis
Test. Statistica software was used for the statistical analyses of variations in sediment

characteristics.

3.4 Results

3.4.1 Diel activity pattern

Inactive individuals were observed both during the day and night. However for
all treatments, inactive animals were observed mostly at daytime during all monitoring
periods at an average of 1.32 inactive individuals (44%) per hour during the day (Fig

3.3A). The mean direction (i.e. hours) of inactivity within treatment was not statistically


significant (Moore’s Modified Rayleigh Test, p>0.05). Nevertheless, significant
temporal difference within treatment was observed in treatment E between days 0

(10:41 AM) and 30 (02:28 PM) (p<0.05, Moore’s Paired Test; Table 1).

Pairwise comparison showed that the temporal distribution of inactive juveniles
over a 24-hr period significantly differed between treatments E and HC on day 0, where
the juveniles were inactive at an earlier time period in treatment E (10:41 AM) than

treatment HC (11:53 AM) (p<0.01, Moore’s Paired Test; Table 1).

The frequency of observations of feeding were higher at night than day (Fig
3.3B), and nighttime mean feeding hours were documented in all treatments across
monitoring periods between 09:57 PM to 11:52 PM (n.s., Moore’s Modified Rayleigh
Test, p>0.05; Table 1). An average of 0.22 individuals (0.07%) were feeding per hour
at night. Nighttime feeding hour, regardless of treatment, showed that feeding is

endogenously controlled.

Moreover, pairwise comparisons revealed statistically significant differences in
the mean feeding hours between observation days within treatment. Specifically,
significant differences were documented on: treatment C on days 0 (10:47 PM, 0.042
feeding individuals) and 30 (10:36 PM, 0.089 individuals), on treatment E on days 0
(10:04 PM, 0.03 individuals) and 15 (11:18 PM, 0.082 individuals), and on treatment
HC on days 0 (11:28PM, 0.051 individuals) and 5 (10:40 PM, 0.09 individuals). In this
case, there are minor variations when it comes to mean feeding hours but all of which

still happened at night.


3.4.2 Location of individuals during inactive and active periods

There was significantly higher number of inactive juveniles in the shaded
portion of the treatment HC on days 5, 10, 15 and 30 during the day, but not at night
(Mann-Whitney U Test, p<0.05) (Table 2). On a finer scale, the juveniles were
frequently found in grids corresponding to the shaded portion of the aquarium (Fig,

3.4A, B).

For treatments E and C, juveniles were frequently observed on the corners of
the aquarium (Fig, 3.4A). In addition, there is high incidence of juveniles found in pairs
or groups in grids corresponding to the comers (Fig. 3.4B). Meanwhile, active and
feeding individuals tend to disperse at night regardless of treatment and sampling day

(Fig 3.5).

3.4.3 Animal Growth and Survival

The fully covered set-up exhibited the significantly lowest growth rate at -0.07
g + 0.032 SD (Kruskal-Wallis Test, H (2, N=14) = 6.26 p=0.04), but had 100% survival
(Fig 3.6). The half-covered set-up also had a negative growth rate (-0.04 g + 0.07 SD),
and a mean survival of 61%. Specifically, one replicate aquarium had mass mortality,
while 3 out of the 5 remaining replicate aquaria had 100% survival. Considering only
the replicate aquaria that have 100% survival in half-covered treatment, the adjusted

AGR becomes positive.

The highest absolute growth rate (AGR) was documented in the E treatment at
0.01 g + 0.05 SD (Fig 3.6B). However, mass mortalities occurred in three out of the six
replicate aquaria between days 15 to 30 of rearing. As a result, the average survival is

lowest in this treatment at 50% (Fig. 3.6A).


Initial and final biomass were comparable across treatments (Kruskal-Wallis
Test: H (2, N =17) =2.89 p=0.23), even after the biomass was adjusted (Kruskal-Wallis
Test: H (2, N =12) =5.61 p=0.06) (Fig 3.6C). Nevertheless, adjusted biomass is higher
than the original biomass which considered only replicate aquaria with 100% survival.
Further, within-treatment tests showed that biomass significantly declined in the C

treatment (Mann-Whitney U Test, p=0.05).

The relationship between AGR and final juvenile density varied per treatment
(Fig 3.7). For the exposed treatment, high AGR were documented at replicate aquaria
with high juvenile densities. Meanwhile, low AGR was observed in high juvenile
densities for the covered set-up. The relationship is much more variable in the half-
covered treatment, where there are high AGR at high juvenile densities for some
replicate aquaria, low AGR at high densities comparable to the fully covered, and low

AGR even at low juvenile densities.

Two replicate aquaria of treatment HC had negative growth rates despite having
only | individual left in the aquaria. The organisms in this study were not tagged hence
individual feeding behaviour cannot be described. Moreover, the two individuals left
had varying responses to lack of conspecific, wherein that of replicate 1 had higher

incidence of feeding when left alone in contrast with that of replicate 6 (Fig 3.8)

3.4.4 Light and temperature measurements

The average illumination at the hatchery was highest in the fully exposed
treatment, reaching up to 4726.51 + 1582.43 lux at noon (Fig 3.9A). This was followed
by the half-covered treatment at 1015.71 + 272.60 lux, and the covered treatment at

663.48 + 384.15 lux. There is no illumination at night in all of the treatments. Water


temperature was maintained at almost similar levels across treatments due to the flow
through water system. The average temperature during the day is 28.33 °C + 0.21 SD,

while 28.16 °C + 0.17 SD at night (Fig 3.9B).

3.4.5 Sediment characteristics

Four PCs had Eigenvalues greater than 1, and contributed 86.1% of the variation
in the treatments. The first PC accounts for 32% of variation, and was dominated by
labile organic matter (LOM) and total organic matter (TOM) (Fig 3.10). However, no
significant differences in LOM and TOM was documented across treatments. Both
LOM and TOM only varied significantly within treatment across sampling days (Fig
3.11C), particularly, the latter days of the experiment having lower OM measurements
which could also be a manifestation of enhanced grazing activity by the juveniles. LOM
was significantly lower on day 26 than day 21 on treatment C (Kruskal-Wallis test: H(7,
N=46) =19.64 p<0.01); day 31 compared to day 1 on treatment E (Kruskal-Wallis test:
H (7, N=46) =23.98 p<0.01), and; days 26 and 31 compared to day | in the exposed
portion of the HC treatment (Kruskal-Wallis test: H (7, N =47) =27.08 p<0.01). Day 26
of the exposed portion of treatment HC also had significantly lower LOM than day 11
(Kruskal-Wallis test: H (7, N =47) =27.08 p<0.01). Meanwhile, TOM was significantly
lower on day 26 than 11 on the C treatment (Kruskal-Wallis test: H (7, N =46) =20.47
p=0.05), and; day 26 compared to day | in the exposed portion of the HC treatment
(Kruskal-Wallis test: H (7, N=47) =23.36 p<0.01). The only exception to this trend is
the shaded portion of the HC treatment having significantly higher TOM on day 21 than

11 (Kruskal-Wallis test: H (7, N=46) =23.13 p<0.01).

The second PC accounts for 22% of the variation, is dominated by illumination

and Chl a. Treatment E is separated from the rest along this PC. This is concordant with


the results of overall Chl a having significantly highest concentration in E treatment
(13.44 mg/g + 4.57 SD; Kruskal-Wallis test: H (3, N=28) =17.93 p<0.01), where the
light intensity was highest. Meanwhile, Chl a was significantly lowest in C treatment
(4.58 mg/g + 0.73 SD), but comparable to the covered portion of the HC treatment (8.29
mg/g + 2.45 SD; Kruskal-Wallis test: H (3, N=28) =17.93 p<0.01). Despite the partial
shading, there were no significant differences in Chl a in the exposed (11.60 mg/g +
3.94 SD) and shaded portions in the HC treatment Kruskal-Wallis test: H (3, N=28)
=17.93 p<0.01). Likewise, there was an apparent overlap in the shaded and exposed

areas of treatment HC, but both had a minimal overlap with treatment C along PC 1.

Despite the lack of statistical significance, trends revealed an increase in Chl a
in the lighted treatments (i.e. E ad HC, Fig 3.11A) on the days 11 to 21 (Fig 3.11A),
while that of C treatment remained relatively low. This was followed by a decrese in
Chl a in the lighted treatments which might be due to the grazing of juveniles on the

sediment.

The third PC accounts for 16.9% of variation and is dominated by ROM and
Phae/Chl a. Pooled ROM did not vary significantly across treatments, but showed
variability within treatment across sampling days (Wilcoxon Matched Pars Test
p<0.05). Meanwhile, Phae/Chl a remained low across treatments and sampling days. In
treatment HC, exposed area had its significantly Phae/Chl a on day 21 (0.03 + 0.01 SD)
followed by the significantly highest Phae/Chl a on day 26 (0.04 + 0.01 SD; Wilcoxon
Matched Pairs Test p<0.05). The shaded portion of this treatment had more variable
Phae/Chl a. On the other hand, treatment E had significantly lowest Phae/Chl a on day
6 (0.02 + 0.004), and significantly highest on day 11 (0.03 + 0.02 SD; Wilcoxon

Matched Pairs Test, p<0.05).


Lastly, the fourth PC accounts for 15.1% of variation and is dominated by
temperature. Temperature was comparable across treatments (Fig 3.9B) since flow

through system was used.

3.5 Discussion

An overall diel pattern was observed wherein most juveniles are inactive at day,
while active and feeding at night (Fig 3.3). This pattern was maintained throughout the
30 days of rearing, the first study to demonstrate that their overall diel pattern did not
change at longer exposure durations. Non-visual light detection is documented in non-
holothurian invertebrates, and is mediated by opsin expressed in photoreceptor cells in
the tube feet, spines and epidermis of sea urchins, and spines of the brittle stars (Burke
et al., 2006; Delroisse et al., 2016, 2014; Lesser et al., 2011; Raible et al., 2006; Ullrich-
Liiter et al., 2013). Differential gene expression of Apostichopus japonicus (80-130g)
had an up-regulated expression of genes for signal transduction (i.e. Thioredoxin) when
reared in the dark compared to those reared in normal (100 lux) and strong light (2000
lux) environments; however, opsins were not detected probably due to limitation of
reference genome currently available (Zhang et al., 2018). Results also showed that
genes associated to movement is overexpressed in dark conditions (Zhang et al., 2018)
and might also be the case for the nocturnally-active S. cf. horrens juveniles.

Nevertheless, there were still cases of juveniles feeding and active at day,
suggesting that juveniles at this age are not strictly nocturnal. This is in contrast to that
of hatchery-bred juveniles weighing about 21 grams reared individually, where all of
the replicate individuals fed at night (Palomar-Abesamis, Juinio-Meiiez, and Slater
2017). The reason for the discrepancy might be the age, where our study used smaller
and presumably younger juveniles (4.27 g to 19.41 g, 180 days post fertilization). The


effect of conspecific on feeding behaviour cannot be discounted, wherein juveniles in
this study reared with conspecifics had daytime feeding activities as opposed to those
reared individually having strictly nocturnal feeding pattern (Palomar-Abesamis,

Juinio-Meiiez, and Slater 2017).

Foraging at night in the fully covered treatment, despite the minimal variation
in light intensity (i.e. 663.48 + 384.15 lux at noon and 0 Lux at midnight) relative to
other treatments, might be due to the influence of an endogenous clock controlling
nocturnal feeding and the ability to detect low-light intensities to maintain a nocturnal
feeding activity pattern (Fig 3.3B). This persistence of nocturnal feeding might be an
indication of a phylogenetic carry-out from ancestor holothurians, similar to the
persistent nocturnal feeding in A. japonicus juveniles (30.27 g + 3.08 SD) in constant
dark treatment (Dong et al., 2010b; Hammond, 1982). Moreover, detection of low light
intensities is well documented for deep-sea echinoderms specifically arctic starfishes
having highly sensitive ommatidia (Birk et al., 2018). Extra-ocular light perception in
echinoderms is mediated by opsins found in different parts of the body, depending on
the species (Ullrich-Litter et al., 2013). Opsin was not found in A. japonicus subjected
to different light treatments, but nevertheless had an up-regulated expression of genes
for signal transduction (i.e. Thioredoxin) when reared in the dark, together with
movement-associated genes (i.e. dynactin subunit 5-like isoform I and dynein light
chain roadblock-type 2), suggesting a coordinated detection and response to darkness

(Zhang et al., 2018).

For shallow water sea cucumbers, sensitivity to low light intensity and
maintenance of cyclic nocturnal activity was reported only for juvenile A. japonicus
reared at 15-500 lux (Dong et al., 2010b). Results of the present study demonstrated a
similar sensitivity to low light (713 lux) of S cf. horrens. Nevertheless, some juveniles


were also observed inactive at night, and foraging individuals at day indicate that

feeding activity is plastic and may also be due to intrinsic variability among individuals.

Nocturnal behaviour varies with light intensity either from the setting sun or
moon, called as circadian or circalunar rhythms (Gerrish et al., 2009). Noctumal
activity in this species is associated with feeding. Notably, the juveniles were dispersed
when feeding at night in all treatments. Dispersal during feeding maximizes feeding
area per individual even in the exposed treatment where food is not limiting.
Meanwhile, the same frequency of juveniles feeding in the exposed and shaded portions
of the HC treatment may be due to the relatively similar microalgal biomass in these
two portions (i.e, Chl a, Fig 3.9). Preference for the exposed portion may have been
observed if there was a pronounced difference in relative food abundance in the exposed

portion.

Previous studies have documented negative phototaxis of Stichopus horrens in
the wild, where the clade A S.cf horrens juveniles (Palomar-Abesamis, Abesamis, and
Juinio-Mefiez 2017; Palomar-Abesamis, Juinio-Mefiez, and Slater 2017) and adults
(Edullantes, 2014) of clade A hide under the crevices or other structures at daytime.
This behaviour might have evolved as an adaptive strategy to minimize encounter with
predators which are visual and/or active at day. In this study, daytime inactivity was
related to negative phototaxis and positive thigmotaxis, comparable to what was
observed in short-term laboratory observations (48 hours) using individual juveniles

(Palomar-Abesamis, Juinio-Mefiez, and Slater 2017).

Most of the inactive juveniles were found at the comers of the aquarium in the
fully covered and exposed treatments (Fig 3.4A), an indication of positive thigmotaxis

addressed by contact with a physical structure. The juveniles found in pairs or groups


were mostly at the corners (Fig. 3.4B), further suggesting that their need for physical
contact can be addressed both by a conspecific and a physical structure. In the case of
half-covered treatment, juveniles were mostly found at the comers of the shaded portion
(Fig 3.4), which can be both a function of their negative phototaxis and positive
thigmotaxis, where they avoid light by hiding under the shade and staying at the
corners. In this case, thriving in seagrass meadows (Palomar-Abesamis, Abesamis, and
Juinio-Mefiez 2017) matches with the reported behaviours, since seagrasses provide
shelters along the blades and stalks, and at the same time offer structure to satisfy their

need for contact.

Deposit-feeding sea cucumbers rely on the organic component of the sediment,
which can be measured as TOM (Zamora and Jeffs, 2012, 2011). However, TOM,
together with LOM and ROM, varied only with respect to sampling days and not
treatment (Fig 3.11), hence, could not be used to assess the indirect effects of light
through food abundance. More observable trends were found in sediment Chl a, which

is the proxy for the benthic microalgal biomass.

The increase in Chl a in treatments E and HC at the start of the experiment up
to day 21 suggests that exposure to high light intensities favored algal growth. In a study
of Baloi et al. (2013), algal growth and biomass increased in the presence of light.
Hence, light availability, in this case light intensity, directly increased sediment
periphyton which sea cucumber juveniles could graze on. Further, the highest food
abundance in treatment E was translated to the highest growth rate (0.10 g + 0.054 SD).
Moreover, Chi a values in treatments E and HC declined towards the end of the

experiment, suggesting that grazing surpassed microalgal production rate.

Average survival was lowest in treatment E, which might be caused by exposure
to high light intensities. The body walls of stichopodids were composed of type 1
collagen (Abedin et al., 2012; Cui et al., 2007; Zhong et al., 2015) that undergoes
extreme damage when exposed to UV light (Jariashvili et al., 2012; Miles et al., 2000).
Remnants of the body tissues were recovered in this treatment and were disposed
immediately to avoid any further chemical signal of a dead animal inside the aquaria.
Palomar-Abesamis, Juinio-Mefiez, and Slater (2017) also noted that juvenile S. cf.
horrens in shallow water are cryptic during daytime as a defensive response against UV
light, similar to the response in sea urchins and brittle stars (Adams, 2001; Johnsen and

Kier, 1999).

Chl a remained relatively low in treatment C, an indication that low light
intensities limited microalgal production. This low food abundance was translated to
shrinkage in the juveniles as reflected in negative AGR (-0.072 g + 0.032 SD).
Nevertheless, 100% survival of all juveniles in this treatment also indicates high

resilience of this species to low food conditions.

Overall food abundance (i.e. Chl a concentration) in the treatment HC’s exposed
portion was comparable to that of treatment E, while the shaded portion is comparable
to both E and C treatments. Higher AGR in the HC treatment while having the same
juvenile densities as the C treatment (n=3) showed the benefit of having more food due
to higher light intensities (Fig 3.7). Meanwhile, the higher survival in HC than E
treatment shows the importance of a shaded portion, wherein the juveniles can shelter
and minimize the lethal effects of high light intensities (Fig 3.6). Interestingly, low
AGR was also documented even when survival is low in two replicate aquaria, which

might be due to intrinsic variability in growth per individual (Fig 3.7).


3.5. 1 Implications to culture

Stichopus cf. horrens is a tropical high-value species currently being cultured
experimentally in the Philippines. This is the first study on juveniles carried out at
longer rearing durations and with conspecifics, hence, can serve as a baseline for future
culture optimization. The sensitivity of the juveniles of this species to light indicate that
carefully calibrated manipulation of light intensity and photoperiod may provide
opportunities to boost growth and survival during the nursery phase. Further
optimization of conditions simulated in the fully dark or covered set-up may improve
nursery systems being developed for this species. Addition of other physical structures
which can serve as shelters may be beneficial since this will provide two important
juvenile requirements observed in this experiment: (1) surfaces for contact (positive

thigmotaxis) and (2) additional grazing area (dispersal when feeding).

At the same time, increasing sediment productivity therein will be essential.
Daytime exposure to high light intensities in the fully exposed treatment in this study
was up to 4726.51 + 1582.43 lux at noon. Although microalgal biomass and growth of
surviving animals were high in the half-exposed treatment, the high mortalities indicate
that high light intensity may be stressful to the juveniles. In a fully covered rearing set-
up, the juveniles can be provided with supplementary benthic diatoms, which is a
common practice in hatchery-based sea cucumber culture, to augment the natural
biofilm. For instance, indoor culture of post-settled Isostichopus fuscus juveniles in
Ecuador were provided with plexiglass plates covered with biofilm as food (Mercier et
al. 2012). Likewise, juveniles of, Apostichopus japonicus, were provided benthic
diatoms on settlement plates and filtrate of ground fresh Sargassum thunbergii (Yang
et al., 2015). Growth of juvenile Holothuria scabra reared individually in aquaria and

in groups in sea pens enriched with Sargassum spp. was likewise enhanced (Sinsona


and Juinio-Mefiez, 2018). In contrast, aquarium experiments with individual juvenile
S. cf. horrens showed addition of macroalgal detritus did not enhance growth and
survival (Palomar-Abesamis, Juinio-Mefiez, and Slater 2018). Improvement of water
management and use of larger tanks in the hatchery and sea pens with shade or artificial
shelters will be explored. Moreover, a better understanding of the intraspecific
interactions in this species is essential in determining optimal stocking density together

with light and food related interactions under different culture conditions and systems.


Table 1 Time of mean inactivity and feeding in hours across monitoring days.
Superscripts a-b corresponds to significant differences across treatments at day 0
(Moore's Paired Test p<0.01), superscripts 1-2 corresponds to significant differences of
inactive period in E treatment only (Moore's Paired Test p<0.05), and superscripts 3-4
corresponds to within treatment significant differences across days (Moore's Paired

Test p<0.05)
Day
Activity Treatment Day 0 Day 5 Day 10 15 Day 30
05:14 10:44 11:09 11:21 03:15
Inactive Covered PM ® AM AM AM PM
10:41 10:42 09:47 01:30 02:28
Exposed AM *! AM !? AM !? PM _!? PM ?
Half- 11:53 10:36 10:47 12:22 11:39
covered AM ? AM AM PM AM
10:47 10:29 10:07 09:57 10:36
Feeding Covered PM > PM 34 PM >4 PM 34 PM 4
10:04 11:52 11:20 11:38 11:27
Exposed PM _? PM_>* PM ** PM 4 PM _*4
Half- 11:28 10:40 10:10 11:18 10:47
covered PM > PM 4 PM >4 PM 34 PM >

Table 2 Locations with significantly higher number of feeding and inactive juveniles
in the Half-covered treatment. S stands for the shaded portion, and E for the exposed
portion. Mann-Whitney U Test p values are in parentheses.

Day no Location when inactive Location when active or feeding
Day Night Day Night

0 ns. ns. ns. ns.

5 S>E S>E ns. S<E
(0.005) (0.010) (0.005)

10 S>E ns. S>E ns.
(0.004) (0.039)

15 S>E ns. DS. ns.
(0.006)

30 S>E S>E L.s. DLs.
(0.025) (0.009)


Figure 3.1 Photograph of the experimental units from left to right: half-covered (HC),
covered (C) and exposed treatments (E)


A Treatments B

Exposed (E Monitoring grid
equosedi(e Top view of the atop the half-
monitoring grid covered aquarium
A B A B
| Covered (C)
| c |] D Cc D
; | — | F E | F
|
Half-covered (HC) | __
| G H 5 G H
; | 2
Nn
7.75cm
31cm

Figure 3.2 Experimental treatments containing 3 juveniles each (A) and diagrammatic
representation of the monitoring grid (B). For the half-covered set-up, grids A to D
correspond to the shaded region, while grids E-H correspond to the exposed region


Treatments
= Covered

@= Exposed
@dHalf-covered

Figure 3.3 Twenty-four hour clocks showing the average inactive (A) and feeding (b)
times of juveniles on days 0, 5, 10, 15 and 30. Color-coded arrows were based on
treatment (covered, exposed, half-covered). Thick arrows indicate the average feeding
time per monitoring day and thin arrows represent the average number of feeding
juveniles per monitoring hour.


A Average number of inactive juveniles per grid
Treatment 0 22
oa DayO — Day5 Day10 Day15 Day 30
we —
Exposed te a
m2 60.
| iy
covered 07
m@
B No. of observations where inactive juveniles
were in pairs or groups
Treatment 0 >10
(top view) ue
30 ag 10 20
20 a Mad a
Exposed
| 202
=
| |

Figure 3.4 Shading matrices showing the average number of inactive juveniles per grid
(A), and the location of inactive juveniles found in pairs or group (B). Since the
juveniles were predominantly inactive at day, only the data from daytime observations
(08:00 AM to 06:00 PM) on days 0, 5, 10, 15 and 30 were pooled and used for this

representation.



Average number of active & feeding juveniles per grid

Treatment 0 22

(top view)
Day 0 Day5 Day10 ODay15 _ Day 30
03 04 02 0. 02 02 03 04 01 04
iGovered o1 0 00 04 01 O41 00 of 01 of
01 od 02 al 00 oO 02 of 02 02
04 023 01 0. 03 0. 03 UK | 06 og
02 0. 04 a 04 a 03 og 03 04
Exposed 00 og 02 04 01 01 02 Ce) 01 03
01 og O1 04 01 04) 01 04 01 04
03 04] 04 O14 06 04 04 03 01 og
Half 06 0.1 01 024 03 04 01 0g 01 og

| covered

| 01 0.4 02 04 01 01 01 04 00 og
01 04 03 04 02 09 o1 of 02 o4
04 0.4) 04 0g 04 04 04 og 03 [)

Figure 3.5 Shading matrix showing the average number of feeding juveniles per grid.
Since feeding predominantly happened at night, only the data from nighttime
observations (06:00 PM to 08:00 AM) on days 0, 5, 10, 15 and 30 were averaged for
this representation.


120 n=11 A

ae n=18 n=9
()

Survival (%)

2 0.25 B
©
= a
SF 0.15
$8
a
oO ie 0.95 b a a
LO —
scx
2205 i
n
a ,
ot 0.15 (Adjusted
AGR)
40 Olntial
@ Final
B 30 |
ao 10
()
Covered Exposed Half- Half-
covered covered
(Adjusted
biomass)

Figure 3.6 Average survival (A), absolute growth rate (B) and biomass (C) in covered.
exposed, and half-covered treatments. Adjusted AGR and biomass in the half-covered
treatment only considered replicate aquaria with 100% survival. Error bars indicate
standard deviation from the mean. Letters indicate significant differences in average
AGR across treatments (Kruskal-Wallis Test, p<0.05). Asterisk indicates significantly
lower final biomass in the covered treatment (Mann-Whitney U Test, p<0.05)



0.15

° E (3 reps left) 5
z 0.1 @ HC (5 reps left)
2 nos = C (6 reps left) .
2 K
rg 0 Q
s 0 1 2 3
8 0.05 D
8 01 ° :
wo e s
< 945

Figure 3.7 Absolute growth rate (g per day) against the final juvenile count in the exposed
(E), half-covered (HC) and covered (C) treatments. Number of replicates left after the 30-
day experiment were indicated in the parenthesis. Each replicate had 3 juveniles at the
start of the experiment.

Mortality in 2 out Mortality in 2 out
of 3 juveniles of 3 juveniles
01 indiv '
@ 2-3 indiv

| on i
0 aa

oN fF DW OO

DayO 5 10 15 30 5 10.1
Rep 1 Rep 6

No. of observations
where juveniles are feeding

Figure 3.8 Incidence of feeding in replicates 1 and 6 of the half-covered treatment.
across sampling days. These are the replicates that have experienced negative AGR at
lowest densities (1 individual). The only remaining individual in replicate 6 did not eat
on day 30, hence the absence of a bar in the graph.


gssees

eoooogac Sf

~ oun tan
(xn)

Aysuayuy 1y61q

(cD)

© Jainjesodwiay

26.5

ooez
00Lz
000z
Oo6L
ooet
OOZL
oost
Oost
oorL
ooeL
o0z-
OOLL
oooL
o0so
00€0

Time (H)

Figure 3.9 Average light intensity (A) and temperature (B) across treatments during

the experiment.


‘Ty Treatments and Day
*E(1) A HC_E (1)
af vE(@)  wHC_E@)
iam ~ © E(11) 9 @HC_E(11)
intensity (Lux) < © E (16) @ HCZE (16)
ar Chia ©E(21)  @HC_E(21)
~ E (26) + HC_E (26)
\ ~ E(31) x HC_E (31)
= x \ aC (1) A HC_S(1)
a \ vC(6) y HC_S (6)
8 PIC \ mc(11) mw HC_S(11)
9 OT me @C(16)  @HC_S(16)
= ° \ | @C(21)  @ HC_S(21)
; x } +C (26)  +HC_S (26)
‘ * a / xC(31) x HC_S (31)
\ Hf
2+ /
x
Se S
44 ; : . ;
4 . 0 z i
PC 1 (32%)

Figure 3.10 Ordination plot of treatments (E = exposed, C = covered, HC_E = exposed
portion of half-covered, HC_S = shaded portion of half-covered) on sampling days 1,
6, 11, 16, 21, 26, and 31 using the following variables: light intensity (Lux), Chl a,
Phaeo/Chl a (P/C), labile organic matter (LOM), refractory organic matter (ROM), and

total organic matter (TOM).


Wdddeadoll cial

0.15

Chia

(mg/g)
Phae/Chla 01
Ratio

[A]

[8 |

Labile OM (LOM)
ME Refractory OM (ROM)

baabadidbiadiadaanid sibitasenis

0.05

*(ROM)
*(ROM
*(LOM)
Half-covered
(Exposed area)

3s
OG
$3
8a

anol
=o
Gc
lo

Exposed

*(ROM, LOM)
Covered


)

%

Organic
Matter
(TOM

Total
Figure 3.11 Sediment Chl a (A), Phae/Chl (B), and TOM (C) across treatments and

sampling days. Error bars represent standard deviation from the mean. Asterisks
indicate significant within-treatment differences in TOM, LOM and ROM (Knuskal-

Wallis Test, p<0.01)


Chapter 4

Synthesis

Stichopus cf. horrens are high value tropical sea cucumber species currently
being developed for culture production. In the Philippines, phylogenetic analyses of S.
cf. horrens populations showed 2 lineages, designated as clades A and B (Lizano,
2017). Clade A adults are mostly found in rocky and reef areas, demonstrating cryptic
nocturnal behaviour and spawn 3-5 nights after 3° lunar quarter (Edullantes 2014; Rioja
et al. unpub. data). Late-stage juveniles (>20 g) of this clade were seagrass-associated
and nocturnally active in the wild and in the laboratory over a 48-hour period (Palomar-
Abesamis, Abesamis, and Juinio-Mefiez 2017; Palomar-Abesamis, Juinio-Mefiez, and
Slater 2017). This thesis investigated the early life stages of clade A S. cf. horrens over
a longer rearing duration (30 days), which can contribute in culture optimization for
this species. Insights into the development of photosensitivity in echinoderms and the
possible effects of the presence of conspecifics were also elucidated. Specifically, the
thesis determined the direct and indirect effects of light on the behaviour, growth and
survival of two early life stages of S. cf. horrens with different feeding modes. Post-
settled juveniles (47 days post settlement; 0.24 cm to 1.14 cm) are primarily grazers on
periphyton but can also suspension feed. Older juveniles (180 days post-settlement;

4.3 g to 19.4 g) are primarily deposit feeders.

The effect of light on growth and survival of post-settled juveniles was tested
under three photoperiods: continuous light (24L), continuous dark (24D), and 12:12
light-dark cycle 12L:12D), with either the presence (S) or absence (W) of artificial
seagrass units (ASU). Ten post-settled juveniles were added in each 2-L replicate jar.

Each treatment had 4 replicates. The average illumination was 713 lux and water


temperature was 28.3°C during the 30 day experiment. For the older juveniles,
sediment (2 cm thick) was added to the experimental aquaria (31 cm x 15.5 cm 22.5
cm; 10 liters). The light treatments were fully exposed (E) (4726.51 + 1582.43 lux at
noon), half-covered (HC) (1015.71 + 272.60 lux), and fully covered (C) (663.48 +

384.15 lux). Each aquaria had three juveniles, with 6 replicates per treatment.

Light is an important environmental factor varying with depth and diurnal cycle,
and it affects the ecological functions of marine organisms through their daily activity
rhythm, migration, and aggregation behaviour (Dong et al., 201 0b). Previous laboratory
experiments and field observations showed that juvenile S. cf. horrens clade A are
nocturnally active, with nighttime activity associated to feeding (Palomar-Abesamis,
Juinio-Mefiez, and Slater 2017). However, results of this study showed that feeding is
not strictly nocturnal. Post-settled juveniles had an average daytime feeding at the start
of the experiment, which then shifted to nighttime feeding starting day 11 (Chapter 2).
This provides empirical evidence that photosensitivity is still developing during the
post settlement stage. Notably, the first to exhibit a shift to night time feeding were the
juveniles in continuously exposed to light (24LxW) and 12L:12D without shelter
(12L:12Dx W) on day 11. The last to exhibit a shift were juveniles in complete dark
with and without shelter (24DxW and 24DxS) on day 29. There were instances where
juvenile Apostichopus japonicus weighing 30.27g + 3.08 did not have a marked
emergence behaviour, hence no clear cyclic nocturnal activity, when reared in
continuous dark photoperiod (Dong et al., 2010b). The results of this study clearly
indicate that the development of nocturnal feeding is inherent and activated by the light-
dark cycle. This study is the first to describe developmental changes in the
photosensitvity of S cf. horrens and to demonstrate that the shift happens during the

early juvenile stage or a few weeks after settlement. The biology of early and post


settlement juveniles of S. cf. horrens is not known. However results of this study
suggest that the nursery phase may be similar to H. scabra. In nature, juvenile H.
scabra settles on seagrass leaves (Mercier, Battaglene, and Hamel 2000a) and
eventually moves to the sediment where they become deposit feeders (Mercier et al.,
2000b). The same feeding modes were observed in S. cf. horrens juveniles and the
development of photosensitivity may coincide with the shift to deposit feeding,
specifically when they start emerging at night to feed on the sediment. Nocturnal
feeding might be an adaptation of the larger deposit-feeding juveniles to minimize
exposure and visual detection by predators. Threat from predation might be non-

existent for the transparent and younger juveniles.

The older S. cf. horrens juveniles (Chapter 3) predominantly fed at night,
although some individuals were also seen feeding during the day. This is in contrast to
the behaviour of older juveniles (>20g) reared individually, which exhibited nocturnal
activity and feeding (Palomar-Abesamis, Juinio-Mejiez, and Slater 2017). Results of
this study may reflect individual variations in feeding activity and the possible effects

of the presence of conspecifics on behaviour.

Regardless of treatment, the juveniles tend to disperse when feeding at night, as
observed in their distribution using a shading matrix (Fig 3.4). Meanwhile, juveniles
hid under the shade of the half-covered treatment during the day (Fig 3.3), an indication
of negative phototaxis. The juveniles also exhibited positive thigmotaxis in all
treatments, situating themselves at the corners of the aquaria and usually with a

conspecific.

Light also indirectly affected the animal, by influencing the benthic microalgal

biomass as indicated by Chorophyll (Chl a) in the sediment. Specifically, Chl a was


highest in the exposed treatment (E) (13.44 mg/g + 4.57 SD) due to high light intensities
(4726.51 + 1582.43 lux at noon) (Chapter 2). Concurrently, the highest juvenile
absolute growth rate (AGR; 0.095 g + 0.05 SD) was recorded in this set-up. The
decrease in Chl a abundance in treatments E and HC over time, suggests that as the
juveniles increased in size, reduction in microalgal biomass due to grazing was greater

than its replenishment.

In contrast to the larger age group, negative phototaxis and thigmotaxis were
not evident in the post-settled juveniles reared with conspecifics and provided with
artificial shelter (Chapter 2). There were no significant differences in the number of
juveniles feeding on the surface of the artificial shelter and the jar, but juveniles had
higher AGRs compared to those in the treatments without shelter. The artificial seagrass
units could have provided additional substratum for benthic diatom growth, similar to
the shelters used in rearing Apostichopus japonicus (Dong et al. 2011; Han, Keesing,
and Liu 2016; Yamaguchi, Masuda, and Yamashita 2018). This highlights the
importance of food availability to enhance growth, similar to that in older juveniles with
higher AGRs when reared in the highest Chl a abundance. This is consistent with the
suggestion that the high association of juvenile S. cf. horrens with seagrasses in the
wild may be due to accessibility to food (i.e. epiphytes along the blades) as well as
shelter (Palomar-Abesamis, Juinio-Mefiez, and Slater 2017). It is also possible that the
presence of the artificial substrate also attenuated or diffused light such that the
juveniles in these treatments were not as negatively affected by high light intensity

compared to those without the shelters.

Thirty-day exposure to continuous light or high light intensities resulted in
lower survival among post-settled and older juveniles. Younger juveniles exposed to
30 days of constant light (713 lux) had the highest mortality, with mass mortalities in 2


out of four replicates (Chapter 2). Results suggest that continuous exposure to light
intensities may be lethal to juveniles. Survival was also compromised in the exposed
treatment (E), having the highest mortality at 50% between 15 to 30 days of rearing
(Chapter 2). In the wild, juveniles likely sheltered to avoid the ultraviolet light’s
damaging effect to dermal tissues (Palomar-Abesamis, Juinio-Mefiez, and Slater 2017).
Conversely, the highest survival was documented in the fully covered treatment in
Chapter 2 (C) (100%), indicating low light conditions (0 lux) favored survival.
However, the lowest AGR (-0.07 g+ 0.032 SD) in the fully covered treatment was
associated to low food abundance (4.58 mg/g + 0.73 SD) (C). Meanwhile, younger
juveniles in Chapter 2 had highest survival in 24-h dark with ASUs (92.5%), but with
highest AGR (0.46 cm/day + 0.04 SD) probably due to the presence of shelter trapping

the benthic diatom, hence providing additional access to food.

Overall, this experiment showed that it is best to rear the post-settled juveniles
in complete and continuous darkness (0 lux), and the older ones in low light conditions
(663.48 + 384.15 lux) to ensure survival. However, it is still important to assess the
behaviour and survival of the juveniles upon release to the wild. This is to make sure
that the chosen light regime would not lead to maladaptive behaviour that would
compromise survival upon release. Further, examining the optimal light intensity within
the aforementioned illumination range is essential to optimize the growth of both
benthic algal biomass and S.cf. horrens juveniles. The use of artificial shelters during
culture can be done to increase the substratum for the growth of benthic diatoms.
Enriching the culture container with food to boost growth can be also be explored.
Experiments examining the effects of conspecifics and juvenile density on growth and
behaviour can also be done, especially for optimizing mass production protocols.

Further, the development of photosensitivity and related photoreceptor cells of the 2 S.


cf. horrens clades is an interesting research opportunity to better understand the biology

and ecology of this species.

Bibliography

Abedin, M.Z., Karim, A.A., Ahmed, F., Latiff, A.A., Gan, C.-Y., Che Ghazali, F., Islam
Sarker, M.Z., 2012. Isolation and characterization of pepsin-solubilized collagen
from the integument of sea cucumber (Stichopus vastus). J. Sci. Food Agric. 93,
1083-1088. https://doi.org/10.1002/jsfa.5854

Adams, N.L., 2001. UV radiation evokes negative phototaxis and covering behaviour
in the sea urchin Strongylocentrotus droebachiensis. Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser. 213,
87-95. https://doi.org/10.3354/meps2 13087

Amato, K.R., Emel, S.L., Lindgren, C.A., Sullan, K.M., Wright, P.R., Gilbert, J.J.,
2008. Covering behaviour of two co-occurring Jamaican sea urchins: Differences
in the amount of covering and selection of covering material. Bull. Mar. Sci. 82,
255-261.

Aminot, A., Rey, F., 2000. Standard procedure for the determination of chlorophyll a
by spectroscopic methods, ICES Techniques in Marine Environmental Sciences.
Denmark. https://doi.org/10.1167/iovs.06-0427

Baloi, M., Arantes, R., Schveitzer, R., Magnotti, C., Vinatea, L., 2013. Performance of
Pacific white shrimp Litopenaeus vannamei raised in biofloc systems with varying
levels of light exposure. Aquac. Eng. 52, 39-44.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aquaeng.2012.07.003

Battaglene, S.C., 1999. Culture of Tropical Sea Cucumbers. ICLARM Q.

Birk, M.H., Blicher, M.E., Garm, A., 2018. Deep-sea starfish from the arctic have well-
developed eyes in the dark. Proc. R. Soc. B Biol. Sci. 285, 1-9.
https://doi.org/10.1098/rspb.2017.2743

Burke, R.D., Angerer, L.M., Elphick, M.R., Humphrey G.W., Yaguchi, S., Kiyama, T.,
Liang, S., Mu, X., Agca, C., Klein, W.H., Brandhorst, B.P., Rowe, M., Wilson,
K., Churcher, A.M., Taylor, J.S., Chen, N., Murray, G., Wang, D., Mellot, D.,
Olinski, R., Hallbook, F., Thorndyke, M.C., 2006. A genomic view of the sea
urchin nervous system. Dev. Biol. 300, 434-460.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ydbio.2006.08.007

Chen, Y., Gao, F., Liu, G., Shao, L., Shi, G., 2007. The effects of temperature, salinity
and light cycle on the growth and behaviour of Apostichopus japonicus. J. Fish.
China 5, 687-691.

Choo, P.S., 2008. The Philippines: a hotspot of sea cucumber fisheries in Asia, in:
Toral-Granda, V., Lovatelli, A., Vasconcellos, M. (Eds.), Sea Cucumbers. A
Global Review of Fisheries and Trade. FAO Fisheries and Aquaculture Technical
Paper, No. 516. FAO, Rome, pp. 119-140.

Cui, F., Xue, C., Li, Z., Zhang, Y., Dong, P., Fu, X., Gao, X., 2007. Characterization
and subunit composition of collagen from the body wall of sea cucumber
Stichopus japonicus. Food Chem. 100, 1120-1125.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2005.11.019

Delroisse, J., Mallefet, J., Flammang, P., 2016. De Novo Adult Transcriptomes of Two


European Brittle Stars: Spotlight on Opsin-Based Photoreception. PLoS One 11.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0152988

Delroisse, J., Ulirich-Liiter, E.M., Ortega-Martinez, O., Dupont, S., Amone, M.-I.,
Mallefet, J., Flammang, P., 2014. High opsin diversity in a non-visual infaunal
brittle star. BMC Genomics 15. https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2164-15-1035

Dong, G., Dong, S., Tian, X., Wang, F., 2011. Effects of photoperiod on daily activity
rhythm of juvenile sea cucumber, Apostichopus japonicus (Selenka). Chinese J.
Oceanol. Limnol. 29, 1015-1022. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00343-01 1-0204-6

Dong, G., Dong, S., Wang, F., Tian, X., 2010a. Effects of materials, incubation time
and colors of artificial shelters on behaviour of juvenile sea cucumber
Apostichopus japonicus. Aquac. Eng. 43, 1-5.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aquaeng.2010.01.002

Dong, G., Dong, S., Wang, F., Tian, X., 2010b. Effects of light intensity on daily
activity rhythm of juvenile sea cucumber, Apostichopus japonicus (Selenka).
Aquac. Res. 41, 1640-1647. https://doi.org/10.1111/).1365-2109.2010.02534.x

Dumont, C.P., Drolet, D., Deschénes, I, Himmelman, J.H., 2007. Multiple factors
explain the covering behaviour in the green sea urchin, Strongylocentrotus
droebachiensis. Anim. Behav. 73, 979-986.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.anbehav.2006. 11.008

Edullantes, C.M.A., 2015. NOT THIS Reproductive ecology and larval edvelopment
of the sea cucumber Stichopus cf. horrens. University of the Philippines.

Edullantes, C.M.A., 2014. Reproductive ecology and larval development of the sea
cucumber Stichopus cf. horrens. University of the Philippines.

El-Sayed, A.F.M., Kawanna, M., 2004. Effects of photoperiod on the performance of
farmed Nile tilapia Oreochromis niloticus: I. Growth, feed utilization efficiency
and survival of fry and _fingerlings. Aquaculture 231, 393-402.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aquaculture.2003.11.012

Gamboa, R.U., Aurelio, R.M., Ganad, D.A., Concepcion, L.B., Abreo, N.A.S., 2011.
Small-scale hactheries and simple technologies for sandfish (Holothura scabr)
production, in: Hair, C.A., Pickering, T.D., Mills, D.J. (Eds.), Asia—Pacific
Tropical Sea Cucumber Aquaculture. Proceedings of an International Symposium
Held in Noumea, New Caledonia. Australian Centre for International Agricultural
Research, Canberra, pp. 63—71. https://doi.org/10.1 152/jn.90958.2008

Gerrish, G.A., Morin, J.G., Rivers, T.J., Patrawala, Z., 2009. Darkness as an ecological
resource: the role of light in partitioning the nocturnal niche 525-536.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00442-009-1327-8

Gianasi, B.L., Hamel, J.F., Mercier, A., 2018. Morphometric and behavioural changes
in the early life stages of the sea cucumber Cucumaria frondosa. Aquaculture 490,
5-18. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aquaculture.2018.02.017

Gorospe, J.R., 2015. Growth and survival of the early stage Holothuria scabra Jaeger,
1833 juveniles in a bottom-set ocean nursery system. University of the Philippines.

Graham, J.C.H., Battaglene, S.C., 2004. Periodic movement and sheltering behaviour
of Actinopyga mauritiana (Holothuroidea: Aspidochirotidae) in Solomon Islands,


in: SPC Beche-de-Mer Information Bulletin. pp. 23-31.

Hammond, L.S., 1982. Deposit-feeding Holothurians and Echinoids (Echinodermata).
From a shallow back-reef lagoon, Discovery Bay, Jamaica. Discovery 32, 549-
571. https://doi.org/10.3354/meps008025

Han, D., Xie, S., Lei, W., Zhu, X., Yang, Y., 2005. Effect of light intensity on growth,
survival and skin color of juvenile Chinese longsnout catfish (Leiocassis
longirostris Giinther). Aquaculture 248, 299-306.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aquaculture.2005.03.016

Han, Q., Keesing, J.K., Liu, D., 2016. A Review of Sea Cucumber Aquaculture,
Ranching, and Stock Enhancement in China. Rev. Fish. Sci. Aquac. 24, 326-341.
https://doi.org/10.1080/23308249.2016.1193472

Hendler, G., 1984. Brittlestar color-change and phototaxis (Echinodermata:
Ophiuroidea: Ophiocomidae). Mar. Ecol. 5, 379-401.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1439-0485.1984.tb00131.x

Hu, C., Xu, Y., Wen, J., Zhang, L., Fan, S., Su, T., 2010. Larval development and
juvenile growth of the sea cucumber Stichopus sp. (Curry fish). Aquaculture 300,
73-79. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aquaculture.2009.09.033

James, D.W., 2000. Diet, movement, and covering behaviour of the sea urchin
Toxopneustes roseus in rhodolith beds in the Gulf of California, México. Mar.
Biol. 137, 913-923. https://doi.org/10.1007/s002270000423

Jariashvili, K., Madhan, B., Brodsky, B., Kuchava, A., Namicheishvili, L., Metreveli,
N., 2012. Uv damage of collagen: Insights from model collagen peptides.
Biopolymers 97, 189-198. https://doi.org/10.1002/bip.21725

Johnsen, S., Kier, W.M., 1999. Shade-seeking behaviour under polarized light by the
brittlestar Ophioderma brevispinum (Echinodermata: Ophiuroidea) 761-763.

Juinio-Mefiez, M.A., Evangelio, J.C., Miralao, S.J.A., 2012. Trial grow-out culture of
sea cucumber Holothuria scabra in sea cages and pens. Aquac. Res. 45, 1332-
1340. https://doi.org/10.1111/are.12078

Juinio-Meiiez, M.A., Tech, E.D., Ticao, I.P., Gorospe, J.R., Edullantes, C.M.A., Rioja,
R.A. V., 2017. Adaptive and integrated culture production systems for the tropical
sea cucumber Holothuria scabra. Fish. Res. 186, 502-513.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fishres.2016.07.017

Kehas, A.J., Theoharides, K.A., Gilbert, J.J., 2005. Effect of sunlight intensity and
albinism on the covering response of the Caribbean sea urchin Tripneustes
ventricosus. Mar. Biol. 146, 1111-1117. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00227-004-
1514-4

Kelley, J.L., Davies, W.I.L., 2016. The biological mechanisms and behavioural
functions of opsin-based light detection by the skin. Front. Ecol. Evol. 4, 1-13.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fevo.2016.00106

Koueta, N., Boucaud-Camou, E., 2003. Combined effects of photoperiod and feeding
frequency on survival and growth of juvenile cuttlefish Sepia officinalis L. in
experimental rearing. J. Exp. Mar. Bio. Ecol. 296, 215-226.
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0022-098 1(03)00322-8


Lambio, K.A., 2017. Growth of Holothuria scabra juveniles in a periphyton-based
ocean nursery system. University of the Philippines.

Lesser, M.P., Carleton, K.L., Bottger, S.A., Barry, T.M., Walker, C.W., 2011. Sea
urchin tube feet are photosensory organs that express a rhabdomeric-like opsin and
PAX6. Proc. R. Soc. B_ Biol. Sci. 278, 3371-3379.
https://doi.org/10.1098/rspb.201 1.0336

Levy, A., Milstein, A., Neori, A., Harpaz, S., Shpigel, M., Guttman, L., 2017. Marine
periphyton biofilters in mariculture effluents: Nutrient uptake and biomass
development. Aquaculture 473, 513-520.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aquaculture.2017.03.018

Lizano, A.M., 2017. Genetic diversity and population genetic structure among
Philippine populations of Stichopus cf. horrens. University of the Philppines.

Mercier, A., Battaglene, S.C., Hamel, J.F., 2000a. Periodic movement, recruitment and
size-related distributon of the sea cucumber Holothuria scabra in Solomon Islands.
Hydrobiologia 440, 81-100.

Mercier, A., Battaglene, S.C., Hamel, J.F., 2000b. Settlement preferences and early
migration of the tropical sea cucumber Holothuria scabra. J. Exp. Mar. Bio. Ecol.
249, 89-110. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0022-098 1(00)00187-8

Mercier, A., Battaglene, S.C., Hamel, J.F., 1999. Daily burrowing cycle and feeding
activity of juvenile sea cucumbers 239, 125-156.

Mercier, A., Ycaza-Hidalgo, R., Hamel, J.-F., 2004. Aquaculture of the Galapagos sea
cucumber, Isostichopus fuscus. Adv. Sea Cucumber Aquac. Manag. FAO Fish.
Tech. Pap. No. 463 347-357.

Mercier, A., Ycaza, R.H., Espinoza, R., Arriaga Haro, V.M., Hamel, J.F., 2012.
Hacthery experience and useful lessons from Isostichopus fuscus in Ecuador and
Mexico, in: Hair, C. a., Pickering, T.D., Mills, D.J. (Eds.), Asia-Pacific Tropical
Seaa Cucumber Aquculture Proceedings of an International Symposium Held in
Noumea, New Caledonia. Ausralian CEntre for International Agricultural
Research, Canberra, pp. 79-90. https://doi.org/10.1152/jn.90958.2008

Miles, C.A., Sionkowska, A., Hulin, S.L., Sims, T.J., Avery, N.C., Bailey, A.J., 2000.
Identification of an intermediate state in the helix-coil degradation of collagen by
ultraviolet light. J. Biol. Chem. 275, 33014-33020.
https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M002346200

Millott, N., 1955. The covering reaction of sea- urchins 508-523.

Palomar-Abesamis, N., Abesamis, R.A., Juinio-Mefiez, M.A., 2017a. Distribution and
microhabitat associations of the juveniles of a high-value sea cucumber, Stichopus
cf. horrens, in northern Philippines. Aquat. Ecol. 51, 17-31.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10452-016-9591-2

Palomar-Abesamis, N., Juinio-Mefiez, M., Slater, M.J., 2018. Macrophyte detritus as
nursery diets for juvenile sea cucumber Stichopus cf. horrens. Aquac. Res. 49,
3614-3623. https://doi.org/10.1111/are.13829

Palomar-Abesamis, N., Juinio-Mefiez, M.A., Slater, M.J., 2017b. Effects of light and
microhabitat on activity pattern and behaviour of wild and hatchery-reared


juveniles of Stichopus cf. horrens. J. Mar. Biol. Assoc. United Kingdom 98, 1703—
1713. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0025315417000972

Purcell, S., 1999. Criteria for release strategies and evaluating the restocking of sea
cucumbers. Adv. sea cucumber Aquac. Manag. 181-191.

Purcell, S., Samyn, Y., Conand, C., 2012. Commercially important sea cucumbers of
the world, FAO Species Catalogue for Fishery Purposes No. 6, FAO Species
Catalogue for Fishery Purposes No. 6.

Raible, F., Tessmar-Raible, K., Arboleda, E., Kaller, T., Bork, P., Arendt, D., Amone,
MLL, 2006. Opsins and clusters of sensory G-protein-coupled receptors in the sea
urchin genome. Dev. Biol. 300, 461-475.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ydbio.2006.08.070

Rier, S.T., Stevenson, R.J., 2002. Effects of light, dissolved organic carbon, and
inorganic nutrients on the relationship between algae and heterotrophic bacteria in
stream periphyton. Hydrobiologia 489, 179-184.
https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1023284821485

Rosenberg, R., Lundberg, L., 2004. Photoperiodic activity pattern in the brittle star
Amphiura filiformis. Mar. Biol. 145, 651-656. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00227-
004-1365-z

Shiell, G.R., Knott, B., 2008. Diurnal observations of sheltering behaviour in the coral
reef sea cucumber Holothuria whitmaei. Fish. Res. 91, 112-117.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fishres.2007.12.010

Sinsona, M.J., Juinio-Mefiez, M.A., 2018. Effects of sediment enrichment with
macroalgae, Sargassum spp., on the behaviour, growth, and survival of juvenile
sandfish, Holothuria scabra. Aquac. Reports 12, 56-63.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aqrep.2018.09.002

Slater, M.J., Jeffs, A.G., 2010. Do benthic sediment characteristics explain the
distribution of juveniles of the deposit-feeding sea cucumber Australostichopus
mollis? J. Sea Res. 64, 241-249. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.seares.2010.03.005

Spyksma, A.J.P., Taylor, R.B., Shears, N.T., 2017. Predation cues rather than resource
availability promote cryptic behaviour in a habitat-forming sea urchin. Oecologia
183, 821-829. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00442-017-3809-4

Terakita, A., 2005. The opsins 6, 1-9.

Ullrich-Liiter, E.M., D’Aniello, S., Amone, M.I., 2013. C-opsin expressing
photoreceptors in echinoderms. Integr. Comp. Biol. 53, 27-38.
https://doi.org/10.1093/icb/ict050

Uthicke, S., Karez, R., 1999. Sediment patch selectivity in tropical sea cucumbers
(Holothurioidea: Aspidochirotida) analysed with multiple choice experiments. J.
Exp. Mar. Bio. Ecol. 236, 69-87. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0022-098 1(98)00190-

Vail, L., 1987. Diel patterns of emergence of crinoids (Echinodermata) from within a
reef at Lizard Island, Great Barrier Reef, Australia. Mar. Biol. 93, 551-560.
https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00392793


Yamaguchi, M., Masuda, R., Yamashita, Y., 2018. Phototaxis, thigmotaxis, geotaxis,
and response to turbulence of sea cucumber Apostichopus japonicus juveniles.
Fish. Sci. 84, 33-39. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12562-017-1147-4

Yang, H., Hamel, J.F., Mercier, A., 2015. The Sea Cucumber Apostichopus japonicus:
History, Biology and Aquaculture.

Yoshida, M., 1962. The effect of light on the shadow reaction of the sea urchin,
Diadema setosum (Leske). J. Exp. Biol. 589-602.

Young, C.M., Chia, F.-S., 1982. Factors Controlling Spatial Distribution of the Sea
Cucumber. Mar. Biol. 69, 195-205.

Zamora, L.N., Jeffs, A.G., 2012. The ability of the deposit-feeding sea cucumber
Australostichopus mollis to use natural variation in the biodeposits beneath mussel
farms. Aquaculture 326-329, 116-122.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j-aquaculture.2011.11.015

Zamora, L.N., Jeffs, A.G., 2011. Feeding, selection, digestion and absorption of the
organic matter from mussel waste by juveniles of the deposit-feeding sea
cucumber, Australostichopus mollis. Aquaculture 317, 223-228.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aquaculture.201 1.04.011

Zhang, L., Feng, Q., Sun, L., Fang, Y., Xu, D., Zhang, T., Yang, H., 2018. Differential
gene expression in the body wall of the sea cucumber (Apostichopus japonicus)
under strong lighting and dark conditions. Acta Oceanol. Sin. 37, 54-66.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s13131-017-1101-4

Zhong, M., Chen, T., Hu, C., Ren, C., 2015. Isolation and Characterization of Collagen
from the Body Wall of Sea Cucumber Stichopus monotuberculatus. J. Food Sci.
80, C671-C679. https://doi.org/10.1111/1750-384 1.12826

Ziegenhorn, M.A., 2016. Best dressed test: a study of the covering behaviour of the
collector urchin Tripneustes gratillaa PLoS One 11, 1-13.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0153581