Nutritional and Functional Composition, In Vitro and In Vivo Anti-Oxidant and Lipid-Lowering Activity and Acute Oral Toxicity of Philippine Duhat [Syzygium cumini (L.) Skeels] Fruit

CARMELA JHOY GARCIA MERCADO

UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES LOS BAÑOS

Doctor of Philosophy in Human Nutrition

JUNE 2022

ABSTRACT

Philippine indigenous berries are known as rich sources of antioxidants that may promote
health and prevent occurrence of diseases. This study investigated the nutritional,
antioxidant, anti-obesity and lipid-lowering properties of freeze-dried duhat [Syzygium
cumini (L.) Skeels] (FDD) fruit using proximate analysis, in vitro assays and in vivo
efficacy using obese diet-induced ICR mice, respectively. Acute toxicity was conducted in
male and female ICR mice following the OECD Guidelines 425 (2008) to evaluate its
safety profile. For the in-vivo efficacy, mice were randomly allocated to five groups fed
with various diets ad libitum for nine weeks as follows: Group 1: normal diet (ND) and
served as the control; Group 2: high-fat diet (HFD), that served as negative control; Group
3: HFD + 10% w/w FDD powder; Group 4: HFD + 20% w/w FDD powder; and Group 5:
HFD + 30% w/w FDD powder. Proximate composition of FDD fruit flesh includes 20.16
± 0.75% moisture content, 2.64 ± 0.06% total crude fiber, 4.50 ± 0.21% crude fat, 7.10 ±
0.20% crude protein and 62.22 + 1.11% carbohydrate. It is a rich source of antioxidants
with a total flavonoid content (TFC) of 0.02 mg QE/g FDD, total phenolic content of 12.52
± 0.02 mg GAE/g FDD and anti-oxidant activity of 96.07 ± 0.86. Result of the in vitro lipid
lowering activity showed that FDD has 15.03% bile acid binding capacity, 43.61%
cholesterol micellar inhibition and 11.09% pancreatic lipase inhibition capacity. Acute
toxicity findings reveal that FDD does not exert acute toxic effects by oral administration
as shown by the histology, hematology and biochemical findings measured at the end of
the treatment, suggesting that oral supplementation of FDD is relatively safe with an
estimated LD₅₀ value of >5000 mg/kg in treated ICR mice. Results of the in vivo study
showed a significant reduction in blood TG by 50% at 30% FDD supplementation (w/w)
and by 30% at 20% FDD supplementation (w/w) (p<0.05). Significant increase up to 45%
in HDL-C in 30% FDD-supplemented group was noted compared to the baseline mean
(week 0) at week 3 and week 6 of supplementation (p<0.05). Meanwhile, no significant
findings were noted in the blood TC levels. The improvement in lipid profile could be
attributed to the nutritional and bioactive compounds found in Philippine duhat. Taken
collectively, this study yielded interesting findings that can be further investigated at the
cellular and molecular levels.

CHAPTER I

INTRODUCTION

The prevalence of overweight and obesity is increasing worldwide. It nearly tripled
between 1975 and 2016 (WHO, 2018) and presently affecting 1.9 billion people globally
(Saltiel and Olefsky, 2017). Although obesity is a global problem, the prevalence of
obesity in developed countries is reported to have slowed in the past few years while the
rate in developing countries continues to increase and might have even tripled in some
developing countries over the past few years (Hossain et al., 2007; Ng ef al., 2014). This
is said to be strongly attributed to growing changes in lifestyle, reduced physical activity,

and availability of modified junk foods (Hossain ef al., 2007; Sena et al., 2018).

In the Philippines, its prevalence has steadily increased from 7.2% to 9.6% from
2015 to 2018, (FNRI-DOST, 2018) affecting various age groups more particularly adults
20 years old and above. The rising concerns on obesity is correlated to the subsequent
increase in the rates of various obesity-related metabolic disorders which are considered
major risk factors of cardiovascular diseases (CVD), the leading causes of mortality
globally (Roth et a/., 2017). This increase in cardiovascular risk depends to a significant

extent on the changes in lipid profiles as observed in obesity.

Obese people tend to develop dyslipidemia. Dyslipidemia associated with obesity

plays a major role in the development of atherosclerosis and CVD (Miller, 2009; Lin er al.,

2018). Dyslipidemia is a blood lipid disorder characterized by abnormal levels of blood
lipids such as increased levels of triglycerides (TG) and low density lipoprotein
cholesterol (LDL-C), and decreased level of high density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C)
(Klop ef al, 2013). In 2008, the World Health Organization (WHO) estimates the
prevalence of dyslipidemia in the Southeast Asia at 30.3% and 36.7% in the Western
Pacific, while higher prevalence was recorded in Europe (53.7%) and in Americas (47.7%)
(Lin et al., 2018). In the Philippines, around one out of two Filipino adults have borderline
to high total cholesterol (TC) levels (47.2%) and borderline to high LDL-C (47.5%), nearly
three fourths (71.0%) had low HDL-Cl and more than one third (38.7%) had borderline to
very high TG level (FNR-DOST, 2015).

The predisposing role of unhealthy lifestyle in obesity is already clear and well-
established. Unhealthy diet characterized by overeating particularly of foods rich in fats
and sugars combined with decline in physical activity results in an imbalance of intake and
expenditure of calories, resulting in excess weight and eventually obesity (Singh ef al.,
2011). Hence, lifestyle modification is necessary to effectively target obesity. Dietary
intervention is recognized as an effective lifestyle strategy to address obesity, dyslipidemia
and other comorbidities. Specifically, intakes of fruits and vegetables have increasingly
been associated with reduced risk of obesity-related diseases including CVDs, cancer and

diabetes mellitus (Netu, 2007; Basu et al., 2010).

Berries are highly recognized among all fruits and vegetables for their distinct
health benefits. In other countries, in vivo studies suggest that supplementation with some

variety of berries such as lingonberry and bilberry, reduced body weight, insulin

resistance, low-grade inflammation and hepatic lipid accumulation in mice fed with a high-

fat diet (Heyman ef al., 2014; Heyman Lindén ef al., 2016).

Syzgium cumini L. locally known as “‘duhat” is one of the Philippines indigenous
berries which are known to contain health-promoting and disease-preventing compounds.
Studies on varieties of ‘““duhat” fruit done abroad revealed that it has very high anthocyanin
content which accounts for its antioxidant and free radical scavenging activity (Swami ef
al., 2012). The anthocyanins rich edible part of S. cumini was comparable with that of
blueberry, blackberry and blackcurrent, whose nutraceutical properties are well
documented, suggesting the potential nutraceutical value of S. cumini (Benherlal &
Arumughan, 2007). In the Philippines, studies on nutritional and health-promoting
properties of berries remain few while published studies on efficacy of duhat are lacking.
This study therefore aims to investigate both the in vitro and in vivo effects of Philippine
Duhat on biomarkers of obesity and dyslipidemia. Some varieties of S. cumini fruit have
been reported to contain high amounts of polyphenols (Santos ef al., 2013; Sowjanya ef

al., 2013).

Objectives of the Study

The general objective of this study is to investigate the effects of Philippine duhat

(Syzgium cumini L.) supplementation on biomarkers of obesity and dyslipidemia.

Specifically, it aims to:

1) characterize the nutritional content in terms of proximate composition, vitamins
A, C and E and functional properties in terms of total phenols and flavonoids of
Philippine duhat;

2) determine its antioxidant and lipid-lowering mechanism of actions using in vitro
assays;

3) assess its acute oral toxicity in terms of hematological, biochemical and
histopathological parameters; and

4) investigate the effects of Philippine duhat supplementation on biomarkers of obesity,

and hyperlipidemia in HFD fed ICR mice.

Significance of the Study

Studies on the health benefits of Philippine duhat, specifically in ameliorating the
biomarkers of obesity and associated metabolic disorders such as dyslipidemia and
hyperglycemia, are not yet explored in the local setting. This research provides scientific
evidence to fill this knowledge gap. The rationale is to find alternative strategies in
combating the increasing prevalence of CVD by ameliorating its risk factors such as

obesity and dyslipidemia.

Scope and Limitations of the Study

The study focused on 1) characterization of freeze-dried Philippine duhat fruit, 2)
in- vitro antioxidant and lipid lowering activity of freeze-dried duhat; 3) acute oral toxicity

evaluation of freeze-dried duhat in mice; and 4) in- vivo evaluation of the effects of freeze-

dried duhat on biomarkers of obesity and associated metabolic disorders such as

hyperglycemia and dyslipidemia in HFD-induced obese mice.

Fully matured duhat (S. cumini) fruit was obtained, preserved and stored until
further use. Freeze drying has been proven to produce high-quality fruit and vegetable
products to maintain their color, flavor and nutritional value. Most of the berry fruits are
generally preserved and consumed using this method (Munzenmayer et al., 2020). Hence,
freeze- dried duhat (FDD) was utilized to perform all the experiments. The characterization
section included the determination of the nutritional contents (proximate analysis, vitamins
A, C and E) and functional properties (total phenols and flavonoids ) of freeze-dried fruit
of Philippine duhat. On the other hand, the in-vitro tests were done to assess the antioxidant
activity and lipid-lowering properties of FDD. DPPH free radical scavenging activity and
TEAC-ABTS assays were used to evaluate the antioxidant activity while pancreatic lipase
inhibition, cholesterol micellar solubility and bile acid binding activity were used for lipid
lowering activity. For the in-vivo study, the ICR strain of mice was used as the animal
model. Plasma lipid profile between mice and men have differences including lack of
cholesteryl ester transfer protein (CETP) causing mice to carry a majority of plasma
cholesterol in HDL fraction (Heyman, 2015). Hence, the cut- off criteria for dyslipidemia
for human was not used for this study. Acute oral toxicity was conducted following the
guidelines set by the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD)
using main test procedure. Meanwhile, in-vivo efficacy testing focused on investigating the
effects of freeze dried duhat supplementation on biomarkers of obesity i.e. weight and

adiposity index and biomarkers of dyslipidemia such as total cholesterol, HDL cholesterol

and triglyceride levels. Induction of obesity and dyslipidemia was done by feeding the mice
with custom high fat (45% FDC) purified rodent diet (Dyets #102629). For the test
samples, freeze dried powdered duhat was mixed with the custom HFD to facilitate ease
of feeding. Ten per cent (10%), 20% and 30% doses of freeze-dried duhat supplementation
were prepared while maintaining the same levels of calories (isocaloric) across treatment
groups. The study is exploratory in nature, thus, the test sample was not be compared to

any drug or compound with established mechanism of action (positive control).

CHAPTER II

REVIEW OF RELATED LITERATURE

Obesity
Definition of Obesity

Obesity is defined as excess body weight for height, but this simple definition belies
an etiologically complex phenotype primarily associated with excess adiposity, or body
fatness, that can manifest metabolically and not just in terms of body size (Hu, 2008).
Excess fat deposition, especially in the abdominal area, is a consequence of energy
imbalance. This energy imbalance results from interaction of several factors such as
increased intake of energy-dense foods, decreased intake of food rich in micronutrients and
bioactive compounds, decreased physical activity. Other contributing factors include
nutritional and hormonal status in early life, genetic, cultural, environmental and economic
factors (Greenberg and Martin, 2006). The most common method of assessment
recommended by the World Health Organization (WHO) is the body mass index (BMI). It
correlates closely with the total body fat in relation to height and weight. A BMI of 25 to
30 kg/m? and BMI >30 kg/m’ is classified as overweight and obese, respectively (PASOO,
nd). Other methods including waist circumference (WC) and central and peripheral fat
mass, have also been used to classify obesity (Engin, 2017). Excess visceral fat, also

referred to as central obesity, has a stronger association with cardiovascular disease than

subcutaneous fat with is deposited mainly around the hips and buttocks. Central obesity
produces a characteristic body shape which resembles an apple and thus is also referred to
as “apple shaped” obesity as opposed to ‘“‘pear shaped” obesity in which fat is deposited on

the hips (Segula, 2014).

Prevalence of Obesity

In 2014, more than 2.1 billion people, nearly 30% of the global population, were
overweight or obese and 5% of the deaths worldwide were attributable to obesity. In 2016,
39% men and 39% of women aged 18+ were overweight (BMI > 25 kg/m2) and 11% of
men and 15% of women were obese (BMI 230 kg/m2). Thus, nearly 2 billion adults
worldwide were overweight and, of these, more than half a billion were obese. Both
overweight and obesity have shown a marked increase over the past four decades. Obesity
rates in men have risen from around 3% in 1975 and in women from just over 6% in 1975
while overweight has risen over this same time period from 20% in men and from just
under 23% in women (WHO, 2018).

In the Philippines, there is also an increasing trend in the prevalence of overweight
and obesity from 2003 to 2015 among various population groups, more especially among
adult 20 years and above. In the recent National Nutrition Survey, there was a significant
increase in the prevalence of overweight and obesity among adolescents (10-19 y/o) from
2015 to 2018. The prevalence was increased from 9.2% to 11.6% (FNRI-DOST, 2018).
Also, a significant increase in the prevalence of overweight and obesity was also marked

among adult Filipinos (20-59 y/o) from 2015 to 2018. In 2015, the prevalence of

overweight and obesity were 24.7% and 7.2% respectively. In 2018, it went up to 28.8%
and 9.6% correspondingly. On the other hand, trends in the prevalence of high WC among

adults also increased in 2018 in both male and female (FNRI, DOST, 2018)

Assessment and Classification of Obesity

Obesity can be assessed in several ways. Each method has advantages and
disadvantages, and the appropriateness and scientific acceptability of each method will
depend on the situation (Han ef al., 2006). It is known that the most accurate means of
determining excess body fat and its distribution is CT scan or magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI), however, BMI has traditionally been used to identify individuals who are most
likely to be overweight or obese. It is calculated by dividing the weight (in kilograms) by
the height (in meters) squared. Generally, a high value indicates excessive body fat and

consistently relates to increased health risks and mortality (Han ef al., 2006).

Table 1. Classification of body fatness based on body mass index (BMI) (WHO, 2018).

BMI CLASSIFICATION
<18.5 Underweight

18.5- 24.9 Healthy

25-29.9 Overweight

30-39.9 Obese

>40 Morbidly Obese


Waist circumference was developed initially as a simpler measure and a potentially
better indicator of health risk than BMI that is used in health promotion. The amount of
intraperitoneal or visceral fat has been shown to be directly related to the morbidity and
mortality of fatness. The level of health risk associated with WC is presented in Table 2

(Han et al., 2006).

Table 2. Levels of health risk associated with waist circumference (cm).

Level Men Women Health Risk*
Below action level | <94 <80 Low

Action Levels 1 to2 94-101.9 80-87.9 Increased
Action Level 2 2102 288 High

*Risk for type 2 diabetes, coronary heart disease or hypertension (Han, Sattar, & Lean,
2006)

Although WC and BMI are interrelated, the former provides an independent
prediction of risk over and above that of BMI. The WC measurement is particularly useful
in patients who are categorized as normal or overweight in terms of BMI. For individuals
with a BMI of > 35, WC adds little to the predictive power of the disease risk classification
of BMI (National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, 2000). Table 3 incorporates both BMI
and WC in the classification of overweight and obesity and provides an indication of
relative disease risk. Therefore, it is recommended that the measurement of the WC be
utilized clinically for the calculation of added risk. A high WC is associated with an

increased risk for type 2 diabetes mellitus, dyslipidemia, hypertension, and CVD in patients


with a BMI between 25 and 34.9 kg/m2 (National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, 2000

and PASOO, n.d.).

Table 3. Classification of overweight and obesity by BMI, waist circumference and
associated disease risk.

Disease Risk*

(Relative to Normal Weight and Waist
Circumference)

BMI Obesity
Class

Underweight <18.5
Healthy 18.5- 24.9
Overweight 25-29.9 I
Obese 30-39.9 8
Morbidly 240 ll
Obese

Men < 40in (<102
cm)

Women < 35in (<
88cm)

Increased
High
Very High

Extremely High

Men >40in (>102

cm)

Women >35in
(>88 cm)

High
Very High
Very High

Extremely
High

*Disease Risk for type 2 diabetes, coronary heart disease or hypertension

Source: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (adapted from “Preventing and
Managing the Global Epidemic of Obesity Report of the World Health Organization
Consultation of Obesity”, WHO, Geneva, June 1997”


Factors influencing the Development of Obesity

Obesity is a complex, multifactorial health issue with genetic, behavioral,
socioeconomic, and environmental origins (Adela and Hu, 2014). The abundance of stored
fat is required for survival during nutritionally deprived states such as starvation. However,
in times of prolonged abundance of food, very efficient fat storage results in the excessive
storage of fat, eventually resulting in obesity (Redinger, 2007).

Genetics/Heredity Factor. There is no single theory that can explain all the
manifestations of obesity or which consistently apply to all persons. The level of
heritability is the fraction of population variation in a trait i.e. BMI that can be explained
by genetic transmission. Studies, through application of complex analytical techniques,
have led to the conclusion that the true heritability of BMI in large sample sizes was likely
to be in the range 25-40%, while similar genetic epidemiological research has shown that
the profile of fat distribution was also characterized by a significant heritability level of the

order of about 50% of the total human variation (WHO, 2000).

Endocrine and Metabolic Factors. Appetite and food intake food reward, or
addiction are controlled by many peripheral hormones that are acting in the central nervous
system (CNS). Hunger and satiety signals from adipose tissue (leptin), the pancreas
(insulin), and the gastrointestinal tract (cholecystokinin, CCK), glucagon-like peptide-|
(GLP-1), peptide YY3-36 (PY Y3-36), and ghrelin are involved in relaying information
about energy status through the neural hormonal gut-brain axis primarily targeting the

hypothalamus and brainstem, and may directly or indirectly interact with the midbrain


dopaminergic (DA) pathways to impact feeding (Zhang e/ al., 2014). Figure | illustrates
the role of peptides secreted by the gut and adipose tissue in the control of energy balance

(Ahima, 2008).

Cortex and limbic areas

Figure | . Schematic illustration of peptides secreted by the gut adipose tissue that control
energy balance (Ahima, 2008).

Leptin. Leptin, a polypeptide hormone produced by adipocytes in proportion to
their TG content, links changes in body energy (fat) stores to adaptive responses in the

central control of energy balance. It decreases food intake while increasing energy


expenditure by binding to and activating the long form of its receptor (LEPR-B) in the
brain (Myers ef al., 2010). Once bound to its central receptor, leptin down-regulates
appetite-stimulating neuropeptides like neuropeptide Y (NP) and agouti-related peptide
(AgRP). Genetic defects in leptin and leptin receptors result in severe early onset obesity
in children. Leptin concentration in the blood is elevated with obesity, promoting a leptin
resistance that renders the elevated leptin futile in curbing appetite and obesity (Zhang ef
al., 2014). When leptin cannot or does not signal the hypothalamus, the brain thinks it is
starving. Sympathetic tone drops, leading to reduced energy expenditure, while vagal tone
increases, leading to increased appetite and caloric intake, thereby perpetuating the obese

state (Lustig, 2008).

It was demonstrated that low leptin levels during weight loss increase the activity
of brain areas involved in the decision-making and reward aspects of eating behavior. Thus,
preventing the decline of leptin levels during weight loss by hormone replacement may be
a means of over-riding the homeostatic and behavioral tendencies toward energy

conservation and weight regain during dieting (Ahima, 2008).

Insulin. The primary function of insulin is to reduce blood glucose levels by
inducing blood glucose uptake in insulin-sensitive tissue such as skeletal muscle, fat and
heart. In addition, insulin stimulates synthesis of fatty acids and glycogen, promotes
mitochondrial function, improves microcirculation and induces cell proliferation (Ye,
2007). Insulin resistance occurs when the insulin-sensitive tissue loss response to insulin.

In the insulin sensitivity assays, insulin resistance has following characteristics:


hyperinsulinemia and hyperglycemia in fasting condition, increased glycosylated
hemoglobin (HbAIc), postprandial hyperglycemia, hyperlipidemia, impaired glucose
tolerance, impaired insulin tolerance, decreased glucose infusion rate, increased hepatic
glucose production, loss of first phase secretion of insulin, hypoadiponectinemia, and

increased inflammatory markers in plasma (Jianping, 2014).

Like leptin, insulin is capable of modulating the DA pathway and associated eating
behaviors. Leptin and insulin resistance in the brain affects the DA pathways resulting in
heightened intake of palatable foods as compared to leptin- and insulin-sensitive conditions

in order to generate a sufficient reward response (Figlewicz et al., 2006).

Ghrelin. Ghrelin is a gastrointestinal peptide hormone that is mainly produced in
the stomach. Ghrelin plays an important role in the regulation of energy balance since it
has proven orexigenic effects that lead to adipogenesis and body weight gain. Apart from
that, it has been shown that ghrelin possesses regulatory roles in many organs and systems
(Kirchner ef al., 2012). Ghrelin signaling has been recognized as a key regulator of obesity,
insulin resistance and diabetes (Pradhan ef al., 2013). Studies have shown that central
ghrelin administration in rodents induces food intake as potently as NPY (Tschop ef ai.,
2000). In humans, serum ghrelin levels are lower in obese individuals compared to normal
weight individuals and characteristically increases with attenuation of obesity,
demonstrating a negative correlation with high BMIs (Zhang ef al., 2014). The lower levels

of ghrelin in obese subjects may reflect a compensatory adaptation mechanism that aims


to reduce a hunger stimulus and might suggest that ghrelin itself is not the key driver of

obesity (Kirchner e/ a/., 2012).

Peptide Tyrosine Tyrosine YY (PYY). PYY is a short, 36-amino acid peptide
secreted in the ileum and colon in response to feeding. PYY is released from the L-cells in
the distal segment of the small gut after food ingestion. It reduces the rate of intestinal
motility and gallbladder and gastric emptying and therefore decreases appetite and
augments satiety (Zhang ef al., 2014). Two endogenous forms, PYY 1-36 and PY Y3-36,
are released postprandially into the circulation. In the fasted state, PY Y 1-36 predominates
in the circulation, whereas post-prandially, PYY3-36 is the major circulating form.
Following a meal, circulating levels of PYY3-36 rise within 15 minutes, peak at
approximately 90 minutes and remain elevated for up to six (6) hours (De Silva & Bloom,
2012). Research show that the effects of peripherally administered PY Y3—36 decreased
body weight in animal models of obesity, and decreased glycemic indices in an animal

model of type II diabetes mellitus (Pittner e¢ al., 2004).

In humans, obese people secrete less PYY than non-obese people, thus, PYY
replacement may be used to treat overweight and obesity (Alvarez ef al., 2002). Studies by
Batterham ef al. (2007) suggest that administration of PY Y3-36 to rodents and humans
leads to marked inhibition of food intake. It was reported that there was a 36% reduction
in ad libitum food intake at meal served 2 hours after 90 minute intravenous infusion of
PY Y3-36 compared with the placebo group and 33% reduction in 24 hour food intake

following 90 minute intravenous infusion of PY Y3-36 (Batterham ef a/., 2002). Further


studies demonstrated that aside from reduced food intake, intravenous infusion of PY Y3-
36 to humans modulated activity in the hypothalamus and orbitofrontal cortex (OFC) , as
assessed by MRI (Batterham ef al., 2007). It was hypothesized that the presence of PY Y3-
36 switches regulation of food intake from a homeostatic brain region (hypothalamus) to a

hedonic region (OFC) (De Silva & Bloom, 2012) .

Glucagon and Glucagon-Like Peptide 1 (GLP-1).Glucagon is a peptide hormone
secreted by the a-cells of pancreatic islets. On one hand, it raises blood glucose levels by
stimulating glycogenolysis and gluconeogenesis; on the other hand, it reduces food intake.
GLP-1 is an incretin peptide that augments glucose-stimulated insulin secretion, reduces

secretion of glucagon, and delays gastric emptying (Hussain & Bloom, 2011).

Morbidities Related to Obesity

Collecting evidence indicates that obesity is closely associated with an increased
risk of metabolic diseases such as insulin resistance, type 2 diabetes mellitus, dyslipidemia
and non-alcoholic fatty liver disease. Obesity results from an imbalance between food
intake and energy expenditure, which leads to an excessive accumulation of adipose tissue
(Jung & Choi, 2014).The Adipose tissue plays a vital role in the development of co-
morbidities of obesity. It is an active endocrine organ, secreting several hormones called
adipokines that act locally and systemically. Adipose tissue has a major role in several
physiological functions, such as in the regulation of food intake and body weight, insulin
sensitivity, inflammation, coagulation, or vascular function. Moreover, it is populated by

different cell types, such as mature adipocytes, preadipocytes, vascular cells, and


macrophages (Dias et al., 2018). Obesity is an exaggeration of normal adiposity and is a

central player in the pathophysiology of diabetes mellitus, insulin resistance, dyslipidemia,

hypertension, and atherosclerosis, largely due to its secretion of excessive adipokines

(Figure 2) (Redinger, 2007).

cD

.

inflammation
'

insutin resistance’
’

Hyperglycemia’
OM-2

* Endothelial dysfunction

* Atheroma formation
’

Inflammatory Adipokines

FFA
FFA TNF «<i, 1-6 .
Increased
WAT F
Lipotysis (TG)
oy?
33 * Sympathetic NS
A
er
* Renin
* | + Angiotensinogen
e + Angiotensin
* Plaque Acute phase
reactants
+ Thrombosis Macrophage PAI
infiltration
’
'
immune dysfunction
NF-«B

T-cell proliferation

.
» Atherosclerosis

Lipotoxicity

IRS dysfunction

isiet cell dysfunction

TG-FFA

* — Endothelial
dysfunction

* Increased inflammation
+ Coagulationthrombosis
* Macrophage SMC proliferation

Result]

Insulin resistance’
Glucose transport
+ Hyperglycemia
* Hyperinsulinemia
8 OM-2
Oyslipidemia*

+ Hypertension

Atherosclerotic
plaque

» all constitute «

Metabolic syndrome

Figure 2. Role of lipotoxicity and inflammation on obesity (Redinger, 2007).

Metabolic Syndrome

Metabolic syndrome (MS) can be considered as a combination of disorders which,

when occurring together, increase the risk of developing cardiovascular disease and

diabetes (Michalakis et al., 2013). According to the National Cholesterol Education


Program’s Adult Treatment Panel III (NCEP: ATP III), MS is defined when an individual
has any three of the following five features: (i) WC above 40 inches for men and >35 inches
for women, (ii) TG above 150mg/dl, (iii) HDL-C > 40mg/dl for men and >50mg/dl for

women, (iv) Blood pressure above 130/85 mmHg, and (v) Fasting glucose above 100mg/dl.

Obesity, especially abdominal obesity, is one of the predominant underlying risk
factors for metabolic syndrome and it was suggested that chronic inflammation in adipose
tissue may play a critical role in the development of obesity-related metabolic dysfunction

(Jung & Choi, 2014).

Low-grade Inflammation

Plasma free fatty acids (FFA) are elevated in obese people as a consequence of an
increased fatty acid release from adipose tissue and a reduction in plasma FFA clearance.
The increase in FFA and obesity-induced inflammation play a crucial role in the
development of insulin resistance (Klop ef al., 2013). A bioactive substance called
“adipokines” is also generated during adipose tissue accumulation in obesity. Many of the
adipokines are involved in energy homeostasis and inflammation, including chemokines
and cytokines. The adipocyte is integral to the development of obesity-induced
inflammation by increasing secretion of various pro-inflammatory chemokines and

cytokines (Jung & Choi, 2014).

Life-style-induced chronic inflammation also referred to as ‘low-grade

inflammation’, play an important role in the development of metabolic disorders. There is


an increased level of circulating cytokines and acute-phase proteins, such as tumor necrosis
factor-a (TNF-a), plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1), C-reactive protein (CRP) and
serum-amyloid A (SAA) in obese state. In contrast, weight loss and healthy eating patterns

are associated with lower concentrations of inflammatory markers (Heyman, 2015).
Impaired Glucose Tolerance and Diabetes Mellitus

Obesity is strongly correlated with development of insulin resistance, a condition
in which cells fail to adequately respond to the hormone insulin. In the normal state,
glucose homeostasis is precisely controlled by target tissues such as fat, liver and muscle
adjusting metabolic flux to maintain plasma glucose levels within an appropriate range. In
insulin resistance, the pancreatic B-cells have to secrete more insulin to achieve the same
glucose lowering effect. If or when the B-cells no longer are able to produce the required
amounts of insulin, blood glucose levels rise and overt type 2 diabetes mellitus develops
(Gonzales ef al., 2009). The mechanisms linking overnutrition and obesity to insulin
resistance are not fully understood, however several aspects leading to impaired insulin
signaling have been explored, including elevated circulating non-esterified fatty acids,
ectopic fat accumulation, intracellular lipid metabolites and activation of intracellular stress
response pathways. On the molecular level, insulin desensitizing events may result in
increased serine phosphorylation of insulin receptor substrate (IRS), which attenuates the
insulin signaling cascade (Heyman, 2015). The development of insulin resistance is also
related to lipotoxicity as a result of excessive production of FFA and adipokines (Redinger,

2007).


The association of obesity with diabetes mellitus has been shown in several studies.
In one of the biggest cohort studies, in which 84,941 female nurses were followed up for
16 years, there were 3,300 new cases of diabetes mellitus. Importantly, the study revealed
that overweight or obesity was the main predictor of type 2 diabetes mellitus (Frank ef al.,

2001).

Dyslipidemia

Obesity and dyslipidemia are two main features of MS. Dyslipidemia refers to a
range of lipid profile disorders, resulting from quantitative (higher or lower lipid and/or
lipoprotein levels) or qualitative modifications (structural lipoprotein changes) and is a
primary major risk factor for CVD (Dias ef al., 2018). Evidence suggests that insulin
resistance is the most probable link between obesity and obesity-associated metabolic
dyslipidemia (Klop ef al., 2013). According to Magkos ef al. (2010) insulin resistance and
metabolic dyslipidemia are associated with adiposopathy. Adiposopathy is characterized
by several structural and functional changes in adipose tissue which have detrimental
effects on adipocyte intracellular structure, leading to endoplasmic reticulum stress and
dysfunction of mitochondria (Pagliassotti, 2016). Moreover, as previously described,
changed adipocytes increases lipolysis and release of FFAs into the circulation. Increased
FFAs concentration provokes lipotoxicity, as another mechanism of obesity-related insulin

resistance in non-adipose tissue (Boden, 2002).

According to Klop ef al. (2013), the dyslipidemia in obesity is also associated with

hypertriglyceridemia in part due to increased FFA fluxes to the liver, which leads to hepatic


accumulation of TG. This leads to an increased hepatic synthesis of large very low-density
lipoproteins (VLDL) 1, which hampers the lipolysis of chylomicrons due to competition
mainly at the level of lipoprotein lipase (LPL) with increased remnant TG being transported
to the liver. Lipolysis is further impaired in obesity by reduced mRNA expression levels
of LPL in adipose tissue and reduced LPL activity in skeletal muscle. Hypertriglyceridemia
further induces an increased exchange of cholesterol esters (CE) and TG between VLDL
and HDL and LDL) by cholesterylester-transfer-protein (CETP). This leads to decreased
HDL-C concentrations and a reduction in TG content in LDL. In addition, hepatic lipase
(HL) removes TG and phospholipids from LDL for the final formation of TG-depleted

small dense LDL (Figure 3) (Klop et a/., 2013).

Likewise, VLDL clearance in plasma is dependent on the rate of hepatic synthesis
and catabolism by LPL, an enzyme which is also involved in formation of HDL. In obesity,
insulin resistance is associated with increased hepatic synthesis of VLDL and impaired

lipoprotein lipase (Segula, 2014).

Apo B Sy 4 i
TG = ail HOLA
bo ie “
cranes sa),
Lot -
ee

y 4

ra Ee al fe

P PF.

Figure 3. Role of increased free fatty acids during obese state in the development of
dyslipidemia (Klop ef a/., 2013).


Obesity Treatment and Management

Obesity is a complex disorder with multiple interacting contributory factors that
include genetic, biologic, behavioral, environmental, as well as socioeconomic elements.
Drastic weight reduction is not encouraged and management should be sought for, because
reducing weight is the only way to reduce the ill-effects of too much weight, as well as, to
improve the quality of life of the obese person. This section discusses the current lifestyle
modifications, pharmacological treatment, and surgical options for the management of

obesity and the benefits, limitations, and risks of each.
Lifestyle Interventions

Sedentary lifestyle and excessive calorie intake promote weight gain which may
lead to obesity. Lifestyle interventions such as food intake restriction, exercise, and
behavior modification form the cornerstone of obesity management. Weight gain or loss is
directly related to the difference in energy intake and energy expenditure. Lifestyle
interventions aim to increase the energy deficit and thereby promote weight loss. Such
interventions continue to be the most successful nonsurgical treatment of obesity (Hussain

& Bloom, 2011).

Aggressive lifestyle modification has been proven to be an effective and safe
intervention both for the prevention and treatment of obesity and its attendant
comorbidities. Many of the noncommunicable diseases (NCD), such as diabetes mellitus,

hypertension and CVD, can be treated or prevented by lifestyle modification. However,


lifestyle modification is associated with noncompliance, recidivism and behavior-related

problems (Jasul, 2011).

Diet Therapy

There are a number of conventional hypocaloric diets that maintain energy intake
greater than 800 kcal/day but below daily energy expenditure requirements and
unconventional diets, such as very-low-calorie ( < 800 kcal/day) and fad diets (Freedman
et al., 2001). Table 4 presents the summary of more widely prescribed diets (Hussain &

Bloom, 2011).

Table 4. Diet Considerations in Weight Management

Diet Main Features of the Diet

Balanced low-calorie diets | Eliminate high-fat and sugar-containing foods and
beverages with adequate carbohydrate, protein, and
essential fatty acid intake.

Portion-controlled diets Structured calorie-controlled meal plan via packaged,
portioned, vitamin- and mineral- fortified meal
replacements.

Low-fat diets Limits overall calorie consumption from energy-dense

fats (20%-25% energy from fats).

Low-carbohydrate diets Limits carbohydrate consumption with protein and
monounsaturated fats as main constituents.



Mediterranean diet Vegetables, fruits, legumes, and grains with a moderate
consumption of dairy products and low consumption of
meat products.

Very-low-calorie and Very-low-calorie (200-800 kcal/day) and starvation
starvation diets (200 kcal/day) diet
Physical Activity

Physical activity of any form can help protect against the development of obesity
and has beneficial effects on metabolism and body composition. However, as a single
treatment for obesity, exercise therapy has been shown to be ineffective (Ross ef al., 2000;
Slentz ef al., 2004). Similarly, exercise therapy in combination with dietary therapy has not
been shown to be superior to dietary therapy alone. The main established benefit of exercise
in the management of obesity is the maintenance of weight loss after weight reduction
(Jakicic, 2008). The Philippine Association for the Study of Overweight and Obesity
(PASOO) recommends aerobic exercise programs, formal or functional. Table 5 presents

the guidelines provided by PASOO (n.d.).

Table 5. Exercise guidelines for weight management.
General Guidelines For Weight Management
a. Medical clearance should be obtained for those above 40 years as well as those below

40 years with known risk factors which could compromise health. A graded exercise
test should be included.


b. Sessions should begin and end with 5-10 minutes of light aerobic/flexibility
activities.

c. Aerobic exercises should be performed at least three times a week and once during
weekends.

d. The duration of exercise should be that which would expend at least 300 kcal per
session (average of 30-60 minutes/session.)

e. Maximum oxygen consumption should be 40-80%, which is equivalent to about 60-
90% of the maximum heart rate. (220 - age)

f. weave more physical activity into daily routines - stairs instead of elevators, walk
instead of ride to work, etc.

g. Chronic strenuous exercises should be done with caution. Recent studies suggest a
suppression of the immune system brought about by the decrease in the natural killer
cells.

Behavior Modification


Behavioral therapy aims to change these lifelong habits that promoted weight gain

into healthy eating and activity patterns that promote and maintain weight loss, and seeks

to provide the necessary support and motivation for obese patients to adhere to their weight

loss program (Hussain & Bloom, 2011). Moreover, behavioral approaches to obesity

should help patients make lifelong changes in diet and exercise behaviors. Interventions

which focus on decreasing sedentary activities, rather than increasing physical activity

maybe a way for obese persons to adhere to prescribed exercise programs (PASOO, n.d.).

Table 6. Behavioral therapy strategies.


Strategies for Behavioral
Therapy

Self-monitoring

Stimulus control

Goal setting

Behavioral contracting and
reinforcement

Nutritional education

Eating slowly

Increasing physical activity

Social support
Cognitive restructuring

Problem solving and
assertiveness

Source: (Hussain & Bloom, 2011)

Activities involved

Food diaries and activity records

Control over environmental triggers for eating and
eliminating factors that promote overeating,
including stressors

Setting realistic weight loss goals

Providing incentives for weight loss and rewarding
successful outcomes

Dietary counseling and promoting healthy eating

Slowing the process of eating to allow satiety signals
to prevent overeating

Encouraging exercise and promoting physical
activity in daily routines

Inclusion of family members to help reinforce goals
Positive thinking

Coping with situations that promote food intake


Drug Therapy

The American College of Physicians’ guidelines for the management of obesity in
primary care recommend that pharmacotherapy be considered for individuals with a BMI
of 30 kg/m2 who have failed to achieve weight loss goals through diet and exercise alone
(Snow ef al., 2005). The drug intake should be an adjunct to diet, exercise and behavior
modification and not the primary means to weight reduction. The characteristics of an ideal
weight loss drug are orally active, few or no side effects, dose-dependent reduction in body
fat, reduces visceral fat, inexpensive, long-acting and non-toxic (PASOO, n.d.). Table 7
presents the common FDA-approved Pharmacotherapy for the Short-term and Long-term
Management of obesity. It also shows all other several agents that promote weight loss for
patients requiring treatment for type 2 diabetes mellitus , seizure disorders, or depression

(Hussain & Bloom, 2011).

Table 7. Pharmacotherapy for the short-term, long-term and for obesity related conditions*

Agent/ Drug Description
Long Term
Orlistat A pancreatic lipase inhibitor that is taken as a tablet with meals

and results in reduced fat absorption by the digestive tract,
leading to increased fecal fat excretion. The reduction of ingested
fat absorption is dose dependent. At a maximal dose of 120 mg 3
times per day, up to 30% of ingested fat is excreted.

Short Term



Phentermine

Diethylpropion

T2DM Medication

Metformin

GIP-1 receptor
antagonists

Pramlintide

Anticonvulsant
Medications

Topiramate

Zonisamide

Antidepressants

An adrenergic reuptake inhibitor with both central nervous
system (CNS) and peripheral effects as a de facto adrenergic
agonist. It promotes weight loss by inhibiting food intake and
increasing resting energy expenditure (Bray et al., 2007).

An orally administered anorectic agent which, like phentermine,
is an adrenergic agonist and schedule IV drug in the United
States.

A biguanide that is currently advocated by the American
Diabetes Association as initial monotherapy for type 2 diabetes
mellitus. Metformin is a useful agent in the treatment of
overweight patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus as it results in
a mild but significant weight loss or prevention of weight gain.

An incretin peptide that augments glucose-stimulated insulin
secretion, reduces secretion of glucagon, and delays gastric

emptying.

Pramlintide is a synthetic analog of amylin (ie, islet amyloid
polypeptide). Amylin is a peptide hormone co-secreted by B-cells
along with insulin; its effects include slowing gastric emptying.
promoting satiety, and reducing post- prandial glucagon
secretion. It has been shown to improve glucose homeostasis in
both Type | and type 2 diabetes mellitus.

An anticonvulsant medication that is also approved for the
treatment of migraine. Side effects includes metabolic acidosis,
thus, safety and efficacy trials are needed before recommending
this agent for the primary indication of obesity.

Zonisamide is an anticonvulsant with serotonergic and dopa-
minergic agonist activity. Weight loss with zonisamide was
noted during clinical trials for its use in epilepsy.


Fluoxetine and Fluoxetine and sertraline are selective serotonin reuptake

Sertraline inhibitors (SSRIs) used in the treatment of depression. A meta-
analysis demonstrated that both agents may promote short-term
weight loss (0.45 to 0.91 kg for sertraline and -0.4 to 14.5 kg for
fluoxetine).

Bupropion An atypical antidepressant and smoking cessation aid. It acts
primarily as a dopamine reuptake inhibitor,but is also an
antagonist of norepinephrine and a3f4-nicotinic receptor
antagonist. Bupropion produced a weight loss of up to 10.1% of
initial body weight compared with 5% with placebo during a 24-
week trial, with increased maintenance of lost weight at 48 weeks

Source: (Hussain & Bloom, 2011)

Surgical Therapy

Bariatric surgery is indicated for obese patients with a BMI of 40 kg/m?,
particularly when obesity-exacerbated health conditions are present. There are three basic
types of surgical procedures which vary in complexity and efficacy (Hussain & Bloom,
2011). These include the vertical sleeve gastrectomy (VSG), Roux-en-Y gastric bypass
(RYGB), and adjustable gastric banding (AGB). The VSG is the most popular bariatric
operation worldwide and is estimated to account for nearly 50% of all operations
(Angrisani, 2014). VSG is performed by using a cutting/sealing tissue stapler to create a
long stomach tube that resembles a “sleeve”, irreversibly removing the greater curvature
of the stomach (Choi ef a/., 2014). Studies typically report a weight loss of between 50%

and 60% of excess body weight (Peteril et a/., 2018; Salminen ef al., 2018).

The second most prevalent bariatric operation worldwide is the RYGB. Surgically,

RYGB is technically more challenging, as it involves creating a small stomach pouch


(typically about 30 mL) that is connected to an end of the more distal small intestine (that
is, jejunum), which creates a “Roux” limb (about 100-150 cm). This Roux limb is
sometimes referred to as the alimentary limb, the limb by which foodstuffs travel after
transit through the stomach pouch (Albaugh & Abumrad, 2018). In terms of weight loss,
studies have demonstrated that weight loss of RYGB is similar to VSG, reaching about 50-

60% of excess body weight loss (Peteril et a/., 2018; Salminen ef al., 2018).

Lastly, AGB involves placing an externally compressive device on the upper
portion of the stomach, which can be inflated or deflated with a subcutaneous port,
permitting adjustment of the degree of gastric compression to limit stomach distention and
food intake. The perioperative complications associated with AGB are also rare (<1%),
however, the lack of efficacy and the advent of newer and more effective options in the
surgical armamentarium have led to increasingly fewer individuals choosing AGB
(Albaugh & Abumrad, 2018). The weight loss response with AGB is highly variable, and

prospective studies show, on average, a body weight loss of about 20% (Dixon ef a/., 2008)

Philippine Duhat [Syzygium cumini (L.)

Syzygium cumini is an evergreen tree that grows up to 80 feet tall. It has grayish
white stems with coarse and discolored lower bark. The leaves are simple, opposite, elliptic
to oblong, smooth, glossy, and somewhat leathery. The midrib of the leaves is prominent
and yellowish (Bandiola et al., 2017). Syzygium cumini is locally known as Philippine
duhat. It is characterized as a tropical fruit tree, native to the Philippines and also found

mostly in India, Indonesia, and throughout other Southeast Asian countries (Hilario, 2018).


The botanical description of S. cumini is presented in Table 8. The fruits are 1-
seeded berry, ovoid in shape with length about 2 cm, dark purple red in color with white to
lavender flesh (Sharma ef al., 2012). The taste has a combination of sweet, mildly sour,
and astringent flavor which also tends to color the tongue purple (Ayyanar & Subash-Babu,

2012).

: LEAVES

Figure 4. Philippine duhat [Syzygium cumini (L.) Skeels]

Table 8. Botanical description of [Syzygium cumini (L.) Skeels].

Feature Description

Habitat It is widely cultivated in Haryana as well as the rest of the Indo-
Gangetic plains in India. West Indies, West Africa and some
subtropical regions including Florida, California, Algeria, and Israel

Appearance — S. cumini may reach 30 m tall, broad crown up to 11 m in diameter and
a trunk diameter of 0.6-0.9 m


Used parts Dried fruits, fresh fruit, seed, leaves, root bark, flowers

Leaves Turpentine smell, and are opposite, 5-25 cm long, 2.5-10 cm wide,
oblong-oval or elliptic, blunt or tapering to a point at the apex; pinkish
when young, becoming leathery, glossy, dark-green above, lighter
beneath, with a conspicuous, yellowish midrib when mature

Fruits appear in clusters of just a few or 10-40, are round or oblong, often
curved, 1.25-5 cm long, turning from green to light-magenta, then
dark-purple or nearly black, although a white-fruited form has been
reported in Indonesia

Fruit is usually astringent, sometimes unpalatably so, and the flavour
varies from acid to fairly sweet

Pulp is purple or white, very juicy, and normally encloses a single,
oblong, green or brown seed, up to 4 cm long, though some fruits have
2-5 seeds tightly compressed within a leathery coat, and some are
seedless

Flowers Fragrant and appear in clusters 2.5-10 cm long, each being 1.25 cm
wide and 2.5 cm long, with a funnel-shaped calyx and 4-5 united petals,
white at first, becoming rose- pink, shedding rapidly to leave only the
numerous stamens

Seeds 2-5 seeds tightly compressed within a leathery coat

Barks Rough, cracked, flaking and discolored on the lower part of the trunk,
becoming smooth and light-grey higher up

Flowering Start flowering from March to April. The fruits develop by May or June
and fruiting and resemble large berries

Source: Bijauliya ef al., 2018
Nutritional Properties

The proximate composition per 100g edible portion of duhat is shown in Table 9

(FNRI-DOST, 2019) while the chemical composition of anatomical parts of fresh Jamun


fruit is shown in Table 10. The fresh pulp (JP) had the highest moisture content, (850.0 +
40.0 g kg—1) whereas seed coat recorded the lowest (100.0 + 20.0 g kg—1). In terms of
quantity, bulk of the fruit parts was composed of starch, soluble sugars, fiber and protein
with negligible amount of fat. Alcohol extracted most of the soluble sugars and minerals
present in the fruit parts, the alcohol extract therefore was enriched with these constituents
in terms of quantity. The residue obtained after alcohol extraction contained mostly fiber

and fatty matter (Benherlal & Arumughan, 2007).

Table 9. Food composition per 100 g edible portion of duhat fruit.

Composition Content
Water (g) 82.2
Energy, calculated (kcal) 71
Protein (g) 0.8
Total Fat (g) 0.4
Carbohydrate, total (g) 16
Crude Fiber 0.3
Ash, total (g) 0.6

Table 10. The chemical composition of fruit parts, their ethanol extract and residue
(Benherlal & Arumughan, 2007).


Sampe — Masture’ TEM Prarein® TESC Crude fore* Starr Asn’

° 630.0220 "6020 66.0=60 400.0 = 33.0 702130 380220 435208
hee Ss t 1302025 © 820.0290 NO - 400235
sid 5 0260 100275 1380270 200220 B7202230 = 8025
v4 470020 3326. 60204 1200280 26220 600=BI Woz".
AEE = Tr B0=05 = NN = 10.0 ND - Weel
AK = so20é 78.0222 2010-65 aia. 61602155 = 18 tte
uC M0220 50207 = 180.050 = 2700=70 200-60 4002150 250207
SCEE S Tr 90203 700 13.0 ND S 16.9208
RSC S 47206 = 1380204 69.0213 460250 60302650 dords

All results are given as gkg ‘. * Fresh nasis: ° dry basis,

JP. Jamun puip; PEE, puip ethanol extract. AP, residual pulp; JK, Jamun kemel; KEE, kemel ethanol extract; RK, residual keme!: JSC, Jamun seed

coat: SCE, seed coat ethanol extract: RSC. residual seed coat: TFM, total fatty matter, TESC, total 80% etnanol solsbie carbohycrate.

Tr. trace: ND, not detected (n = 3 = SEE

Benherlal & Arumughan (2007) also reported that the composition of S. cumini

pulp was rich in total minerals (45.0 + 0.6 g kg—1) on dry weight followed by seed coat

(25.0 + 0.7 g kg—1) and kernel (20.0 + 1.0 g kg—1). Among the minerals the most abundant

were Ca and K in all the fruit parts and that indicates that the edible part of fruit is a rich

source for these essential minerals. Alcohol extracts of these fruit parts showed a similar

trend in their mineral content as those of the whole fruit parts.

Phytochemical Constituents

Berry fruits in general are rich in in phytochemicals and bioactive plant compounds

that may provide health benefits beyond basic nutrition. Different berries have different

polyphenol composition profiles (Heyman ef al., 2014).


Phenolic compounds are secondary plant metabolites consisting of one or more
aromatic rings with variable degrees of hydroxylation, methoxylation and glycosylation.
The overall structure, phenolic compounds are classified into the groups phenolic acids,
lignans, stilbenes and flavonoids, which may be further divided into subclasses as a

function of minor structural differences (Figure 5) (Manach et al., 2004).

Hydroxybenzoic acids Hydroxycinnamic acids

R. R,

7 R.
R, 2 fo}
OH ‘

R) OH
R,= R= OM Ry=H  Protocatechuic acid R, = OH : Coumante acid
Ryo R= R,= OH Gallic acid R, 2 R, = OH: Caffeic acid

R, = OCH,, R, = OH > Fenulic acta

Flavonoids

Chlorogenic acid
Stilbenes Lignans
ase) CH,O HOH
cy \ ae i HO L CH,OH
\ +
HO
Resveratrol @ Secoisolaricirosinol
OCH,
OH

Figure 5. Chemical structure of polyphenols (Manach ef al., 2004).


Polyphenols provide color, astringency and bitterness in plants. The health benefits
of consuming fruits and vegetables are sometimes attributed to these bioactive compounds
(Heyman ef al., 2014). Many investigators have studied the phytochemical profiles of the
different parts of S. cumini i.e. roots, stem, leaves and fruits. The major phytochemicals
that are mostly studied are phenols, flavonoids, anthocyanins, and tannins (Bandiola ef ai.,
2017). Methanol and water extracts of S. cumini have been found to possess a range of
alkaloids, flavonoids, glycosides, steroids, phenols, tannins, saponins and cardiac

glycosides (Shyamala Gowri & Vasantha, 2010).

Ramos and Bandiola (2017) reported that phytochemical constituents present in the
leaves of S. cumini include alkaloids, flavonoids, saponins, tannin,; glycosides, phenols,
proteins, triterpenoids, steroids, fixed oils, and fats. Different extraction methods also
showed variation in the type and amount of phytochemicals present in the leaves. The
presence of tannins, alkaloids, flavonoids, sterols, glycosides, and carbohydrates were
demonstrated in ethanolic extract of leaves while methanolic extract showed a presence of
flavonoids. Moreover, the High Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC) data

indicated that ferulic acid and catechin are also present in leaf extracts. (Sharma ef ai.,

2012).

In a comparative study on antioxidative capacity of bark, leaves and seeds of S.
cumini plant, n- hexane, chloroform, ethyl acetate, butanol and aqueous fractions were
made from the crude methanolic extract of bark, leaves and seeds. Leaves aqueous fraction

showed highest phenolic content of 253.6 + 0.025mg/mL while seed aqueous showed


maximum flavonoid content of 0.732 + 0.0005 mg/mL among all extracts (Haroon ef al.,

2015).

Kamal (2014) evaluated the methanol and ethyl acetate extracts of seeds. Data
showed that saponins and flavonoids were in more quantity than alkaloids, glycosides,
triterpenoids, steroids, and tannins in the ethyl acetate. Moreover, studies also show that
total phenolic and flavonoid contents in fruits were lower than in seeds while the total
anthocyanin content was present in fruits but not in seeds (Raza ef al., 2015). Margaret ef
al. (2015) also determined the antioxidant activity of methanolic extract of leaves, fruit
pulp and seeds of S. cumini L. It was demonstrated in the study that the total phenolic and
flavonoid content of S. cumini leaves is greater than the content found in pulp and seed

extracts.
Toxicity Studies

Acute toxicity studies using 70% methanolic extracts of leaf and stem bark of S.
cumini Linn. grown in Abuja, Nigeria was carried out by Ugbabe ef al. (2010). Nine mice
were divided into three groups of three each for the phase I study. Three dose levels of
10mg/kg, 100mg/kg and !1000mg/kg were administered orally to group 1, 2, and 3
respectively. Saline water was used as control. Results reveal that 70% methanol leaf
extract produced a lower LDso (3,873 mg/kg) compared to the stem bark (> 5000 mg/kg)
which suggests possible presence of more potent compounds in the leaf as compared to

the stem bark.


In the study conducted by Deb et al. (2013), acute oral toxicity of methanolic and
aqueous extracts of leaves, seeds, barks and roots was performed in albino mice of either
sex and weighing!8-25 grams following the OECD 423 Guidelines. Except for the
methanolic extract of seeds, the study revealed that the different extracts did not show
mortality at the dose of 2,000 mg/kg body weight (BW). Thus, 2,000 mg/kg BW dose was
considered as LDso cut off dose under Globally Harmonised Classification System (GHS)
category 5 (safe dose), as per OECD guideline 423 (2002). While for methanolic seed
extract, LDso cut off was 200 mg/kgBW (GHS, category 3). From the study, common side
effects such as, mild diarrhea, loss of weight and depression in treated groups of animals

were not recorded within the first seven days of observation.

Roy et al. (2011) reported that the acute oral toxicity for the methanolic leaf extract
of S. cumini in male Swiss albino mice was safe up to 3,500 mg/kg BW. While acute
toxicity study of the aqueous leaf extract of S. cumini (n=6 rats) with doses ranging from
100 mg/kgBW-1,000 mg/kg of BW/day and 2,000-5,000 mg/kg BW/day did not result to

any toxic effects and there was absence of mortality in all groups (Prasad et a/., 2014).

Acute and sub-chronic oral toxicities on ethanolic extract of S. cumini leaves were
also done in experimental rats. Acute toxicity study was carried out using the fixed dose
method according to OECD guideline no. 423. The different doses of 500, 1000, 2000,
3000, 4000 and 5000mg/KgBW were administered orally to the rats, observed for 24 hours
after dosing and for the nextl4 days. Results reveal that acute oral administration of

ethanolic extract of S. cumini leaves to rats at a dose level of up to 5000mg/kgBW did not


cause any mortality or toxic symptoms. In sub-chronic oral toxicity study on the other hand,
evaluations were done after administering daily oral doses of 1250, 2500 and 5000
mg/kgBW for 28 days to the rats. Body weights of the rats were measured weekly while
biochemical, hematological, and relative organ weights were measured observed on the
29th day. Results show that repeated oral administration caused significant increase red
blood cell (RBC) count, white blood cell (WBC) count, hemoglobin (Hb) levels and kidney
size. Histopathologic examination of kidneys from the S. cumini leaves treated rats
revealed multifocal moderate tubular nephritis, multifocal moderate tubular degeneration
at oral doses of 1,250, 2,500 and 5,000mg/kgBW (Ayyanna ef al., 2015). Meanwhile,
Prasad ef al. (2016) evaluated the acute oral toxicity of the ethanolic extracts of S. cumini
stem bark. Result showed that the LDso was >5,000 mg/kgBW and there were no
significant alterations in body weights, organ weights, and hematological parameters
compared to control group. The microscopic anatomy of the reproductive organs and liver

showed normal architecture.

From the acute toxicity study by Mastan ef a/. (2009) using the methanolic extract

of S. cumini seeds (SME), LDso was 5,000 mg/kg BW using OECD Guidelines.

Much of the published data on toxicity studies of S. cumini utilized the barks, seeds
and leaf. Currently, there is no published data on various oral toxicity tests of S. cumini

fruit.

Health-Promoting Properties of S. cumini


Since S. cumini is known to possess wide range of medicinal properties, which have
been attributed to the presence of bioactive compounds in different parts of the plant,
Chagas ef al. (2015) highlighted the cardiometabolic properties of S. cumini by correlating

its identified phytochemicals with their described mechanisms of action (Figure 6).

-— L-type
Ca" Channel OH Insulin
Loon

ia Secretion
HO. was 0A
Blood if i
Rig L
Pressure OH ore
con i hee OH
oy quercetin or
C — J HO. OD Ay A
HO won YY + ri.
LAA oH : AK 10 i Berea fee
OH 0 + OH 0 j
fmyricetin rutin We kd
GLUT4 : i SN a
Expression Pix : 9 OH
0.04 i | ee
ee «two Son
Syzygium cumini i SU
ee Ss
OH re)
gallte acid
ellagic acut
HMG-CoA
Reductase “Tt
Insulin Antioxidant Activity Lipid
Sensitivity Metabolism

Figure 6. Biological properties and main mechanism of action of polyphenolic compound
present in [Syzygium cumini (L.) Skeels] (Chagas et al., 2015).


Antioxidant Activity

Antioxidants are vital substances, which possess the ability to protect the body from
damages caused by free radical-induced oxidative stress (Margaret er al., 2015). Free
radicals are chemical species possessing an unpaired electron that can be considered as
fragments of molecules and which are generally very reactive. They are produced
continuously in cells either as accidental by-products of metabolism or deliberately during,
for example, phagocytosis. Reactive free radicals formed within cells can oxidize
biomolecules and lead to cell death and tissue injury. Cells have developed a
comprehensive array of antioxidant defenses to prevent free radical formation or limit their
damaging effects. These include enzymes to decompose peroxides, proteins to sequester
transition metals and a range of compounds to ‘scavenge’ free radicals (Cheeseman &

Slater, 1994).

Furthermore, a crucial step in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis is believed to be
the oxidative modification of LDL. The oxidation of LDL is a free radical driven lipid
peroxidation process and the aldehyde products of lipid hydroperoxide breakdown are
responsible for the modification of the LDL apoprotein. Aldehyde-modified apoB protein
has altered receptor affinity, causing it to be scavenged by macrophages in an uncontrolled
manner with the development of foam cells and the initiation of the atherosclerotic lesion.
The aldehydic products of lipid peroxidation may also be involved in other aspects of the
development of the lesion. The oxidation of LDL may be prevented by its endogenous

antioxidant compounds, most prominent of which is alpha-tocopherol. Consequently, an


improved antioxidant status may offer possibilities for the prevention of this major disease

(Esterbauer ef al., 1979).

Food rich in antioxidants plays an essential role in the prevention of diseases. It
neutralizes free radicals or their actions. Several studies have showed the important
functions of antioxidant to reduce effect of cancers, CVDs, neurodegenerative diseases,
diabetes, and many more diseases (Banerjee ef al., 2016). The phytochemicals present in
plants are known for their anticancer, antioxidant, immunity-potentiating,

neuropharmacological and detoxifying functions (Prasad et al., 2016).

The antioxidant activity of the different parts of S. cumini using different assays
have been investigated due to its high phenolic content. Margaret et al. (2015) evaluated
the antioxidant activity of methanolic extracts of leaves, fruit pulp and seeds of S. cumini
(L.) using the ferric reducing power assay. Results show that S. cumini leaf extract had the
highest RPA value (324.67 mg ASE/ml) followed by the seed extract (292.5 mg ASE/ml)
and pulp extract (249.5 mg ASE/ml), respectively. It was deliberated that the presence of
polyphenolic compounds in methanol extracts of seed, leaf & pulp of S. cumini are

responsible for the antioxidant activity.

In the study conducted by Banerjee ef al. (2016), the antioxidant activity of the
fruit skin of S. cumini has been analyzed using different assays, such as hydroxyl radical-
scavenging assay, based on the benzoic acid hydroxylation method, superoxide radical-
scavenging assay, based on photochemical reduction of nitroblue tetrazolium (NBT) in the

presence of a riboflavin-light-NBT system, dinitrophenyl picryl hydrazyl (DPPH) radical-


scavenging assay, and lipid peroxidation assay, using egg yolk as the lipid-rich source. It
was concluded that the fruit skin of S. cumini have significant antioxidant activity and a
significant pcorrelation existed between concentration of the extract and percentage
inhibition of free radicals or percentage inhibition of lipid peroxidation. The antioxidant
property of the fruit skin may come in part from the antioxidant vitamins, phenolics. or

tannins and anthocyanins present in the fruit.

The DPPH assay of leaf extracts of S. cumini demonstrated a high antioxidant
potential (ICso value of133 g/ml), which was comparable to the ICso of ascorbic acid
(122.4 pg/ml) (Ahmed ef al., 2019). While in both DPPH and ferric reducing power
(FRAP) methods, the methanol extract exhibited the highest antioxidant activity than

methylene chloride extract of leaves (Kumar & Kalakoti, 2015).

The antioxidant capacity of a functional fruit extract rich in anthocyanins was
evaluated through the peroxyl radical (ORAC) and the protective effect against singlet
oxygen ('O2). The functional extract showed 60% of dimethylanthracene protection against

'O2 and an ORAC value of 16.4 Imol Trolox/g fruit (Faria ef al., 2011).

In an investigation where pulp extract was utilized to study its potential to inhibit
the iron (FeSO4)-induced lipid peroxidation in different organs such as liver, liver
mitochondria, brain, testes etc. of rat in-vitro, a concentration of Sppm was found to show
beneficial results with highest lipid peroxidation inhibition in liver mitochondria (86%),

followed by liver (83%), testes (72%) and brain (68.3%) (Veigas et al., 2007).


Furthermore, Benherlal & Arumughan (2007) evaluated the lipid peroxidation
inhibition activity of the fruit pulp, seed coat and kernel extracts. It was seen that the seed
and coat and the pulp extracts were less active than the kernel. Overall result showed that
the extracts evaluated had lower inhibition of peroxidation of membrane lipids than that of

the control standards.

Anti-Inflammatory Activity

Inflammation can be defined as a generalized, nonspecific but beneficial tissue
response against injury. It comprises a complex array of adaptive responses to tissue injury
which are both local and systemic. The local responses lead to staffing of phagocytic cells
and removal of endogenous or foreign material. The systemic responses may alter the
environment interior to permit these processes to occur more proficiently (Bijauliya ef al.,

2018)

Muruganandan ef a/. (2001) evaluated the anti-inflammatory activity of ethanolic
bark extract of S. cumini L. using different rat models of inflammation. Significant anti-
inflammatory activity was found using the carrageenan- (acute inflammation), kaolin-
carrageenan- (subacute inflammation), formaldehyde- (subacute inflammation) induced
paw edema and cotton pellet granuloma (chronic inflammation) tests in rats. The lower
dose 100 mg/kg of the extract exhibited significant anti-inflammatory effect using the
subacute and chronic models of inflammation, but not with acute inflammation. It was
suggested that the anti-inflammatory activity of S. cumini L. bark extract may be attributed

to the presence of tannins which inhibits prostaglandin biosynthesis. Overall, it was


concluded that S. cumini L. bark extract possessess a potent anti-inflammatory action
against different phases of inflammation without any side effect on gastric mucosa. Further
study conducted by Kumar et al. (2008) revealed that extracts of S. cumini seed possessed
varying degree of anti-inflammatory activity when tested at various doses. The methanol
extract at a dose of 400 mg/kg showed significantly high anti-inflammatory activity four
hours post-injection, where it caused 62.6% inhibition, as compared to the positive control

diclofenac sodium.

Anti-Diabetic Property

Diabetes mellitus is one of the most common endocrine disease and the type 2
diabetes mellitus is the major form of diabetes mellitus, accounting for 90% of cases
worldwide (Singh & Marar, 2011). Numerous investigations performed in the past have
indicated that different parts of S. cumini possess anti-diabetic property. Kumar ef al.
(2008) isolated and identified the supposed antidiabetic compound from the S. cumini L.
seed. The isolated mycaminose (50 mg/kg) from S. cumini seed extract and the ethyl] acetate
and methanol extracted compounds of S. cumini seed at 200 and 400 mg/kg were evaluated
for its anti-diabetic activity using streptozotocin (STZ)- induced diabetic rats. Mycaminose
exhibited a significant reduction in blood glucose level comparable with Glibenclamide.
This result demonstrates that mycaminose isolated from S. cumini possesses anti-diabetic

activity in STZ-induced diabetic rats.

In an investigation on the anti-diabetic activity of bark extract of Syzygium cumini

L. on STZ-induced diabetic Wistar rats, it was reported that administration of Syzygium


cumini (L.) extracts before oral glucose loading significantly decreased (p<0.001) the rise
in postprandial blood glucose levels in treated rats. Continuous oral treatment of diabetic
rats with various S.cumini L. bark extract for three weeks lead to significant reductions in

fasting blood glucose levels as compared to diabetic controls (Tripathi & Kohli, 2014).

The effects of ethanolic extract of S. cumini L. seed powder on blood glucose level
and pancreatic islets were investigated in alloxan-induced diabetic rats (Singh & Gupta,
2007). The ethanolic extract of S. cumini seeds significantly decreased blood glucose level
in alloxan-induced diabetic rats. Moreover, histopathologic examination showed definite

improvement in the pancreatic islets with S. cumini seed extract treatment.

Cardioprotective Activity

In an in vivo study on the potential antihypertensive effect of hydroalcoholic extract
of S. cumini leaves (HESC) in spontaneously hypertensive (SHR) rats. It was demonstrated
that treatment with S. cumini reduced the blood pressure and heart rate of SHR rats. This
anti-hypertensive activity of S. cumini leaf extract is probably due to inhibition of arterial

vascular tone and extracellular calcium influx (Ribeiro e¢ al., 2014).

Administration of methanolic extract of S. cumini seed to isoproterenol-induced
infarction in rats, reduced serum levels of myocardial necrosis biomarkers, specifically
aspartate aminotransferase (AST), alanine aminotransferase (ALT), uric acid, creatine
phosphokinase (CPK), and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) (Mastan et al., 2009). Moreover,

the elevated serum levels of ALT, CPK, AST, (LDH, HDL-C due to doxorubicin-induced


cardiotoxicity in rats returned to normal values post administration of aqueous suspension
of S. cumini seed extract at a concentration of 100 mg/kgBW for 15 days (Soncharan ef al.,
2010). On the other hand, the hydroalcohol extract from the fruits of S. cumini (EHSCF)
also demonstrated a hypotensive and bradycardic effects in normotensive non-
anaesthetized rats. The hypotensive effect of S. cumini seed was attributed to a decrease in
peripheral resistance, mediated by the vacular endothelium, while the bradycardia may be

due to both indirect and direct cardiac muscarinic activation (Herculano et al., 2014).

Conceptual Framework

The conceptual framework of the study provides an overview of the effects of
phenolic compounds and some antioxidant vitamins present in freeze-dried duhat fruit on
biomarkers of obesity and dyslipidemia (Figure 7). The in vitro investigation will focus on
the capacity of the bioactive compounds in duhat to inhibit the pancreatic lipase activity,
bile acid binding capacity and cholesterol micellar solubility, which are related to obesity

and dyslipidemia.

Obesity is related to an increase in inflammation which is associated with an
increase in oxidative stress (Abdali e¢ al., 2015). Mitochondrial stress in obesity can trigger
oxidative stress and activation of stress-sensitive kinases. Impaired insulin secretion and
sensitivity occur as a result of stress-induced B-cell dysfunction and insulin resistance
(Casuso & Huertas, 2018). Lipid abnormalities are associated with insulin resistance which
consists of elevated TG levels, low HDL-C levels, and elevated levels of catabolic products

of TG-rich lipoprotein (TRLs), .mainly VLDL, IDL and LDL-C (Cohn et al., 2001).


Antioxidants have been used extensively to overcome the effects of excess reactive oxygen

species in several pathologies (Abdali et al., 2015).

Naturally occurring compounds like polyphenols have been reported to have anti-
obesity properties and lipid-lowering properties. Proposed mechanism of actions include
inhibition of pancreatic lipase and thereby influence fat digestion and affect energy intake
(McDougall & Stewart, 2005); bile acid binding by both antioxidants and polyphenols
(Kahlon & Smith, 2007) and reducing the levels of cholesterol in the blood by decreasing

the cholesterol micellar solubility. (Kobayashi & Ikeda, 2017).

Freeze-Dnied Philippine Duhat (Syzgium cumini )

t Bloactive Compounds
Antioxidant Vitamins (Vit. A. C & E)
Phenolic Compounds (TPC and TFC)

+ Antioxidant Capacity

In-Vitro Study
‘TBile Acid Binding Capacity +Pancreatic Lipase Activity WO bdelesterol Mice Satabiliny
* Insulin sensitivity Fut dlossption
a
a saute de me! \
SAdiposity Index
Body weight

+ Choxesseral sptate

MTrighyceride tHDLC 4 Total Chatesteral +Liver Stestosis


Figure 7. Conceptual Framework of the effects of freeze- dried Duhat [Syzygium cumini

(L.) Skeels]on biomarkers of obesity and dyslipidemia.

CHAPTER III

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Preparation of Raw Materials

The collection of Philippine duhat fruit was coordinated with the Institute of Plant
Breeding of the University of the Philippines Los Banos (UPLB) and was authenticated by
the Museum of Natural History, UPLB. The samples were subjected to freeze-drying at the
Institute of Food Science and Technology (IFST) and stored at -80°C until use. Freeze-
dried duhat (FDD) was characterized according to its physico-chemical, proximate and
functional properties, following the standard methods AOAC (2000). All quantitative
analysis were performed in triplicate and done at the Bioassay Laboratory in the Institute

of Human Nutrition and Food, UPLB.

Characterization of Freeze-Dried Duhat [Syzygium cumini (L)]

Nutritional and functional properties of foods are important attributes used to assess
food qualities and its potential health benefits. The characterization of freeze-dried duhat
(S. cumini) in this section includes the determination of the proximate composition,
analysis of some vitamins, analysis of the functional properties and determination of

phenolic compounds.


Proximate Analysis

Moisture content, crude protein (CP), crude fat, crude fiber, and ash of rice-like

grains was be determined following the procedure as described in AOAC (2000).

Moisture content. Moisture content refers to the amount of water present in a
sample. The oven-drying method was used in determining the moisture content. The
samples were chopped into smaller particles and ten grams sample was placed in a tared
moisture dish then put in an oven at 45°C. The samples were dried overnight then its weight

after drying was recorded and its moisture content was computed using the formula:

% MC = fresh weight—dry weight x 100%

fresh weight

Crude protein. Fifty milligrams (50 mg) of dried defatted ground sample was
weighed and placed in a micro Kjeldahl digestion flask. Samples were defatted using
soxhlet fat extractor. About 0.50 grams or a pinch of catalyst mixture made up of selenium
mixture were added and mixed with the sample. Subsequently, two (2) mL of concentrated
sulfuric acid were added and digested using a microdigestor until the solution turns clear
and odorless.

After cooling, samples were transferred into 100 mL volumetric flask and diluted
with distilled water. Then, 100 uL aliquot were placed in a test tube and 1.5 mL working
buffer, 0.40 mL salicylate reagent and 0.20 mL hypochlorite solution were added to the
sample. Samples were allowed to stand at room temperature for color development.

Samples were diluted to final volume of 10 mL with distilled water and mixed well.


Samples were injected to the atomic absorption spectrophotometer and the absorbance was

read at 660 nm. The following equations were used to calculate for nitrogen content:

% Nitrogen = (Slope)sa x (absorbance)sample x 100 %

weight of sample

where: slope = uw Nitrogen
unit absorbance

% Protein Content = % Nitrogen x 6.25

Crude fat. Soxhlet fat extractor was used to determine the crude fat content of the
sample. Samples were dried in an oven at 105°C for about two (2) hours. One gram of dried
sample was weighed, wrapped in a filter paper and placed into the thimble. Samples were
then placed on a soxhlet fat extractor. Then petroleum ether was placed into the boiling
flask and samples were refluxed for 12 to 16 hours. After the extraction, the samples were
removed from the extractor and placed in an oven for at least an hour at 45°C. After drying,
samples were placed in a desiccator. It was equilibrated in a desiccator and the samples
were removed and the weight of the thimble then the defatted sample were recorded to be
able to compute the crude fat using the formula:

% Fat Content = weight of fat x 100%
weight of sample

where:
weight of fat = (weight of thimble + sample before refluxing) —
(weight of thimble + sample after drying)

weight of sample = (weight of sample + thimble) — (weight of
thimble)


Crude fiber. Crude fiber is that fraction of the sample that is not removed either
by an acid or a base hydrolysis. It is used as an index to determine the amount of the
indigestible matter and approximates the amount of the dietary fibers present in the food.
One hundred milligrams (100 mg) of dried, defatted sample was weighed and placed in a
Bercillus beaker; 50 mL of 2.5 % sulfuric acid were added and refluxed for 30 minutes.
Mixture was washed with distilled water until it is no longer acidic. Fifty millilitres (50
mL) of 2.5 % sodium hydroxide solution were added and refluxed again for 30 minutes. It
was washed with distilled water until the washing became neutral using the litmus paper.
Samples were dried for two hours at 105°C, cooled, and weight were determined. The
samples were ignited in a muffle furnace at 550°C to decompose organic matter for two (2)
hours. The loss in weight indicated the weight of the fiber. The amount of crude fiber were

computed using the formula:

% Crude Fiber Content = weight of fiber. x 100%
weight of sample

where:
weight of fiber or loss in weight = (weight of crucible + sample after drying)

(weight of crucible + sample after ignition)

Ash. Samples in evaporating dish were placed in muffle furnace and ignited over
night at 650°C. Samples were cooled to 50°C then placed in a desiccator and further cooled
before taking the weight. Samples were reignited and reweighed. Total ash was calculated

based on the formula:


% Total Ash Content = _weightofAsh x 100%
weight of sample

where:

weight of Ash = (weight of crucible + sample after ignition) — (weight of
crucible)

Carbohydrate and energy contents. The carbohydrate extract was calculated by
subtracting the sum of moisture, ash, crude fat, fiber and protein from 100. The energy
content was calculated by multiplying carbohydrate, protein and fat contents by 4, 4 and 9

kcal/g, respectively and values obtained were summed.

Analysis for Antioxidant Vitamins: Vitamins A, C and E

Vitamin A, C and E Analysis was tested by Lipa Quality Control Center Inc.
following AOAC Official Methods of Analysis, 20" edition (2016). The test was
performed in three replicates using HPLC Method. Vitamin A (Retinol) was expressed in

IU/g while vitamins C and E were expressed in mg/kg.

Analysis for the Functional Properties

Total phenolic content (TPC). TPC was spectrometrically analyzed in triplicates
using the Folin-Ciocalteu method (Esmaeili et a/., 2015). To prepare the extract, 50 mg of
dried sample in five (5) mL absolute methanol were mixed for 30 minutes using a vortex

mixer and centrifuged at 300 rpm for 10 minutes. Afterwards, 200 wL of each methanol


extract or gallic acid standard solution (0, 200, 400, 600, 800, 1000 g/ml) was mixed with
2.8 mL distilled water, one (1) mL of 2M sodium carbonate solution, and 200 uL of Folin-
Ciocalteu reagent, consecutively. The solution was placed in boiling water for 15 minutes
and cooled to room temperature for color development. Absorbance was measured at 710
nm using Labtronics microprocessor UV-Vis spectrophotometer. Results are expressed as

mg gallic acid equivalents (GAE) per gram of FDD.

Flavonoid content. TFC was measured with the aluminium chloride colorimetric
assay in triplicates. Two hundred microliter aliquots and 200 wL standard quercetin
solution (0, 100, 200, 400, 600, 800 ug/ml) was positioned into test tubes and two mL of
distilled water and 0.3 ml of 5 % sodium nitrite solution was added into each. After five
minutes, 0.3 ml of 10 % aluminum chloride was added. The solution was allowed to stand
for one minute for color development and then one ml of 1M sodium hydroxide was added.
The absorbance was measured at 510 nm _ spectrophotometer using Labtronics
microprocessor UV-Vis spectrophotometer. Data of total flavonoids of was expressed as
mg of quercetin equivalents (QE)/ 100 g of FDD (Patel et a/., 2012 and Kamtekar ef al.,

2014).
In Vitro Antioxidant and Lipid Lowering Activity of

Freeze- Dried Duhat (Syzgium cumini L.) Fruit

Freeze- dried samples of duhat fruit, after characterization of its bioactive

components, was subjected to analysis for various metabolic parameters including lipids


and inflammatory markers. This section provides the discussion of the methods used for

the in vitro antioxidant and lipid lowering activities of freeze-dried duhat fruit.

Dinitropheny] Picryl Hydrazyl (DPPH) Free Radical Scavenging Activity

DPPH assay is one of the most widely used methods for screening the antioxidant
activity of plant extracts by investigating the free radical-scavenging activities of the
present bioactive compounds (Rahman et al., 2015). The DPPH reagent (2,2-diphenyl-|-
picrylhydrazyl) is relatively stable and can be reduced principally by more reactive
reducing components such as phenolic substances (Morabbi-Najafabad & Jamei, 2014).
DPPH radical scavenging activity was measured in triplicates according to the method of
Shimada ef al. (1992, as cited by Lizardo ef al., 2015). One hundred grams of each sample
were weighed and placed in a test tube wrapped in aluminum foil. Five milliliters (ml) of
50% methanol solution was added in each test tube and mixed intermittently for 10 minutes
using a vortex mixer. Solutions were transferred and filtered in another tube using filter
paper. One ml aliquot was obtained from each filtered solution then four (4) mL distilled
water was added. One ml of the previously prepared DPPH solution was transferred in
each tube. Tubes were maintained for 30 minutes in a dark room. Spectrophotometric
measurements were done at 517 nm _ using Labtronics microprocessor UV-Vis
spectrophotometer (Labtronics Panchkula, Haryana, India). DPPH scavenging activity
was computed using the formula below. The inhibition of the DPPH radical by the sample

was calculated based on the formula below:

%Antioxidant activity (DPPH) = [(Abscontro! — AbSsampie)/ AbScontrot] 100


where, AbsScontrol and AbSsample are the absorbance of control and sample, respectively. The

control used was the methanolic DPPH solution.

2,2’-azinobis-(3-ethylbenzothiazoline-6-sulfonate)- Trolox equivalent antioxidant

capacity

ABTS [2,2’-azinobis-(3-ethylbenzothiazoline-6-sulfonate)] assay, also known as
Trolox equivalent antioxidant capacity (TEAC) assay, is one of the widely used method in
studying both lipid-soluble and water-soluble antioxidants (Zhong & Shahidi, 2015). The
established procedure of Tomasina et al. (2012) was used in this analysis wherein a 0.25
M ABTS solution with 3.45 M potassium persulfate was prepared for ABTS radical cation.
The mixture was stood for 12 to 16 hours in a dark environment at 4°C before. Dilutions
were made until the absorbance reading reached 0.704 0.05 at 732nm. A 2.7mL ABTS
radical cation solution was added to 0.3mL diluted sample and incubated for 15 minutes in
a dark environment at room temperature. The standards used were methanolic solutions of
Trolox (2-40 g/mL) and the absorbance was read at 732nm. Analysis was done in
triplicates and results were expressed as mg Trolox equivalents per g sample (mg TE/g).

Trolox equivalents were calculated using the formula:

TE =cV/m

where, TE refers to trolox equivalents, c is the concentration (ug/mL) of trolox
established from the calibration curve; V is the volume (mL) of the extract solution and m

is the weight (g) of extract.


Pancreatic Lipase Inhibition

Lipase is a key enzyme in lipid absorption and pancreatic lipase, a main lipase of
the human, is responsible for the hydrolysis of 50-70% of total dietary fats. Therefore, a
reduction in fat absorption by the inhibition of pancreatic lipase is suggested to be
beneficial for the regulation of obesity (Jo et al., 2017). The pancreatic lipase inhibition
assay was carried out following the methods of Chedda ef al. (2013). The test samples were
macerated in phosphate buffered saline (Img/ml) for 4 hours at 37°C followed by
centrifugation at 4000g for 10 minutes. The supernatant obtained (1mg/ml) was used as
stock solution and was used to test its lipase inhibition activity. Orlistat was used as positive

control for this assay.

One hundred (100) mM Phosphate buffered saline with 150 mM sodium chloride
was prepared. Then 0.5% (v/v) of Triton-X-100 was added at pH adjusted to 7.2.
Meanwhile, porcine pancreatic lipase enzyme solution was prepared by dissolving six
milligrams of the enzyme in 10 mL of the buffer solution by gentle vortexing. It was

prepared immediately prior to use.

The substrate that used was p-Nitrophenylbutyrate (PNPB). PNPB working
solution was prepared with 8.493 uL of PNPB stock solution in a vial. The solution was

made up to 10 mL with acetonitrile.

The total assay volume was 200 pL. Twenty five microliter (25 L) of test solution

or standard was incubated with 50 pL of the enzyme solution. Then 100 uL of the buffer


solution and 25 wL of PNPB solution was added. The reaction was allowed to stand for 30
minutes at 37°C. Lipase activity was determined by measuring the hydrolysis of PNPB to
p-nitrophenol at 400 nm using an Multiskan™ GO microplate reader (Thermo Fisher
Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) plate reader. Orlistat (Sigma-Aldrich Chemical Co., St.
Louis, MO, USA) dissolved in dimethylsulphoxide was used as a positive control. Two
determinations per test solution with three replicates each were conducted for this assay.

Percent inhibition was calculated using the formula:

%*inhibition= Absorbance of blank—absorbance of test x100
Absorbance of blank

Bile acid binding assay

Bile acid binding assay was performed according to the method of Kongo-De-
Moukala ef a/. (2011). Bile acid substrate solution was prepared by making a 2 mM of
sodium taurocholate in 50 mM phosphate buffer of pH 6.5. Cholestyramine was used as

positive control for this assay.

A solution of 400 wL of 2 mM sodium taurocholate solution, 50 wL of buffer, and
50 pL of each sample was prepared. The solutions were incubated at 37 °C for 30 min,
centrifuged at room temperature (25-28 °C) for 20 min with a speed of 6000 rpm using a
Labnet Prism™ Model C1801-230 V-EU centrifuge (Labnet International Inc., NJ, USA),
and supernatant was collected in a new set of microcentrifuge tubes. The supernatant was

filtered using a 25-mm nylon-welded syringe filter (0.22 um) prior to transferring into


sample vials for separation and analysis via Acquity Ultra-Performance Liquid
Chromatography H Class with RP BEH C18 column (130 A, 1.7 um, 2.1 mm x 50 mm)
(Waters Corp., Prague, Czech Republic) maintained at 35 °C and detected through a
photodiode-array detector (Waters Corp., Prague, Czech Republic). The injected sample
volume was 3 wL for each sample and the bile acid (taurocholate) was eluted with
methanol:0.4% KH2POsg (65:35) at a flow rate of 0.1 mL/min for 6 min. The absorbance of
the eluate was monitored continuously at 210nm and quantified using a
standard calibration curve generated from the peak area responses of the standard
solutions. Two injections with three replicates each sample were conducted for this assay.
From the standard calibration curve, unbound bile acid concentration was calculated using

the following formula:

% bound bile acid= [(Cc-Cs)/Cc ] x 100
Where: Cc was the concentration of bile acid in the control, and
Cs was the concentration of bile acid in the samples

To prepare for the standard calibration, Sodium taurocholate solution with the
following concentrations: 0 uM, 400 uM, 800 uM, 1200 uM, 1600 uM, and 2000 uM

were prepared. Peak absorbance at 210 nm were recorded.

Cholesterol Micellar Solubility inhibition
The assay for cholesterol micellar solubility inhibition was carried out using the

methods of Boungoura et al. (2009). For this assay, | mg/mL cholesterol micellar solution


without sample was used as control to calculate recovery. A cholesterol micellar solution
was prepared by sonicating 10 mM sodium taurocholate, 0.4 mM cholesterol, | mM oleic

acid in 132 mM NaCl, and 15 mM sodium phosphate buffer (pH 7.4).

Test sample (450 nL) was mixed with 400 uL cholesterol micellar solution and
incubated at 37 °C for 24 h followed by centrifugation at room temperature (25—28 °C) at
a speed of 12,000rpm for 30min. The supernatant was collected for cholesterol
concentration determination. Cholesterol micellar solubility activity was determined on a
96-well plate with each well containing a mixture of 80 uL of the incubated solution,
100 uL glacial acetic acid, and 120 uL Zak’s coloring reagent, then incubated for 30 min
at room temperature. The cholesterol binding capacity was determined at 560 nm using the
same microplate reader and quantified using a standard calibration curve. Two

determinations with three replicates for each test solution were conducted for this assay.

To prepare the standard calibration curve, cholesterol standards in glacial acetic
acid with the following concentrations: 0 ug/mL, 8 pg/mL, 16 pg/mL, 24 pg/mL, 32
pg/mL, 40 pg/mL, and 48 pg/mL were prepared. Absorbance at 560 nm was recorded and

standard curve was prepared.
Acute Oral Toxicity Testing of Freeze- Dried Duhat Fruit

All procedures in mice were approved by the UPLB Animal Care and Use

Committee with assigned protocol number CHE-2019-002.


Animals

Ten male and 10 female healthy 6 week old ICR mice weighing 25-30 g obtained
from the Research Institute for Tropical Medicine (RITM), Alabang, Muntinlupa City were
used for the acute oral toxicity test. Mice were housed individually in properly labelled
polycarbonate cages with stainless steel top and maintained at 22—25°C, 40-60% humidity
and 12 hours light: 12 hours dark cycle lights on at 7:00 AM and lights off at 7:00 PM.
Commercial maintenance mice pellets (Altromin, Germany) and distilled drinking water

were provided ad /ibitum during the one-week acclimation period.

Methodology

Preparation of Freeze-dried Duhat (FDD) Fruit Flesh Extract

Freeze-dried duhat (FDD) fruit flesh were finely ground, and then passed through
an 80-mesh US standard sieve. Contingent on mouse body weight, powdered FDD fruit
flesh was then reconstituted in distilled water at various doses: 55 mg/kg BW, 175 mg/kg
BW, 550 mg/kg BW, 2000 mg/kg BW and 5000 mg/kg BW. To allow homogeneity, the

samples in one (1) ml of distilled water were vortexed for one (1) minute prior to feeding.

Acute Oral Toxicity Main Test Procedure

Acute oral toxicity of FDD fruit flesh extract was done following the OECD
guidelines 425 for up and down procedure. After the acclimatization period, the 10 male

and 10 female ICR mice were randomly distributed into five (5) groups (n=1I male, | female


per group) namely: Group | was treated with 55 mg/kg BW FDD; Group 2 was treated
with 175 mg/kg BW FDD; Group 3 was treated with 550 mg/kg BW FDD; Group 4 was
treated with 2000 mg/kg BW FDD; and Group 5 was treated with 5000 mg/kg BW FDD.
Each group treated with FDD has a corresponding control group resulting to five (5) control
groups. There is no available data on FDD’s lethality, hence, dosing was initiated at 55

mg/kg BW

Food and water were withheld one (1) hour before and one (1) hour after the
administration of the treatment. Animals per treatment groups were given with FDD and
vehicle once using a l-inch 22G stainless steel gavage needle (Thermoscientific, USA) and
I ml sterile disposable syringe (Terumo, Japan) at Day | of experimentation. Treatment
per group was instituted successively from lower to higher dose with at least 48-hour

interval to confirm absence of mortality.
Observation of Signs of Toxicity

Immediately after administration of test substance, the mice were closely
observed during the first 30 minutes, then for 24 hours and daily thereafter for 14
days. Presence of physical (e.g. wasting, hair loss), behavioral (e.g. ataxia, change
in posture) and physiological (e.g. sweating/shivering, alteration of breathing
pattern/heart rate/muscle tone, fecal abnormalities) symptoms of toxicity were
noted. In this study, physical and behavioral changes were not numerically scored
but only categorically noted whether present or absent. Morbidity and mortality rate

per group were calculated using the following formulas:


Morbidity rate = Total number of mice that showed toxicity signs per group. x
Total number of mice per group

Mortality rate = Total number of mice that died per group. x 100
Total number of mice per group

Body Weight Measurement

Individual weights of animals were determined shortly before the test
substance was administered and then monitored weekly using a digital top loading
balance (Shimadzu, Japan). Weight changes were calculated and recorded to the

nearest 0.001 gram.
Measurement of Feed and Water Intake

All animals were subjected to daily monitoring of feed intake and water
intake for fourteen (14) days. Left-over feeds were measured daily using a digital
top loading balance starting at 7:00 A.M. The amount of left over feeds were
subtracted from the pre-weighed feeds given to attain the daily feed intake. Data
were recorded to the nearest 0.01 gram. On the other hand, the remaining distilled
water in the water bottle were measured using a 100 mL graduated cylinder starting
also at 7:00 A.M. daily. The volume of left-over distilled water were subtracted from
the known volume of water given per mouse to get the daily water intake. Data

were recorded to the nearest 1 mL.


Blood Collection, Hematology and Blood Chemistry Analysis

Blood collection was performed using the retroorbital sinus on day | prior
to administration of the test substance or distilled water and on day 14. One drop
of ophthalmic anesthetic proparacaine hydrochloride (Alcon-Couvreur NV,
Belgium) was placed in the right eye. After 1-2 minutes, 260 uL of blood were
collected via the retroorbital sinus using a heparinized microhematocrit tube
(INRIS, Netherlands). Ten ul of the collected blood were transferred in | mL
microcentrifuge tube for hematology test i.e. total red blood cell count (tRBC), total
white blood cell count (tWBC), hemoglobin (Hb) level, platelet count (PLT), and
differential WBC count using an automatic hematology analyzer (Woodley
Equipment Company Ltd, UK). While 250 uL of collected blood was used for
measurement of the creatinine (CRE) and blood urea nitrogen (BUN) for
nephrotoxicity assessment using an automated dry blood chemistry analyzer

(Spotchem EZ SP-4430, Japan).

Euthanasia, Necropsy and Measurement of Organ Weight

Mice were sacrificed with intraperitoneal injection (IP) of pentobaribital
sium using the >100 mg/kg dose (American Veterinary Medical Association,
2020). Then, necropsy was performed on all mouse per treatment group by licensed
veterinarian to take note of any gross abnormalities on the organs such as liver,
kidneys, heart, lung, spleen, esophagus, stomach, small intestine, large intestine and

brain. These aforementioned organs were weighed individually.


Processing of Organs and Examination of Stained Tissue Sections

Each organ were trimmed using a scalpel blade, fixed in 10% formalin for
at least 72 hours, and processed using the routine paraffin techniques. Paraffin
blocks of each organ were sectioned at 5 um in thickness using a rotatory
microtome (American Optical, USA) and stained using Hematoxylin and Eosin
(H&E). Stained tissue sections were examined under a research microscope (Nikon,
Japan) for microscopic changes. Digital photographs of microscopic lesions were

recorded and obtained using a research microscope.

In Vivo Evaluation of the Anti-obesity and Lipid-Lowering Properties
of Freeze- Dried Duhat
All animal experiments performed were approved (2019-001) by the UPLB Animal

Care and Use Committee (UPLB ACUC).

Animals

A total of thirty-five (35) 6-week-old male ICR mice weighing 22.0 + 2.0g were
obtained from the Laboratory Animal Facility of the Research Institute for Tropical
Medicine at Alabang, Muntinlupa City, Philippines. ICR male mice were chosen since it
was used as a model for obesity, hyperlipidemia, hypercholesterolemia and hyperglycemia
studies (Park ef al., 2005; Hayashi er al., 2006; Lu et al., 2012; Zhao et al., 2014; Lee er
al., 2017) as well as not to contend with the of influence of sex hormones. Mice were

individually housed in commercial polycarbonate cages with stainless steel top and sterile


corn cob bedding under 12h: 12h light/dark cycle lights on at 7:00 A.M. and off at 7:00

P.M., 24 + 2°C and 50-60% humidity at the laboratory animal experimental room,
Department of Basic Veterinary Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, UPLB. Mice
were acclimatized for one week and were given commercial mouse maintenance diet

(Dyets, Pennsylvania, USA) and distilled water ad libitum.

Components and Preparation of Diets

A regular diet (AIN-93G purified rodent diet, Dyets, USA) and a custom high fat
diet (HFD) purified rodent diet were used for the control and negative control groups,
respectively. The HFD was based on the composition of Dyets, Inc. (Pennsylvania, USA)
with 45% calories from fat. Briefly, HFD was formulated by heating the agar solution in
a microwave for three minutes. Pork lard was added, heated for another minute, then
placed in an electric mixer and stirred until it reaches 40°C. All the dry ingredients (Table
1 1)were then added to agar-lard solution and mixed until homogenous. For HFD-Duhat
mixtures, exactly the same procedures were applied but portions of cornstarch, casein, lard
and dyetrose were replaced with different amounts of FDD powder such as 10% w/w,
20%w/w and 30% w/w to allow consistency with the calorie and macronutrient content of
the HFD. These doses of FDD were based on the available published literature that reported
its lipid-lowering effects (Mykkanen ef al., 2014; Heyman et al., 2015). The prepared mice
diet was then transferred in properly labelled clean containers and stored inside a freezer

until use. Table 11 shows the composition and caloric content of the diets. The diet


formulation was done every week at the Bioassay Laboratory of Institute of Human

Nutrition and Food, CHE, UPLB.

Table 11. Composition and caloric content of the different diets

HFD+ HFD+ HFD+
Ingredients were ® o. 10%FD 20%FD 30%FD
D D D
3.58 116.5
Casein 100.0 4 112.57 108.60 104.64
L-Cystine 4.0 1.5 1.75 1.75 1.75 1.75
4.0 100.6
Sucrose 50 9 100.69 100.69 100.69
Cornstarch 3.6 198.7 42.42 7.85 0.00 0.00
Dyetrose 3.8 66.0 58.27 58.27 32.96 0.21
Soybean Oil 9.0 35.0 0 0 0 0
t-Butylhydroquinone 0 0.007 0.003 0.00 0.00 0.00
Cellulose 0 25.0 29.13 29.13 29.13 29.13
Mineral Mix #210025 0.88 17.5 0 0.00 0.00 0.00
Vitamin Mix #310025 3.87 5.0 0 0 0 0
Choline Bitartrate 0 1.25 1.17 1.17 1.17 1.17
Salt Mix #210088 1.6 0 5.83 5.83 5.83 5.83
Dicalcium Phosphate 0 0 7.57 7.57 7.57 7.57
Calcium Carbonate 0 0 3.20 3.20 3.20 3.20
Potasium CitrateH20 0 0 9.61 9.61 9.61 9.61
Vitamin Mix 3.92
#3000050 0 5.83 5.83 5.83 5.83
9.0 118.0
Pork Lard 0 0 115.75 113.5 111.254
3.177
FDD 8 0 0 50.00 100.00 150.00
Total 500.0 500.0 509.22 519.84 530.88
Keal per gram . 3.76 4.59 4.51 4.42 4.32

ND- Normal Diet; HFD- High-Fat Diet, HFD-10%FDD — HFD w/ 10% Freeze-dried
Duhat; HFD-20%FDD — HFD w/ 20% Freeze-dried Duhat; HFD-30%FDD — HFD w/

30% Freeze-dried Duhat


Induction of Obesity and Dyslipidemia and Intervention Phase

Obesity and hypercholesterolemia were induced by giving HFD ad libitum for three
(3) weeks. Mice with more than 20% body weight gain were considered as obese (Wang
et al., 2010) while mice with at least 20% increase in blood total cholesterol (TC) were
considered hypercholesterolemic (Franciosi et al., 2009). Mice that met the criteria for
these conditions were included in the intervention phase. For the intervention phase, mice
were randomly allocated into four treatment groups (n=7 each group) namely: Normal
Control Group: Regular Diet (Dyets, Inc (Dyet# 110700, AIN-93G) + distilled water (DW),
Negative Control Group: HFD + DW; Treatment Group 1: HFD + 10% w/w FDD + DW;
Treatment Group 2: HFD + 20% w/w FDD + DW; and Treatment Group 3: HFD + 30%
w/w FDD + DW.

Animals received their respective diets ad libitum for nine (9) weeks of
supplementation. and the effect of the specific treatments on mice were determined by
measuring the body weight, feed and water intake, and the following markers of obesity

like total cholesterol, triglycerides and HDL-C levels.
Body Weight Measurement

Body weights of mice were measured weekly for nine weeks using a digital top
loading balance starting at 8:00 A.M. The measurement was done by placing the mouse in
a container with known weight, and then placing the container with mouse on the top

loading balance. The weight of the container was then subtracted to the weight of container


+ mouse to determine the weight of the mouse. The weights were recorded to the nearest

0.001 gram.

Feed Intake Measurement

Left-over feeds were measured daily for nine weeks using a digital top loading
balance starting at 7:00 A.M. The amounts of left over feeds were subtracted from the pre-
weighed feeds given to attain the daily feed intake. Data were recorded to the nearest 0.01

gram.

Water Intake Measurement

The remaining distilled water in the water bottle were measured using a 100 mL
graduated cylinder starting at 7:00 A.M. daily for nine weeks. The volume of left-over
distilled water were subtracted from the known volume of water given per mouse to get

the daily water intake. Data were recorded to the nearest | mL.

Blood Collection and Blood Lipid Measurement

One drop of ophthalmic anesthetic proparacaine hydrochloride was placed in the
right eye of each mouse. Then, 250ul of blood were collected from the retro-orbital sinus
using heparinized hematocrit tubes (NRIS, Denmark). The collected blood was placed in
a 1.5 ml microcentrifuge tube (Eppendorf tube, USA), labeled, and then analyzed for TC,

HDL-C and TG using Arkray SpotChem-EZ SP-4430 blood chemistry analyzer


(ARKRAY Inc., Japan). Blood TC, HDL-C and TAG were measured at baseline prior to

start of intervention phase, then every three (3) weeks for nine (9) weeks.

Euthanasia, Necropsy, and Tissue Collection, Processing and Examination

Mice were euthanized via intraperitoneal injection of pentobarbital sodium
(Dolethal, Vetoquinol UK Ltd) at a dose of 80mg/kg body weight then intracardiac blood
collection was done. Necropsy was performed by licensed veterinarians. Fat pads such as
the subcutaneous, epididymal, mesentery, abdominal and heart fat were collected and
weighed using an analytical balance (Shimadzu, Japan). Additionally, the liver, left and
right kidneys, spleen, stomach, and heart were collected, weighed and examined for gross
pathologic changes. The relative organ weights were determined by dividing the weight
of the organ (g) by body weight (g) and multiplied by 100. Meanwhile, the total adiposity
index (AI%) was determined by calculating the sum of the subcutaneous, epididymal,
mesentery and abdominal fat weights (g) divided by body weight (g) and multiplied by

100.

Liver, and fat samples were processed using the paraffin technique, sectioned with
a rotatory microtome, and stained with Hematoxylin and Eosin. Stained sections were
coded to prevent bias during examination under light microscopy (Zeiss Primostar).
Furthermore, the mean diameter of abdominal white adipocytes from seven animals per
group were calculated as an indicator of adipocyte hypertrophy in restricted view fields on

a computer monitor using an automated image analysis system (Image J). The mean


adipocyte diameter was expressed in ym and a minimum of ten (10) white adipocytes per

each fat pad was measured.

Human dose equivalent

Human dose equivalent was calculated using the method by Reagan- Shaw et al.
(2008). It was determined by multiplying the animal dose (mg/kg) by 3 (Animal Km

factor for mouse) divided by 37 (Human Km factor for adult).

Statistical Analysis

For the characterization of the nutritional and functional properties of FDD fruit
flesh, all assays were carried out in triplicate and their results were expressed as mean +
standard deviation. Correlation coefficients (r) and coefficients of determination (7?) were
calculated using Microsoft Excel Professional Plus 2013. For the in-vitro study, results
were expressed as mean + standard deviation (SD). For the in vivo investigation, the anti-
obesity and lipid-lowering properties were expressed as mean + standard error of the mean
(SEM) while adipose diameter measurement results were expressed as mean + standard
deviation (SD). Changes in lipid profiles across time periods were expressed as percentiles
(%). The data were analyzed using, one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) and Tukey,
test at p<0.05 for differences between groups and within groups across time periods using

Statistical Package for the Social Sciences (SPSS) version 20.0.

ASoTOpoyjay [[e19AG JO Wessviq] MeWIOYDS “g INI]

RAC Re: A FI BED canteen
| Fr nity om & aqiaecany | hemi) Sopeg reves - mr PE SEY

mane os (tg
BXSOFERS DR PR OY CR
wepmpeey | aE RY SET SS erpcnrrurin~
Se-CGR |e cap By Pd EN,

inp ey cosy. SC RY SH

RRA AEONT pe Gag) pa

ul
1 "i
a oe Bein . :
Sang as <a
aoe [pouq-229014) ]

| wag 7 nang wms2{y |


CHAPTER IV

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Proximate Composition and Antioxidant.Properties of Philippine Duhat
(Syzygium cumini L.) Skeel Freeze-Dried Fruit Flesh
Proximate Analysis
Proximate analysis in plants gives valuable information on moisture content, ash
content, lipid, protein and carbohydrate contents (Ahongshangbam et al., 2017) which are
important in the food industry for product development, quality control (QC) or regulatory

purposes (Thangaraj, 2016).

Moisture determination is one of the most widely used measurements in the
processing and testing of foods (Pomeranz, 1994). In this study results showed that FDD
fruit flesh has a moisture content of 20.16 + 0.75%. The low moisture content is brought
about by lyophilization or freeze-drying which was used to preserve the samples. Freeze-
drying is an effective method to preserve not just the desirable quality but also the
antioxidant properties of fruits and other food materials (Gumusay & Yalcin, 2019). The
final moisture content of the lyophilizate is a critical parameter because it determines the
storage of the product. Too high value is not favorable for long term storage while too low

may damage the active compounds present in the food (Hua et al., 2010)


The dry matter in a food is inversely related to the amount of moisture it contains,
various fresh berries generally contains 81-90% water (Pomeranz, 1994), S. cumini fresh
fruit in particular, contains 82.19+2.46% moisture content as previously reported by Raza
et al. (2015). The moisture content of any food indicates its level of water activity and may
thus, be used to measure its stability and susceptibility to microbial contamination (Edem

etal., 2011).

Crude fiber consists largely of cellulose (60-80%) and lignin (4-6%) plus some
mineral matter which have beneficial effects in the body such as in weight management
(Madhu ef al., 2017). Fruits and vegetables are generally rich sources of fiber. In the present
study, results show that FDD fruit flesh has as total crude fiber of 2.64 + 0.06%. The result
is higher compared to the fresh fruit flesh as previously reported by Ali ef al. (2013) and
Raza et al. (2015), who found that S. cumini fruit flesh consists of 1.60£0.02% and
1.76+0.05 crude fiber respectively. Meanwhile, other varieties of berries such as
blackberries, raspberries, and blueberries were found to have crude fiber content between

0.91£0.02% to 2.97£0.03% (Stajcic et al., 2012).

Table 12. Proximate composition of FDD fruit flesh

Proximate Composition Content level in FDD fruit
flesh
Moisture Content (%) 20.16 + 0.75%
Total Crude Fiber (%) 2.64 + 0.06%
Crude Fat (%) 450+ 0.21%
Crude Protein (%) 7.10 + 0.20%

Carbohydrate (NFE) (%) 62.22 + 1.11%.


Macronutrients are classes of chemical compounds (i.e. carbohydrates, proteins,
fats) that humans consume in the largest quantities (Fellows, 2009). Plant lipids are a large
group of compounds that could be stored as energy reserves or have structural functions
such as in cellular membranes and cuticular waxes (Maestri ef a/., 2020). Proteins are
energy provider with other purposes, including the passage of bio-chemicals across cellular
membranes and enzyme activity (Hayes, 2020). Lastly, carbohydrate stores energy reserves
and makes cell structural framework. In some fruits, monosaccharides are the major sugars.
Carbohydrates are the second most abundant constituents in fruits and vegetables. They

may account for 50 to 80% of dry weight (Vicente ef al., 2021).

FDD fruit flesh were assessed for its macronutrient composition and findings are
also presented in Table 12. According to the results obtained, FDD fruit flesh contained a
crude fat of 4.50 + 0.21%, crude protein of 7.10 + 0.20%, and carbohydrate (NFE) value
of 62.22 + 1.11%. It provides a caloric value of 317.78 kcal per 100g making it a good

energy source.

The current results are higher than the findings previously reported for fresh S.
cumin fruit where it contains 4.3740.04% crude protein, 2.0940.03% crude fat and
11.0340.33 (NFE) value (Ali et al., 2013; Raza ef al., 2015). Moreover, FDD fruit flesh
also have higher protein content compared to Raspberry (1.584 0.07%), black berry
(1.4+0.05%) and bilberry (1.01+0.09) (Stajcic et al., 2012). The caloric value is relatively
higher than other usually consumed dried fruit such as raisins having 299 kcal per 100

grams sample (Fulgoni ef al., 2017) and other known high-calorie fruits such as banana


(73.43 to 148.80 kcal/100g) and avocado (167 kcal/100g) (Hapsari & Lesari, 2016; Dreher

& Davenport, 2013).

Functional Properties
Vitamins

Antioxidant vitamins such as vitamins A, C and E were also evaluated in this
study. Vitamins are essential compounds required in trace amounts that cannot be produced
in enough quantities. Vitamin A, or retinol, is an essential nutrient for man since it cannot
be synthesized within the body (Vicente ef al., 2021). Previous evidence has shown vitamin
A, carotenoids and provitamin A carotenoids can be effective antioxidants for inhibiting
the development of heart disease (Palace ef al., 1999, Sesso et al., 2003). It has also been
recognized that carotenoids may have a protective role against cancer (Donaldson, 2004;

Kantoff, 2006) and degenerative eye disease (Mozaffarieh ef al., 2003).

The present evaluation showed that the vitamin A content of FDD fruit flesh was
19.71 + 0.56 IU/g (Table 13). The content was relatively lower compared with other berries
like blackberry (214 IU), raspberry (160 IU), and blueberry (54 TU) (Njoku ef a/., 2015).
The vitamin A value in FDD fruit flesh was also very low compared to other fruits such as
guava (151.23 IU), carrots (616.20 1U), mango -(90.48IU), water melon (105.04 IU),
tomato (162.86 IU) and pawpaw (206.98 IU) (Aremu & Nweze, 2017). The average
recommended nutrient intake (RNJ) for vitamin A in adults is 1332 IU per day (PDRI,

2015). Approximately 70g of FDD will meet the recommended daily intake for vitamin A.


Ascorbic acid, also known as vitamin C, is naturally found in high amounts in
fruits and vegetables. It is a six carbon compound related to glucose that is potent water
soluble antioxidant and is an essential nutrient in the human diet as it helps in the absorption
of iron, calcium and folic acid and maintenance of the connective tissues and bones, hence
prevention of scurvy and a major component of cold and flu remedies (Shivembe &

Ojinnaka, 2017).

FDD fruit flesh contained 7.01 + 3.03 mg per 100g vitamin C (Table 13). The
content is higher than apples (3.91mg/100g) but lower compared to blueberry
(12.60mg/100g), raspberry (31.93), strawberry (57.95), blackcurrant (162.73), guava
(19.36 ), kiwifruit (74.56), Goji (48.94) and orange (71.12) as previously reported (Donno
et al., 2014). Vitamin C is an essential antioxidant that helps in neutralizing free radicals.
The average recommended nutrient intake (RNJ) for vitamin C in adults is 60-70mg/day

(PDRI, 2015).

Vitamin E, also known as a-tocopherol, is a general term used to describe a group
of eight lipophilic compounds known as tocochromanols (Mellidou e¢ a/., 2018). Vitamin
E prevents the peroxidation of membrane phospholipids and cell membrane oxidation
through its antioxidant actions (Njoku ef al., 2015). It is abundant in oily seeds, olives,
nuts, peanuts, avocados, and almonds. In some foods, its levels and composition were
dependent on cultivar and, to a lesser extent, on fruit developmental stage (Georgiadou ef

al., 2019).


The vitamin E content in FDD fruit flesh (0.323 + 0.09 mg/100g) (Table 13) was

higher than citrus fruits (0.24-0.25 mg/100g) (Njoku er a/., 2015) but lower than the content

of blackberries (1.43 mg/100g), kiwi (1.31 mg/100g), and cranberries (1.23 mg/100g)

(Chun ef al., 2006). The levels of vitamin E differ from plant to plant in composition,

activity and quantity. Variation in the values in food is also caused by many factors

including processing procedures, storage time and conditions, sample preparation and

variation in analytical methods (Georgiadou et al., 2021; Chun et al., 2006). Deficiency in

vitamin E can cause hemolytic anemia in premature babies and neurological and

ophthalmological disorders in children (Georgiadou ef al, 2021). The average

recommended nutrient intake (RNJ) for adults is 10mg/day (PDRI, 2015)

Table 13. Functional Properties of FDD fruit flesh

Property

Content level in FDD fruit
flesh

Vitamins
Vitamin A (IU/g)
Vitamin C (mg/100g)
Vitamin E (mg/100g)
Polyphenols
TPC (mg GAE/g)
TFC (mg QE/g)
Antioxidant Properties

DPPH free radical scavenging activity (%)
TEAC-ABTS (mg TE/g)

19.71 + 0.56 IU/g
7.015 + 3.03 mg/100g
.323 + 0.09 mg/100g

12.52 + 0.02 mg GAE/g
1.83 + 0.02 mg QE/g

96.07 + 0.86

77.87 = 5.43 mg TE/g

Polyphenols

Polyphenols are phytochemicals with a flavone backbone as a common structure.

Three main categories are flavonoids, phenolic acids and stilbenes. Polyphenols contribute


directly to the sensory characteristics in most fruits and vegetables such as flavor,
astringency and color (Shivembe & Ojinnaka, 2017). In this study, the total phenolic

content (TPC) and total flavonoid content (TFC) of FDD were evaluated as they exhibit

antioxidant activity in biological systems. Results show that TPC and TFC were 12.52 +
0.02 mg GAE/g FDD fruit flesh and 1.83 + 0.02 mg QE/g FDD fruit flesh, respectively
(Table 13). TPC value was higher compared to freeze-dried blueberry (4.26 mg GAE/g)
and cherry laurel (10.57 mg GAE/g) (Islary ef al., 2016; Shivembe & Ojinnaka, 2017;
Gumusay & Yalcin, 2019). It is also higher compared to other freeze-dried fruits such as
starfruit (4.67 mg GAE/ 100g), mango (8.34 mg GAE/ 100g), papaya (16.84 mg GAE/
100g) and watermelon (2.38 mg GAE/ 100g) (Shofian et al., 2011). Findings also showed
higher values in the total phenolic (6.26 + 14.08 mg GAE/g extract) and flavonoid (0.36 +
0.47 mg QE/g extract) contents for the methanolic extract of dried plum, a fruit also
extensively known to contain copious amounts of antioxidants and other phytochemicals

(Morabbi-Najafabad &Jamei, 2014).

The biosynthesis of phenolic compounds is dependent on many factors, such as
the plant genotype, growth conditions, developmental stage, soil, environmental
conditions, and other agricultural practices, as well as abiotic and biotic stress factors (Pap
er al., 2021). Phenolic antioxidants interfere with the oxidation process as free radical
terminators and sometimes also as metal chelators (Hidalgo ef a/., 2017). Flavonoids on
the other hand, are secondary metabolites with antioxidant activity which potency depends

on the number and position of free OH groups (Panche ef al., 2016)


Antioxidant Potential of FDD

Antioxidants retard oxidative processes through several mechanisms such as
hydrogen donation, singlet oxygen quenching, enzyme inhibition, UV absorption peroxide

decomposition and metal chelation (Pisoschi & Pop, 2015).

The DPPH assay has been used in many studies to monitor the scavenging
activities of antioxidants in lipophilic systems and the antioxidant activity of the
phytochemicals. It tests the ability of compounds to act as free radical scavengers or
hydrogen donor (Shivembe & Ojinnaka, 2017). On the other hand, the Trolox Equivalent
Antioxidant Capacity (TEAC) assay is based on the scavenging of the 2,2'-azinobis-(3-
ethylbenzothiazoline-6-sulfonic acid) (ABTS) radical converting it into a colorless
product. The degree of decolorization induced by a compound is related to that induced by

trolox, giving the TEAC value (Arts ef al., 2004).

The present findings indicate that FDD fruit flesh has a DPPH antioxidant activity
(AA) of 96.07 + 0.86 and ABTS value of 77.87 + 5.43 mg TE/g FDD fruit flesh (Table 1).
Fruits with a DPPH free radical scavenging activity of 87% and above are considered to
have an excellent scavenging effect against DPPH radical (Shofian ef al., 2011). The AA
of FDD fruit flesh were higher than other freeze-dried berries such as blueberry (49%) and
cherry laurel (35% AA) (Islary ef al., 2016; Shivembe & Ojinnaka, 2017; Gumusay &
Yalcin, 2019). Moreover, the ABTS value of FDD fruit flesh was higher than other red
fruits such as pomegranate (76.10 + 0.05 mg TE/g), strawberry (29.70 + 0.02 mg TE/g),

and raspberry (25.50 + 0.02 mg TE/g) (Gramza-Michatowska ef al., 2019).


The presence of the phenolic compounds in FDD fruit flesh can be accounted to
its antioxidant activity as previously reported for other fruits. Correlation analysis showed
the significant contribution of the phenolic compounds to the antioxidant activity of FDD
fruit flesh. Specifically, TPC had a correlation value of 0.9987 contributing to about 79.8%
(r?= 0.798, p<0.05) while TFC had a correlation value 0.7279 contributing to about 88.5%
(r?= 0.885, p<0.05) of the DPPH radical scavenging activity in freeze-dried duhat fruit.
The remaining proportion of its antioxidant activity can be attributed to other non-phenolic
compounds such as antioxidant vitamins and minerals as indicated in related studies on

berries (Heyman, 2015; Basu, 2019).

In-Vitro Lipid-Lowering Property of Philippine Duhat (Syzygium cumini L.) Freeze-
Dried Fruit Flesh

In vitro assay was performed to evaluate the potential lipid-lowering mechanism of
FDD fruit flesh through bile acid binding capacity, cholesterol micellar solubility inhibition
and pancreatic lipase inhibition. Cholestyramine and orlistat, a lipid-lowering drugs, were

also evaluated and used as the positive control.

Bile Acid Binding Capacity

Bile acids (BAs) contains both hydrophilic and hydrophobic regions that are
synthesized from cholesterol in the liver, stored in the gall bladder, and flow into the small
intestine after meal ingestion. Intestinal BAs facilitate digestion and absorption of lipids

and fat-soluble vitamins (Taoka ef a/., 2006).


Bile acid binding and increasing of their fecal excretion have been hypothesized as
a possible mechanism for lowering plasma cholesterol levels. Cholestyramine, a bile acid
sequestrant, disrupts the enterohepatic circulation of bile acids by sequestering them and
preventing their reabsorption from the gut, hence reduces the bile acid pool (Ngamukote ef
al., 2011). To maintain a steady level of bile acids in the blood, greater amount of

cholesterol is utilized by the body and converts it into bile (Insull et a/., 2006).

In the present study, the percentage of bile acid binding of polyphenol extracts from
FDD and the positive control cholestyramine were evaluated and presented in Figure 9. It

was found that FDD (1 mg/mL) had the ability to bind taurocholic acid at 15.034 1.26%.

However, the result was significantly lower compared to cholestyramine (43.29 + 0.93%).

Several studies support that the polyphenols extracted from fruits have a significant
positive correlation with the bile acid-binding ability (Adisakwattana ef al., 2010;
Ngamukote ef al., 2011; Wu et al., 2015; Chamnansilpa ef al., 2020). In the similar study
on freeze-dried bignay fruit, another local indigenous berry in the Philippines, it was
reported that its polyphenol rich extract could bind bile acids at 41.9%- 54.0%. The
variation was affected by the cultivar, maturity stage and thermal processing (Crieta ef al.,
2021). Previous study also reported that anthocyanin rich extracts (I mg/ml) of Thai berries
(i.e. Prunus domestica L. (TPE), Antidesma bunius (L.) Spreng, Syzygium cumini (L.)
Skeels, and Syzygium nervosum) could bind primary and secondary bile acids by 16.4—
36.6% (Chamnansilpa et al., 2020). Ogawa et al. (2006), proposed that epigallocatechin

gallate (EGCG) which is a tea polyphenol, disrupts the function of the bile acid through


intermolecular interaction via hydrogen bonding of steroid skeleton of sodium taurocholate
and the gallate group of EGCG. This interaction causes a chemical shift in the structure of
bile which would further cause prevention of micelle formation. A bile acid binding
capacity of 4-7% according to Kahlon & Smith (2007), is encouraging and could already

indicate health promoting benefits.

50.00
S 4500 43.30 + 2.28
40.00 :
35.00
30.00
25.00
20.00 15.03 + 2.71a
15.00 fi

10.00

Bile Acid Bound Bindong Capacity (%

ou
8 8

Freeze-Dried Duhat Cholestyramine

Figure 9. Mean (+SD) Sodium taurocholate binding of FDD Fruit Fresh Extracts
and Cholestyramine. Different superscript letters indicate significant differences
(Tukey’s HSD, p < 0.05).


Cholesterol Micellar Inhibition

Cholesterol plays a vital role in steroid hormone biosynthesis and biomembrane
formation and function. However, too much accumulation in the human body through the
blood vessels may result to the development of atherosclerosis (Su ef al., 2015). In
cholesterol synthesis, free cholesterol must be incorporated into micelles in intestinal
lumen for absorption (Woollett ef al, 2006), hence, interference in mixed micelle
formation in the intestine may help prevent hyperlipidemia. In the present study, the effect
polyphenol from FDD and cholestyramine, on the micellar solubility of cholesterol was
evaluated and summarized in Figure 10. Results show that polyphenols from FDD at 100
ug/ml concentration, had reduced the solubility of cholesterol micelles by 43.614 5.34% .
On the other hand, cholestyramine, used as positive control, had inhibited cholesterol

micellar solubility by 76.79 + 3.82% and was significantly different (p<0.05) from the FDD

samples. This is in agreement with the result on the anthocyanin-rich fraction from Thai
berries such as Prunus domestica L. (TPE), Antidesma bunius (L.) Spreng, Syzygium
cumini (L.) Skeels, and Syzygium nervosum, where, solubility of cholesterol in artificial
micelles was reduced by 53.0-67.6% at 0.25 mg/ml concentration (Chamnansilpa ef ai.,
2020). Meanwhile, the cholesterol micellar inhibition of FDD extract in the present study
was generally higher as compared to gallic acid (27.26 + 2.17%,), catechin (11.88 + 0.75%)
and epicatechin (19.49 + 3.71%) from grapeseed extract (Ngamukote ef al., 2011). The
reduced cholesterol solubility in micelles has also been reported for green tea
epigallocatechin gallate (EGCG) (Raederstorff et al., 2003) It was suggested that EGCG

decreases the micellar solubility of cholesterol by interfering with the structure of micellar


cholesterol, inducing the micelles to be larger and insoluble, thus inhibiting their formation
(Ngamukote ef al., 2011). The polyphenol-rich extracts of FDD, therefore, play a vital role
in the suppression of cholesterol absorption by reducing solubility of cholesterol
micellization. It is speculated that the reduction can be associated with the changes in the

structure of micellar cholesterol.

90.00
76.79 6.12a

|

80.00

x
iJ
=)
o

60.00
5000 43.614 5.352
40.00 if
30.00

20.00

Cholesterol Bound Capacity (%)

10.00

0.00 '
Freeze-Dried Duhat Cholestyramine

Figure 10.Mean (+SD) Cholesterol binding capacity of FDD Fruit Flesh Extracts and
Cholestyramine (Control). Different superscript letters indicate significant differences
(Tukey’s SD, p < 0.05).

Pancreatic Lipase Inhibition

Pancreatic lipase inhibition is the most widely studied mechanism for the
identification of potential anti-obesity agents (Lunagariya ef al., 2014). Pancreatic lipase is

the primary lipolytic enzyme that hydrolyzes dietary fats or triglycerides. Lipase inhibitors


like Orlistat, a drug used for obesity treatment, are used to reduce the activity of lipases in
order to decrease the gastrointestinal absorption of fats and thereby eliminated by fecal
route in vivo (Heck e¢ a/., 2000). In this study, the per cent pancreatic lipase inhibition of
polyphenol rich extract of FDD and positive control Orlitast are summarized in Figure 11.
As shown in the figure, FDD (11.091+ 3.80%) had a lipase inhibition that is significantly

lower than the control (65.574 1.21%) (p<0.05).

In the study conducted by Crieta ef al. (2021), bignay polyphenols inhibited
pancreatic lipase from 18.7%-39.0%, depending on it cultivar, maturity and thermal
processing applied. For other berries, in vitro studies reveal various inhibitory effect on
pancreatic lipase. Blackcurrant extract had no effect, blueberry and lingonberry extract
caused slight inhibition while berries from the Rubus family (raspberry, arctic bramble and
cloudberry) and strawberry had the highest pancreatic inhibition (McDougall et al., 2009).
It appears that proanthocyanidins components of the extracts may have influenced the
inhibition of these berries (Moreno ef al., 2003; McDougall ef al., 2009).. Findings on
oligomeric proanthocyanidins from apple have shown to be the main active components
responsible for inhibition of pancreatic lipase in vitro and for the prevention of triglyceride

absorption in humans and in mice models (Sugiyama ef al., 2007).

In the present study, the pancreatic lipase inhibition observed might be attributed
the flavonoid content found in FDD. It was suggested that flavonoids and phenolic acids
have the ability to bind to similar sites in pancreatic lipase while quercetin, might form a
complex interaction with pancreatic lipase thereby reducing the action of lipase. The

quercetin size and structural rigidity could be responsible for its binding characteristics


(more polar interactions) and consequently its higher pancreatic lipase inhibitory

potency. (Martinez-Gonzalez ef al., 2017).

80.00

70.00 65.57+1.91a
I

60.00

50.00

40.00

30.00

20.00

Pancreatic Lipase Inhinition (%)

11.09 + 3.79a
10.00 a

0.00 a
Freeze-Dried Duhat Orlistat

Figure 11. Mean (+SD) Pancreatic Lipase Inhibition of FDD Fruit Flesh Extracts and

Orlistat (Control). Different superscript letters indicate significant differences (Tukey’s
SD, p < 0.05).

Acute Oral Toxicity Evaluation of Philippine Duhat (Syzygium cumini L.) Freeze-Dried
Fruit Flesh

Acute toxicity test evaluates the adverse effects that occur within a short time after
a single dose administration of a test substance. The test is performed principally in rodents
to provide information on the potential toxicity of a new chemical or product (Loha et al.,
2019). In medicinal plants, the principal aim of assessing the safety is to identify the nature
and significance of adverse effect and to establish the exposure level at which this effect is

observed (Ibrahim et al., 2016). Consumption of medicinal plants, without evaluating their


safety and efficacy profile can result in toxic effects that may affect different organs like
the liver and kidneys (Hodges & Minich, 2015). Various parts of S. cumini plant have been
tested and proven to possess several properties like anti-inflammatory, chemoprotective,
hepatoprotective, and anti-diabetic (Ayanna ef al., 2015) and there exist many studies on
the acute and sub-chronic toxicity of plant part extracts in animal models. However, there
is a lack of experimental data on the toxicity of duhat (S. cumini) fruit. Hence, this study
was undertaken to examine the possible toxic effects of FDD fruit flesh extracts in male
and female ICR strain mice following a single oral administration of FDD at various doses

starting at 55 mg/kg BW.
Effect on Mortality and Morbidity

Data collected from the test procedure revealed that there were no clinical and
behavioral signs of toxicity such as tremors, convulsions, diarrhea, lethargy, and coma
observed in any of the mice examined during the 14 days of observation. There was also
zero morbidity and mortality in both male and female mice (Table 14). Similar results were
observed in other toxicological studies on ethanolic extracts of different parts of S. cumini.
In the study by Ayyanna ef al. (2015), acute oral administration of ethanolic extract of S.
cumini leaves to rats at a dose level of up to 5000mg/kg did not cause any mortality or toxic
symptoms up to 14 days of observation. Another study by Loha er al. (2019) showed that
methanolic leaf extract of S. guineense, another species from Myrtacea family, had an

LD50 greater than 5000mg/kg BW when tested in rats.


Table 14. Mortality and morbidity rate in treated male and female ICR Mice

Treatment Male ICR Mice Female ICR Mice
Mortality Morbidity Mortality Morbidity

Distilled Water 0 0 0 0
55 mg/kg FDD 0 0 0 0
Distilled Water 0 0 0 0
175 mg/kg FDD 0 0 0 0
Distilled Water 0 0 0 0
550 mg/kg FDD 0 0 0 0
Distilled Water 0 0 0 0
2000 mg/kg FDD 0 0 0 0
Distilled Water 0 0 0 0
5000 mg/kg FDD 0 0 0 0

Effect on Feed and Water Intake and Body Weight

In experimental animals, changes in body weight, feed and water intake have been
used as an indicator of their general health status (El-Hilaly et a/., 2004). According to the
National Laboratory Animal Center (2013), the normal feed intake of an adult ICR mice
ranges from 3-8 g/day. In the present study, the mean daily feed intake for all mice groups
(Figure 12A-B) fall within this range and there was no significant difference among the
control and treatment groups in both male (P=0.07) and female (P=0.44) mice. For the
daily water intake (Figure 13A-B), there was also no significant difference observed

between control group and treatment group for both sexes.

Meanwhile, the body weight was recorded on Day 0 (before treatment), Day 7 and
Day 14. Results show that both control and treated male and female mice groups exhibited
a gradual increase in body weight compared to their initial values (Figure 14A and 14B).

At the end of the experiment, all FDD- treated male mice groups obtained an average body


weight gain of 2.33 + 1.07 while the male control mice obtained an average body weight
gain of 3.621+ 1.60. On the other hand, FDD-treated and control female mice groups
obtained an average body weight gain of 1.86+ 1.16 and 1.07+ 0.63, respectively. No
significant differences were observed between the control and FDD treated groups for both

male (p=0.17 ) and female (p=0.21) ICR mice.

Male

8 y
5.9441 .14a

5.71#.86a 5.58+0.93a 5.6520.80a

§.340.9a 5.31+.98a ~ Aad - 18a
5.1140.84a 5.0620.83a § .07+0.70a

HTT

Treatment Groups

Feed Intake (grams)
> a
+ +

nN
+

SSmg/kg D
17Smg/kg D
Distilled water
550mg/kg D
Distilled water
2000me/kg D
Distilled water
5000mg/kg D

Distilled water
Distilled water

Figure 12A. Average daily feed intake of control and FDD-treated male mice



Feed Intake (grams)

8.00 Female

6 se 80a

S.16#1.21a 5.3821,08a

4.9241.02a ] 4.91+1.02a ¢ 2 4,9340.89
6.00 4.7740.96a 5.02+0.76a + a 4560.09a 47820740 |

STL


S

55mg

5000mg/kg D

175mg¢/kg D
2000mg/kg D
Distilled water

Distilled water

Dis!
Di

Treatment Groups

Water Intake (grams)

Figure 12B. Average daily feed intake of control and FDD-treated female mice

|.
|.

S5meg/kg D

550mg/kg D
§000mg/kg D

Distilled water
Distilled water

Distilled water
Distilled water

cas : —

Figure 13A. Average daily water intake of control and FDD-treated male mice


12.00 +
11.00 +
10.00 +
9.00 +

|

6.00 +
5.00 +
4.00 +
3.00 +
2.00 +

Water Intake (grams)

1.00
1 |
0.00 |

2000me/kg D

Distilled

Distilled y

Figure 13B. Average daily water intake of control and FDD-treated female mice

The change in body weight usually reflects the physiological changes that take
place in animals like changes in liver function, hormones, and poor absorption of protein
and amino acids. In the present study, a drastic decrease in body weight was observed in
female group 5 on the 7th day and regained it on the 14th day of the observation period.
This result may not be considered as a reflection of the toxicological effects of the fruit but
could be related to stress caused by the administration of the test substance and the blood
extraction performed for hematological and biochemical assessment. In a similar incident
reported by Perk e¢ al. (2013), they reported that the stress induced by the gavage may
cause inflammation on the digestive tract, which could lead to difficulty in eating among
animals. Moreover, loss of body weight and reduced food intake usually happen during
stressful procedures in mice (Goldkuhl ef a/., 2010; Teilmann ef a/., 2012). In the study

by Teilmann ef al. (2012), groups of sampled mice using retro-orbital sinus puncture and


facial vein phlebotomy significantly lost weight following blood sampling, both groups
also consumed less feed following the blood sampling compared to pre-experimental
levels. These data, therefore, suggest that single oral dose administration of FDD fruit does

not affect the feed and water intake, and body weight of ICR mice.

Male
40.00 +
35.00 4 aia
30.00 + =
a —— —*— Distilled water
i oe SSme/ke D
2500 + sSme/kg |
a) Distilled water
~
© 2000 | ~~ 175me/kg D
3 Distilled water
} i500 | —e—550me/kg D
8 —*—Distilled water
Pano —-—2000meg/kg D
—— Distilled water
5.00 ——5000mg/kg D
0.00
Day 1 Day 7 Day 14
Days

Figure 14A. Body weight of control and FDD-treated ICR male mice at day 0, day 7 and
day 14


Female
40.00 T
35.00 +
3000 4
a
E 2500 +
g
a)
=
S 20.00 4
$
> 15.00 4
Bis
oS r
a
10.00 4 —e—2000mg/kg D
—e Distilled water
500 4 ——5000m¢g/kg D

0.00 -
Day 1 Day 7 Day 14

Days
Figure 14B. Body weight of control and FDD-treated ICR male mice at day 0, day 7 and
day 14

Macroscopic and Microscopic Observation of Organs

One of the most sensitive drug toxicity indicators is organ weight. Several factors
have been reported that may influence animal organ weights including the strain of animal,
age, sex and environmental and experimental conditions (Michael ef al., 2007; Piao ef
al., 2013). An increase in organ weight may indicate the occurrence of hypertrophy while

a decrease suggests necrosis in the target organ (Teo e/ al., 2002).

In this study, organs of male and female ICR mice in situ given distilled water and

varying doses of FDD fruit flesh extracts are shown in Figure 15. Gross pathological


examination of both control and treatment groups during the time of necropsy showed no
macroscopic manifestations of toxicity in the organs (Figure 16). The organ weight of the
collected tissues such as esophagus, stomach, small and large intestines, lungs, liver,
kidneys, spleen, heart, and brain of both male (Table 15A) and female (Table 15B) mice
treated with various doses of FDD fruit flesh extracts were comparable to their

corresponding control group.

Ee gee RTE
rf 4 oF
on

)
o
~~ '
&
a
o
ir
€
Control 55 me/ke 175 mg/kg 550 mg/kg 2000 mg/kg 5000mg/ke
(Distilled Water) FODE FODE FODE FDDE FODE

Figure 15. Organs of male and female ICR mice in situ given distilled water and varying
doses of FDD fruit flesh extracts: 55 mg/kg, 175 mg/kg, 550 mg/kg, 2000 mg/kg and
5000 mg/kg

On the other hand, light microscopic examination of the vital organs including liver,
kidney, heart, lung, spleen, gastrointestinal tract (GIT), stomach, and brain of mice in all
the FDD- treated and control groups did not reveal any pathological lesions. Liver and

kidney showed normal morphological and cellular architecture that are similar with the

control group. Varying concentrations of FDD treatment groups showed normal cardiac


muscle fibers and lungs showed normal alveolar structure with no treatment-related
inflammatory response. Normal structure and histology of the spleen, GIT, and brain were

also observed in all FDD-treated mice (Figure 17).

Esophagus
and
Brain Heart Lungs Liver Stomach Spleen Intestines Kidneys

5000 mg/kg
FDDE

Control
(Distilled Water)

Figure 16. Organs of representative ICR mice given distilled water (control) and the
highest dose (5000mg/kg BW) of FDD

Table 15A. Weight of selected organs (g) of FDD-treated male ICR mice.
pee

. . Right Left
Treatment Brain Heart Liver Spleen Stomach LI SI Kidn Kidn

Distilled water 0.46 0.3 1.85 0.08 0.18 0.32 0.51 0.28 0.26 0.37
55 mg/kg FDD 0.47 0.19 1.62 0.07 0.17 0.24 0.53 0.19 0.18 0.17
Distilled water 0.46 0.18 1.67 0.06 0.3 0.33 0.6 0.22 0.22 0.14
175 mg/kgFDD 0.46 0.2 1.93 0.11 0.24 0.25 0.76 0.29 0.28 0.17
Distilled water 0.48 0.24 1.87 0.08 0.19 0.3 0.85 0.26 0.27 0.17
550 mg/kg FDD 0.47 0.16 1.67 0.06 0.19 0.31 0.55 0.27 0.26 0.14
Distilled water 0.47 0.23 1.7 0.09 0.23 0.31 0.82 0.29 0.29 0.18

Lungs

2000 mg/kg
FDD 0.48 0.16 1.69 0.09 0.23 0.25 0.72 0.31 0.29 0.27
Distilled water 0.42 0.22 1.94 0.1 0.17 0.28 0.53 0.29 0.26 0.17
5000 mg/kg
FDD 0.45 0.22 1.54 0.06 0.18 0.3 0.58 0.29 0.27 0.13


Table 15B. Weight of selected organs (g) of FDD-treated female ICR mice
——EEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEE——EEE—————EEEEEEE rE EEErrEr———————EEEOEOE EEE

Right Left

Treatment Brain Heart Liver Spleen Stomach LI SI Petia tay Lungs
Distilled water 0.51 0.22 1.62 0.1 0.21 0.24 0.43 0.17 0.15 0.18
55 mg/kg FDD 0.46 0.21 1.44 0.08 0.19 0.32 0.51 0.17 0.16 0.15
Distilled water 0.46 0.19 1.36 0.06 0.19 0.3 0.61 0.22 0.22 0.14
(75 mgkgFDD 0.46 0.16 1.21 0.06 0.22 0.31 0.51 0.29 0.17 0.18
Distilled water 0.51 0.18 1.33 0.11 0.2 0.5 0.76 0.2 0.19 0.15
$50mg/kgFDD 0.47 0.19 1.15 0.08 0.17 0.15 0.49 0.17 0.19 0.14
Distilled water 0.51 0.18 1.5 0.08 0.2 0.32 0.74 0.23 0.17 0.13
2000 mg/kg
FDD 0.51 0.13 1.32 0.07 0.23 0.39 0.68 0.18 0.17 0.16
Distilled water 0.48 0.22 1.26 0.08 0.13 0.18 0.59 0.19 0.17 0.15
5000 mg/kg

FDD 0.5 0.18 1.13 0.07 0.19 0.38 0.6 0.11 0.2 0.16

Similarly, the microscopic examination of selected organs such as liver, lungs,
kidneys, stomach, intestine, heart and pancreas in toxicity evaluation of hydroalcoholic
extract (HE) of S. cumini (L.) Skeels, Myrtaceae, leaves revealed that the extract at different
doses had normal architecture suggesting no treatment-related effects in rodents (Silva er
al., 2021). Also, in other species from Myrtaceae family, treatment of animals with S.
guineense leaves extract did not show significant microscopic changes on the normal

architecture of the liver and kidney (Shenkut e¢ al., 2021).


Distilled Water 2000 mg/kg FOD

2000 mg/kg FDD

Distilled Water

Figure 17. Histological findings of the brain (A), liver (B), spleen(C), small intestine(D),
large intestine (E), heart(F), lungs(G), and kidney (H) of ICR mice given distilled water
(control) and FDD fruit flesh extract (2000 mg/kg BW).

Effects on Biochemical Parameters

Biochemical parameters have significant roles as a marker in toxicological
evaluation because of their response to clinical signs and symptoms produced by toxicants.
Evaluation of kidney and liver function is of prime importance to assess the toxic properties
of extracts and drugs (Fe'res ef al., 2006 as cited by Loha et al., 2019). In this study,

creatinine and BUN were used as indicators to determine the effect of FDD on kidneys.


Results showed that creatinine levels of male and female mice given with various
concentrations of FDD were within the normal range of the control group and published
normal range by Suckow ef al. (2003) except for male and female mice treated with 175
mg/kg dose that showed a moderate increase. Likewise, BUN levels of FDD-treated male

and female mice were also within the range of the control group (Figure 18A and 1 8B).

In the study conducted by Deb ef al. (2013), aqueous extracts of leaves, roots and
seeds and methanolic extracts of leaves and barks of S. cumini at SOmg/kg BW and 100
mg/kg BW showed a highly significant effect in controlling plasma urea levels and plasma

creatinine in diabetic Wistar albino rats compared to diabetic control.

cot

Bs Bs fs oes a ay oe oe

youN}Xo Ysayy WN4yy Gd Jo sasop BurArea
pue ([o1UOD) JoeM pal[NsIp UdAIT ddI YO] aeway pue afeul Jo (gq) uadoIU vain poolq pue (VY) eUTUTOID poolg “g] aNdIy

ree

rea santa
ld - tall
ea

i ia | ie — (v)


Renal damages are usually associated with creatinine and BUN levels. These are
waste products excreted in urine by kidneys. When the kidneys become impaired, the
creatinine and urea levels in the blood will rise due to poor clearance by the kidneys
(Wang efal., 2011). A high serum level of urea also indicates that the animal is dehydrated
while low urea levels indicates acute liver failure or overhydration (Ugwah- Oguejiofor ev.

al., 2019).

The incongruity in the creatinine levels in male and female mice treated with
175mg/kg dose may be due to other factors affecting mice’s metabolism. Nevertheless,
macroscopic and microscopic examination of the right and left kidneys demonstrated
absence of pathologic lesions across all treatment regimen evaluated. Hence, results imply

that FDD did not cause any damage to the kidneys.
Effect on Hematological Parameters

Hematopoiesis is the process of blood cell formation. Hematological parameters in
animal studies provide a likelihood of toxicity on the hematological system in humans
(Olson et al., 2000). All of the cells found in the blood begin its life as stem cells. It matures
into three main types of cells- erythrocyte (RBC), a leukocyte (WBC), or a thrombocyte
(platelet). While WBC has three main types i.e. lymphocytes, monocytes, and
granulocytes—and three main types of granulocytes (neutrophils, eosinophils, and

basophils) (Dean, 2005).

Elevated or very low levels of hematological parameters may indicate a possible

harmful effect of compounds present in plants (Arika ef a/., 2016). In this study, all the


hematologic parameters evaluated were within the range of the control (Figure 19) and the
established range of Serfilippi ef al. (2003) except for the day 14 monocyte level in male
given with 55mg/kg dose and day 14 granulocyte level in male given with 55 and
5000mg/kg dose, which was slightly above the normal range of the control on day 14.
Increased circulating monocytes and granulocytes are associated with infections, trauma.
and autoimmunity (Kratofil et a/., 2016; Haist et al., 2017). However, the alteration may

not be treatment-related as histologic finding confirmed the lack of toxicity of FDD.

Similar results were observed in subacute toxicity study on methanolic extract of S.
guineense leaves using treatment doses at 500 mg/kg and 1500 mg/kg and on freeze-dried
gooseberry (Physalis peruviana L.) fruit juice using a treatment doses up to 5000 mg/kg
where hematological parameters for the animals tested also did not differ from the control

group (Perk ef al., 2013; Loha et al., 2019)

Combining the results of the histology, hematology and biochemical parameters,
data suggest that FDD does not appear to produce a significant toxicity in mice by oral
administration of 55mg/kg BW to 5000mg/kg BW dose. Hence, the estimated LD50 of

FDD for acute oral toxicity test is >5000 mg/kg.


Female

10.60

M/ evOl OAM

Male

wo

|

=
>
= 2.8 Sb Soc

WH tvOl OAM

<

dds 3>/3Wo00s

aomnay poypAsia

Gs 33 Q 007

sain ay poqtasiGh

dds 340s ¢

ddl 3471

aay poqLAsiG,

dda S>ySus¢

Jawa POASICL

daa 3x3 wooos

sae poHNs! a

daa 3x3 woooe

4910 paINsEd

daa 34/3 woss

4910 8 POISE

daa 3x/3uscr

s910 8 POTS

daa sysuss

49108 poHUs

aDy |

Groups

e

Cl 3 >v3wWO00S

a

| :

da 3>/%wWo00z

Jaws poyAStaL

as 31Awoss

Female

2aiWAs PoILOSIG,

ddl 34 /sus7 1



= aay pornsi,

dd 3>y8ug¢

aamay poyasia

Irv 9vOl O1

‘ Se wee

= JAVA POTLASTA

da 3vRwW900T

sae ay ponAsil


ida 34Auross

=
= saw pounsia

da SyAurset

Male

dda Aysugs

Wy ovol oam

ges
ae

5m

»
2m
i)


nent Gi

it Groups

Treatment

~~
[=4)
—


yaqeer ye

Ms

|

PIPPI

nyu

yoRNXa YSay WnIy GGA JO Sesop SurAyea pur ([01UOd) Ja}2M pays! UdAIS OOIW
a[eulay pue afew Jo (q) ayAoojnuess — pue (q]) aAoou0w “(D) ayAooydurt] “(g) O@u ‘(V) OPM ‘A1ord moore i amnied

LOT


In Vivo Investigation of the Anti-Obesity and Lipid-Lowering Properties of Freeze-
Dried Fruit Duhat” [Syzygium cumini (L.) Skeels| (FDD) Fruit Flesh

Induction of Obesity and Hypercholesterolemia
Food and Water Intake

The food and water intake of the mice groups during induction is presented in Table
16. The food and calorie intakes of the HFD group (5.32+ 0.06 g and 24.42+0.29 kcal) were
significantly higher than that of the ND group (4.56 0.15 g and 20.944 0.71 kcal) during
the induction period. Meanwhile, significantly lower average water intake was recorded
from HFD group (7.93+ 0.66 ml) as compared with that of the ND group (9.05+ 0.61 ml).
Nonetheless, both mean water and feed intakes were within the normal range as proposed

by Bachmanov ef al. (2002).

Table 16. Food and water intake of mice during induction period.

Mean Feed Mean Feed Mean Water
SO Ns Intake (g) Intake (kcal) Intake (ml)
ND 4.56+ 0.15? 20.94+ 0.71a 9.05+ 0.61?
HFD 5.32+ 0.06° 24.42+0.29> 7.93+ 0.66°

ND — Normal Diet HFD — High Fat Diet

Values represent the mean +S.E. (ND n= 7; HFD n=28).

Means in the same column followed by common letter(s) are not significantly different at
5%


Body Weight

Table 17 presents the body weights and weight gain of the mice after the 3- week
induction period. The baseline body weights of ND ( 23.78+ 0.56g) and HFD (25.94
0.42g) groups were not significantly different. On the other hand, a significant increase

from the baseline weights of both ND group (31.24 1.53) and HFD group (32.39+ 0.51)

were observed after the 3-week induction period. The increase in body weight is related

to the mice’s natural growth as they age. Weight gains between the ND (+7.45 + 1.02 g)

and HFD (+6.45 + 0.52) groups after the induction period were not statistically different.

Table 17. Mean body weight and weight gain of mice during induction

MEAN BODY WEIGHT
GROUP Before After Mean Weight %&Change
Gain(g)
Induction (g) Induction (g)
ND 23.78+ 0.568 31.24 1.53% 7.45 + 1.02 31%
HFD 25.94+ 0.423 32.394 0.51> 6.45 + 0.52 25%

ND — Normal Diet HFD — High Fat Diet
Values represent the mean +S.E. (ND n= 7; HFD n=28).
Means in the same column followed by common letter(s) are not significantly different at 5%

Blood Lipids

The blood TC and TAG levels of mice throughout the 3-week induction period are
shown in Table 18. No significant difference was seen from the blood TC and TAG levels
between the ND (135.574 13.99mg/dl and 95.28+ 14.67) and HFD group (139.75+ 4.21
and 135.35+ 18.59mg/dl) prior to induction. A fter the induction, the mean TC level of HFD

group (180.03£6.11 mg/dl) increased from the baseline blood TC level by 29% while the


ND group (129.284 5.75 mg/dl) decreased by 5%. The increase in blood TC of HFD mice
was significantly higher compared to the ND mice group. Meanwhile the blood TAG levels
did not vary significantly between ND (104.574 6.46 mg/dl) and HFD
(133.60£19.07mg/dl) group after the 3-week induction period. The implies the success of
inducing obesity (20% body weight gain) and hypercholesterolemia (at least 20% increase
in TC) in mice fed with HFD.

Table 18. Mean blood cholesterol and triglyceride levels of mice during induction
MEAN TC (mg/dl) MEAN TAG (mg/dl)

GROUP Before After Before After
oO 0
Induction Induction “Change Induction Induction AEE UEL
ND 135.57+13.9% 129.28+5.75* -5% 95.28414.677 104.574 6.46° 10%
HFD 139.75+4.2? 180.03+6.11° 29% 135.35+18.59° 133.60+19.07° -1%

ND — Normal Diet HFD — High Fat Diet
Values represent the mean +S.E. (ND n= 7; HFD n=28).
Means in the same column followed by common letter(s) are not significantly different at 5%

Effects of Freeze-Dried Fruit Duhat” [Syzygium cumini (L.) Skeels] (FDD) Fruit
Flesh Supplementation on Biomarkers of Obesity and Dyslipidemia

Food and Water Intake

Mean feed and water intakes of different mice groups during the supplementation
period are shown in Table 19. All the mice from the different treatment groups consumed

normal amount of feeds. Control mice fed with normal diet consumed significantly lower


amount of feeds compared with the HFD and HFD + different concentrations of FDD mice
groups. Highest feed consumption was observed in mice fed with HFD+30% FDD but
not significantly different among other groups. In terms of water intake, no significant
difference was seen among mice groups and water consumed were within the normal intake

for mice.

Table 19. Mean feed and water intake of mice during supplementation period

GROUP MEAN FEED INTAKE (g) MEAN WATER INTAKE (ml)
ND 4.24+ 0.198 8.32+ 0.433
HFD 5.17+0.19° 7.74+ 0.492
HFD + 10% FDD 5.34+ 0.20° 7.31+ 0.39
HFD + 20% FDD 5.32+ 0.09% 7.71 0.48?
HFD + 30% FDD 5.54+ 0.17° 7.484 0.423

ND- Normal Diet; HFD- High-Fat Diet; HFD-10%FDD — HFD w/ 10% Freeze-dried
Duhat; HFD-20%FDD — HFD w/ 20% Freeze-dried Duhat; HFD-30%FDD — HFD w/ 30%
Freeze-dried Duhat;

Values represent the mean +S.E. (n= 7).

Means in the same column followed by different letter(s) are significantly different at
p<0.05.

Body Weight

Table 20 presents the mean body weights of all mice groups which were statistically
comparable at the start and end of the study. Weight gain was noted in all treatment groups
with the HFD+20% FDD group having the least average weight gain and nearest with the
control ND group weight gain, although not significantly different with other mice groups.
Furthermore, FDD supplementation at different doses did not suppress weight gain in obese
mice fed with HFD. Similar finding was reported by Prior ef al. (2010) where ingestion of

black raspberries did not significantly suppress body weight gain in mice fed a HFD


containing 60% fat. This result could be attributed to higher feed intake of mice groups
supplemented with FDD which could possibly due to the natural sweetness of full-ripe

duhat that enhanced appetite.

Table 20. Mean body weight and weight gain of mice during supplementation

MEAN BODY WEIGHT (g) MEAN WEIGHT

GROUP Week 0 Week 9 GAIN (g)
ND 31.24+ 1.532 34.374 2.478 3.13+ 1.324
HFD 33.10+ 0.76? 37.35+ 1.128 4.25+ 0.744
HFD + 10%

FDD 32.214 0.91? 37.92+ 1.554 5.71+ 0.882
HFD + 20%

FDD 32.414 0.70? 36.284 1.01? 3.87+ 0.822
HFD + 30%

FDD 31.84+ 1.632 37.544 3.14? 5.69+ 1.702

ND- Normal Diet; HFD- High-Fat Diet; HFD-10%FDD — HFD w/ 10% Freeze-dried
Duhat; HFD-20%FDD — HFD w/ 20% Freeze-dried Duhat; HFD-30%FDD — HFD w/ 30%
Freeze-dried Duhat;

Values represent the mean +S.E. (n= 7).

Means in the same column followed by different letter(s) are significantly different at
p<0.05.

Macroscopic and Microscopic Observations of Adipose Tissues

Mean weights of adipose depots including the abdominal, subcutaneous,
epididymal, mesenteric, and heart fat of each experimental group are shown in Figure 20.
HFD+30%FDD group had the highest weights of adipose depots as well as percent
adiposity index (%AI), a marker of central adiposity (Figure 21). These observations
correspond to higher weight gain which could possibly be due to the higher food

consumption of this mice group. Interestingly, HFD+20% FDD displayed the lowest


weights of adipose tissues and %AI, although these values did not vary significantly with

other mice groups.

Microscopic observations of abdominal adipose tissues between groups showed
varying sizes of the adipocytes (Figure 22). Measurement of the diameter of the adipocytes
from the HFD group showed significant difference in adipocyte diameter compared to the
other groups (Table 21). Meanwhile, there was no significant difference between ND, HFD
+ 10% FDD, and HFD + 30% FDD, while HFD + 20% FDD showed significant difference

compared to ND.

Body fat accumulation in obesity is said to play a role in disease risk. Generally, a
high-fat diet feeding is associated with the development of central obesity and fatty liver
(Eccleston ef al., 2011; Ulla ef al:, 2017). In the present study, histological analysis of the
liver tissues showed that FDD supplementation prevented liver steatosis and controlled
abdominal adipocyte hypertrophy. This result could indicate that FDD could regulate
HFD-induced lipid accumulation in adipose tissues and liver. On the other hand, body fat
distribution across major fat fads showed that 20%FDD supplementation prevented more
body fat accumulation compared to HFD group despite an increased in feed intake.
HFD+20%FDD group had 18% lower abdominal fat, 13% lower subcutaneous fat, 11.67%
lower epidydimal fat 11.4% lower mesenteric fat, and 16.67% lower heart fat than the HFD
group. Consistent with this result, HFD+20%FDD group also had the lowest AI% among
the groups which was | 1.36% lower as compared with the HFD group. This is in agreement
with the results reported by Heyman ey al. (2014), where, the relative weight of epididymal

fat pads were lower in groups supplemented with 20% w/w lingonberry and acai, compared


to the high-fat control. Meanwhile, the study on S. cumini seed and leaves also showed its
limiting effects on retroperitoneal, mesenteric and epididymal adipose fat pad

accumulation in rat models (Benevides et al., 2019; Ulla et al., 2017).

Several mechanisms involving the actions of polyphenols in controlling lipid
accumulation are previously reported. The potential mechanisms include modifications in
appetite, up-regulation of enzymes involved in hepatic fat oxidation, and decreased nutrient
absorption (Rains ef al., 2010). Kuppusamy & Das (1992) demonstrated that quercetin
induced lipolysis of primary rat adipocytes in a dose- and time-dependent manner by
increasing cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) levels and hormone-sensitive lipase

(HSL) activity.

Some polyphenols also exhibits anti-inflammatory activity by reducing serum
levels of inflammatory cytokines IL-1B and IL-4 of obese individuals (Ganjali & Sahebkar,
2014) and suppressing oxidative stress in obese animal models (Boccellino, 2020).
Previous study reported that supplementation with bilberry juice resulted in significant
decreases in plasma concentrations of C-reactive protein, IL-6, and IL-15 (Karlsen ef al.,
2010). In clinical studies, strawberry extract, rich in anthocyanins, reduced the postprandial
inflammation, plasma IL-6, as well as increased insulin sensitivity in obese humans

(Edirisinghe e¢ al., 2011)

Resveratrol, a polyphenolic compound found in berries, can play a role in
regulating energy homeostasis by activating adenosine monophosphate-activated protein

kinase (AMPK). AMPK may inhibit differentiation and decreasing proliferation of


adipocytes, promote lipolysis and B-oxidation and reduces lipogenic gene expression and
lipid accumulation. (Tomé-Carneiro et al., 2012; Han er al., 2019). Lee and Kim (2020)
proposed that mulberry fruit extract suppress adipogenesis through modulating miR-
21/143 expression and AMPK activity in 3T3-L1 adipocytes. Moreover a supplementation
of resveratrol combined with epigallocatechin-3-gallate increased mitochondrial capacity

and stimulated fat oxidation in obese humans (Most et al., 2016)

A me

Figure 20. Mean adipose tissue weights (tSEM) of different treatment mice after
supplementation. Bars with different letter(s) are statistically different at p<0.05 using
ANOVA.

ND- Normal Diet; HFD- High-Fat Diet; HFD-10%FDD — HFD w/ 10% Freeze-dried
Duhat; HFD-20%FDD — HFD w/ 20% Freeze-dried Duhat; HFD-30%FDD — HFD w/ 30%
Freeze-dried Duhat.

AFat- Abdominal Fat; MFat- Mesentery Fat; SFat- Subcutaneous Fat; EFat- Epididymal
Fat; HFat- Heart Fat.



Figure 21. Mean adiposity index (“) in mice after supplementation. Bars with the same
letters are not statistically significant at p<0.05 using ANOVA.

Table 21. Mean adipocyte diameter (um) from mice abdominal adipose tissues with
different diets

GROUP ADIPOCYTE DIAMETER (um)
ND 13.13 43.79?

HFD 28.51 + 9.93

HFD + 10% FDD 14.93 + 6.30 3°

HFD + 20% FDD 16.16 + 4.68 °

HFD + 30% FDD 13.75 + 3.08 *°

ND- Normal Diet; HFD- High Fat Diet, HFD-10%FDD — HFD w/ 10% Freeze-dried
Duhat; HFD-20%FDD — HFD w/ 20% Freeze-dried Duhat; HFD-30%FDD — HFD w/ 30%
Freeze-dried Duhat;

Values represent mean + SD (n=60)

Means with the same superscript are not significant at p<0.05 using Tukey’s HSD


Figure 22. Effect of FDD on adipocyte size and architecture. Representative photograph
of abdominal fat sections from each group of rats: ND- Normal Diet; HFD- High Fat Diet;
HFD-10%FDD — HFD w/ 10% Freeze-dried Duhat; HFD-20%FDD — HFD w/ 20%
Freeze-dried Duhat,; HFD-30%FDD — HFD w/ 30% Freeze-dried Duhat. Representative
histological sections of the abdominal fat from groups showed varying degrees of sizes of
the adipocyte diameter. Hematoxylin and eosin. Magnification = 10x, Scale bar = 20 pm.


Macroscopic and Microscopic Observations of Organs

It was observed that the HFD group mice developed pale, soft, and enlarged livers
which were absent in other mice groups (Figure 23). Consistent with this result, the
histolopathologic analyses of the liver showed that HFD group developed steatosis,
characterized by small intracytoplasmic fat vacuoles at the periacinar and centrilobular
areas with limited necrosis in the hepatocytes. Compared to HFD group, normal
appearance of liver architecture without any steatotic, fibrotic, and inflammatory changes
were observed in the ND group. Treatments with 10% and 20% FDD showed a liver
histology comparable with that of the ND group while the HFD+30%FDD group showed
similar histological features in HFD group but to a lesser extent (Figure 24). Meanwhile,
no significant effect was observed in terms of relative weights of the left and right kidneys,
spleen, pancreas and stomach which may indicate that these organs were not adversely

affected by the HFD and HFD-FDD complexes (Figure 25).

HFO+ 10% HFD+ 20% HFD+ 30%
FoD FoD FOD

Figure 23. Gross appearance of the liver of representative mouse per treatment
group. There was enlargement, softness, and paleness of the liver from the high-fat diet
(HFD) group. Gross abnormalities of the liver were not observed in mice fed with normal
diet (ND) and those that received HFD + different concentration of freeze-dried duhat
(HFD+FDD).


An increase in organ weight may indicate the occurrence of hypertrophy while a
decrease suggests necrosis in the target organ (Teo ef al., 2002). In the present study, the
relative weights of liver, left and right kidneys, stomach and spleen of the treatment groups
were comparable to that of the control group. Similar findings were reported by Wu ef al.
(2013) using blueberry and mulberry juice supplementation in high fat fed mice. In an in
vivo study reported using various parts of S. cumini, liver and kidney weights were 8.78%
and 4.91% lower in rats fed with high carbohydrates, high fat diet supplemented with S.

cumini seed powder (Ulla et al., 2017).


Figure 24 . Effects of FDD on histopathological features of the liver. Representative
photograph of liver sections from each group of rats: ND- Normal Diet; HFD- High Fat
Diet; HFD-10%FDD — HFD w/ 10% Freeze-dried Duhat, HFD-20%FDD — HFD w/ 20%
Freeze-dried Duhat; HFD-30%FDD — HFD w/ 30% Freeze-dried Duhat. The liver in ND
group showed normal appearance of the liver architecture. However, mild infiltration of
fat deposit in the liver parenchyma and degenerative changes such as mild necrosis in the
hepatocytes were found in HFD group. HFD + 10% FDD and HFD + 20% FDD did not
show fat deposits and showed normal appearance similar to ND group. HFD + 30% FDD
showed occasional fat deposits and were decreased sometimes to zero. Hematoxylin and
eosin. Magnification 4x, Scale bar = 200 um


YY Yp ln Y Y

Figure 25. Mean (4SEM) organ-to-body weight ratios of different treatment mice
after supplementation. Bars with the same letters are not statistically significant at p<0.05
using ANOVA. ND- Normal Diet; HFD- High-Fat Diet; HFD-10%FDD — HFD w/ 10%
Freeze-dried Duhat; HFD-20%FDD — HFD w/ 20% Freeze-dried Duhat; HFD-30%FDD —

HFD w/ 30% Freeze-dried Duhat.

Blood Lipids

Cholesterol is a sterol synthesized by animal cells and is also a component of the
diet. Its main function is to maintain the integrity and fluidity of cell membranes and to
serve as a precursor for the synthesis of substances that are vital for the organism including

steroid hormones, bile acids, and vitamin D (Zampelas & Magriplis, 2019)

Prior to 9-week supplementation, HFD and HFD-FDD mice groups had

significantly higher blood TC levels compared to the ND group (Figure 26), showing that


HFD (45% fat) had induced hypercholesterolemia in male ICR mice during the 3-week
induction period. During the supplementation period, the mean blood TC levels of FDD-
supplemented groups were lower but not significantly different compared to HFD group.
There was also no significant difference in the mean blood TC level across time periods

within the same treatment group.

Chronic dyslipidemia is believed to be a major clinical symptom associated with
high-fat diet feeding in animals and has been characterized as a major risk factor for CVDs
(Ulla er al., 2017). In this study, high-fat diet feeding in mice increased blood TC level.
Among the treatment groups, 20% FDD supplementation prevented the rise of blood TC
levels at week 9. This result was in agreement with the in vivo evaluation of some berries
where mice groups fed with 20% w/w freeze-dried lingonberry and blackcurrant obtained
a blood TC significantly lower compared to the control (Heyman ef al., 2014). Rekha ef
al. (2008) investigated the possible antioxidant potential of aqueous extract of S. cumini
(pulp) in streptozotocin (STZ)-induced diabetic Wistar female rats. Results reveal that
animals fed with aqueous extract of S. cumini (100 mg/kg and 200 mg/kg BW) pulp had

significantly lower TC compared to STZ-induced diabetic rats.


“—ND =—HFD —HFD+10%FDD =@®HFD+20%FDD =mHFD + 30% FOD

MEAN TOTAL CHOLESTEROL (mg/dl)

—- —

SUPPLEMENTATION PERIOD (WEEKS)

Figure 26. Mean (4SEM) blood cholesterol levels of different treatment mice during
supplementation. ND- Normal Diet; HFD- High-Fat Diet; HFD-10%FDD —HFD w/ 10%
Freeze-dried Duhat; HFD-20%FDD — HFD w/ 20% Freeze-dried Duhat; HFD-30%FDD —
HFD w/ 30% Freeze-dried Duha. Different letters in the same week period are significantly
different among the various treatment groups at p<0.05 using ANOVA and Tukeys test.

The effects of FDD supplementation on blood TG levels of mice are shown in
Figure 27. From week 0 to week 9 of supplementation period, the mean blood TG levels
were statistically comparable among treatment groups. However, the trend shows that
FDD-supplementation has decreased TG level from week 0 to week 9, with 20%FDD and

30%FDD having the highest reduction at week 9, that is, by 50.14+ 8.96 % and 30.86+


8.01% respectively. The percent change from the baseline mean TG levels of the said
groups were significantly lower (p<0.05) compared to ND (-8.00+ 14.89%), HFD (13.00+

4.55 %) and HFD+10%FDD (-23.43+ 10.96 %) groups.

Blood TG levels for the FDD-supplemented groups were consistently lower from
throughout the supplementation compared to HFD group. Interestingly, despite having the
highest mean feed intake, HFD+ 20% FDD and HFD+30% FDD mice groups were seen
to have a significant reduction in the blood TG levels compared to ND, HFD and
HFD+10%FDD at week 9. Blood TG reduction brought about by the consumption of S.
cumini fruit was in agreement with the findings of Rekha et al., (2008) where diabetic rats
fed with aqueous extract of S. cumini pulp at 100 mg/kg and 200 mg/kg body weight
resulted to 28% and 46% lower TG levels respectively, as compared to the diabetic control
group. Similar with the result in the blood TC levels, HFD+20%FDD group also obtained
the highest reduction in TG levels at week 9. These findings suggest that 20% FDD
supplementation was more prominent in suppressing blood TG levels brought about by

consumption of HFD.


“-ND -*HFD -t-HFD +10%FDD -®HFD+20%FDD -@HFD + 30% FDD

MEAN TRIGLYCERIDE (mg/dl)

—+ + -- to

WEEK O WEEK 3 WEEK 6 WEEK 9
SUPPLEMENTATION PERIOD (WEEKS)
Figure 27. Mean (4SEM) blood triglyceride levels of different treatment mice during
supplementation. ND- Normal Diet; HFD- High-Fat Diet; HFD-10%FDD — HFD w/ 10%
Freeze-dried Duhat; HFD-20%FDD — HFD w/ 20% Freeze-dried Duhat; HFD-30%FDD —

HFD w/ 30% Freeze-dried Duhat. Same letters in the same week period are not
significantly different at p<0.05 using ANOVA.

Meanwhile, results on the mean blood HDL-C levels were statistically comparable
among mice groups from week 0 to week 9 (Figure 28). The trend shows that the levels
were increasing throughout the study with HFD+30%FDD mice group having the highest

percent increase of 34.86% compared to the ND (17.00%), HFD (6.00%), HFD+10%FDD


(6.57%), and HFD+20%FDD (3.43%). Additionally, data shows that treatment with 30%
FDD resulted in a significant increase from the baseline mean (Week 0) HDL-C levels of

HFD fed mice immediately at week 3 and week 6 of supplementation.

“ND = HFD “we-HFD+10%FDD =-@HFD+ 20% FDD ~@HFD + 30% FDL

MEAN HDL-C (mg/dl)

+ ~ + _—

SUPPLEMENTATION PERIOD (WEEKS)

Figure 28. Mean blood HDL-C levels of different treatment mice during
supplementation. ND- Normal Diet; HFD- High-Fat Diet, HFD-10%FDD — HFD w/ 10%
Freeze-dried Duhat; HFD-20%FDD — HFD w/ 20% Freeze-dried Duhat; HFD-30%FDD —
HFD w/ 30% Freeze-dried Duhat. Same letters in the same week period are not
significantly different at p<0.05 using ANOVA. **Significantly different from week 0 at
the same treatment, p<0.05


Increase in blood HDL-C levels from week 0 to week 9 were consistently displayed
in all mice groups. It was noticeable, however, that the percent increase in HDL-C level of
HFD+30%FDD group resulted to 5.6-fold higher compared to the HFD group at the end
of supplementation. Similar findings were found in high-fat fed mice supplemented with
freeze-dried acai berry where HDL-C level was 1.2-fold higher than the control at the end

of supplementation (Heyman ef al., 2014).

The dyslipidemia in obesity is also associated with hypertriglyceridemia in part due
to increased FFA fluxes to the liver, which leads to hepatic accumulation (Klop ef al. 2013).
S. cumini fruits are known to contain bioactive compounds such as phenols, flavonoids,
and tannins (Chagas ef al., 2015). Studies suggest that polyphenols may reduce cholesterol
absorption through interaction of these compounds with cholesterol carriers and
transporters present across the brush border membrane (Zern & Fernandez, 2005).
Moreover, mechanisms of action underlying the potential cardio-protective effects of berry
polyphenols include counteracting free radical generation, attenuating inflammatory gene
expression, downregulating foam cell formation (Basu ef a/., 2010). Anthocyanins, in
particular, were reported to affect lipid metabolism in cellular and animal models (Basu e/
al., 2010). In the study conducted by Liu ef al. (2008), mulberry anthocyanins have
demonstrated antioxidative and antiatherogenic affects, by inhibiting oxidation of LDL and
formation of foam cells. Anthocyanins further protects from oxidative damage and

inflammation by decreasing the cytotoxicity caused by chemical inducers of oxidative


stress and reducing TNF-a induced upregulation of inflammatory mediators in human

microvascular endothelial cells (Youdim et al., 2002).

Catechins were also associated with the inhibition of cholesterol absorption in the
intestine. (Loest ef al., 2002). Epicatechins in particular, have shown to inhibit pancreatic

lipase activity, thereby interfering with lipid digestion and absorption (Juhel ef a/., 2000).

Gallic acid, catechin and epicatechin were observed to inhibit cholesterol esterase
bind to the secondary bile acid and reduce solubility of cholesterol micellization
(Ngamukote ef a/., 2011). Pancreatic cholesterol esterase plays an important role in
hydrolyzing dietary cholesterol esters which liberates free cholesterol in the lumen of the
small intestine (Brodt-Eppley et al., 1995). It also enhances the incorporation of
cholesterol into mixed micelles and aids transport of free cholesterol to the
enterocyte (Myers-Payne et al., 1995). Hence, the inhibition of cholesterol esterase may
limit the absorption of dietary cholesterol leading to reduced cholesterol absorption.
Binding of bile acids increases its fecal excretion and prevents their reabsorption from the
gut. Sequestering them leads to greater amount of cholesterol utilized to form bile, thereby
maintaining a steady level in blood circulation leading to a decreased plasma cholesterol

level (Insull, 2006).

Other mechanisms by which bile acids excretion can be augmented by polyphenols
include (1) increased expression of cholesterol 7 a-hydroxylase CYP7A | (the rate-limiting

enzyme in reverse cholesterol transport that converts cholesterol to bile acids); (2) reduced


expression of intestinal bile acid transporters; and (3) changes in the gut microbiota.

(Chambers ef al., 2019)

Reduction in cholesterol micellar solubility by polyphenols may be due to its ability
to interfere with the structure of micellar cholesterol, inducing the micelles to be larger and
insoluble, thus inhibiting their formation (Ikeda er al., 1992; Ngamukote ef al., 2011). It
has also been described that polyphenols increase the expression of cAMP-dependent
phosphokinase which inhibits HMG-CoA reductase, the rate-limiting enzyme of
cholesterol biosynthesis (Havsteen, 2002; Ravi ef al., 2005; Sharma ef al., 2008).
Moreover, flavonoids also showed to inhibit basal apolipoprotein B (apoB) secretion and
the expression and activities of both acyl-CoA cholesterol acyltransferase (ACAT) and
microsomal triglyceride transfer protein (MTP) in human hepatoma cells. This inhibition
is related to reduced cholesterol esterification and triglyceride accumulation (Borradaile ef

al., 2003)

Human Dose Equivalent

The oral dose of 20% FDD w/w in mice that showed beneficial effects to blood TG
represents a human oral dose of 2796 mg/kg/day FDD, which is approximately 302 grams
or around 1.5 cups of fresh Duhat fruit daily for a typical adult weighing 60kg. On the
other hand, oral dose of 30%FDDw/w in mice that showed improvement in HDL-C levels
represents 4291 mg/kg/day FDD for human consumption or approximately 463 grams or

around 2.5 cups of fresh Duhat fruit daily for a standard 60kg human. This amount is


equivalent to 5-7 exchanges of fruits (200- 280kcal) daily with reference to the Philippines
Food Exchange List. Almost similar recommendation was proposed by Basu ef al. (2010),
where approximately 350 g or 2.3 cups fresh blueberries improved selected features of
metabolic syndrome and related cardiovascular risk factors. While Derrick et al. (2021)
recommended including 1-1.5 cups of fresh or frozen red raspberries into a well-balanced
and nutritious diet to provide beneficial effects on glucose, insulin, and lipid profiles for

individuals at high-risk for chronic disease or in need of mitigating type 2 diabetes mellitus.

CHAPTER IV

SUMMARY, CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS

Summary and Conclusion

The prevalence of obesity in local and global settings is increasing worldwide
which affects billions of people globally The rising concerns on obesity are correlated to
the increase in the rates of various obesity-related metabolic disorders that are considered
as major risk factors of cardiovascular diseases (CVDs), which are the leading causes of
mortality globally. Intakes of fruits and vegetables are proven dietary strategy to reduce
the risk of obesity-related diseases. Fruits like berries were reported to have health
promoting properties due to its high nutritional and functional components. Syzygium
cumini (L.) Skeels or locally known as duhat is one of the indigenous berries in the
Philippines. Its various parts are known to contain high amounts of polyphenols which
exhibits antioxidant characteristics. However, the health-promoting and disease-
preventing activities of duhat have not been explored yet in the Philippine setting. Thus,
the present study aims to evaluate the effects of freeze-dried duhat (FDD) fruit flesh on

biomarkers of obesity and associated metabolic disorders.

The study was divided into four parts: 1) characterization of FDD fruit flesh; and

2) in vitro antioxidant and lipid lowering assessment of FDD fruit flesh; 3 acute oral


toxicity evaluation of FDD fruit flesh on ICR mice and 4) in vivo effect of FDD fruit flesh

on biomarkers of obesity and associated metabolic disorders.

For the preparation of raw materials, duhat fruits were pulped at room temperature
and fruit flesh, including peels, were freeze-dried at the Institute of Food Science and
Technology, University of the Philippines Los Bafios (UPLB). Freeze-drying of duhat fruit
flesh and peels yielded 20% of the original weight. The FDD samples were ground into a

fine powder, packed in metalized bags, and stored at —20°C until use.

Proximate analysis was based from established protocols of AOAC. Jn vitro assays
were performed at Bioassay Laboratory, Institute of Human Nutrition and Institute of Food
Science and Technology, University of the Philippines Los Bafios (UPLB), following
various methodologies from previous studies. Acute toxicity was conducted in male and
female ICR mice following the OECD Guidelines 425 (2008) to evaluate its safety profile.
For the in-vivo efficacy, the study also used five to six week old male Institute of Cancer
Research (ICR) mice from the Research Institute for Tropical Medicine at Alabang,
Muntinlupa Metro Manila, which were randomly allocated to five groups fed with various
diets ad libitum for nine weeks as follows: Group |: normal diet (ND) and served as the
control; Group 2: high-fat diet (HFD), that served as negative control; Group 3: HFD +
10% w/w FDD powder; Group 4: HFD + 20% w/w FDD powder; and Group 5: HFD +
30% w/w FDD powder. The mice were individually caged following a 12h: 12h light/dark
cycle with lights on at 7:00 A.M. and off at 7:00 P.M., 24 + 20C room temperature and 50-
60% humidity at the laboratory animal experimental room, Department of Basic Veterinary

Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, University of the Philippines Los Bajfios.


The following are the significant findings of the study:

o The proximate analysis revealed that FDD fruit flesh are good source of
energy and have significant levels of macro nutrients such as fat, protein, and
carbohydrate.

o Analysis of antioxidant properties revealed that FDD fruit flesh has high
amounts of total phenolic ad flavonoid contents which significantly contribute
to its antioxidant activity. Also, it has high antioxidant activities in terms of
DPPH antioxidant activity (AA) and ABTS value.

o Polyphenol extract from FDD showed an encouraging lipid-lowering property
in-vitro through its cholesterol micellar solubility inhibition capacity

o Acute oral toxicity test following the OECD 425 main test procedure revealed
that FDD fruit extract did not appear to produce a significant toxicity in mice
with an estimated LD50 of >5000 mg/kg.

o The in vivo efficacy test revealed that FDD supplementation did not produce
an anti-obesity effect in terms of body weight changes in ICR mice but could
regulate HFD-induced lipid accumulation in adipose tissues and the liver, as
shown in the histopathologic findings.

o FDD supplementation resulted in significantly lower adipocyte diameter
(p<0.05) compared to HFD mice group (negative control) which may suggest

its anti-obesity potential.


FDD supplementation did not reduce the total cholesterol significantly but
exhibited a hypotriglyceridemic effects, more evidently at 20% w/w FDD supplementation,
and a significant increase on blood HDL-C level at 30% w/w specifically at week 3 and 6
of supplementation. The observed effects of FDD fruit flesh supplementation in controlling
lipid accumulation and improving blood lipid profiles could be due to several mechanisms
reported in related studies on polyphenols which are high in FDD. The mechanisms
include: 1) increased mitochondrial action, stimulating B-oxidation hence inhibiting fatty
acid synthesis and decreasing fat storage; 2) induction of lipolysis of adipocytes by
increasing cyclic adenosine monophosphate (CAMP) levels and hormone-sensitive lipase
(HSL) activity. 3) activation of adenosine monophosphate-activated protein kinase
(AMPK) that can regulate energy homeostasis; 4) up-regulation of enzymes involved in
hepatic fat oxidation, and decreased nutrient absorption; 5) modulation of the inflammation
processes by decreasing plasma concentrations of inflammatory markers like C-reactive
protein, IL-6, and IL-15; 6) adipogenesis inhibition by decreasing gene expression levels
of the key adipogenic factors peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor y (PPARy) and
CCAAT/enhancer binding protein a (C/EBP a); 7) increased expression of CYP7A I (rate-
limiting enzyme in reverse cholesterol transport) and reduced expression of intestinal bile
acid transporters; 8) inhibition of pancreatic lipase activity, cholesterol micellar solubility
and HMG-CoA reductase.

Human oral dose equivalent to 20% FDD w/w supplementation that gave
beneficial effects to blood TG is approximately1.5 cups of fresh duhat fruit daily for a

typical adult weighing 60kg. While human oral dose equivalent to 30% FDD w/w that


showed significant improvement in HDL-C levels is approximately 2.5 cups of fresh duhat
fruit daily. This corresponds to approximately 5 to 7 exchanges of fruits daily contributing

about 200-280kcal/day..
Recommendations

The current findings suggest that Philippine duhat fruits have a potential use in
controlling obesity and dyslipidemia. However, the study is limited in terms of establishing
the mechanisms of actions of FDD in ameliorating obesity markers and related risk factor.

Hence, the following are recommended for further investigation:

© quantitative evaluation of other phenolic compounds present in FDD such
as anthocyanins, quercetin, tannins and other phenolic compounds;

e in vivo and in vitro studies on cause-relationships between health effects
and specific polyphenol compound present in FDD;

e effects of FDD on inflammatory markers like C-reactive protein, IL-6, and

IL-15

e effects of FDD on satiety hormones (Peptide YY and Glucagon- Like

Peptide 1)

e effects of FDD intake through gene expression analysis

e effect of FDD supplementation on microbiota modulation

e sub-chronic and chronic oral toxicity tests to establish safety levels for long

term oral consumption of FDD; and


e human clinical trial confirm the benefits of FDD supplementation in obesity
and related risk factors and to explore dose-dependent relationship and

treatment modality.


LITERATURE CITED

ABDALI, D.. SAMSON, S. E., & GROVER, A. K. 2015. How effective are antioxidant
supplements in obesity and diabetes? Medical Principles and Practice. 24(3): 201-
215.

ADEDAPO, A.A., ABATAN, M.O., & OLORUNSOGO, 0.0., 2004. Toxic effects of
some plants in the genus Euphorbiaceae on haematological and biochemical
parameters of rats. Veterinarski Arhiv. 74 (1): 53-62.

ADISAKWATTANA,S., INTRAWANGSO, J., HEMRID, A.,. CHANATHONG, B.,
& MAKYNEN, K. 2012. Extracts of edible plants inhibit pancreatic lipase,
cholesterol esterase and cholesterol micellization, and bind bile acids. Food
Technology and Biotechnology. 50 (1):11-16:

AHIMA, R. 2008. Revisiting leptin's role in obesity and weight loss. The Journal of clinical
investigation. 118: 2380-2383.

AHMED, R., TARIQ, M., HUSSAIN, M., ANDLEEB, A., MASOUD, M. S., ALI, 1., &
HASAN, A. 2019. Phenolic contents-based assessment of therapeutic potential of
Syzygium cumini leaves extract. PLoS ONE. 14(8): 1-16.

ALBAUGH, V.L., & ABUMRAD, N. N. 2018. The surgical treatment of obesity.
F'1000Research. 7: 617.

AHONGSHANGBAM, S. & GURUARIBAM, S. 2017. Proximate analysis and mineral
(elemental) composition of certain spices of Manipur, India. Jnternational Research
Journal of Pharmacy. 8:28-32

ALI, A., T., MASUD, K.S., ABBASI, A., & ALI, A. 2013. Some compositional
and biochemical attributes of jamun fruit (Syzygium cumini L.) from Potowar region
of Pakistan. Pharmaceutical Research. 3: 01-09.

ALVAREZ, B.M., BORQUE, M., MARTINEZ-SARMIENTO, J., APARICIO, E.,
HERNANDEZ, C., CABRERIZO, L., & FERNANDEZ-REPRESA, J.A. 2002.
Peptide, Y.Y. Secretion in morbidly obese patients before and after vertical banded
gastroplasty. Obesity Surgery. 12: 324-327.

AMERICAN VETERINARY MEDICAL ASSOCIATION. 2020. AVMA Guidelines for
the Euthanasia of Animals: 2020 Edition. Schaumburg, IL. p. 60.


ANGRISANI L., SANTONICOLA A., IOVINO P., VITIELLO, A., ZUNDEL N.,
BUCHWALD, H., & SCOPINARO N. 2014. Bariatric surgery and endoluminal
procedures: IFSO worldwids Survey. Obesity Surgery. 27(9): 2279-89.

AREMU, S., & NWEZE, C. 2017. Determination of vitamin A content from selected
Nigerian fruits using spectrophotometric method. Bangladesh Journal of Scientific
and Industrial Research. 52:153.

AOAC. 2000. Official Methods of Analysis. 17" Edition. The Association of Official
Analytical Chemists. Gaithersburg, MD, USA. Methods 925.10, 65.17, 974.24,
992.16.

ARIKA, W.M., NYAMAT, D.W., MUSILA M.N., NGUGI, M.P., & NJAGI, E.N.M. 2016.
Hematological markers of in vivo toxicity. Journal of Hematology &
Thromboembolic Diseases. 4: 236- 242

ARTS, M. J., HAENEN, G. R., VOSS, H. P., & BAST, A. 2004. Antioxidant capacity of
reaction products limits the applicability of the Trolox Equivalent Antioxidant
Capacity (TEAC) assay. Food and chemical toxicology: An international journal
published for the British Industrial Biological Research Association. 42(1): 45-49.

AYYANNA, C., SEKAR, M., NIRANJAN, R., & VEERA, P. 2015. Nephrotoxic effect of
ethanolic extract of Syzygium cumini. Linn leaves on experimental animals.
International Journal of Biological & Pharmaceutical Research. 6(8): 678-683.

AYYANAR, M., AND SUBASH-BABU, P. 2012. Syzygium cumini (L.) Skeels: A review
of Its phytochemical constituents and traditional uses. Asian Pacific Journal of
Tropical Biomedicine. 2 (3): 240-246.

BACHMANOV, A. A., REED, D. R., BEAUCHAMP, G. K., & TORDOFF, M. G. 2002.
Food intake, water intake, and drinking spout side preference of 28 mouse
strains. Behavior genetics. 32(6): 435-443.

BANDIOLA, T. M. B., IGNACIO, G. B., GRACE, E., YUNSON, A., & DOMINIC, P.
2017. Syzygium cumini (L.) Skeels: A Review of its phytochemical constituents,
toxicity studies, and traditional and pharmacological uses. Jnternational Journal of
Applied Pharmaceutical and Biological Research. 2(6): 15-23.

BANERJEE, A., DASGUPTA, N., & DE, B. 2005. In vitro study of antioxidant activity of
Syzygium cumini fruit. Food Chemistry. 90(4): 727-733.

BARIWENI, M.W., YIBALA, O.I., & OZOLUA, R.I., 2018. Toxicological studies on the
aqueous leaf extract of Pavetta crassipes (K. Schum) in rodents. Journal of Pharmacy
& Pharmacognosy Research. 6 (1): 1-16.


BARTH, S.W., KOCH, T.C.L., WATZL, B., DIETRICH, H. WILL, F., & BUB, A. 2012.
Moderate effects of apple juice consumption on obesity-related markers in obese men:

Impact of diet-gene interaction on body fat content. European Journal of Nutrition.
51: 841-850.

BATTERHAM, R. L., COWLEY, M. A., SMALL, C. J., HERZOG, H., COHEN, M. A.,
DAKIN, C. L., WREN, A., BRYNES A., LOW, M., GHATEI, M., CONE, R.. &
BLOOM, S. R. 2002. Gut hormone PY Y3-36 physiologically inhibits food intake.
Nature. 418(6898): 650-654.

BATTERHAM, R.L., FFYTCHE, D.H., ROSENTHAL, J.M., ZELAYA, F., BARKER G.,
WITHERS, D., & WILLIAMS, S. 2007. PYY modulation of cortical and

hypothalamic brain areas predicts feeding behaviour in humans. Nature. 450: 106-
109.

BASU, A. DU, M., LEYVA, M., SANCHEZ, K., BETTS, N., WU, M., ASTON, C.. &
LYONS, T. 2010. Blueberries decrease cardiovascular risk factors in obese men and
women with metabolic syndrome. Journal of Nutrition. 140: 1582-1587.

BENHERLAL, P. S., & ARUMUGHAN, C. 2007. Chemical composition and in vitro

antioxidant studies on Syzygium cumini fruit. Journal of the Science of Food and
Agriculture. 87: 2560-2569.

BIJAULTYA, R. K., ALOK, S., SABHARWAL, M., & CHANCHAL, D. K. 2018.
Syzygium Cumini (Linn.)- an Overview on Morphology, Cultivation, Traditional Uses
and Pharmacology. International Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences and Research.
9(9): 3608-3620.

BODEN, G., & SHULMAN, G.I. 2002. Free fatty acids in obesity and type 2 diabetes:
defining their role in development of insulin resistance and B-cell dysfunction.
European Journal of Clinical Investigation. 32:14-23.

BOCCELLINO, M., & D'ANGELO, S. 2020. Anti-obesity effects of polyphenol intake:
Current status and future possibilities. International journal of molecular
sciences. 21(16): 5642.

BORRADAILE, N. M., DE DREU, L. E., BARRETT, P. H. R., BEHRSIN, C. D., &
HUFF, M. W. 2003. Hepatocyte apoB-containing lipoprotein secretion is decreased
by the grapefruit flavonoid, naringenin, via inhibition of MTP-mediated microsomal
triglyceride accumulation. Biochemistry. 42(5): 1283-1291.

BOUNGOURA, M., WENSHUI, X., & JIALI, Z. 2009. In-vitro binding capacity of
cholesterol and bile salts by partially depolymerized chitosans. Academic J. Food
Technol. 4(3):2009


BRAY, G.A., & RYAN, D.H. 2007. Drug treatment of the overweight patient.
Gastroenterology. 132(6): 2239-2252.

BRODT-EPPLEY J., WHITE P., JENKINS S., & HUI, D.Y. 1995. Plasma cholesterol
esterase level is a determinant for an atherogenic lipoprotein profile in
normolipidemic human subjects. Biochimica et Biophysica Acta. 1272: 69-72.

CASUSO, R. A., & HUERTAS, J. R. 2018. Antioxidant supplements in obesity and
metabolic syndrome. Obesity. 10: 263-275. https://doi.org/10.1016/b978-0-12-
812504-5.00013-1

CHAGAS, V. T., FRANCA, L. M., MALIK, S., & PAES, A. M. DE A. 2015. Syzygium
cumini (L.) skeels: A prominent source of bioactive molecules against
cardiometabolic diseases. Frontiers in Pharmacology. 6(11): 1-8.

CHAMBERS, K., DAY, P., ABOUFARRAG, H., & KROON, PAUL. 2019. Polyphenol
effects on cholesterol metabolism via bile acid biosynthesis, CYP7A1: A review.
Nutrients. 11: 2588-2611.

CHARLES, N. I. 2014. Effect of thermal processing on lycopene, beta-carotene and
vitamin C content of tomato [Var.UC82B]. Journal of Food and Nutrition Sciences.
2(3): 87-92.

CHEDDA, U., KAIKINI, A., BAGLE, S., & SEERVI, M. 2016. In vitro pancreatic lipase
inhibition potential of commonly used Indian spices. JOSR Journal Of Pharmacy .
6(10): 10-13.

CHEESEMAN, K. H., & SLATER, T. F. 1994. An introduction to free radical
biochemistry. British Medical Bulletin. 49:48 1-493.

CHAMNANSILPA, N., AKSORNCHU, P., ADISAKWATTANA, S., THILAVECH. T..
MAKYNEN, K., DAHLAN, W., & NGAMUKOTE, S. 2020. Anthocyanin-rich
fraction from Thai berries interferes with the key steps of lipid digestion and
cholesterol absorption. Heliyon. 6: 05408-05414.

CHOI, E., ROLAND, J.T., BARLOW, B.J., O'NEAL, R., RICH, A., NAM, K.. SHI, C.,
& GOLDENRING, J. 2014. Cell lineage distribution atlas of the human stomach
reveals heterogeneous gland populations in the gastric antrum. Gut. 63(11): 1711-
1720.

CHUN, J., LEE, J.. YE, L., EXLER, J., & EITENMILLER, R. 2006. Tocopherol and
tocotrienol content of raw and processed fruits and vegetables in the United States
diet. Journal of Food Composition and Analysis. 19: 196-204.


COHN, G., VALDES, G., & CAPUZZI, D. M. 2001. Pathophysiology and treatment of
the dyslipidemia of insulin resistance. Current Cardiology Reports. 3(5): 416423.

CRIETA, B. R. A., TUANO, A. P. P., TORIO, M. A. O., VILLANUEVA, J. C., GABAN,
P. J. V, & CASTILLO-ISRAEL, K. A. T. 2021. In vitro lipid-lowering properties of
the fruits of two bignay [Antidesma bunius (L.) Spreng] cultivars as affected by
maturity stage and thermal processing. Food Chemistry: Molecular Sciences. 2:
100020.

DEAN, L. 2005. Blood Groups and Red Cell Antigens. Chapter 1, Blood and the cells it
contains. Bethesda (MD): National Center for Biotechnology Information (US).
Available from: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK2263/

DEB, L., BHATTACHARIEE, C. B., SHETTY, S.R., & DUTTA, A. D. 2013. Evaluation
of anti-diabetic potential of the Syzygium Cumini (Linn) skeels by reverse
pharmacological approaches. Bulletin of Pharmaceutical Research. 3(1): 6-13.

DERRICK, S., KRISTO, A., REAVES, S., & SIKALIDIS, A. (2021). Effects of dietary
red raspberry consumption on pre-diabetes and type 2 diabetes mellitus parameters.
International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health. 18: 9364-9380.

DE SILVA, A., & BLOOM, S. R. 2012. Gut hormones and appetite control: A focus on
PYY and GLP-I as therapeutic targets in obesity. Gut and Liver. 6(1): 10-20.

DIAS, S., PAREDES, S., & RIBEIRO, L. 2018. Drugs involved in dyslipidemia and
obesity treatment: Focus on adipose tissue. International Journal of Endocrinology.
2018: 1-21.

DIXON, J.B., O'BRIEN, P.E., PLAYFAIR, J., CHAPMAN, L., SCHACHTER, L.,
SKINNER, S., PROIETTO, J., BAILEY, M., & ANDERSON, M. 2008. Adjustable
gastric banding and conventional therapy for type 2 diabetes: A randomized controlled
trial. The Journal of the American Medical Association. 299(3): 316-23. |

DONALDSON, M.S. (2004), Nutrition and cancer: A review of the evidence for an anti-
cancer diet. Nutrition Journal 3 (1): 19-40.

DONNO, D., BECCARO, G.L. MELLANO, M., CERUTTI, A.K., & BOUNOUS, G.
2014. Goji berry fruit (Lycium spp.): Antioxidant compound fingerprint and
bioactivity evaluation. Journal of Functional Foods. 18: start and end pages?.

DULAY, R., & DE CASTRO, M. E. 2016. Chemical constituents, antioxidant and
antibacterial activity of Syzygium cumini (L.) skeels (Myrtaceae). Der Pharma
Chemica. 8(20): 317-321.


ECKEL, R. H., GRUNDY, S. M., & ZIMMET, P. Z. 2005. The metabolic syndrome. The
Lancet. 365(9468): 1415-1428.

EDIRISINGHE, I., BANASZEWSKI, K., CAPPOZZO, J., SANDHYA, K., ELLIS, C.L.,
TADAPANENI, R., KAPPAGODA, C.T., & BURTON-FREEMAN, B.M.
2011.Strawberry anthocyanin and its association with postprandial inflammation and
insulin. British Journal of Nutrition. 106: 913-922.

EDEM, C. A.. AND DOSUNMU, M. I. 2011. Chemical evaluation of proximate
composition, ascorbic acid and anti-nutrients content of African star apple
(Chrysophyllumafrcanum) fruit. RRAS. 9(1):146-149.

EL HILALY, J., ISRAILI, Z.H., & LYOUSSI, B. 2004. Acute and chronic toxicological
studies of Ajuga iva in experimental animals. Journal of Ethnopharmacology. 91(1)
43-50.

ENGIN, A. 2017. The definition and prevalence of obesity and metabolic syndrome.
Advances in Experimental Medicine and Biology. 960: 1-17.

ESTERBAUER, H., WAG, G., & PUHL, H. 1993. Lipid peroxidation and its role in
atherosclerosis. British Medical Bulletin. 49: 566-576.

FARIA, A. F., MARQUES, M. C., & MERCADANTE, A. Z. 2011. Identification of
bioactive compounds from jambolao (Syzygium cumini) and antioxidant capacity
evaluation in different pH conditions. Food Chemistry. 126(4): 1571-1578.

FELLOWS, P. J. 2009. | - Properties of food processing. In P. J. B. T.-F. P. T. (Third E.
Fellows (Ed.), Woodhead Publishing Series in Food Science, Technology and
Nutrition. 11-95.

FERES, C.A.O. & MADALOSSO, R., ROCHA, O.A., LEITE, J.P.V., GUIMARAES. T.,
TOLEDO, V.P.P., & TAGLIATI, C. 2007. Acute and chronic toxicological studies of
Dimorphandra mollis in experimental animals. Journal of Ethnopharmacology. \08:
450-456.

FRANK, B., HU, F.B., MANSON, J.E., STUMPFER, M.J., COLDITZ, G., LIU, S.,
SOLOMON, C.G., & WILLETT, W.C. 2001. Diet, Lifestyle, and the risks of type 2
diabetes in women. The New England Journal of Medicine. 345: 790-797.

FIGLEWICZ, D.P., BENNETT, J.L., NALEID, A.M., DAVIS, C., & GRIMM, J.W. 2006.
Intraventricular insulin and leptin decrease sucrose self-administration in rats.
Physiology and Behavior. 89: 611-616.


FREEDMAN, M.R., KING, J., & KENNEDY, E. 2001. Popular diets: A scientific review.
Obesity Research. 9: 1-40.

FOOD AND NUTRITION RESEARCH INSTITUTE-DEPARTMENT OF SCIENCE
AND TECHNOLOGY (FNRI-DOST). 2015. The Philippines Food Composition
Tables 2019. FNRI Bldg., DOST Compound, Bicutan, Taguig City, Metro Manila,
Philippines.

FOOD AND NUTRITION RESEARCH INSTITUTE-DEPARTMENT OF SCIENCE
AND TECHNOLOGY (FNRI-DOST). 2015. Philippine Nutrition Facts and Figures
2013: 8" National Nutrition Survey Overview. FNRI Bldg., DOST Compound,
Bicutan, Taguig City, Metro Manila, Philippines.

FOOD AND NUTRITION RESEARCH INSTITUTE-DEPARTMENT OF SCIENCE
AND TECHNOLOGY (FNRI-DOST). 2015. Philippine Nutrition Facts and Figures
2013: Clinical and Health Survey. FNRI Bldg., DOST Compound, Bicutan, Taguig
City, Metro Manila, Philippines.

FURUKAWA, S., FUJITA, T., SHIMABUKURO, M., IWAKI, M., YAMASA, Y.,
NAKAJIMA, Y., NAKAYAMA, O., MAKISHIMA, M., MATSUDA, M., &
SHIMOMURA. I. 2004. Increased oxidative stress in obesity and its impact on
metabolic syndrome. The Journal of Clinical Investigation. 114(12): 1752-1761.

GANJALI, S., SAHEBKAR, A., MAHDIPOUR, E., JAMIALAHMADI, K., TORABL. S.,
AKHLAGHI, S., & GHAYOUR-MOBARHAN, M. 2014. Investigation of the effects
of curcumin on serum cytokines in obese individuals: A randomized controlled trial.
The Scientific World Journal. 2014: 898361-898367

GEORGIADOU, E.C, KOUBOURIS, G., GOULAS, V., SERGENTANI, C.,
NIKOLOUDAKIS, N., & MANGANARIS, G.A. 2019. Genotype-dependent
regulation of vitamin E biosynthesis in olive fruits as revealed through metabolic and
transcriptional profiles. Plant Biology. 21(4): 604-614.

GEORGIADOU, E., MANGANARIS, G., & FOTOPOULOS, V. 2021. The diverse roles
of vitamin E and its occurrence and regulation in different plant tissues. Zywnosc
Nauka Technologia Jakosc/Food Science Technology Quality. 125:113-126.

GOLDKUHL, R., HAU, J., & ABELSON, K.S.P. 2010. Effects of voluntarily-ingested
buprenorphine on plasma corticosterone levels, body weight, water intake, and
behaviour in permanently catheterised rats. In Vivo. 24:131-135.


GONZALEZ, E.L., JOHANSSON, S., WALLANDER, M., & GARCIA- RODRIGUEZ,
L.. 2009. Trends in the prevalence and incidence of diabetes in the UK: 1996-2005.
Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health. 63(4): 332-336.

GOPINATH, S.M., RAKESH, C.K., PATIL, G.M., & DAYANANDA, K.S. 2012.
Preliminary phytochemical evaluation of leaf extracts of Euphorbia hirta, Syzygium
cumini of Siddarabetta, Tumkur district, Karnataka. International Journal of Pharma
and Biosciences. 3(2): 431-435.

GREENBERG, A., & OBIN, M. 2006. Obesity and the role of adipose tissue in

inflammation and metabolism. The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 83: 461S-
465S.

GOWRI, S., & VASANTHA, K. 2010. Phytochemical screening and antibacterial activity
of Syzygium cumini (L.) (Myrtaceae) leaves extracts. International Journal of
PharmTech Research, 2(2): 1569-1573.

HAIST, K.C., BURRACK, K.S., DAVENPORT, B.J., & MORRISON, T.E. 2017.
Inflammatory monocytes mediate control of acute alphavirus infection in mice. PLoS
Pathogens. 13(12): €1006748

HAN, Y., HU, Z., CUI, A., LIU, Z., MA, F., XUE, Y., LIU, Y., ZHANG, F., ZHAO. Z.,
YU, Y., GAO, J., WEI, C., LI, J., FANG, J., LI, J., FAN, J. G., SONG, B. L., & LI,
Y. 2019. Post-translational regulation of lipogenesis via AMPK-dependent
phosphorylation of insulin-induced gene. Nature communications. 10(1): 623-637.

HAN, T. S., SATTAR, N., & LEAN, M. 2006. ABC of obesity: Assessment of obesity and
its clinical implications. British Medical Journal. 333(7570): 695-698.

HARALD, M. 1997. Determination of the carotenoid content in selected vegetables and
fruit by HPLC and photodiode array detection. Z. Lebensm. Unters. Forsch. A.
Springerverlag. 204: 88-94.

HAROON, R., JELANI, S., & ARSHAD, F. K. 2015. Comparative analysis of antioxidant
Profiles of bark, leaves and seeds of Syzygium cumini (Indian Blackberry).
International Journal of Research — Granthaalayah. 3(5): 13-26.

HAYES, M. 2020. Measuring protein content in food: An overview of methods. Foods
(Basel, Switzerland). 9(10): 1340-1344.

HECK, AM., YANOVSKI, J.A. &CALIS. K.A. 2000. Orlistat, a new lipase inhibitor for
the management of obesity. Pharmacotherapy: The Journal of Human
Pharmacology and Drug Therapy, 20 (3): 270-279


HERCULANO, E. DE, A., DA COSTA, C. D. F., RODRIGUES, A. K. B. F., ARAUJO-
JUNIOR, J. X., SANTANA, A. E. G. FRANCA, P.H. B., & RIBEIRO, E. ALN.
2014. Evaluation of cardiovascular effects of edible fruits of Syzygium cumini
myrtaceae (L) skeels in rats. Tropical Journal of Pharmaceutical Research. 13(11):
1853-1861.

HEYMAN, L., AXLING, U., BLANCO, N., STERNER, O., HOLM, C., & BERGER, K.
2014. Evaluation of beneficial metabolic effects of berries in high-fat fed C57BL/6J
mice. Journal of Nutrition and Metabolism. 2014: 4030-4041

HEYMAN, L. 2015. Berries in prevention of metabolic disease — focus on obesity, diabetes
and gut microbiota. Lund University Publications. 2015: 122-139.

HEYMAN LINDEN, L., KOTOWSKA, D., SAND, E., BJURSELL, M., PLAZA, M.,
TURNER, C., HOLM, C., FAK, F. ,& BERGER, K.. 2016. Lingonberries alter the
gut microbiota and prevent low-grade inflammation in high-fat diet fed mice. Food
and Nutrition Research. 60: 1-14.

HEYMAN-LINDEN, L., SEKI, Y., STORM, P., JONES, H. A., CHARRON, M. J.,
BERGER, K., & HOLM, C. 2016. Berry intake changes hepatic gene expression and
DNA methylation patterns associated with high-fat diet. Journal of Nutritional
Biochemistry. 27: 79-95.

HILARIO, A. L. 2018. Evaluation of the anti-hyperglycemic property of the Philippine
Duhat (Syzygium cumini), crude methanolic leaf extract on glucose challenged
hyperglycemic mice. Der Pharma Chemica. 10(6): 21-24.

HODGES, R.E., & MINICH, D.M. 2015. Modulation of metabolic detoxification
pathways using foods and food-derived components: A scientific review with clinical
application. Journal of Nutrition and Metabolism. 2015: 760689-760692

HOSSAIN, P., KAWAR, B., & NAHAS, M. 2007. Obesity and diabetes in the developing
world — A growing challenge. The New England Journal of Medicine. 356: 213-215.

HRUBY, A., & HU, F. 2014. The Epidemiology of obesity: A big picture.
Pharmacoeconomics. 33: 673-689.

HUA T.C., LIU B.L., & ZHANG H. 2010. Freeze-Drying of Pharmaceutical and Food
Products. Volume 198. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: Elsevier Science. pp. 1-257.

HU, F.B. 2008. Obesity epidemiology. Oxford, New York: Oxford University Press. p.
498.


HUSSAIN, S. S., & BLOOM, S. R. 2011. The pharmacological treatment and management
of obesity. JAMA: The Journal of the American Medical Association. 123(1): 34-44.

IKEDA, I., IMASATO, Y., SASAKI, E., NAKAYAMA, M., NAGAO, H., TAKEO, T..,
YAYABE, F., & SUGANO, M. 1992. Tea catechins decrease micellar solubility and
intestinal absorption of cholesterol in rats. Biochimica et Biophysica Acta. 1127: 141-
146.

INSULL, W. 2006. Clinical utility of bile acid sequestrants in the treatment of
dyslipidemia: a scientific review. Southern Medical Journal. 99(3):257-274

JAKICIC, J.M., MARCUS, B.H., LANG, W., & JANNEY, C. 2008. Effect of exercise on
24-month weight loss maintenance in overweight women. Archives of Internal
Medicine. 168(14):1550-1560.

JANG, M. H., PIAO, X. L., KIM, J. M., KWON, S. W., & PARK, J. H. 2008. Inhibition
of cholinesterase and amyloid- aggregation by resveratrol oligomers from Vitis
amurensis. Phytotherapy Research. 22(4): 544-549,

JASUL, G. J. 2011. Obesity treatment recommendations in the Philippines: Perspective on
their utility and implementation in clinical practice. Journal of the ASEAN Federation
of Endocrine Societies. (2): 122-128.

JIANPING, Y. 2014. Mechanisms of insulin resistance in obesity. Frontiers of Medicine.
27(2): 5-6.

JIANHUI, S.U., HONGXIN, W., CHAOYANG, M.A., CHENGXIANG, L.,
CHUANZHONG G., RONGJING, N., & MD RAMIM TANVER RAHMAN. 2015.
Hypocholesterolaemic mechanism of bitter melon aqueous extracts via inhibition of
pancreatic cholesterol esterase and reduction of cholesterol micellar solubility.
International Journal of Food Sciences and Nutrition. 67(1):20-28.

JO, Y. H., KIM, S. B., LIU, Q., DO, S. G., HWANG, B. Y., & LEE, M. K. 2017.
Comparison of pancreatic lipase inhibitory isoflavonoids from unripe and ripe fruits
of Cudrania tricuspidata. PLOS ONE. 12(3): 1-14.

JUNG, U. J., & CHOI, M. 2014. Obesity and its metabolic complications : The role of
adipokines and the relationship between obesity, inflammation, insulin resistance,
dyslipidemia and nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. International Journal of Molecular
Sciences. 15: 6184-6223.

JUHEL, C., ARMAND, M., PAFUMI, Y., ROSIER, C.. VANDERMANDER, J., &
LAIRON, D. 2000. Green tea extract (AR25®) inhibits lipolysis of triglycerides in


gastric and duodenal medium in vitro. The Journal of Nutritional Biochemistry. 11(1):
45-51.

KAFKAS, E., OZGEN, M., OZOGUL, Y., & TUREMIS, N. 2008. Phytochemical and
fatty acid profile of selected raspberry cultivars: A comparative study. Journal of
Food Quality. 31(1): 67-78.

KAHLON, T. S., & SMITH, G. E. 2007. In vitro binding of bile acids by blueberries
(Vaccinium spp.), plums (Prunus spp.), prunes (Prunus spp.), strawberries (Fragaria
X ananassa), cherries (Malpighia punicifolia), cranberries (Vaccinium macrocarpon)
and apples (Malus sylvestris). Food Chemistry. 100(3): 1182-1187.

KAHLON, T.S., & SMITH GE. 2007. Jn vitro binding of bile acids by bananas, peaches,
pineapple, grapes, pears, apricots and nectarines. Food Chemistry. 101: 1046-1051.

KAHKONEN, M., HOPIA, A., & HEINONEN, M. 2001. Berry phenolics and their
antioxidant activity. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry. 49: 4076-4082.

KAMAL, A. 2014 Phytochemical screening of Syzygium cumini seeds. Indian Journal of
Plant Sciences. 3(4): 2319-3824.

KANTOFF, P. 2006. Prevention, complementary therapies and new scientific
developments in the field of prostate cancer, Review of Urology. 8: S9-S14.

KAO, Y.H., CHANG, H.H., LEE, M.J., & CHEN, C.L. 2006. Tea, obesity, and diabetes. .
Molecular Nutrition and Food Research. 50: 188-210.

KARLSEN, A., PAUR, I., BOHN, S.K., SAKHI, A.K., BORGE, G.I., SERAFINI, M.,
ERLUND, I., LAAKE, P., TONSTAD, S., & BLOMHOFF R. 2010. Bilberry juice
modulates plasma concentration of NF-kappaB related inflammatory markers in
subjects at increased risk of CVD. European Journal of Nutrition. 49: 345-355.

KIRCHNER, H., HEPPNER, K. M., & TSCHOP, M. H. 2012. The role of ghrelin in the
control of energy balance. Handbook of Experimental Pharmacology. 209: 161-84.

KLOP, B., ELTE, J. W. F., & CABEZAS, M. C. 2013. Dyslipidemia in obesity:
Mechanisms and potential targets. Nutrients. 5: 1218-1240.

KNEKT, P., KUMPULAINEN, J., JARVINEN, R., RISSANEN, H., HELIOVAARA. M.,
REUNANEN, A., HAKULINEN, T., & AROMAA, A. 2002. Flavonoid intake and
risk of chronic diseases. The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 76: 560-568.


KRATOFIL, R., KUBES, P., & DENISET, J. 2016. Monocyte conversion during
inflammation and injury. Arteriosclerosis, Thrombosis, and Vascular Biology. 37:
116.308198.

KOBAYASHI, M., & IKEDA, I. 2017. Mechanisms of inhibition of cholesterol absorption
by green tea catechins. Food Science and Technology Research. 23(5): 627-636.

KONGO-DIA-MOUKALA, J.U., ZHANG, H. & IRAKOZE, P.C. 2011. In vitro binding
capacity of bile acids by defatted corn protein hydrolysate. International Journal of
Molecular Sciences. 12(2):1066-1080

KOO, S., & NOH, S. 2007. Green tea as inhibitor of the intestinal absorption of lipids:
Potential mechanism for its lipid-Lg effect. The Journal of Nutritional Biochemistry.
18: 179-83.

KUMAR, A., & KALAKOTI, M. 2015. Phytochemical and antioxidant screening of leaf
extract of Syzygium cumini. International Journal of Advanced Research. 3(1): 371-

KUMAR, A., RAJU, I., JAYACHANDRAN, T., DEECARAMAN, M., KUMAR, R.,
ARAVINDAN, P., PADMANABHAN, N., & KRISHAN, M. 2010. Anti-
inflammatory activity of Syzygium cumini seed. African Journal of Biotechnology.
7(8): 941-943.

KUMAR, A., RAJU, I., JAYACHANDRAN, T., DEECARAMAN, M., KUMAR, R.,
ARAVINDAN, P., PADMANABHAN, N., & KRISHAN, M. 2008. Anti-diabetic
activity of Syzygium cumini and its isolated compound against streptozotocin-induced
diabetic rats. Journal of Medicinal Plants Research. 2(9): 246-249.

KUPPUSAMY, U.R., & DAS, N.P. 1992. Effects of flavonoids on cyclic AMP
phosphodiesterase and lipid mobilization in rat adipocytes. Biochemical
Pharmacology. 44(7): 1307-1315.

LEE, M.S., & KIM, Y. 2020. Mulberry fruit extract ameliorates adipogenesis via
increasing AMPK activity and downregulating microRNA-21/143 in 3T3-L1
adipocytes. Journal of Medicinal Food. 23: 266-272.

LIN, C. F., CHANG, Y. H., CHIEN. S. C., LIN, Y. H., & YEH, H. Y. 2018. Epidemiology
of dyslipidemia in the Asia Pacific Region. Jnternational Journal of Gerontology.

12(1): 2-6.

LINDAHL, M., & TAGESSON, C. 1997. Flavonoids as phospholipase A2 inhibitors:
Importance of their structure for selective inhibition of Group II phospholipase
A2 . Inflammation. 21: 347-356.


LIU, L.K., LEE, H.J., SHIH, Y.W., CHYAU, C.C., & WANG, C.J. 2008. Mulberry
anthocyanin extracts inhibit LDL oxidation and macrophage-derived foam cell
formation induced by oxidative LDL. Journal of Food Science. 73: H113-H121.

LOEST, H. NOH, S., & KOO, S. 2002. Green tea extract inhibits the lymphatic absorption
of cholesterol and a-tocopherol in ovariectomized rats. The Journal of Nutrition. 132:
1282-1288.

LOHA, M., MULU, A., ABAY, S., ERGETE, W. & GELETA, B. 2019. Acute and
Subacute Toxicity of Methanol Extract of Syzygium guineense Leaves on the
Histology of the Liver and Kidney and Biochemical Compositions of Blood in Rats.
Evidence-based Complementary and Alternative Medicine. 2019. 15.

LUNAGARIYA, N. A., PATEL, N. K., JAGTAP, S. C., & BHUTANI, K. K. .2014.
Inhibitors of pancreatic lipase: state of the art and clinical perspectives. EXCLI
journal, 13, 897-921.

LUSTIG, R. H. 2008. Which comes first? The obesity or the insulin? The behavior or the
biochemistry? Acta Physiologica Scandinavica. 41(2-3): 269-276.

MAATTA-RITHINEN, K. R., KAMAL-ELDIN, A., MATIILA, P. H., GONZALEZ-
PARAMAS, A. M., & TORRONEN, R. 2004. Distribution and contents of phenolic
compounds in eighteen Scandinavian berry species. Journal of Agricultural and Food
Chemistry. 52: 4477-4486.

MADHU, C., KRISHNA, K., REDDY, K., LAKSHMI, P., & KELARI, E. 2017.
Estimation of crude fibre content from natural food stuffs and its laxative activity
induced in rats. International Journal of Pharma Research and Health Sciences. 5:
1703-1706.

MAESTRI, D., CITTADINI, MC., BODOIRA, R., & MARTINEZ, M. 2020, Tree nut oils:
Chemical profiles, extraction, stability, and quality concerns. European Journal of
Lipid Science and Technology. 122(6): 1900450.

MAGKOS, F., FABBRINI, E.. MOHAMMED, B.S., PATTERSON, B.W., & KLEIN, S.
2010. Increased whole-body adiposity without a concomitant increase in liver fat is
not associated with augment metabolic dysfunction. Obesity (Silver Spring). 18: 1510-
1515.

MANACH, C., SCALBERT, A., MORAND, C., REMESY, C., & JIMENEZ, L. 2004.
Polyphenols: Food sources and bioavailability. American Journal of Clinical
Nutrition. 79(5): 727-747.


MARFORI, P.A.N., MALIGALIG, M.D., ESTACIO, M.A.C., CENA, R., DESAMERO,
M.J., & ANG, M.J.C. & MARFORI, E. 2016. Acute oral toxicity of lansioside D in

mice. International Journal of Toxicological and Pharmacological Research. 8: 70-
77.

MARGARET, E., SHAILAJA, A. M., & RAO, V. V. 2015. Evaluation of antioxidant

activity in different parts of Syzygium cumini (Linn.). International Journal of Current
Microbiology and Applied.Science. 4(9): 372-379.

MARTINEZ-GONZALEZ. A. I., ALVAREZ-PARRILLA, E., DIAZ-SANCHEZ, A. G.,
DE LA ROSA, L. A., NUNEZ-GASTELUM, J. A.. VAZQUEZ-FLORES, A. A., &
GONZALEZ-AGUILAR, G. A. 2017. In vitro Inhibition of Pancreatic Lipase by
Polyphenols: A Kinetic, Fluorescence Spectroscopy and Molecular Docking
Study. Food technology and biotechnology. 55(4): 519-530

MARSEGLIA, L., MANTI, S., DDANGELO, G., NICOTERA, A., PARISI, E., DI ROSA,
G., & ARRIGO, T. 2015. Oxidative stress in obesity: A critical component in human
diseases. International Journal of Molecular Sciences. 16(1): 378-400.

MASTAN, S., LATHA, T., LATHA, T., SRIKANTH, A., CHAITANYA, G., & KUMAR,
K. 2009. Influence of methanolic extract of Syzygium cumini seeds on the activity of
gliclazide in normal and alloxan-induced diabetic rats. Pharmacologyonline. 3: 845-
850.

MASTAN, S., CHAITANYA, G., BHAVYA-LATHA, T., SRIKANTH, A.,
SUMALATHA, G., & ESWAR-KUMAR, K. 2009. Cardioprotective effect of
methanolic extract of Syzygium cumini seeds on isoproterenol-induced myocardial
infarction in rats. Der Pharmacia. Lettre. 1: 143-149.

MCDOUGALL, G., KULKARNI, N., & STEWART, D., Berry polyphenols inhibit
pancreatic lipase in vitro. Food Chemistry. 115: 193-199.

MELLIDOU, I., GEORGIADOU, E.C., KALOUDAS, D., KALAITZIS, P.,
FOTOPOULOS, V. & KANELLIS, A.K. 2018, ‘Vitamins’, Postharvest Physiology
and Biochemistry of Fruits and Vegetables. pp. 359-83.

MICHAEL, B., YANO, B., SELLERS, R.S., PERRY, R., MORTON, D., ROOME, N.,
JOHNSON, J.K., SCHAFER, K., & PITSCH, S. 2007. Evaluation of organ weights
for rodent and non-rodent toxicity studies: a review of regulatory guidelines and a
survey of current practices. Toxicology Pathology. 35: 742-750.

MICHALAKIS, K., MINTZIORI, G., KAPRARA, A., TARLATZIS, B. C., & GOULIS,
D. G. 2013. The complex interaction between obesity, metabolic syndrome and


reproductive axis: A narrative review. Metabolism: Clinical and Experimental. 62(4):
457-478.

MILLER, M. 2009. Dyslipidemia and cardiovascular risk: The importance of early
prevention. QJM: Monthly Journal of the Association of Physicians. 102(9): 657-667.

MORENO DA, ILIC N, POULEV A, BRASAEMLE D, FRIED S, RASKIN I. 2003.
Inhibitory effects of grape seed extract on lipases. Nutrition 19: 876-879.

MOST, J.. TIMMERS, S., WARNKE, I., JOCKEN J.W., VAN BOEKSCHOTEN, M., DE
GROOT, P., BENDIK, I., SCHRAUWEN, P., GOOSSENS, G.H., & BLAAK, E.E.
2016. Combined epigallocatechin-3-gallate and resveratrol supplementation for 12
wk increases mitochondrial capacity and fat oxidation, but not insulin sensitivity, in
obese humans: A randomized controlled trial. The American Journal of Clinical
Nutrition. 104: 215-227.

MOTOYASHIKI, T., MORITA, T., & UEKI, H. 1996. Involvement of the rapid increase
in cAMP content in the vanadate-stimulated release of lipoprotein lipase activity from
rat fat pads.. Biological & Pharmaceutical Bulletin. 19: 1412-1416.

MOZAFFARIEH, M., SACU, S., & WEDRICH, A. 2003. The role of the carotenoids,
lutein and zeaxanthin, in protecting against age-related macular degeneration: A
review based on controversial evidence. Nutrient Journal 2: 20-28.

MUNZENMAYER, P., ULLOA, J., PINTO, M., RAMIREZ, C., VALENCIA, P.,
SIMPSON, R., & ALMONACID, S. 2020. Freeze-drying of blueberries: Effects of
carbon dioxide (CO2) laser perforation as skin pretreatment to improve mass transfer,
primary drying time, and quality. Foods. 9: 211-219.

MURUGANANDAN, S., SRINIVASAN, K., CHANDRA, S., TANDAN, S. K., LAL, J.,
& RAVIPRAKASH, V. 2001. Anti-inflammatory activity of Syzygium cumini bark.
Fitoterapia. 72(4): 369-375.

MYERS-PAYNE S.C., HUI D.Y., BROCKMAN H.L., & SCHROEDER F.1995.
Cholesterol esterase: a cholesterol transfer protein. Biochemistry. 34: 3942-3947.

MYERS, M. G., LEIBEL, R. L., SEELEY, R. J., & SCHWARTZ, M. W. 2010. Obesity
and leptin resistance: Distinguishing cause from effect. Trends in Endocrinology and
Metabolism. 21(11): 643-651.

NATIONAL HEART, LUNG, AND BLOOD INSTITUTE AND NORTH AMERICAN
ASSOCIATION FOR THE STUDY OF OBESITY. 2000. The Practical Guide:
Identification, Evaluation, and Treatment of Overweight and Obesity in Adults.
National Institutes Of Health publication. Washington, DC. 00-4084,


NATIONAL CHOLESTEROL EDUCATION PROGRAM NATIONAL HEART, LUNG,
AND BLOOD INSTITUTE. 2001. Third report of the National Cholesterol Education
Program (NCEP) expert panel on detection, evaluation and treatment of high blood
cholesterol in adults (Adult Treatment Panel IIT). Circulation,vol.106, pp. 3143-3421.

NETU, C.C. 2007. Cranberry and blueberry: Evidence for protective effects against cancer
and vascular diseases. Molecular Nutrition and Food Research. 51(6): 652-664.

NG, M., FLEMING, T., ROBINSON, M., THOMSON, B., GRAETZ, N., MARGONO,
C., MULLANY, E., BIRYUKOV, S., CRISTIANA, A., ABERA, S., ABRAHAM, J.,
ABU-RMEILEH, N., ACHOKI, T., ALBUHAIRAN, F., ALEMU, Z., ALFONSO-
CRISTANCHO, R., ALI, M., ALI, R., ALVIS GUZMAN, N., & GAKIDOU, E.
2014. Global, regional, and national prevalence of overweight and obesity in children
and adults during 1980-2013: A systematic analysis for the global burden of disease
study 2013. The Lancet. 384: 766-781.

NGAMUKOTE, S., MAKYNEN, K., THILAVECH, T., & ADISAKWATTANA, S.
2011. Cholesterol-lowering activity of the major polyphenols in grape seed.
Molecules (Basel, Switzerland). 16: 5054-5061.

NJOKU, N. E., UBBAONU, C. N., ALAGBAOSO, S. O., ELUCHIE, C. N., & UMELO,
M. C. 2015. Amino acid profile and oxidizable vitamin content of Synsepalum
dulcificum berry (miracle fruit) pulp. Food Science & Nutrition. 3(3): 252-256.

OECD. 2002. Test No. 423: Acute Oral toxicity - Acute Toxic Class Method, OECD
Guidelines for the Testing of Chemicals, Section 4, OECD Publishing. Paris.

OECD. 2008. Test No. 425: Acute Oral Toxicity: Up-and-Down Procedure. OECD
Guidelines for the Testing of Chemicals, Section 4, OECD Publishing. Paris.

OGAWA, K., HIROSE, S., NAGAOKA, S. & YANASE, E. 2016. Interaction between
tea polyphenols and bile acid inhibits micellar cholesterol solubility. Journal of
Agricultural and Food Chemistry. 64 (1):204-209.

OLSON, H., BETTON, G., ROBINSON, D., THOMAS, K., MONRO, A., KOLAJA, G.,
LILLY, P., SANDERS, J., SIPES, G., BRACKEN, W., DORATO, M., VAN DEUN,
K., SMITH, P., BERGER, B., & HELLER, A. 2000. Concordance of the toxicity of
pharmaceuticals in humans and in animals. Regulatory Toxicology and
Pharmacology. 32: 56-67.

@RGAARD A., & JENSEN L. 2008. The effects of soy isoflavones on
obesity. Experimental Biology and Medicine. 233: 1066-1080.


PAGLIASSOTTI, M.J., KIM, P.Y., ESTRADA, A.L., STEWART, C.M., & GENTILE,
C.L. 2016. Endoplasmic reticulum stress in obesity and obesity-related disorders: An
expanded view. Metabolism. 65: 1238-1246.

PALACE, V.P., KHAPER, N., QIN, Q., & SINGAL, P.K. 1999. Antioxidant potentials of
vitamin A and carotenoids and their relevance to heart disease. Free Radialc Biology
and Medicine. Mar26(5-6):7 46-761.

PANCHE, A.N., DIWAN A.D., & CHANDRA S.R. 2016. Flavonoids: An
overview. Journal of Nutrition Science. 5: e47-52.

PARASURAMAN, S., RAVEENDRAN, R., & KESAVAN, R. 2010. Blood sample
collection in small laboratory animals. Journal of Pharmacology and
Pharmacotherapeutics.\(2): 87-93.

PETERLI, R., WOLNERHANSSEN, B.K., PETERS. T, VETTER, D., KROLL, D.,
BORBELY, Y., SCHULTES, B., BEGLINGER, C., DREWE, J., SCHIESSER, M.,
NETT, P., & BUETER, M. 2018. Effect of laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy vs
laparoscopic roux-en-Y gastric bypass on weight loss in 57 patients with morbid
obesity: The SM-BOSS randomized clinical trial. JAMA: The Journal of the American
Medical Association. 319(3): 255-265.

PAP, N., FIDELIS, M., AZEVEDO, L., DO, C., WANG, D., MOCAN, A., PEREIRA, E.,
XAVIER-SANTOS, D., SANT'ANA, A., YANG, B., & GRANATO, DANIEL.
2021. Berry polyphenols and human health: evidence of antioxidant, anti-
inflammatory, microbiota modulation, and cell-protecting effects. Current Opinion in
Food Science. 42: 167-186.

PARK, E., EDIRISINGHE, I., WEI, H., VJAYAKUMAR, L.P., BANASZEWSKI, K.,
CAPPOZZO, J.C., & BURTON-FREEMAN, B. 2016. A dose-response evaluation of
freeze-dried strawberries independent of fiber content on metabolic indices in
abdominally obese individuals with insulin resistance in a randomized, single-
blinded, diet-controlled crossover trial. Molecular Nutrition and Food Research. 60:
1099-1109.

PERK, B., ILGIN, S., ATLI, O., DUYMUS A.,H., & SIRMAGUL, B. 2013. Acute and
subchronic toxic effects of the fruits of Physalis peruviana L. Evidence-based
Complementary and Alternative Medicine. 2013: 1-10.

PIAO, Y., LIU, Y., & XIE, X. 2013. Change trends of organ weight background data in
Sprague Dawley rats at different ages. Journal of Toxicologic Pathology. 26(1): 29-
34.


PHILIPPINE ASSOCIATION FOR THE STUDY OF OVERWEIGHT AND OBESITY
(PASOO). nd. Algorithm for the healthy and Safe weight Management Program 3"4
ed. Makati, Philippines.

PISOSCHI, A. M., & POP, A. 2015. The role of antioxidants in the chemistry of oxidative
stress: A review. European Journal of Medicinal Chemistry. 97: 55-74.

PRASAD, M., VENUGOPAL, S. P., ALAGARSAMY, V., & SRIDEVI, C. 2016. The
preliminary phytochemical analysis and oral acute toxicity study of stem bark of
Syzygium cumini. International Journal of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences.
8(1): 209-213.

PRICE, M., HAGERMAN, A., & BUTLER, L. 1980. Tannin content of cowpeas,
chickpeas, pigeon peas, and mung beans. Journal of Agricultural and Food
Chemistry. 28: 459-461.

PITTNER, R. A., MOORE, C. X., BHAVSAR, S. P., GEDULIN, B. R., SMITH, P. A.,
JODKA, C. M., & YOUNG, A. A. 2004. Effects of PY Y[3-36] in rodent models of
diabetes and obesity. International Journal of Obesity. 28(8): 963-971.

POMERANZ, Y., & MELOAN, C. 1994. Food analysis: Determination of moisture. Food
Analysis. 575-601.

PRASAD, M., RAJYALAKSHMI, M., & NAIK, J. 2014. Ameliorative potential of
aqueous leaves extract of Syzygium cumini (L.) associated metabolic alterations in
alloxan induced diabetic rats. Journal of Pharmacognosy and Phytochemistry. 3(3):
168-172.

PRADHAN, G., SAMSON, S. L., & SUN, Y. 2013. Ghrelin: Much more than a hunger
hormone. Current Opinion in Clinical Nutrition and Metabolic Care. 16(6): 619-624.

PRICE, M. L., HAGERMAN, A. E., & BUTLER, L. G. 1980. Tannin content of cowpeas,
chickpeas, pigeon peas, and mung beans. Journal of Agricultural and Food
Chemistry. 28(2): 459-461.

RAEDERSTORFF, D.G.; SCHLACHTER, M.F.; ELSTE, V., & WEBER, P. Effect of
EGCG on lipid absorption and plasma lipid levels in rats. Journal of Nutritional
Biochemstry. 14: 326-332.

RAINS, T.M., AGARWAL, S., & MAKI ,K.C. 2010. Antiobesity effects of green tea
catechins: A mechanistic review. Journal of Nutritional Biochemistry. 22: 1-7.


RAMOS, I. L., & BANDIOLA, T. M. B. 2017. Phytochemical-screening of Syzygium
cumini Myrtaceae leaf extracts using different solvents of extraction. Der Pharmacia
Lettre. 9(2): 74-78.

RAZA, A., SHAHZAD, N., AHMAD QASRANI, S., NAWAZ SHARIF, M., NAVEED
AKRAM, M., & USMAN ALI, M. 2015. Extraction of bioactive components from
the fruit and seed of jamun (Syzygium cumini) through conventional solvent extraction
method. American-Eurasian Journal of Agricultural & Environmental Science. 15(6):
991-996.

RAZA, A., ALI, M., NISAR, T., QAISRANI, S., HUSSAIN, R., & SHARIF, M., 2015.
Proximate Composition of Jamun (Syzygium cumini) Fruit and Seed. American-
Eurasian Journal of Agriculture & Environmental Science.15: 1221-1223.

REDINGER, R. 2007. The pathophysiology of obesity and its clinical manifestations.
Gastroenterology & Hepatology. 3: 856-863.

RIBEIRO, R. M., PINHEIRO NETO, V. F., RIBEIRO, K. S., VIEIRA, D. A., ABREU, I.
C., SILVA, S. D. N., & BORGES, M. O. D. R. 2014. Antihypertensive effect of
Syzygium cumini in spontaneously hypertensive Rats. Evidence-Based
Complementary and Alternative Medicine. 2014: 605452-605459.

ROTH, G. A., JOHNSON, C., ABAJOBIR, A., ABD-ALLAH, F., ABERA, S. F., ABYU,
G., BESHIR, M., AKSUT, B., ALAM, T., ALAM, K., ALLA, F., ALVIS GUZMAN,
N., AMROCK, S., ANSARI, H., ARNLOV, J., ASAYESH, H., ATEY, TE., AVILA-
BURGOS, L., AWASTHI, A., & MURRAY, C. 2017. Global, regional, and national
burden of cardiovascular diseases for 10 causes, 1990 to 2015. Journal of the
American College of Cardiology. 70(1): 1-25.

ROY, A., BHATTACHARYA, S., PANDEY, J. N., & BISWAS, M. 2011. Anti-
inflammatory activity of Syzygium cumini leaf against experimentally induced acute
and chronic inflammations in rodents. Alternative Medicine Studies. 1(1): 23-25.

ROSS, R., DAGNONE, D., JONES, P.J., SMITH, H., PADDAGS, A., HUDSON, R.. &
JANSSEN, I. 2000. Reduction in obesity and related comorbid conditions after diet-
induced weight loss or exercise-induced weight loss in men. A randomized, controlled
trial. Annals of Internal Medicine. 133(2): 92-103.

SALMINEN, P., HELMIO, M., & OVASKA. J. 2018. Effect of laparoscopic sleeve
gastrectomy vs laparoscopic Roux-en-Y Gastric bypass on weight loss at 5 years
among patients with morbid obesity: The SLEEVEPASS randomized clinical trial.
JAMA: The Journal of the American Medical Association. 319(3): 241-254.


SALTIEL, A., & OLEFSKY, J. 2017. Inflammatory mechanisms linking obesity and
metabolic disease. Journal of Clinical Investigation. 27: 1-4.

SANTOS, D.T., CAVALCANTI, R., ROSTAGNO, M., QUEIROGA, C., EBERLIN, M.,
& MEIRELES, M. 2013. Extraction of polyphenols and anthocyanins from the Jambu
(Syzygium cumini L) fruit peels. Food and Public Health. 3(1): 12-20.

SEGULA, D. 2014. Complications of obesity in adults: A short review of the literature.
Malawi Medical Journal: The Journal of Medical Association of Malawi. 26: 20-24.

SENA, C. M., LEANDRO, A., AZUL, L., SEICA, R., & PERRY, G. 2018. Vascular
oxidative stress: Impact and therapeutic approaches. Frontiers in Physiology. 9: 1668-
1679.

SERFILIPPI, L., PALLMAN, D. & RUSSELL, B. 2003. Serum clinical chemistry and
hematology reference values in outbred stocks of albino mice from three commonly
used vendors and two inbred strains of albino mice. Contemp Top Lab Anim Sci.
2003;42(3):46-52.

SESSO, H.D., LIU, S., GAZIANO, J.M., & BURING, J.E. 2003. Dietary lycopene,
tomato-based food products and cardiovascular disease in women, Journal of
Nutrition. 133: 2336-2341.

SHARMA, S. MEHTA, D., NAGAR, H., & MISHRA, A. 2012. A review on
pharmacological activity of Syzygium cumini extracts using different solvent and their
effective doses. International Research Journal of Pharmacy. 54: 3-12.

SHENKUT, M., ASRES, K., BEKURETSION, Y., ABEBE, A., BIKILA, D., &
SEYOUM, G.. 2021. Sub-chronic toxicity of ethanol leaf extract of Syzygium
guineense on the biochemical parameters and histopathology of liver and kidney in
the rats. Toxicology Reports. 8: 822-828.

SHIVEMBE, A., & OJINNAKA, D. 2017. Determination of vitamin C and total phenolic
in fresh and freeze dried blueberries and the antioxidant capacity of their extracts.
Integrative Food, Nutrition and Metabolism. 4(6):1-5.

SHOFIAN, N. M., HAMID, A. A., OSMAN, A., SAARI, N., ANWAR, F., DEK, M. S.,
& HAIRUDDIN, M. R. 2011. Effect of freeze-drying on the antioxidant compounds
and antioxidant activity of selected tropical fruits. Jnternational journal of molecular
sciences. 12(7): 4678-4692.

SILVA, S., ABREU, I, SILVA, G., RIBEIRO, R., LOPES, A., CARTAGENES, M.,
FREIRE, S., BORGES, A., & BORGES, M. 2012. The toxicity evaluation of


Syzygium cumini leaves in rodents. Revista Brasileira de Farmacognosia. 22(1):102-

SINGH, A., SINGH, S., SINGH, N., AGRAWAL, N., & GOPAL, K. 2011. Obesity and
dyslipidemia. International Journal of Biological & Medical Research. 2: 824-828.

SINGH, N., & GUPTA, M. 2007. Effects of ethanolic extract of Syzygium cumini (Linn)
seed powder on pancreatic islets of alloxan diabetic rats. Indian Journal of
Experimental Biology. 45(10): 861-867.

SINGH, A., & MARAR, T. 2011. Inhibitory effect of extracts of Syzygium Cumini and
Psidium Guajava on glycosidases. Journal of Cell and Tissue Research. 11(1): 2535-
2539,

SLENTZ, C.A., DUSCHA, B.D., JOHNSON JL, KETCHUM, K., AIKEN, L., SAMSA,
G., HOUMARD, J., BALES, C., & KRAUS, W. 2004. Effects of the amount of
exercise on body weight, body composition, and measures of central obesity:
STRRIDE—A randomized controlled study. Archives of Internal Medicine. 164(1):
31-39.

SMITH, D. G. 2007. Epidemiology of dyslipidemia and economic burden on the healthcare
system. The American Journal of Managed Care. 13: 68-71.

SNOW, V., BARRY, P., FITTERMAN, N., QASEEM, A., & WEISS, K. 2005.
Pharmacologic and surgical management of obesity in primary care: A clinical
practice guideline from the American College of Physicians. Annals of Internal
Medicine. 142(7): 525-531.

SONCHARAN, P., SHANMUGARAJAN, T. S., SOMASUNDARAM, I., & NILADRI,
M. 2010. Protective effect of Syzygium cumini seeds against doxorubicin. Chemistry.
1(6): 343-349.

SOWJANYA, K.M., & SATYA, A. 2013. A review on phytochemical constituents and
bioassay of Syzygium cumini. International Journal of Natural Products Science.
3(2): I-11.

SU, J., WANG, H., MA, C., LIU, C., RAHMAN, M.D.R., GAO, C., &NIE, R. 2015.
Hypolipidemic mechanism of gypenosides via inhibition of pancreatic lipase and
reduction in cholesterol micellar solubility. European Food Research and
Technology. 242. 305-312

SUGIYAMA, H., AKAZOME, Y., SHOJI,T., YAMAGUCHI, A., YASUE, M.,
KANDA, T. & OHTAKE, Y.2007. Oligomeric procyanidins in apple polyphenol are


main active components for inhibition of pancreatic lipase and triglyceride absorption.
Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry. 55 (2007):4604-4609

SUCKOW, M.A, DANNEMAN, P. & BRAYTON, C. 2001.The Laboratory Mouse. Boca
Raton, FL: CRC Press, LLC; 2001:16-20.

SWAMI, S.B., THAKOR, N.S.J., PATIL, M.M., & HALDANKAR, P. M. 2012. Jamun
(Syzygium cumini (L.)): A review of its food and medicinal uses. Food and Nutrition
Sciences. 3: 1100-1117.

SRIVASTAVA, R. 2018. Lipid lowering activity of some medicinal plants: A review of
literature. Biomedical Journal of Scientific & Technical Research. 9(1): 6853-6856.

STAICIC, S., TEPIC, A., DJILAS,S., SUMIC, Z.. CANADANOVIC-BRUNET. J.,
CETKOVIC, G., VULIC, J., & TUMBAS, V. 2012. Chemical composition and
antioxidant activity of berry fruits. Acta Periodica Technologica. (43): 93-105.

TAOKA, H., YOKOYAMA, Y., MORIMOTO, K., KITAMURA, N., TANIGAKI, T.,
TAKASHINA, Y., TSUBOTA, K., & WATANABE, M. 2016. Role of bile acids in
the regulation of the metabolic pathways. World journal of diabetes. 7(13): 260-270.

TEILMANN, A., JACOBSEN, K., KALLIOKOSKI, O., KORNERUP HANSEN, A.,
HAU, J., & ABELSON, K. 2012. The Effect of automated blood sampling on
corticosterone levels, body weight and daily food intake in permanently catheterized
male BALB/c Mice. Jn vivo (Athens, Greece). 26: 577-582.

TEO, S., STIRLING, D., THOMAS, S., HOBERMAN, A., KIORPES, A., & KHETANI,
V., 2002. A 90-day oral gavage toxicity study of d-methylphenidate and d, I-
methylphenidate in Sprague Dawley rats. Toxicology. 179 (3): 183-196.

THANGARASJ, P. 2016. Pharmacological Assays of Plant-Based Natural Products
Proximate Composition Analysis. Springer. pp.21- 31

THE NATIONAL CHOLESTEROL EDUCATION PROGRAM (NCEP). 2001. Expert
panel on detection, evaluation, and treatment of high blood cholesterol in adults
(Adult Treatment Panel III). The Journal of the American Medical Association. 285:
2486-2497.

TOME-CARNEIRO, J., GONZALVEZ, M., LARROSA, M., GARCIA-ALMAGRO. F J.
AVILES-PLAZA, F., PARRA, S., YANEZ-GASCON, M.J., RUIZ-ROS, J.A.,
GARCIA-CONESA M.T., & TOMAS-BARBERAN, F.A. 2012. Consumption of a
grape extract supplement containing resveratrol decreases oxidized LDL and ApoB
in patients undergoing primary prevention of cardiovascular disease: A triple-blind,


6-month follow-up, placebo-controlled, randomized trial. Molecular Nutrition and
Food Research. 56: 810-821.

TRIPATHI, A. K., & KOHLI, S. 2014. Pharmacognostical standardization and antidiabetic
activity of Syzygium cumini (Linn.) barks (Myrtaceae) on streptozotocin-induced
diabetic rats. Journal of Complementary and Integrative Medicine. 11(2): 71-81.

TSCHOP M. , SMILEY D, L., & HEIMAN, M. L. 2000. Ghrelin induces adiposity in
rodents. Nature 407: 908-913.

UGBABE, G. E., EZEUNALA, M. N., EDMOND, I. N., APEV, J., & SALAWU, O. A.
2010. Preliminary phytochemical, antimicrobial and acute toxicity studies of the stem,
bark and the leaves of a cultivated Syzygium cumini Linn. (family: Myrtaceae) in
Nigeria. African Journal of Biotechnology. 9(41): 6943-6747.

UGWAH-OGUEJIOFOR, C., OKOLI, C., UGWAH, M., UMARU, M., OGBULIE, C.,
HALILU, E., MOHAMMED, U., & NJAN, ANOKA. 2019. Acute and sub-acute
toxicity of aqueous extract of aerial parts of Caralluma dalzielii N. E. Brown in mice
and rats. Heliyon. 5: e01179-01199.

VEIGAS, J. M., NARAYAN, M. S., LAXMAN, P. M., & NEELWARNE, B. 2007.
Chemical nature, stability and bioefficacies of anthocyanins from fruit peel of
Syzygium cumini Skeels. Food Chemistry. 105(2): 619-627.

VICENTE, A., MANGANARIS, G., DARRE, M., ORTIZ, C., SOZZI, G., & CRISOSTO,
C.. 2021. Compositional determinants of fruit and vegetable quality and nutritional
value. Postharvest Handling. 565-619.

WANG, D., XU, K., ZHONG, Y., LUO, X., XIAO, R., HOU, Y., BAO, W., YANG, W.,
YAN, H., YAO, P., & LIU, LIEGANG. 2010. Acute and subchronic oral toxicities of
Pu-erh black tea extract in sprague-dawley rats. Journal of ethnopharmacology.
134:156-64.

WADDEN, T. A., BUTRYN, M.L., & WILSON, C. 2007. Lifestyle modification for the
management of obesity. Gastroenterology. 132(6): 2226-2238.

WELZ, A. N., EMBERGER-KLEI, A., & MENRAD, K. 2018. Why people use herbal
medicine: Insights from a focus-group study in Germany. BMC Complementary and
Alternative Medicine. 18(1): 1-9.

WOOLLETT, L., WANG, Y., BUCKLEY, D., YAO, L., CHIN, S., GRANHOLM, N., &
HEUBI J. 2006. Micellar solubilisation of cholesterol is essential for absorption in
humans. Gut. 55: 197-204.


WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION. 1997. Obesity: Preventing and managing the
global epidemic. Report of WHO consultation presented at: the World Health
Organization; June 3-5, 1997; Geneva, Switzerland.

WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION. 2000. WHO Consultation on Obesity (1999 :
Geneva, Switzerland), Obesity: Preventing and managing the global epidemic : report
of a WHO consultation.

WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION. 2002. Quantifying selected major risks to health.
In: The World Health Report 2002 ’Reducing Risks, Promoting Healthy Life. Chapter
4: Geneva: World Health Organization. 47-97.

WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION 2018. Fact Sheet: Overweight and Obesity.

WU, Z., TENG, J., HUANG, L., XIA, N., & WEI, B. 2015. Stability, antioxidant activity
and in vitro bile acid-binding of green, black and dark tea polyphenols during
simulated in vitro gastrointestinal digestion. RSC Advances.5: 92089-92095.

YANG, R.L., SHI, Y. H., HAO, G., LI, W., & LE, G. W. 2008. Increasing oxidative stress
with progressive hyperlipidemia in human: Relation between malondialdehyde and
atherogenic index. Journal of Clinical Biochemistry and Nutrition. 43(3): 154-158.

YE, J. 2007 Role of insulin in the pathogenesis of free fatty acid-induced insulin resistance
in skeletal muscle. Endocrine Metabolic and Immune Disorders- Drug Targets. 7(1):
65-74.

YELE, S.U., & VEERANJANEYULU, A. 2010. Toxicological assessments of aqueous
extract of Eugenia jambolana stem bark. Pharmaceutical Biology. 48: 849-854.

YOUDIM, K.A., MARTIN, A., & JOSEPH, J.A.2000. Incorporation of the elderberry
anthocyanins by endothelial cells increases protection against oxidative stress. Free
Radical Biology Medicine. 29: 51-60.

YOUDIM, K.A., MCDONALD, J., KALT, W., & JOSEPH, J.A. 2002. Potential role of
dietary flavonoids in reducing microvascular endothelium vulnerability to oxidative
and inflammatory insults. Journal of Nutritional Biochemistry. 13: 282-288.

ZAMPELAS. A., & MAGRIPLIS, E. 2019. New insights into cholesterol functions: A
friend or an enemy?. Nutrients. 11(7): 1645-1649.

ZERN, T., & FERNANDEZ, M. 2005. Cardioprotective effects of dietary polyphenols!.
The Journal of Nutrition. 135: 2291-2294.


ZHANG, Y., LIU, J., YAO, J., JI, G., QIAN, L., WANG, J., & LIU, Y. 2014. Obesity:
Pathophysiology and intervention. Nutrients. 6(11): 5153-5183.

ZHAO, Y., CHEN, B., SHEN, J., WAN, L., ZHU, Y., YI, T., & XIAO, Z. 2017. The
beneficial effects of quercetin, curcumin, and resveratrol in obesity. Oxidative
Medicine and Cellular Longevity. 2017: 1-8

ZHI, J., MELIA, A.T., GUERCIOLINI, R., CHUNG, J., KINBERG, J.. HAUPTMAN, J.,
& PATEL, I. 1994. Retrospective population-based analysis of the dose-response
(fecal fat excretion) relationship of orlistat in normal and obese volunteers. Clinical

Pharmacology & Therapeutics. 56(1): 82-85.
