Detection of Protozoans with Zoonotic Potential in the Tabanids (Diptera: Tabanidae) of Brgy. Catalanacan, Science City of Muñoz, Nueva Ecija

Frances Paula L. Miaral

University of the Philippines Manila

Master of Science in Public Health (Parasitology)

July 2024

ABSTRACT

Hematophagous flies from the family Tabanidae, Latreille 1802 (Phylum
Arthropoda: Order Diptera) are important nuisance pests and vectors in animals. Recently,
protozoan infections initially restricted to animals, such as babesiosis (Babesia sp.),
theileriosis (Theileria sp.), and surra (Trypanosoma evansi) have been reported in humans.
In this study, the potential role of tabanids in the transmission of zoonotic parasites such as Babesia sp., Theileria sp, and Tr. evansi was determined through molecular approaches. A cross-sectional, descriptive design was used in the study. Nzi traps and carabao-
baited traps were installed near backyard farms in Brgy. Catalanacan, Science City of
Mufioz, Nueva Ecija for the collection of tabanids. The species, relative abundance and
density of the collected tabanids were recorded. The occurrence of Trypanosoma evansi (n
= 383) and Theileria/Babesia sp. (n = 382) in the proboscis of tabanids were determined
using molecular techniques. The presence of human blood among the samples positive for
the target protozoans was also determined as an indicator of human blood feeding by the tabanids. A total of 4,321 tabanids were collected belonging to the genus Tabanus, 99.95%
of which were Ta. partitus while 0.05% were Ta. reducens. Using polymerase chain
reaction (PCR), the occurrences for Jr. evansi and Theileria/Babesia sp. were 47.26% (n =
181) and 31.15% (n = 119), respectively. The co-occurrence of the parasites was detected
in 6.01% (n = 23) of the proboscis. Twelve samples found positive for Theileria/Babesia
sp. were subjected to sequencing and found to be from the genus Theileria. About 18.41% (n= 51) of the samples positive for either or both protozoans have detectable human blood. The results indicate that humans could become exposed to 7x evansi, Babesia sp., and Theileria sp. through tabanid bites.

CHAPTER I
INTRODUCTION

A. Background of the Study

Hematophagous flies from the family Tabanidae Latreille 1802 (Phylum
Arthropoda; Order Diptera), commonly known as horseflies and deer flies (called
tabanids), have long been implicated in the transmission of pathogens (Carn, 1996). Over
4,400 species have been described in this family (Pape ef al., 2011), and 63 species of
tabanids are recorded in the Philippines (Baltazar, 1990). Morphologically, tabanids are
stout-bodied and can be distinguished from other dipterans through their antennae which
extend anteriorly from the head. They have large compound eyes, which can be used to
determine their sex. The female flies have dichoptic eyes (separated by the frons), while
males have holoptic eyes (meeting medially) (Mullens, 2019). The biting members of this
family have a short, robust proboscis consisting of piercing-lapping mouthparts, which are

specialized to cut through the host’s hide like a scissor (Krenn & Aspock, 2012).

Recently, tabanids from the genus Chrysops sp. were implicated in the mechanical
transmission of hepatitis B resulting in the high incidence in India (Kuriakose & Ittyachen,
2018). Several species also serve as biological and mechanical vectors for parasites of
medical and veterinary importance, yet they are not as well studied as other insect vectors
(Baldacchino et al., 2014). Chrysops dimidiata and C. silacea are the biological vectors for
Loa loa, a filarial nematode that causes Loaiasis in humans (Connal & Connal, 1922).
Tabanids also act as mechanical vectors of parasites of veterinary importance, such as
Besnoitia besnoiti (Bigalke, 1968), a cyst-forming protozoan of bovines, and trypanosomes
such as Trypanosoma vivax, Tr. congolense (Desquesnes & Dia, 2003a, b; 2004), and 77.


evansi (Desquesnes et al., 2013b). Recently, other protozoan species from the piroplasmid
genera Theileria sp. and Babesia sp. have been detected from tabanids (Taioe et al., 2017;
Lakew et al., 2021). Although the transmission by tabanids of Theileria sp. and Babesia
sp. has not yet been observed under controlled conditions, several species under this family
have been implicated in the mechanical transmission of some parasitic protozoans in areas
where the biological vectors are absent (Desquesnes & Dia, 2003a, b; 2004; Lakew et al.,
2021). There have been numerous cases of human piroplasmosis caused by zoonotic
Babesia in several countries in Asia, Australia, Europe, America, and Africa (Young et al.,
2019). On the other hand, there is limited information on the occurrence of human
theileriosis. However, there have been reports of human seropositivity for Tr equi
(Gabrielli et al., 2014, and one patient was reported to be PCR positive with Theileria sp.

that is genetically related to 7. Junwenshuni (Liu et al., as cited by Chen et al., 2014).

Among the trypanosomes transmitted by tabanids, the protozoan 7r. evansi whose
transmission was initially thought to be restricted to animals has been reported to cause
atypical human trypanosomiases in India, Egypt, Sri Lanka (Truc et al., 2013), and Vietnam
(Van Vinh Chau et al., 2016). Tr. evansi is a hemoflagellate that primarily affects animals,
and its wide-ranging geographical distribution can be attributed to its capability to
parasitize several host species (Lun & Desser, 1995). This trypanosome does not require a
biological vector as it exists only in its blood form stage and can be directly transmitted
mechanically by blood-feeding flies, including tabanids. The other modes of transmission
of 7r. evansi include horizontal transmission through sexual contact, vertical transmission
through the transplacental infection, and through the oral route by contamination of the

oral mucosa with the blood and meat of infected animals (Desquesnes et al., 2013b).

The successful transmission of trypanosomes by tabanids is determined by several
factors: density, blood-feeding behavior (including interrupted feeding and the tendency of
the flies to feed on another host) and the amount of blood meal residues in the mouthparts
of the biting flies. Meanwhile, the host’s behavior (defensive habits), level of parasitemia
and susceptibility to the infection are variables which also influence the mechanical
transmission by tabanids (Magnarelli & Anderson, 1980; Desquesnes et al., 2009; Muzari
et al., 2010; Desquesnes ef al., 2013b). Among natural hosts of trypanosomes, tabanids
have been known to be efficient vectors and can cause outbreaks within a short period of

time upon the introduction of an infected host (Desquesnes et al., 2009).

Surra is an infection in livestock animals caused by Tr. evansi. The name is a Hindi
word adaptation meaning “rotten”. The symptoms of surra include fever, anemia, wasting,
edema, and lethargy. Spontaneous abortions and stillbirths might also take place if the
infected animal is pregnant (Brun, 1998). Asymptomatic infections might also occur
(Dargantes et al., 2009) as a result of mild treatment, which alleviates the symptoms of the
infected animals but fails to completely remove the parasite. These sub-clinical infections
may result to the continuous transmission of surra among its hosts (Desquesnes et al.,

2013b).

Tr. evansi was initially highly susceptible to the trypanosome lytic factors (TLFs)
present in the normal human serum (Rifkin, 1978). The essential components of the TLFs
are the apolipoprotein A-1 (apo-A1), apolipoprotein L-1 (apo-L1), and haptoglobin-related
protein (Hpr), which mediate the lysis of the parasite’s cell membrane (Harrington ef al.,
2009). The presence of trypanosome lytic factors in the normal human serum (NHS)

generally provides protection against Trypanosoma infection. However, it has been

demonstrated that some strains of Tr. evansi exhibit resistance to the trypanocidal activity

of the NHS (Lai et al., 2010).

Recently, six human surra cases have been reported in other countries. Among these
cases, one died while the others successfully recovered from the infection. Unfortunately,
four of the cases were poorly documented, in which diagnosis was based solely on the
morphology of the parasite. The first human surra case was reported from India in 1977,
resulting from the accidental inoculation of a syringe containing blood infected with 77.
evansi. Decades later, more cases were reported in Sri Lanka (1999), West Bengal, India
(2005), and Egypt (2010) (Truc ef al., 2013). Since Tr evansi is morphologically
indistinguishable from other species when examined using microscopy (Gibson, 2003), the
performance of confirmatory tests using tools that are more specific is warranted for the

correct diagnosis of infection.

To date, only two human surra cases with proper documentation have been
reported. The first molecular-confirmed case of human surra was reported in 2005. A 45-
year-old farmer from India with no travel history was admitted as he was experiencing
intermittent fever accompanied by sweats and chills. Microscopic analysis of the peripheral
blood of the patient revealed the presence of hemoflagellates at 1x10°/mL. The infection
recurred for months, and the trypanosomes were only visible in the blood during febrile
episodes. The infection with Tr evansi was confirmed through card agglutination test
(CATT/Tr. evansi) and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) (Joshi et al., 2005). The patient’s
NHS did not show any trypanolytic activity against Tr. evansi, and it was confirmed
through western blot analysis that apolipoprotein L-1 (apo-L1) was absent in the serum,

making him susceptible to 77. evansi infection. Further investigation revealed mutations in

the coding sequence of the apo-L1 of the patient, which resulted in the premature
termination of the gene’s transcription (Vanhollebeke er al., 2006). This case prompted a
sero-epidemiological investigation in the area using CATT/Tr. evansi wherein numerous
individuals were confirmed positive, indicating exposure to the pathogen. The
hemoflagellate was not detected in the blood smears of the seropositives, but the authors
attribute this to the absence of symptoms that were present during the febrile episodes of

the reported cases (Shegokar et al., 2006).

In Southeast Asia, another human surra case was reported in 2016. A 38-year-old
female factory worker in Vietnam, upon hospital admission was presented with fever,
headache, and joint pain. Antimalarials were presumptively administered for treatment, but
the patient remained febrile. Examination of blood films revealed the presence of
trypanosomes in the peripheral blood. The infection was confirmed to be caused by 7r.
evansi using CATT/T7r. evansi and PCR assays. Similar to the previous case, recurrent
infection was observed, and parasitemia reached more than 7x10°/pL of blood. However,
unlike the first reported human surra case (Joshi et al., 2005), no mutations were detected
in the apo-L1 gene of the patient, and normal titers of the protein was found in the NHS.
This evidence indicates that even in the presence of the TLFs in human blood, 7r. evansi

can successfully establish infection in humans (Van Vinh Chau et al., 2016).

In 2019, a serological survey among livestock farmers was conducted in an animal
surra outbreak area in Indonesia using Field ELISA and CATT/Tr. evansi. Results show
that 4 out of 26 farmers (16.67%) were seropositive for Tr. evansi, yet no symptoms were
reported (Sawitri et al., 2019). Although the suspected source of infection for the reported

cases is the contamination of open wounds, the mechanism by which other individuals were

exposed to the pathogenic agent remains unknown. The seropositivity of numerous
individuals in the conducted surveys confirms the exposure of humans to the pathogen

(Shegokar et al., 2006; Sawitri et al., 2019).

Researchers assume that the occurrence of 7+ evansi infection in humans is
underreported (Desquesnes ef al., 2015). This may be true especially for populations at
risk, as subclinical infections might also be occurring (Shegokar et al., 2006). The
increasing reports of human infection caused by animal trypanosomes have led to the
creation of an international network called the “Network on Atypical Human Infections by
Animal Trypanosomes (NAHIAT),” which aims to spread awareness to the medical
community on the growing cases of these infections. The network has provided technical
consultations on atypical human trypanosomiasis infections. This collaborative movement
between institutions has advocated for the surveillance of trypanosomes causing atypical
human infections such as 7r evansi as their occurrence among humans might be

underreported (Desquesnes et al., 2015).

The Asia Pacific Strategy for Emerging Diseases and Public Health Emergencies
(APSED) framework by the World Health Organization South-East Asia and Western
Pacific Regions focuses on strengthening the preparedness of health systems of the member
states through focusing on several public health threats such as emerging infectious
diseases caused by zoonoses through the One Health approach (WHO, 2005). According
to Woolhouse & Gowtage-Sequeria (2005), the emergence of zoonotic pathogens can be
attributed to several drivers, including but not limited to 1) changes due to anthropogenic
activity (land use or agricultural practices), 2) demographics, 3) poor population health,

and 4) climate change. More attention should be diverted to pathogenic agents such as 7r.

evansi as climate change and continuous changes in habitat structures may have a positive
impact on the proliferation of the tabanid vectors (Baldacchino et al., 2017), and may lead

to an increase in the transmission of the parasite.

Given that the number of emerging pathogens is increasing through the continuous
contact of man with wildlife and livestock animals (Weiss & McMichael, 2004), it is
necessary to conduct research to assess the potential of pathogenic agents to be transmitted
to humans. It has been reported that more than half (73%) of known human pathogens are
transmissible from animals, which causes great concern as it is known that zoonoses are
more likely to become emerging or re-emerging pathogens (Woolhouse and Gowtage-
Sequeria, 2005). In this context, more attention should be given to 7r. evansi as a public
health concern as its intrinsic characteristics (broad host range and transmissibility across
different taxa) and its ability to become virulent in humans makes it a viable candidate to
become an emerging disease (Morse ef al., 2012). Also, given that a large portion of
emerging infectious diseases can be attributed to vector-borne diseases (Jones, 2008),
investigating the transmission dynamics of Tr. evansi, including the species composition
and ecology of its mechanical vectors, is necessary for the formulation of prevention and
control strategies against the disease. The detection of pathogenic agents in hematophagous
flies, including tabanids, is a good candidate for the surveillance circulating zoonoses in
both wild and domesticated animals, and humans as it is non-invasive for these organisms

(Bitome-Essono et al., 2017)

In the Philippines, surra has been the cause of significant economic losses,
especially for livestock farmers (Manuel, 1998; Dobson et al., 2009). An estimation of the

impact of surra on buffaloes in Mindanao revealed a significant reduction in fertility and

increased mortality among buffalo populations, especially in areas where the apparent
prevalence of the parasites was high (Dargantes et al., 2009). In 1912, Tabanus striatus
Fabricus was incriminated as the mechanical vector of 7r evansi in the Philippines
(Mitzmain, 1913b). However, it was later then confirmed by Burger and Thompson (1981)
that the reported 7a. striatus specimens from the Philippines are misdiagnosed Ta. partitus,
which belong to the same complex. Since then, several tabanid species carrying the parasite
have been identified in Mindanao, including C. cinctus, Ta. philippinensis, Ta. partitus, and

Ta. ceylonicus (Dargantes, 2010).

At present, there are no human surra cases reported in the Philippines. However,
the presence of the parasite and its vectors in the country put humans at risk for infection,
especially since the routes of transmission to man are still not well elucidated. In a survey
conducted among buffalo owners in Mindanao, it was reported that the livestock owners
are not well-informed with the etiologic agent, diagnosis, and transmission of surra
(Escarlos et al., 2016). Hence, individuals in close contact with the hosts of Tr. evansi are
at risk of exposure to the parasite, especially since their knowledge of the pathogenic agent

is limited.

B. Statement of the Problem

Surra is one of the most economically important animal parasitic diseases in the
Philippines, with high zoonotic potential as shown by the increasing number of atypical
human infections caused by Tr. evansi. The emergence of zoonotic Tr. evansi poses a public
health threat, especially to those who are in close contact with the natural hosts in areas
where the protozoan is distributed. In serological surveys conducted in other countries, it

was determined that seropositive individuals were usually those who are in close contact

with the natural hosts. This indicates that infection with 7r. evansi might occur unreported
in countries where the parasite is distributed, the Philippines included. In addition, recent
reports on the isolation of Babesia sp. and Theileria sp. among tabanids denotes the

possibility of mechanical transmission by the biting flies.

In the Philippines, there is a knowledge gap in the role of tabanids as vectors of
human diseases. In addition, there is no information on the occurrence of protozoan
parasites in tabanids flies in the country. The presence of the parasites and their mechanical
vectors in the country is a significant cause for alarm on the possibility of zoonotic
transmission to individuals constantly in contact with its natural hosts. This holds true
especially for Filipino farmers and livestock caretakers who work closely with the host
animals and are also exposed to the vectors. It is therefore imperative to conduct a study to
determine the species of tabanid vectors which carry potentially zoonotic parasites, such
as the Babesia sp., Theileria sp and Tr. evansi. The study aimed to answer the following

research questions:

1. What are the species, density and relative abundance of tabanids near backyard
farms in Brgy. Catalanacan of the Science City of Mufioz?
2. What is the occurrence of Babesia sp., Theileria sp., and Tr. evansi in the tabanids?
3. What are the species of tabanids that bite humans?
C. Research Objectives
The purpose of the study was to determine the role of tabanids in the transmission
of Babesia sp., Theileria sp., and Tr. evansi in Brgy. Catalanacan, Science City of Mufioz,

Nueva Ecija. Specifically, the study aims to:

1. Describe the species composition, density, and relative abundance of tabanids near
the cattle-raising farms;

2. Determine the occurrence of Babesia sp., Theileria sp. and Tr. evansi among the
tabanids;

3. Identify which of the tabanids have detectable human blood.

D. Significance of the Study

For decades, a paradigm shift to a more integrated approach in addressing emerging
infectious diseases has been advocated by several organizations. Given that the increasing
number of pathogens which can affect humans is largely driven by human activity, contact
with animals, and climate change, it is only logical that the response to emerging diseases
is multi-disciplinary as the problem exists due to several pressures. The One Health
approach is a collaborative movement across different sectors and disciplines in addressing
disease burdens such as zoonotic diseases, which can be transmitted through contact with
animals, including the domesticated species (WHO, FAO, and OIE, 2019). Also, in line
with the National Unified Health Research Agenda 2017 — 2022 theme on health resiliency,
studying diseases (such as surra) that have the potential to spread through outbreaks are
included in the research priorities (Philippine National Health Research System, 2017).
Pre-empting the emergence of zoonotic pathogens through surveillance and risk
assessment can help in the preparedness for public health emergencies, and
characterization of the threat would provide information for the control of these diseases
in the event of outbreaks. Vector incrimination, including field investigation, helps in

understanding the epidemiology of the pathogens for the development of control strategies.


Tr. evansi has been generally regarded as a pathogen of animals in the Philippines.
Most studies conducted on the trypanosome are focused on its veterinary importance, and
the discussion on its public health importance as a potentially zoonotic parasite is scarce.
Few studies have investigated the seasonal dynamics of the tabanid vectors; however, all
have been conducted in a different geographical location. The objectives of this study are
in line with the interest of the Philippine Inter-agency Committee on Zoonoses (PhilCZ),
composed of the Department of Health, Department of Agriculture, and the Department of
Environment and Natural Resources, which focuses on the prevention, detection, and
control of emerging zoonotic diseases through the One Health approach (DOH, DA,
DENR, 2020). The protozoan species which were investigated in the tabanids collected in
the Science City of Mufioz are pathogenic agents of diseases included in the OIE list of
notifiable animal diseases which are under surveillance by the Department of Agriculture

(Department of Agriculture, 2018).

Asa preliminary study that focused on characterizing the tabanids of the potentially
zoonotic 7r. evansi and other parasites of veterinary importance, such as Theileria spp. and
Babesia spp. in the country, the results of this study would provide surveillance data on the
occurrence of the pathogenic agents in the tabanids of the Science City of Mufioz, Nueva
Ecija. The molecular detection of the parasites in the tabanids would allow the
identification of potential vectors in the Science City of Mufioz, Nueva Ecija. The study
would also provide information on a portion of risk assessment for the pre-event phase of
a possibly emerging infectious disease by identifying vectors that can transmit protozoan
parasites to humans. The results of this study would serve as a basis in the development of

strategies for vector control, livestock management and health promotion of the farmers


and livestock caretakers. The findings would serve as evidence for policy development on
either animal or human health by the Science City of Mufioz local government units, the
Philippine Carabao Center, the Bureau of Animal Industry, the Municipal Health Office,

and the Municipal Veterinary Office of the Science City of Mufioz.
E. Scope and Delimitations of the Study

The study focused on the identification of the species of tabanids in selected
livestock farms in the Science City of Mufioz. Only tabanids collected using the Nzi trap
and carabao-baited trap were used in the study. The identification of the tabanids was
accomplished through morphological examination of their body parts using taxonomic

keys.

This study did not deal with the life history, diversity, seasonal fluctuations, and
spatial and temporal distribution of the tabanids. Some species of tabanids may not have
been collected due to their seasonality, weather-dependent, and species-specific preference
for vegetation or land cover. The pathogenic agents observed were limited to protozoans
associated with tabanids. The protozoans were collected only from the mouthparts. The
molecular detection of the protozoans carried by the tabanids was limited to Tr evansi,
Babesia spp., and Theileria spp., the protozoans of public health and veterinary importance.
Other pathogens such as viruses, bacteria, fungi, and parasitic nematodes were not

investigated in this study.


Operational Definition of Terms

Carrier — mechanical vectors which harbor the parasites or flies in which parasite DNA is

detected; interchangeable with ‘harbor’.

Damaged flies — flies that could not be identified with indistinguishable morphological

characteristics due to damaged or missing body parts (e.g., missing head, thorax).
Negative — term used for flies in which the parasite DNA was not detected.

Occurrence — The proportion of the flies collected in which the protozoans were detected.
Positive — term used for flies in which the parasite DNA was detected.

Protozoa — refers to the parasites of interest in this study, particularly 7+ evansi and the

species under Babesia sp. and Theileria sp.

Reference sample — refers to collected specimen kept for pinning but were excluded in the

data analysis.


CHAPTER II
THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
A. Review of Related Literature
Morphology and Biology of tabanids

Tabanidae is a diverse family from the Order Diptera, comprising over 4,400
described species from 156 genera (Pape et al., 2011). Tabanids are categorized into three
subfamilies: Chrysopsinae, Pangoniinae, and Tabaninae (Morita et al., 2016). Observations
on the life history of several species are limited due to the difficulty of breeding these flies
under laboratory conditions (Mackerras, 1956). Characteristic to all dipterans, tabanids
exhibit a holometabolous development and undergoes complete metamorphosis before
becoming an adult. The lifecycle of a tabanid fly consists of six to thirteen larval instars,
depending on the species before it reaches pupation (Mullens, 2019). Tabanids occupy a
wide range of habitats and have been reported to thrive in various ecosystems, i.e., deserts
(Al Dhafer et al., 2009), marine zones (Lane & Anderson, 1983), forests (Williams, 1962),

and other ecosystems.

Eggs of tabanids are laid in masses and consist of up to hundreds of eggs. For
aquatic species, egg masses can be found on dry surfaces of vegetation; on twigs and
grasses above water sources such as creeks and shallow pools of water. In some species,
the masses are covered in a coating that is insoluble to water. As soon as the larvae emerge
from the eggs, they immediately seek harborage or crawl and drop into the water. The
larvae are carnivorous and feed on other invertebrates such as crustaceans and the larvae

of other dipterans. Cannibalism has also been observed among tabanid larvae. Prior to the


final molt to pupation, larvae were observed to bury themselves under the sand, entering a
phase of semi-dormancy. The development of the larva into pupa may last from a few days
to several months, depending on the species. Prior to the emergence of adults, the pupae,
which were then buried in sand, swim up the water surface to molt (Mitzmain, 1913a; Hill,
1921). The larvae of tabanid species may exhibit varying morphotypes and structural
variations in order to adapt to the conditions of the environment they inhabit. Tabanid
larvae can be found in the bottom of freshwater bodies such as streams or lakes
(hydrobionts), under river substratum or rocks (rheophils), along stream and lake banks
(subrheophils), along poorly oxygenated waterbodies (hemihydrobionts), and in terrestrial

lands such as soil, logs or under rocks (edaphobionts) (Andreeva, 1989).

Adult tabanids are stout-bodied flies ranging from 6 to 30 mm in size (Mullens,
2019). The compound eyes are large, occupying most of the anterolateral portion of the
head (Bromley, 1926). The mouthparts, particularly of the female flies, consist of piercing-
lapping structures. The labrum, mandibles, and lacinia — the piercing structures rest within
the grooved labium, which also serves as a food canal. The labellum is lobed and is located
at the distal end of the labrum. The mandibles are pointed and have serrations at the tip that
is used for cutting, and the lacinia is extensible for fastening during blood-feeding, allowing
the proboscis to move deeper into the skin of the host. In between these structures lie the
hypopharynx, which pumps saliva containing anticoagulants to allow the continuous
bleeding of the host (Krenn & Aspock, 2012). The male tabanids lack the structural
adaptations for blood meals (Gonzales & Flores, 2004), with the mandibles being
completely absent and the lacinia without retorse teeth — indicating a sponging-sucking

mode of feeding (Stoffolano & Yin, 1983; Lawson, 1983).


Factors influencing the population dynamics, diversity, and flight periodicity of

tabanids

The presence and type of dominant vegetation affect the abundance and diversity
of tabanids (Changbunjong ef al., 2018; Hackenberg et al., 2009; Baldacchino et al., 2017;
Dorge et al., 2020). The flight activity of tabanids may also be influenced by several
meteorological factors, namely, relative humidity, barometric pressure, and temperature
(Alverson &Noblet, 1977) as tabanid activity was observed to decrease when the recorded
relative humidity is high (Altunsoy & Kilig, 2012). In terms of seasonality, tabanid
populations have been reported to peak during the wet season (Barros, 2001; Van
Hennekeler ef al., 2006; Sevidzem et al., 2015; Lucas et al., 2020; Metri et al., 2020;
Elobaid et al., 2021) as trap catches were highest in periods when both temperature and
rainfall were high, and humidity was low (Koller et al., 2019). Consequently, tabanid
catches during the dry season were relatively lower than the collections during the wet
season (Phasuk et al., 2011). Similarly, the fluctuations in the abundance of tabanids is
correlated to altitude (Dargantes, 2010) and rainfall (Yutuc, 1949; Dargantes, 2010) in

collection sites.

It should also be noted that differences in the temporal distribution of different
tabanid species have been observed, and the flight activity per species might vary according
to season (Barros, 2001; Krémar, 2005; Altunsoy & Kilig, 2012; Koller et al., 2017; Azza
et al., 2020; Metri et al., 2020; Elobaid et al., 2021). The seasonal variations in tabanid
populations may be due to the increase in the number of habitats for species adapted to
aquatic environments (MikuSka et al., 2012), which may result in the increase in the risk

of pathogenic agent transmission by tabanids increases during the wet season (Koller et al.,


2017). As for the periodicity pattern of tabanid activity, the reported peak of tabanid flight
is at noon (Baldacchino er al., 2017) due to the influence of meteorological factors.
However, it should be noted that species-specific differences in the number of catches
relative to the time of day has also been reported (Krémar et al., 2005; Van Hennekeler et

al., 2011).
Factors influencing the mechanical transmission by tabanids

The mechanical transmission of pathogenic agents by tabanids would require a
succession of events to occur: 1) the initiation of a blood meal on a host with a sufficient
amount of parasitemia for the disease agent to come in contact with the proboscis, 2) an
interruption of the feeding, 3) and re-initiation of a blood meal on a susceptible host
(Desquesnes et al., 2009). Tabanid species are observed to be persistent feeders despite the
defensive habits of hosts, making them more likely to play an important role in the
mechanical transmission of diseases (Weisenhutter, 1975). Furthermore, it was determined
that the minimal theoretical conditions enabling mechanical transmission are: 1) the
parasitemia in donor animals is high, 2) high tabanid density, 3) a high susceptibility
amongst recipient animals, and 4) proximity between the animals (Desquesnes et al.,
2009). It was recorded that tabanids can intake as much as six nanoliters up to 12 nanoliters
of blood in a 15-second feeding, depending on the species (Knaus ef al., 1993), which is
why the parasitemia level in the host should be high enough to transmit the pathogen
successfully. The landing of flies on hosts to initiate blood meals may also be influenced
by the reflectance of the hide and the spatial dispersal of the hosts as the wavelength of
polarized light reflected horizontally by surfaces results in the stimulation of the ventral

portion of the compound eyes of the tabanids (Horvath er al., 2008). This characteristic


aid tabanids in identifying hosts from background vegetation depends on the polarization
emitted by the animal hide (Horvath et al., 2017). It was also determined that cattle with
spotty fur were less attractive for tabanids as the pattern also affects the intensity of

polarized light reflected by the animal hide (Blaho ef al., 2012).

In animal hosts, the blood meal of tabanids becomes interrupted as the cutaneous
irritation directly caused by the tabanids results in ear flicking, tail twitching, feet stomping
(Mooring et al., 2007), head shaking, and skin twitching of the animals (Muzari er al.,
2010) to repel biting flies (Mooring et al., 2007). These defensive behaviors result in the
interruption of blood meals of tabanids, which leads them to move to another host in an
attempt to complete the blood meal (Magnarelli & Anderson, 1980). The residual blood
found in the mouthparts of tabanids may contain pathogens from the initial host that can
be inoculated to the recipient host (Foil et al., 1987). This multiple host feeding behavior
of tabanids can be addressed by increasing the distance between hosts to facilitate return
to the initial host (Foil, 1983; Barros & Foil, 2007), thereby reducing the probability of 7r.

evansi across hosts.
The impact of tabanid infestations on livestock

The infestation with the tabanids causes stress to livestock, and it has been observed
that the animals expend a great deal of energy in fending off the flies. Restlessness has
been observed in both cattle and horses, resulting from the annoyance caused by the flies
as grazing animals become interrupted. The death of horses in pastures has also been
attributed to exhaustion and overheat from the discomfort caused by flies (Philip, 1931).
The exposure of heifers to horseflies resulted in them gaining less weight than those who
were not. It was reported that the exposed animals gained 6.7 kg less than those who were


placed in fly-proof pens (Perich ef al., 1986). The bites also result in the oozing of blood
from the wound (Baldacchino et al., 2014). The blood loss due to tabanid bites was

estimated to be over 200 mL per animal daily (Hollander & Wright, 1980).
Control of tabanids

The targeted control of tabanids is difficult due to variations in the life history of
different species, the short feeding time of females, limited observations on the flight
activity of the adult tabanids, and the complexity of their life cycles (Foil & Hogsette,
1994), Practices such as the strategic implementation of patch-burn grazing activities along
with other population control activities is recommended to reduce the number of flies
alighting on livestock animals (Scasta et al., 2015). Activities such as letting livestock
animals wallow in mud and lighting fires are practiced by some livestock raisers as they
believe that the layer of mud would protect the animals from tabanids and that fires would

repel tabanids (Escarlos et al., 2016).

The use of insecticide has also been studied for the control of horseflies and studies
report that application of pyrethroids in field lands resulted to a drop in the number of
flying tabanids in farms. However, an immediate return of tabanid populations was
observed in the treated areas after one of pesticide application and this can be attributed to
the influx of tabanid populations from areas where no treatment was applied (Hansens,
1981). This implies that the chemical control of tabanid adults through the environmental
application of insecticide is not a sustainable to control tabanid populations. Other chemical
interventions such as spray-on treatment of animals (Lang et al., 1981), and the use of ear

tags treated with 10% lamba-cyalothrin were effective in inducing mortality among the


tabanids (Leprince ef al., 1992) while also reducing the number of hosts available for a

blood meal (Foil et al., 1989).

Various traps have also been used to reduce the population of adult horseflies. Most
traps used for capturing tabanids are designed according to their movement and alighting
behavior and are constructed using visually appealing materials for the flies. For example,
horseflies have been observed to move towards silhouettes that contrast background
vegetation with reference to coloration and reflectance. In addition, in an experiment using
spheres painted with different colors, it was observed that the colors black, blue, and red
were attractive to tabanids (Bracken ef al., 1962). Box traps (Ailes et al., 1992; Wall &
Doane, 1980; Krémar et al., 2014), the Manitoba fly trap (Theorsteinson ef al., 1965;
Schreck et al., 1993; Otarctics et al., 2019), the Vavoua trap (Laveissiére & Grebaut, 1990;
Mihok et al.., 1995; Dijeteye et al., 1998) and the Nzi trap (Mihok, 2002; Tunnakundacha
et al., 2017; Mihok ef al., 2006; Van Hennekeler et al., 2008; Mihok, 2007; Kline et al.,

2018) have been used in capturing tabanids.
Pathogenic agents in tabanids of medical and veterinary importance

Tabanids are insects of medical and veterinary importance because of their capacity
to transmit pathogenic agents during bloodmeal (Carn, 1996; Foil et al., 1987). In India, a
high incidence of hepatitis B was reported in a community wherein the patients included
individuals with no history of exposure to the modes of transmission of hepatitis B, but all
participants (100%) reported to being often bitten by a fly (Chrysops sp.) they commonly
see in animal sheds and grazing locations. The respondents described the bite as painful
and resulted in profuse bleeding. This led the researchers to hypothesize that tabanids could
be playing a role in the transmission of the virus in the community (Kuriakose & Ittyachen,


2018). Because of the hematophagous mode of feeding by tabanids, they can be considered
as ‘flying syringes’ and may be used as sentinel populations to monitor circulating disease

agents in a community (Bitome-Essono ef al., 2017).

Tabanids (particularly Chrysops spp.) act as biological and mechanical vectors in
the transmission of several parasitic agents such Loa Joa that causes Loaiasis in humans
(Connal & Connal, 1922) and Besnoitia besnoiti (Bigalke, 1968). Recently, Babesia sp.
and Theileria sp. were detected through PCR in tabanids (Taioe ef al., 2017). Although
there is no study demonstrating the capacity of tabanids to transmit these piroplasmids
successfully, the isolation of the species B. bigemina and T. parva from tabanids poses the
possibility of mechanical transmission that needs to be further explored (Taoie ef al., 2017;

Lakew et al., 2021).

Another genus of protozoans transmitted by tabanids is Trypanosoma spp. The
species from this genus infect a wide range of hosts, with Zr evansi, Tr. theileri, Tr.
congolense, and Tr. vivax as the species affecting livestock animals. Only 7p. theileri
undergoes cyclical changes in tabanid vectors (Bose & Heister, 1993). Meanwhile, both 77.
congolense and Tr. vivax are biologically transmitted by tsetse flies but have been
demonstrated to be mechanically transmitted by tabanids in the absence of the tsetse fly
vector (Desquesnes & Dia, 2003a, b; 2004). Although these trypanosomes primarily infect
animals, cases of atypical human trypanosomiasis (aHT) caused by animal trypanosomes
have been reported by several authors. The occurrence of aHT may be attributed to the
development of resistance against the trypanolytic factors present in the normal human

serum (Van Xong ef al., 2002; Lai et al., 2010; Lun et al., 2015).


The causative agents of Nagana in livestock, 7r. brucei brucei and Tr. congolense,
were known to be restricted animal hosts due to their sensitivity to the normal human serum
(Van Xong et al., 2002; Rifkin, 1978). In 2008, the molecular analysis of an archived blood
film taken in 2003 revealed that a 10-month-old patient from Ghania who recovered from
human African trypanosomiasis (HAT) might have been infected with Tr. brucei brucei
instead of the causative agents of HAT. Conclusive evidence that it was a case of aHT was
supported by the geographical distribution of the parasite and the mortality from HAT
infection (Deborggraeve ef al., 2008). A Tr. congolense human infection was also reported
in 50-year-old woman who was CATT/7r. brucei-positive. Parasitological test revealed the
presence of trypanosomes which were morphologically different from that of Tr brucei
ssp. It was confirmed that the patient was infected with both Tr. congolense and Tr. brucei
ssp. through molecular detection (Truc et al., 1998). In addition, the sensitivity of Tr
congolense against the NHS has been documented in assays wherein NHS-sensitive Tr.

congolense strains could also develop NHS tolerance (Van Xong et al., 2002).

The natural host of 7r. /ewisi are rodents from the genus Rattus sp. and is transmitted
across hosts by rat fleas (Minchin & Thomson, 1910). However, cases of aHT caused by
Tr. lewisi or Tr. lewisi-like infections have been reported from India (Shrivastava &
Shrivastava, 1974; Verma et al., 2011; Shah et al., 2011), Thailand (Sarataphan ef al.,
2007), and Malaysia (Johnson, 1933), wherein most cases were children. In addition, the
resistance of Tr. lewisi to the NHS was demonstrated in assays wherein a lack of
trypanolytic activity against several Tr. lewisi isolates were observed, therefore concluding
the potential of Tr. /ewisi as a neglected human pathogen (Lun et al., 2015). On the other

hand, Tr. evansi is the only species transmitted by tabanids which is distributed globally —


causing outbreaks in livestock animals resulting in major economic losses (Salah et al.,
2015; Dobson ef al., 2009). Similar to the aforementioned animal trypanosomes, Tr. evansi
has been reported to be capable of infecting humans in several countries (Joshi et al., 2005;

Shegokar et al., 2006; Sawitri et al., 2019; Van Vinh Chau ef al., 2016).

THE BIOLOGY OF TRYPANOSOMA EVANSI, BABESIA SPP., AND THEILERIA

SPP.
The biology of Trypanosoma evansi

Protozoans from the genus Trypanosoma are hemoflagellates under the Order
Kinetoplastida, which are known blood parasites of vertebrates (Jakes ef al., 2001). A
unique characteristic of these parasites is the presence of the kinetoplast composed of a
network of DNA minicircles and maxicircles within the mitochondrion (Sugisaki & Ray,
1987; Carpenter & Englund, 1995; Hong & Simpson, 2003), which are involved with RNA
editing (Domingo ef al., 2003) and respiratory processes (Dewar et al., 2018).
Nevertheless, the deletion of the kDNA gene has been observed in some trypanosome
species — wherein the partial (e.g., in 7. equiperdum) or complete (e.g., in Tr. evansi) loss
of the kDNA in trypanosomes has resulted to dyskinetoplastidy (Dk) or akinetoplastidy

(Ak), respectively (Lai et al., 2008).

Tr. evansi is a salivarian trypanosome that is morphologically indistinguishable and
closely related to Tr. brucei and Tr. equiperdum (Stevens et al., 1998). It was suggested that
Tr. evansi could be recognized as a subspecies of Tr. brucei (Lai et al., 2008) as the species
was hypothesized to have evolved in 7+. brucei-infected livestock which were imported to

areas where tsetse fly vectors were absent (Lun & Desser, 1995). The dyskinetoplastidy of


Tr. evansi allows it to be transmitted across hosts independent of an insect vector (Borst et
al., 1987), as it has been demonstrated partial or complete loss of the KDNA gene in 7.
brucei results in its inability to transform into procyclic forms without affecting its

pathogenicity (Lai et al., 2008). (Lun & Desser, 1995).

Tr. evansi is the causative agent of surra among a wide range of hosts, infecting
both domestic and wild mammals alike (Herrera ef al., 2005), under natural and
experimental conditions (Reid et al., 1999; Franke et al., 1994). It primarily affects
livestock animals such as horses (Seidle et al., 2001), donkeys, cattle, buffaloes, sheep, and
camels (Nunes ef al., 2012; Birhanu ef al., 2015; Villareal et al., 2013), making it a
pathogen of economic importance, especially in the agriculture sector (Seidle er al., 2001;

Dobson et al., 2009; Kumar et al., 2012).
The biology of Babesia sp. and Theileria sp.

Babesia and Theileria are piroplasmids under Phylum Apicomplexa (Ellis et al.,
1992). Species from both genera are intracellular parasites (Conrad ef al., 1985; Shaw &
Tilney, 1995; Reddy et al., 1991), similar to the related genus of malaria-causing parasites
from Plasmodium (Escalante & Ayala, 1994). Several species from both genera are
important pathogens in humans and livestock animals. Bovine babesiosis is caused by B.
bovis (Timms et al., 1990), B. bigemina (De Vos et al., 1989), and B. orientalis (Liu et al.,
2005). Meanwhile, 7: parva (Gardner et al., 2005), T: annulata (Taylor et al., 2002), T.
orientalis (Aparna et al., 2011), and 7. mutans (Saidu et al., 1984) are the reported
pathogenic species under Theileria. The notable difference between the genera is the type

of cell invasion mechanism, with Theileria spp. relying on ‘zippering’ (Shaw, 1996), whilst


Babesia spp. erythrocytic invasion is mediated by the formation of an invagination on the

host cell, similar to Plasmodium invasion (Rudzinska et al., 1976).

THE LIFE CYCLE AND TRANSMISSION OF TRYPANOSOMA EVANSI,

BABESIA SPP., AND THEILERIA SPP.
The life cycle and modes of transmission of Trypanosoma evansi

Tr. evansi exhibits a direct life cycle and does not undergo any cyclical
transformation in its insect vectors. 7r evansi only exhibits the bloodstream form
trypomastigotes in its life cycle and can only multiply (by undergoing binary fission) within
its mammalian hosts (Brun et al., 1998). The blood form or 7r. evansi trypomastigotes can
be detected in the peripheral blood circulation of the hosts and are about 25 microns in
length (Khalafalla & Mawly, 2020). Trypomastigotes can be categorized as thin (slender
or intermediate forms) or transitional forms (such as stumpy forms) based on
morphological features. Like other members of Kinetoplastida, 7r. evansi has a kinetoplast
near the posterior terminus but akinetoplastidy has also been observed (Hoare, 1956; Misra
et al., 2015; Khalafalla & Mawly, 2020). However, the recent isolation of amastigote and
sphaeromastigote stages in organ smears of Tr. evansi-challenged rhesus monkeys (Misra

et al., 2015) challenges the concept of Tr. evansi monomorphism.

Mechanical transmission among animal hosts occurs through the inoculation of 77.
evansi by biting of flies from the family Tabanidae and Glossinidae (Desquesnes & Dia,
2003a, b; 2004), and subfamily Stomoxyinae, wherein the trypanosome remains infective
in the proboscis up to three hours after uptake (Sumba ef al., 1998). Other modes of 7r.

evansi transmission have been speculated, such as sexual transmission (Da Silva et al.,


2016; Campigotto et al., 2017) due to the isolation of Zr evansi DNA in sheep semen (Da
Silva et al., 2016). The vertical transmission of 7r evansi has also been documented in
experimentally infected sheep (Campigotto ef al., 2015) and rats (Campigotto et al., 2017).
Infection through the oral route has also been reported in carnivores after ingestion of meat

infected with 7r. evansi (Raina et al., 1985).
The life cycle and transmission of Babesia sp. and Theileria sp.

Babesia sp. and Theileria sp. are both intracellular parasites, but the main difference
in terms of their life cycle within the host is that the sporozoites of Babesia spp. invades
only erythrocytes (Rudzinska et al., 1976), in which the organism will develop into
gametocytes, or continue to mature into trophozoites containing merozoites (Rudzinska et
al., 1979). Meanwhile Theileria spp. invades both erythrocytes (Donald et al., 1987) and
lymphocytes (Shaw, 1996). Initially, Theileria spp. undergoes development within
lymphocytes to produce merozoites which will invade erythrocytes for piroplasm

formation (Shaw & Tilney, 1992).

Both Babesia spp. and Theileria spp. are transmitted by ticks from the family
Ixodidae which act as the biological vectors for the piroplasmids (Timms et al., 1990;
Razmi et al., 2013). In Babesia spp., gametocytes are acquired by the vectors upon feeding
on hosts (Rudzinska et al., 1979), in which the gametes will develop in the gut. On the
other hand, Theileria spp. gamonts develop from merozoites within red blood cells
consumed by the vector, following the development into gametes (Gauer et al., 1995). For
both genera, the gametes will fuse in the gut, forming a zygote which invades the vector
tissue, in which kinetes will develop and multiply (Mehlhorn et al., 1979; Mackenstedt et
al., 1990). From this point, the infection proceeds to the transstadial transmission through


infection of the salivary glands (Mehlhom et al., 1979; Guimaraes et al., 1998) and ovarian
infection by the kinetes via the hemolyph (Mackenstedt er al., 1990; Ulrich et al., 1982;
Howell et al., 2020). In the salivary glands, sporozoites will develop (Piesman ef al., 1986;
Purnell & Joyner, 1968; Mehlhorn et al., 1979; Guimaraes et al., 1998) which can be

inoculated to the host during blood feeding.

Ticks of the genera Rhipicephalus (Erster et al., 2015; Konnai ef al., 2006),
Haemaphysalis (Tsuji et al., 2008; Yin, et al., 2004), Ixodes (Donnelly & Pierce, 1975;
Camacho et al., 2003), Dermacentor (Swei et al., 2019), Ambylomma (Scoles et al., 2013),
and Hyalomma, (Guan et al., 2009; Mustafa et al., 1983) act as biological vectors for
Babesia and Theileria transmission among animals. Other modes of transmission have also
been reported, such as transplacental (Swilks et al., 2017; Henker et al., 2020) and
iatrogenic transfusion (Hammer et al., 2016; Badan et al., 2007). In man, babesiosis can
be acquired through exposure to tick bites (Pancewicz et al., 2011), vertical transmission

(Joseph et al., 2012), and blood transfusion (Wittner et al., 1982).

ZOONOTIC POTENTIAL OF TRYPANOSOMA EVANSI, BABESIA SPP., AND

THEILERIA SPP.
The zoonotic potential of Tr. evansi

Tr. evansi is primarily known as a pathogen of animals. However, there have been
several reports of human trypanosomiasis caused by 7. evansi. Human surra cases are
highly unusual, mainly because of the trypanocidal activity of the NHS (Rifkin, 1978). The
characterization of TLFs through protein fractionation reveals that TLF1 is mainly

composed of the Hpr, apo-A1, and trace amounts of other proteins, while TLF2 consists of


immunoglobulin M, HPR, and apo-Al (Raper ef al., 1999). Further immunodepletion
studies have led to the identification of a subset of proteins associated with TLFs that hinder
the establishment of infection of animal trypanosomes in humans, such as apo-L1 (Smith
et al., 1995; Vanhamme et al., 2003). The absence of any component of the TLFs,
especially apo-L1 may result to the susceptibility of humans for Jr evansi infection

(Vanhollebeke et al., 2006).

The sensitivity of 77. evansi to NHS has been experimentally demonstrated in vivo
by Hawking (1987). Results show that the injection of NHS to Tr. evansi-infected mice was
protective against the infection compared to its control counterparts. The results
demonstrate the susceptibility of 7 evansi to NHS, which is cytotoxic to animal
trypanosomes. On the other hand, Lai and colleagues (2010) observed that some strains of
Tr. evansi exhibited relatively resistance to NHS in both in vitro and in vivo experiments,
indicating that human surra infection may still occur. The NHS resistance exhibited by 7r.
evansi strains could be a possible explanation for the most recent human surra case reported
(Van Vinh Chau ef al., 2016), as normal titers of apo-L1 was found in the NHS of the
patient. However, and there is no available biomarker for this characteristic and the
mechanism of NHS resistance exhibited by 7+ evansi remains unknown. In addition,
trypanolytic assays with the patient’s (2016) NHS was not done by the researchers, leaving
the NHS susceptibility status of the Jr evansi strain unknown. The speculated route of
transmission for both human surra case is the contamination of an open wound with blood
of an infected animal during handling of meat (Van Vinh Chau et al., 2016) or during

farming (Joshi et al., 2005).


Epidemiological surveys related to human surra

Epidemiological studies with the human surra patients as index cases are limited.
The case reported by Joshi and colleagues (2005) prompted a serologic survey in the
patient's village, where many of the residents are farmers and raise livestock such as cattle.
CATT/Tr. evansi was used for the detection of antibodies in the whole blood and
researchers reported that 410 people screened positive out of 1,806 individuals tested.
Subsequent CATT/T7r. evansi test conducted using the serum from the positive individuals
resulted to 81 tested positive for Tr. evansi antibodies, from whom only 60 were positive
at serial dilution >1:4. The seropositive individuals include veterinarians and their
technicians, but no trypanosome was detected in the peripheral blood through
parasitological techniques. The high antibody titers against Jr evansi among these
individuals indicate a recurring exposure to the pathogen (Shegokar ef al., 2006).
Meanwhile, Van Vinh Chau and colleagues (2016) also conducted a field survey around
the Vietnamese patient's household, wherein blood samples were taken from cattle (n=22)
and buffaloes (n=8), revealed that 14% (3 out of 22) of the cattle were positive for
trypanosome infection. Molecular analysis of the 18s rDNA of the 7rypanosoma isolated
from the patient and the animals revealed a 99.5% sequence identity, implicating the

possibility that human infection may have been sourced from infected local livestock.

In Indonesia, a serological survey in humans was conducted in 2012 during a surra
outbreak in livestock animals (Sawitri et al., 2019), where the sera of twenty-four farmers
with a history of close contact with livestock was taken. CATT/7>. evansi and field ELISA

(FELISA) results show that four out of the total samples (16.67%) tested positive for surra.


Unfortunately, microscopic diagnosis and molecular detection for 7+ evansi were not

conducted in this study to confirm the active infection among the farmers.
Surra symptoms, diagnosis, and treatment in animals and humans

The presence of surra symptoms is associated with the increase in parasitemia in
the hosts, as weakness and neurological symptoms such as ataxia, tremors, and coma were
reported along with the progression of the infection (Wolkmer et al., 2009). Episodes of
fever with fluctuating parasitemia, loss of appetite, weakness, emaciation in buffaloes
(Bubalus bubalis), (Damayanti et al., 1994), fever, neurological symptoms and anemia in
cattle and horses (Kumar et al., 2012; Herrera et al., 2004), and anorexia, corneal opacity,
and edema in dogs (Singh et al., 1993) were observed. Abortions among pregnant hosts
may also occur (Narnaware et al., 2016). In humans, the clinical manifestations of Tr.
evansi infection has not yet been established, but fever, arthralgia, sweats and chills,
headache, disorientation, and agitation have been reported in cases (Joshi et al., 2005; Van

Vinh Chau ef al., 2016)

Infection with 7r evansi can be diagnosed through direct observation of the
parasites in animal blood through parasitological techniques such as microscopy are to
confirm surra cases, (Sivatohji et al., 2017). The sensitivity of parasitological detection can
be increased using different centrifugation techniques and mouse inoculation (Holland et
al., 2001). Meanwhile, serological tests such as immune trypanolysis, card agglutination
test (CATT), and enzyme immuno-linked sorbent assays (ELISA) utilize the variable
surface glycoprotein RoTat 1.2 for the detection of 7. evansi infection in animal sera. Surra

infection may also be confirmed through amplification of Tr evansi-specific DNA


fragments such as the RoTat 1.2 VSG gene (Claes et al., 2004; Ngaira et al., 2005) and the

Tr. evansi mini-chromosome satellite DNA (Elhaig et al., 2013).

Among all diagnostic tests, microscopy has the lowest sensitivity in detecting Tr.
evansi infection (Holland et al., 2001; Elhaig ef al., 2013; Tehseen et al., 2015; 2017;
Boushaki et al., 2019). Meanwhile, CATT/7r evansi is widely used in Tr evansi
seroprevalence studies of buffaloes, horses, cattle, camels, and other domesticated animals
(Verloo et al., 2000; Hilali et al., 2004; Elshafie er al., 2013; Nguyen et al., 2013; Kundu
et al., 2013; Elhaig et al., 2013; Benfodil et al., 2020) and is considered the appropriate
diagnostic test to use in the field setting due to its high sensitivity and specificity, and ease
of use in the field setting (Benfodil et al., 2020). Although serological tests have also been
reported to have higher sensitivity than PCR detection (Tehseen et al., 2015; 2017;
Boushaki et al., 2019; Tapdasan ef al., 2020), these tests may not reflect active infection
(Tehseen ef al., 2015; 2017). As such, molecular methods are the recommended
confirmatory test for suspected cases or seropositive animals (Benfodil et al., 2020) due to
its accuracy in detecting active infections (Tehseen et al., 2017; Benfodil et al., 2020). For
human cases, microscopy, CATT/Tr. evansi, and PCR can be used for the confirmation of

infection (Joshi et al., 2005; Van Vinh Chau et al., 2016).

Chemotherapy may be used as prophylactic or curative treatment against surra
among livestock animals. Trypanocidal drugs such as diminazene aceturate (DA),
isometamidium chloride (IMC), quinapyramine sulfate, suramin, and cymelarsan (CY)
have been used for the treatment of Tr. evansi infection in animals (Zhang et al., 1991).
However, recent reports on the occurrence of drug-resistant strains have been reported,

resulting in the persistence of infection even after administration of treatment (Zhang et


al., 1992; Osman et al., 1992; Tuntasuvan ef al., 2002). Highly resistant Tr. evansi isolates
against IMC, DA and CY have been reported in the Philippines (Lazaro et al., 2019).
Suramin has been effective in treating human surra cases (Joshi ef al., 2005; Van Vinh Chau
et al., 2016), and the possible occurrence of drug resistant strains is problematic in cases

of outbreaks as suramin is currently the only reliable cure for human surra.

Babesia and Theileria symptoms, diagnosis and treatment in animals and

humans

Among animals, babesiosis symptoms may include pale or yellowish conjunctiva,
anorexia, fever, weakness, sluggishness, hemoglobinuria, anemia, and hypoxia (Hashem et
al., 2018). Meanwhile, theileriosis manifests as enlargement of the lymph glands, pyrexia,
heightened heart and respiratory rates, pale or yellowish conjunctiva, excessive
lacrimation, weakness, and anemia (Gill et al., 1977). On the other hand, in humans,
Babesia infection is characterized by symptoms similar to malaria, such as fulminating
fever, anemia, myalgia, and weakness (Dorman et al., 2000). Chills, hematuria, jaundice,
rashes, respiratory complications, kidney failure (Morch et al., 2015), anorexia, and death
(Centeno-Lima et al., 2003) have been reported in severe babesiosis infections. To date,
only one symptomatic Theileria-infected case was reported (Liu et al., as cited by Chen et
al., 2014), however, the symptomatic infection in humans has not yet been fully
characterized. Microscopy, serology and PCR can be used for the detection of infection of
Babesia infection in animals (Galuppi et al., 2012; Al-Hosary, 2017) and humans (Krause

et al., 1996), and Theileria infection in animals (Dehkordi et al., 2012).

In livestock animals, babesiosis is treated using diminazene aceturate and
imidocarb dipropionate (Niazi et al., 2008). Imidocarb dipropionate has been effective in


clearing Theileria in animals (Wise et al., 2018). In humans, the drug combination of
clindamycin and quinine, and atovaquone and azithromycin can be used for the treatment
of infected individuals. However, it should be noted that post-treatment persistence of

infection may occur (Krause et al., 1998).
RISK FACTORS FOR TR. EVANSI, BABESIA AND THEILERIA INFECTION
Risk factors for surra infection in animals and humans

Several risk factors associated with Tr. evansi infection have been investigated for
different host animals. In horses, females (Elshafie ef al., 2013; Sumbria et al., 2014),
introduced breeds (Elshafie et al., 2013), and those less than two years of age were more
likely to become infected with 7r evansi. Farm management practices such as keeping a
disorganized farms were also determined as a risk factor for surra infection in horses
(Sumbria et al., 2014). For cattle and buffaloes, aside from geographic location and animal
demography, farm management was also an identified risk factor as those within crowded
farms with poor drainage and sanitation practices were more likely to get Jr evansi

infection than those in organized farms. (Sharma et al., 2015).

Among humans, no study on the risk factors associated with surra infection or
seropositivity has been conducted yet due to the rare, albeit increasing, occurrence of cases.
Common to both recently reported human surra cases is the contact with the blood of an
infected animal or its meat (Joshi et al., 2005; Van Vinh Chau et al., 2016) and the
proximity of the patients to livestock animals. Similarly, epidemiological studies
characterize 7r. evansi seropositive individuals as those who work in contact with animals

(veterinarians, technicians, and livestock farmers) (Shegokar ef al., 2006; Sawitri et al.,


2019). There is a gap in the knowledge of the zoonotic potential of Jr evansi in the
Philippines, where livestock farmers have limited knowledge on the transmission and

control of surra among animals (Escarlos et al., 2016).
Risk factors for babesiosis and theileriosis in animals and humans

Practices such as the inconsistent use of antiprotozoal chemotherapy, intensive
breeding resulting to crowding, the irregular or absence of acarine control in farms, and the
geographical location of farms may put cattle at higher risk for Babesia infection.
Meanwhile, similar risk factors were identified for the occurrence of theileriosis, in
addition to age, as it was determined that the probability of Theileria infection is greater in
cattle one year-old onwards (Rizk et al., 2017). In human babesiosis (Filstein et al., 1980;
Pancewicz et al., 2011) it was reported that individuals with higher probability of contact
to ticks with regards to their hobbies or profession are at greater risk of exposure with the
pathogens. Similarly, the scenarios which may increase with vectors, such as occupational
exposure, may also result to seropositivity for Theileria spp., such was recorded for

foresters which anti-7, equi antibodies were detected (Gabrielli et al., 2014).

THE OCCURRENCE OF TR. EVANSI, BABESIA SPP., AND THEILERIA SPP. IN

THE PHILIPPINES
Surra in the Philippines

In the Philippines, Tr. evansi is a parasite of economic and veterinary importance.
Surra has posed problems in the agricultural sector — causing economic losses to livestock-
raising farmers. The impact of surra on the population dynamics of buffaloes has been

evaluated using data from epidemiological surveys conducted in Mindanao through a series


of prevalence studies using microhematocrit centrifugation test (MHCT) and CATT/7r
evansi. The analysis of the recorded prevalence in the sites revealed that several provinces
are at high risk of Tr. evansi transmission, and it was determined that subclinical infections
occurred in areas with no confirmed surra cases using MHCT, as buffaloes tested positive
using CATT/Tr. evansi. The data from this study indicates the occurrence of asymptomatic
infections among livestock animals in areas with no confirmed case of surra (Dargantes et
al., 2009). Statistical modeling of host disease states (susceptible-infectious-subclinical or
SIC) based on the surra prevalence of the provinces determined that a village could lose a
total net benefit of 7.9 million pesos if no treatment was administered to the animals for

the control of surra (Dobson et al., 2009).
Babesiosis and theileriosis in the Philippines

In the Philippines, B. bovis and B. bigemina has been reported in cattle (Yu et al.,
2013; Ybafiez et al., 2013) and water buffaloes (Herrera et al., 2017), B. vogeli (Ybajfiez et
al., 2017; Adao et al., 2017) and B. gibsoni (Cruz-Flores et al., 2008) in dogs, and B. caballi
in horses (Ybafiez et al., 2018). Several studies also report the detection of Babesia spp. in
dogs (Galay et al., 2018; Baticados et al.,2011c; Ybafiez et al., 2018) and horses (Del Valle
et al., 2011). Ochirkhuu and colleagues (2015) reported that a two dairy farms, 45.4%
(n=154) and 61.6% (n=209) out of 339 blood samples of cattle were positive for B.
bigemina and B. bovis, respectively. Among these species, human babesiosis caused by B.
bovis has been reported in Colombia (Rios et al., 2003), meanwhile B. canis, a close
relative of B. vogeli and B. gibsoni (Duarte et al., 2011), and B. bigemina has been reported
in humans through immunofluorescence (Osorno et al., 1976). T. annulata and T. orientalis

have been reported in bovids (Ybafiez et al., 2013; Galon et al., 2019), T. equi, formerly


known as B. equi (Mehlhorn & Schein, 1998), has been detected in horses (Ybajfiez et al.,
2018), and a possibly new Theileria species (Belontidos et al., 2014) has been reported in
the Philippines. In the survey by Ochirkhuu et al. (2015), they reported that 41.3% (n=140)
of 339 cattle were positive for Theileria spp. infection. There is limited information on the
occurrence of human theileriosis, however, numerous individuals have been reported to be
seropositive for 7. equi (Gabrielli et al., 2014). Only one patient has been reported to be
PCR positive with a Theileria sp. that is genetically related to 7. Junwenshuni (Liu et al.,

as cited by Chen et al., 2014).

Conceptual Framework

Tabanidae as Infected livestock
vector animals

Weather * Susceptibility to
parameters infection
Geographical ° Density + Parasitemia Treatment with
parameters ee ‘ | |* Defensive ———_ anti-protozoal
re Species behavior drugs
Vector | |* Attractiveness to
control a tabanids

Presence of
protozoans

|

Human exposure to
protozoan parasites

Figure 2.1. Conceptual framework of the study.

The figure illustrates the conceptual framework of the study, which determined the
occurrence of Babesia sp., Theileria sp., and Tr. evansi in the tabanids of Mufioz, Nueva

Ecija. Mechanical transmission occurs through the interplay of factors between tabanid


vectors and infected animals. In tabanids, the abundance and present species in an area are
influenced by weather variables (temperature, relative humidity, and rainfall) and
geographical characteristics (type of dominant vegetation and land cover). Meanwhile in
animals, factors such as parasitemia, defensive behavior (ear and tail flicking, stomping,
and skin twitching), susceptibility to infection, and attractiveness to tabanids may
contribute to the success of mechanical transmission. The occurrence of human exposure
to circulating pathogenic agents carried by tabanids was determined through the detection

of human blood in the proboscis and gut of tabanids.


CHAPTER III
MATERIALS AND METHODS
A. Research Design

This was a cross-sectional, descriptive study that focused on the identification and
detection of protozoans and human blood in the proboscis of tabanids that were collected
near backyard farms in Brgy. Catalanacan, Science City of Mufioz, Nueva Ecija. A non-
probabilistic sampling procedure was conducted to determine the occurrence of Tr. evansi,
Babesia sp., and Theileria sp. in the tabanids during the dry season of the study area. All
tabanid samples examined were collected using a trap designed for the collection of biting

flies. Samples were collected for thirty-one days in the months of May to June 2023.
Study Site

Sample collection was conducted near selected backyard farms in Brgy.
Catalanacan, Science City of Mufioz, Nueva Ecija (Figure 3.1). Nueva Ecija has three
climate types, namely, types I, II, and III (PAGASA, 2014), and is the largest producer of
rice grains in Central Luzon (Philippine Statistics Authority, 2019). Among the livestock
being raised in the province, carabaos and cattle are among the primarily raised animals in
the area (Philippine Statistics Authority, 2018). The Science City of Mujioz is a 4" class
city in the province of Nueva Ecija with a total population of 84,308, while Brgy.
Catalanacan has a total population of 3,783 individuals (Philippine Statistics Authority,

2020). In 2015, it was reported that about 4% of individuals in the Science City of Mufioz


were living in poverty, and 15% of these individuals were working in the agriculture sector

(Department of Social Welfare and Development, 2013).

The selection of sampling sites was based on the following conditions: 1) an area
with a history of a surra infection in animals as identified by the Philippine Carabao Center
National Headquarters (Science City of Mufioz, Nueva Ecija), 2) where backyard farming
is practiced, and 3) there is no usage of pesticide to control tabanids. Areas without surra
cases, where commercial farming and pesticide control against livestock pests are
practiced, were excluded in the study. Barangay Catalanacan is traversed by three rivers,
and the sampling points were characterized by open fields of dry rice paddies prior to the
start of the rice cultivation season. To the researcher’s knowledge, no other vector control
practices specific for tabanids were implemented in the study area throughout the sampling
duration. The livestock in the study area are monitored by the PCC — National Headquarters
for surra infection, and treatment is immediately administered to identified cases. Weather
variables such as relative humidity and rainfall data during the sampling period in the study
site were obtained from the DOST-PAGASA Science City of Mufioz Weather Station as

these have been known to affect the activities of the tabanids.


120°0,0000000"
og

Science City of Mufioz

Figure 3.1. Map of Luzon Island in the Philippines showing: A) the Region III — Central
Luzon Region, B) the province of Nueva Ecija, C) the Science City of Mufioz, and D) Brgy.
Catalanacan where tabanid sampling was conducted. Each yellow dot represents the points
at which the traps were installed. The blue lines represent the rivers located in the study
area. The map was generated using QGIS 3.36.1.

Definition of Study Population

The study population were flies under the Order Diptera and were taxonomically
fit to be classified under family Tabanidae according to their morphological characteristics.

These flies were interchangeably referred to as ‘tabanids’ or ‘tabanid fly.’

Selection Criteria

The flies caught using the Nzi trap used in molecular analysis met the following
criteria: female flies from the family Tabanidae and the bodies of the fly were intact to
allow for species identification using morphological characteristics. Flies that belonged to
the other families caught using the trap, male tabanids, and damaged flies were excluded
from the analysis. The protozoan parasites that were included in this study were considered
the causative agents of diseases included in the World Organization for Animal Health

(WOAH) list of reportable animal diseases that are present in the Philippines.

B. Sampling Design

Sampling Method 1: Animal-baited trap (CBT) collection of tabanids

Animal-baited trap (CBT, Figure 3.2) was utilized for the collection of tabanids in
the study site following the methods of Schultz (1992). An approximately 250 kg carabao
was restrained and placed at the center of a 3.9 m x 3.9 m x 1.8 m (length x width x height)
mosquito net. One side of the net was left open for 60 minutes to serve as an entrance for
the tabanids, after which the resting tabanids were collected inside the net for 30 minutes,
from 1800h to 0400h, while keeping all sides of the net closed. The CBT was installed

overnight on May 20 and June 3, 2023, at one of the five sampling points. All tabanids


resting on the net were collected through sweeping and kept in wax-free paper cups covered
with a mesh screen at the lid. The tabanids collected using CBT were only identified but

excluded in the estimation of the density and relative abundance of tabanids.

Figure 3.2. Carabao-baited trap set-up in Brgy. Catalanacan, Science City of Mufioz,
Nueva Ecija.

Sampling Method 2: Tabanids collection using Nzi trap

For the estimation of the density and relative abundance of tabanids, passive
collection using the Nzi trap (Mihok, 2002) was conducted (Figure 3.3). The traps were
constructed using locally available fabrics: black and blue Katrina fabrics (polyester) and
white organza cloth. The Nzi traps were baited with cow urine, aged, and fermented for
two weeks to increase the attractiveness of the Nzi trap to tabanids and improve the number

of catches (Krémar et al., 2006; Mihok & Mulye, 2010).


The collection of tabanids was conducted following the methods of Taoie et al.
(2017) with slight modifications. Five Nzi traps (Mihok, 2002) were installed at least 90
meters away from each other and near animal sheds. The traps were left standing for 31

days, i.e., from May 5 to June 5, 2023. The cages for collecting tabanids were taken and

replaced daily by the researcher and trained collector.

Figure 3.3. Nzi trap, A) front view, and B) side view, installed at Bray. Catalanacan, Science
City of Mufioz, Nueva Ecija.

All collected tabanids were brought to the Philippine Carabao Center National
Headquarters — Biosafety and Environment Laboratory for sorting, identification, and
preservation. Samples were sorted according to the date of collection, species, and sex.

Each sample was assigned a code, and then individually stored in 1.5 ml microcentrifuge

tubes with 70% ethanol.


C. Method of Data Collection

Species identification

The collected tabanids were identified at the species level using the morphological
characteristics with reference to the identification keys by Philip (1959) and Burger and
Thompson (1981). A total of 1,068 specimens were mounted on the pin and submitted to
the University of the Philippines Los Bafios Museum of Natural History (UPLB-MNH) for
identification. The identified tabanids were used as reference specimens to determine the
species of the remaining samples. To ensure the validity of the identification by the
researcher, 10% of the samples were submitted to UPLB-MNH for identification. Photos

of representatives of each species were kindly provided by the UPLB-MNH.

Determination of Apparent Density

To estimate the density of tabanids in the sampling area, the apparent trap density

(ADT) was computed using the formula (Leak ef al., 2008):

FTD=<2F/TxD

Where:

FTD = flies/trap/day;

XF = total number of tabanids captured;

T = number of traps used;

D = number of trapping days.

Proportion of each tabanid species

The species composition was determined based on the formula described by
Magurran (2008) and Taioe et al. (2017), wherein the relative abundance (RA) or the
proportion of the total of each tabanid species from the total number of flies collected was

computed.
Sample selection

Since the total population of tabanids in the study site is unknown, the formula by

Cochran (1977) in the estimation of the sample size from an infinite population was used:

_ 2p—p)
n= ea

Where:

n= sample size

Z = z-score value

p = population proportion
e = margin of error

_ (1.96)7(0.5)(1 — 0.5)
~ (0.05)?

n = 384.16 ~ 385


A minimum of 385 tabanids were selected from the total collection through
systematic random sampling. The sampling interval was determined by dividing the total
number of tabanids collected by . The samples were obtained every 12" interval during
the random sampling, and these were used for dissection, DNA extraction, and subsequent

analysis.
Sample processing for molecular analysis
Dissection and DNA Extraction

Female tabanids were dissected for the extraction of their proboscis and whole gut
at the Ehime University - DLSU International Collaborative Research Laboratory (Laguna,
Philippines), for the molecular detection of Tr. evansi, Babesia spp., Theileria spp., as well
as human blood. The tabanid flies were washed twice with double distilled water and dried
on filter paper prior to the dissection. The dissection protocol for tsetse flies by Awouche
et al., (2017) was used with slight modifications for tabanids to accommodate the
differences in their mouth structures. The piercing structures, namely, labrum, mandibles,
lacinia, and as well as lapping structures, labium, and labella, were detached from the head
and placed in a microcentrifuge tube containing 95% ethanol. The head was then detached
from the thorax using a scalpel for the extraction of the whole gut by incising ventrally
from the prothorax to the anus. The tabanid was then immersed in PBS, and the whole gut
was taken and placed in a separate microcentrifuge tube containing 95% ethanol as a
preservative for future processing (Whittle, 1984; Scoles et al., 2008). The proboscis and
gut were stored separately and preserved in 95% ethanol at room temperature (25°C) until

DNA extraction (Moreau et al., 2013).


The total DNA of 266 samples was extracted using the QIAGEN Dneasy Blood &
Tissue Extraction kit (Hilden, Germany). With slight modifications from the protocol by
Crane (2011), the preserved samples were centrifuged at 2,500 rpm for 3 minutes, then
moved from the preservative into a new 1.5 ml microcentrifuge tube. Exactly 200 wL of
Buffer ATL and 90 pL of PBS were added to each of the samples before they were crushed
using a micropestle. Once homogenized, 40 pL of proteinase K was added then left to
incubate at 56°C overnight. After overnight lysis, 200 wL of buffer AL and 100% ethanol
were added and then vortexed each time. Each lysate was pipetted into a spin column
placed in a 2 ml collection tube, then centrifuged at 8,000 rpm for 1 minute. To wash, 500
uL of buffer AW1 and AW2 were pipetted into each spin column, then centrifuged at 8,000
rpm for 1 minute and 14,000 rpm for 3 minutes, respectively. All spin columns were left to
incubate for 10 minutes with 100 yL of buffer AE heated to 70°C, then centrifuged at 8000

rpm for 1 minute to elute. The eluates were stored at -20°C until use.

The nucleic acid extracts and remaining tissue samples were transported by the
researcher to the National Research Center for Protozoan Diseases — Obihiro University of
Agriculture and Veterinary Medicine (Hokkaido, Japan) for the detection of Tr. evansi,
Theileria/Babesia sp. and human blood in the proboscis of tabanids. Due to time
constraints, the remaining 119 samples were processed by a trained technician in the same

institution, while being observed by the researcher.

Molecular detection of protozoans

The presence of Tr. evansi was determined using the primer set TBR1: 5'-

GAATATTAAACAATGCGCAG-3’ and TBR2: 5’-CCATTTATTAGCTTTGTTGC-3’ to


amplify a 164 bp fragment of the tandem repeats present in the minichromosomes of the
Trypanozoon subgenus (Masiga et al., 1992). The TBR1/2 primer pair is the gold standard
for the detection of Zr. evansi in samples showing greater sensitivity as compared to other
primer sets (Pruvot ef al., 2010). Reactions were carried out with a total volume of 10 pl
consisting of 5 yl of 2X MightyAmp™ Buffer Ver.3, with Mg2+ and dNTPs (Takara,
Japan), 2.2 ul of nuclease-free water, 1 yl of 10X Additive for High Specificity (Takara,
Japan), 0.3 pl of both forward and reverse primers, and 0.2 pl of MightyAmp™ DNA
Polymerase Ver.3 (1.25 U/l, Takara, Japan). Amplification was done under the following
conditions: initial denaturation at 98°C for 2 minutes, followed by 40 cycles of denaturation
at 98°C for 10 seconds, annealing at 66°C for 15 seconds, and extension at 68°C for 10
seconds. Each run included a positive control with 7. b. brucei DNA and a blank control

to test the validity of the results.

In the determination of the presence of Theileria/Babesia sp., the RLB-F (5’-
GAGGTAGTGACAAGAAATAACAATA-3’) and RLB-R (S’-
TCTTCGATCCCCTAACTTTC-3’) primers were used to amplify an approximately 460-
bp to 520-bp fragment of the V4 hypervariable region in the 18S SSU rRNA gene (Gubbels
et al., 1999). Each 10 jl reaction contained 5 pl of 2X MightyAmp™ Buffer Ver.3, with
Mg2+ and dNTPs (Takara, Japan), 1.0 yl of 10X Additive for High Specificity (Takara,
Japan), 1.0 pl of both forward and reverse primers, 0.8 11 of nuclease-free water, and 0.2
pl of MightyAmp™ DNA Polymerase Ver.3 (1.25 U/ul) (Takara, Japan). The PCR
conditions were as follows: an initial denaturation step at 98°C for 2 minutes, followed by
35 cycles of denaturation at 98°C for 15 seconds, annealing at 63°C for 15 seconds, and

extension at 68°C for 30 seconds. Each run included a positive control with B. bigemina


and 7. equi DNA and a blank control to test the validity of the results. Attempts to
differentiate the Babesia sp. from Theileria sp. samples using the size of the amplified PCR
products were performed through electrophoresis. However, this method was unsuccessful
due to the almost similar band size of some Babesia sp. positive controls with Theileria sp.
positive controls. To address this limitation while considering resource constraints, a few
samples positive for Theileria/Babesia sp. were subjected to sequencing for genus

identification.

Molecular detection of human blood

The tabanid samples found positive for T+ evansi and Theileria/Babesia sp. were
further tested for the presence of human blood by amplifying a 157-bp segment of the
Homo sapiens-specific cytochrome b mtDNA using the primer pair L15674 (5’-
TAGCAATAATCCCCATCCTCCATATAT-3’) and H15782 (S’-
ACTTGTCCAATGATGGTAAAAGG-3’) (Matsuda ef al., 2005). Each reaction, i.e. 10
ul, contained 5 pl of 2X MightyAmp™ Buffer Ver.3, with Mg2+ and dNTPs (Takara,
Japan), 1.8 yl of nuclease-free water, 1 yl of 10X Additive for High Specificity (Takara,
Japan), 0.5 yl of both forward and reverse primers, and 0.2 pl of MightyAmp™ DNA
Polymerase Ver.3 (1.25 U/pl, Takara, Japan). Amplification was carried out with the
following conditions: an initial denaturation step at 98°C for 2 minutes, followed by 35
cycles of denaturation at 98°C for 15 seconds, annealing at 55°C for 15 seconds, and
extension at 72°C for 30 seconds. Each PCR was run with a positive control from a buccal

swab taken from the researcher and a blank control.


The PCR products were mixed with 5 pl of 6X Loading Buffer (Takara, Japan), and
5 pl of each mixture was used for electrophoresis. The amplicons, together with a 100 bp
molecular weight marker (Takara, Japan), were separated through 2% agarose gels in 1X
TAE buffer solution at 100 volts for 30 minutes. The gels were stained with ethidium
bromide solution, and then amplicons were visualized through ultraviolet (UV) light

exposure using a gel documentation system.

Sequencing of Theileria/Babesia sp. positive samples

A total of 13 (10%) of all positive samples were used to determine the presence of
Babesia sp. or Theileria sp. through systematic random sampling. In a total volume of 30
uL, the target gene was re-amplified through PCR, with the following components: 15 wL
of 2X MightyAmp™ Buffer Ver.3, with Mg?* and dNTPs (Takara, Japan), 2.4 pL of
nuclease-free water, 3 pL of 10x Additive for High Specificity (Takara, Japan), 3 yL of the
RLB-F and RLB-R primers (Integrated DNA Technologies, Singapore), 0.6 pL
MightyAmp™ DNA Polymerase Ver.3 (1.25 U/l, Takara, Japan), and 3 pL of the template
DNA. PCR was carried out using the same conditions described for Theileria/Babesia sp.
To check for the success of the PCR, 5 pL of each PCR product was used for

electrophoresis.

The PCR products were purified using QIAquick PCR Purification Kit (Qiagen,
Hilden, Germany) following the manufacturer’s protocol. The samples were eluted with 20
L of double distilled water for sequencing. Sequencing was carried out in a total volume
of 10 wL. Each reaction consisted of 6 1L nuclease-free water, 1 1L of the DNA template,

0.5 wL of the forward or reverse primer, 0.5 wL of BigDye™ Terminator v3.1 (Thermo


Fisher Scientific, Massachusetts, United States), and 2 wL of 5X Sequencing Buffer

(Thermo Fisher Scientific, Massachusetts, United States).

The BigDye™ sequencing conditions with slight modifications were used: an
initial denaturation step at 96°C for two minutes, 30 cycles of denaturation at 96°C for 10
seconds, annealing at 50°C for 5 seconds, and extension at 60°C for 4 minutes. The
products were purified through ethanol precipitation and resuspended in HiDi Formamide
as described in the BigDye™ protocol. The samples were sequenced using the ABI Prism
3100 Genetic Analyzer machine (Applied Biosystems, Massachusetts, USA). The National
Center for Biotechnology (NCBI) Basic Local Alignment Search Tool (BLAST) program

was used for the genus assignment according to the highest percentage identity score.

Parasite and human blood occurrence among tabanids

The occurrence of Tr evansi and Theileria/Babesia sp. were determined by
calculating the percentage (%) of all tabanids positive using the primers in the amplification
assays. The proportion of tabanids biting humans was also computed and reported as

percentages (%).

D. Data Analysis

The apparent density, mean and median for the data sets on tabanid density were
computed using Microsoft Excel Ver. 2403. The median values for density obtained
from the weekly collections of tabanids were presented as a graph using the
software GraphPad Prism 9.0.0. The minimum and maximum values were also

plotted in the graph. The interquartile range was also computed using Microsoft


Excel. The occurrence of the parasites under study and human blood were presented
as percentages in tables. Theileria sp. and Babesia sp. occurrences were presented
as Theileria/Babesia sp. as the primer used in the study simultaneously detects both

piroplasmid genera.

Data collection flowchart

Figure 3.4. Data collection procedure


E. Biosafety Considerations

Tabanids sorting, identification, and processing for molecular works were
conducted following good microbiological procedures, such as the use of personal
protective equipment, decontamination of benchtop surfaces with 10% NaOCl, and
70% ethanol immediately either after dissections or after accidental spills/splashes.
Chemical disinfection or sterilization was performed through autoclaving of reusable
tools. Disposable materials used during dissection such as scalpel blades, syringe
needles, and insect pins were sterilized before disposal in a puncture-resistant container

(Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2020).

F. Ethical Considerations

The research proposal was registered in the University of the Philippines Manila
(UPM) -— Research Grants of Administration Office (RGAO) with RGAO Reference No.
RGAO-2022-0933. The study was reviewed and approved by the UPM Research Ethics
Board (UPM-REB) Panel 1 with study protocol code UPMREB 2023-0003-EX.
Amendments for the slight revisions to the methodology were applied to UPM-REB and

approved on May 16, 2024.

Informed Consent

There was no informed consent since no human subjects were involved in the study.
Authorization to conduct sampling was acquired from the municipal Mayor through the

Municipal Agricultural Officer (MAO) of the study site. Permission to set up the traps near


the animal shelters for the collection of tabanids was requested to and approved by the farm

owners.

Vulnerability

No vulnerable subjects.

Privacy and confidentiality

The results of the study will be provided only to the MHO, MAO, DA- BAI, and
concerned PCC officers. The data will be stored in an external drive and will be kept under
lock and key in Room 303 at the Department of Parasitology, College of Public Health,
University of the Philippines Manila for five years. Only the researcher and the faculty

adviser will have access to the data.

Storage of unused samples

Unused tabanid specimens were pinned, kept, and stored in insect boxes. These
specimens were donated for use in laboratory demonstrations of the Department of
Parasitology (DOP), College of Public Health — University of the Philippines Manila
(CPH-UPM). Excess tissue samples, including nucleic acid derivatives (DNA and RNA),

protein, and cells were kept in a freezer at DOP-CPH-UPM for use in future studies.

Conflict of Interest

The researcher, faculty adviser, and thesis panel members declare no potential, and

actual conflict of interest regarding the study.

Risks

The study involved minimal risk to the researcher during the collection of tabanid
flies. The researcher used PPE to prevent being bitten by flies present in the study area.

Strict adherence to the COVID-19 guidelines was observed during sample collection.
Benefits

The benefits of the study outweigh the minimal risk it entails. The direct benefit
includes the detection of protozoans with zoonotic potential in the study area, which can
be used in the formulation of strategies for the control of tabanids and the prevention of
protozoan infections in animals and humans. The data that was generated may serve as a
basis for the development of local program policies in line with the focus areas of the Asia

Pacific Strategy for Emerging Diseases and Public Health Emergencies (WHO, 2005).
Incentives and Compensation

A PhP 150.00 per night was given to the owner of the carabao during the animal-
baited trapping. The collector of the tabanids from the traps was recruited and compensated

in cash after the sample collection.
Community Considerations

The study was conducted with support from the selected personnel of the Philippine
Carabao Center (PCC) and the office of the Municipal Agricultural Officer (MAO) of the
Science City of Mufioz, Nueva Ecija. The results and recommendations will be shared with

these offices.


WORK PLAN

Procurement of
materials and

reagents
v vy
Trap construction PCR Optimization
v y
3 ¢ Adjustments to PCR
Held tesane ott aD protocols, ifneeded
AA
Data collection proper

Figure 3.5. Flow of preliminary work activities before sample collection.

On-site Activities

Tabanids were collected daily using Nzi traps set near backyard farms in

Brgy. Catalanacan in the Science City of Mufioz, Nueva Ecija from May 5 to June

5, 2023. A carabao-baited trap was also set up every two weeks in the study site for

the nocturnal collection of tabanids. Specimens were sorted, anesthetized by

chilling, and identified in the laboratory in the Philippine Carabao Center.

Preparation of samples for the molecular detection of 7. evansi, Babesia spp., and

Theileria spp., and nucleic acid extraction were conducted after the period of
sample collection in the Ehime — De La Salle University International Collaborative
Research Laboratory (Laguna, Philippines). The molecular detection and
sequencing of the target organisms was performed at the National Research Center
for Protozoan Diseases — Obihiro University of Veterinary Medicine and

Agriculture (Hokkaido, Japan).

G. Plan for Utilization of Results

The results of this study will be reported to all concerned agencies, including the
Philippine Carabao Center, Municipal Health Officer, and Municipal Agricultural Officer
of the study site. The findings will be presented in conferences, symposia, and other
scientific events or presentations to lay audiences. This study will also be submitted for

possible publication in a peer-reviewed journal.


CHAPTER IV
RESULTS
A. Species, density and relative abundance of tabanids

A total of 4,321 tabanids were collected throughout the sampling period (Table 4.1).
Nzi trap collected 4,317 tabanids, while the CBT collected only 4 individuals. The weekly
apparent trap density using the Nzi trap was presented in Table 4.2 and for the entire
sampling period, the apparent density was 30 flies/trap/day. The median apparent density
per week were 49, 36, 24, 18, and 12 flies/trap/day, indicating a decreasing density of
tabanids collected per week. The interquartile range recorded per week were 9, 33, 13, 6,

and 6, respectively.

All tabanids collected throughout the sampling period belong to the genus Tabanus
(Table 4.3 and Figure 4.2). The species of tabanids collected from the Nzi trap were
Tabanus partitus Walker, 1856 (Figure 4.2A) and Tabanus reducens Walker, 1860 (Figure
4.2C), comprising 99.95% and 0.05% relative abundances, respectively. Only 7a. partitus

(Figure 4.2A) adults were collected using CBT.

Table 4.1. Total tabanid captures according to trap used.

Trap Total tabanids collected
Nai tray 4,317
Carabao-baited trap 4
Total 4,321
Table 4.2. Total and apparent density.
. Total Tabanidae Apparent density
Week of collection Captures (Flies/Trap/Day)
May 5 — 12, 2023 1433 41
May 13 - 19, 2023 1307 38
May 20 — 26, 2023 782 23


May 27 — June 1, 2023 558 19
June 2 - 5, 2023* 186 15
Overall 4,317 30

*Three sampling days only.

> o eo
[—) —} So

Flies/Trap/Day

Nd
o

ids

1 2 3 4 5
Week of collection

o

Figure. 4.1. Median with the minimum to maximum range of the weekly flies/trap/day.

Table 4.3. Number of tabanids collected using Nzi trap according to species.

Method of collection Species Count Relative abundance
2.)
Nazi tra Ta, partitus 4,315 99.05
21 trap Ta. reducens 2 0.05
CBT Ta. partitus 4 100
Total count 4,321


Figure 4.2. Tabanus partitus A) male, B) female and C) Tabanus reducens female collected
using traps.

B. The occurrence of 7r. evansi and Theileria/Babesia sp. among tabanids caught

using Nzi traps

Only Ta. partitus proboscis samples were utilized for molecular analysis to
determine the presence or absence of Jr. evansi and Theileria/Babesia sp. A total of 383
proboscis of tabanids were used in the detection of Tr. evansi, while only 382 were utilized
for Theileria/Babesia sp. detection. The expected band size for Tr. evansi was 177 bp as
shown in Figure 4.3. Among the 383 proboscis, 47.26% (181 of 383) were positive for Tr.

evansi (Table 4.4).

On the other hand, the expected band size for Theileria/Babesia sp. was 460 to 520
bp (Figure 4.3). Approximately thirty-one percent (119 of 382) were found positive for
Theileria/Babesia sp. (Table 4.4). The co-occurrence of 7r. evansi and Theileria/Babesia

sp. was detected in 6% of the samples (23 of 382).


Lanes:

L- 100bp ladder

$1 - Tr. brucei brucei (100 pg)
$2 - T. brucei brucei (10 pg)
$3 - Sample

Figure 4.3. Agarose gel electrophoresis results showing the target band size (arrows) for
Tr. evansi (177 bp) PCR detection.

Lanes:

NTC - No template control

‘$1 - B. bigemina (positive control)
$2 Th. equi (positive control)
L- 100bp ladder

$3 - Sample

$4 - Sample

‘$5 - Sample

‘$6 - Sample

Figure 4.4. Agarose gel electrophoresis results showing the target band size (arrows) for
Theileria/Babesia sp. (420 — 560 bp) PCR detection.

Table 4.4. Occurrence of Tr. evansi and Theileria/Babesia sp. in Ta. partitus proboscis
using PCR.

Organism No. of samples Total Parasite
TB analyzed positive Occurrence
Tr. evansi 383 181 47.26%
Theileria/Babesia sp. 382 119 31.15%
Co-occurrence of Tr. evansi
and Theileria/Babesia sp. abe es 6.01%


Sequencing and analysis of samples positive for Theileria/Babesia sp.

A total of 13 samples were used for sequencing the target fragment in the
Theileria/Babesia sp. 18s rRNA V4 hypervariable region. Two samples were excluded due
to the poor reads obtained. Analysis revealed that all 10 samples belong to the genus
Theileria, i.e. mostly T. orientalis. Table 4.5 shows the NCBI GenBank accession of
identical sequences, their origin and their percentage identities according NCBI BLAST.
The median for the sample percentage identities is 93.60%.

Table 4.5. NCBI GenBank accession of identical sequences, their origin and their
percentage identities according NCBI BLAST.

Organism (as NCBI Percentage
Sample code and type indicated in Origin GenBank identity
Genbank) Accession
Sample 1 (Forward read) _T. buffeli India OR625125 91.79%
Sample 1 (Reverse read) T. buffeli Pakistan _PP683107 97.80%
Sample 2 (Forward read) _7. annulata India 0Q411263 92.02%
Sample 2 (Reverse read) T_ buffeli Pakistan PP683107 98.72%
Sample 3 (Forward read) _T. orientalis China 0Q507241 79.15%
Sample 3 (Reverse read) T_ buffeli Pakistan PP683107 97.84%
Sample 4 (Forward read) _T. orientalis China 0Q507241 94.52%
Sample 4 (Reverse read) T. buffeli Spain FJ225391 88.74%
Sample 5 (Forward read) _T. orientalis China 0Q507241 89.36%
Sample 5 (Reverse read) T. buffeli Pakistan _PP683107_ 96.70%
Sample 6 (Forward read) _T. orientalis China 0Q507241 88.21%
Sample 6 (Reverse read) _T. buffeli Pakistan PP683107_ 95.91%
Sample 7 (Forward read) _T. orientalis China 0Q507241 91.42%
Sample 7 (Reverse read) T._ buffeli Pakistan PP683107 98.72%
Sample 8 (Forward read) weultured Thailand MN68S115 93.25%
eileria sp.

Sample 8 (Reverse read) T. buffeli Pakistan _PP683107 95.74%
Sample 9 (Forward read) _T. orientalis China 0Q507241 93.60%
Sample 9 (Reverse read) T. buffeli Pakistan _PP683107 99.33%
Sample 10 (Forward read) - - -

Sample 10 (Reverse read) _ 7. buffeli Pakistan PP683107 74.44%
Sample 11 (Forward read) - : -

Sample 11 (Reverse read) - 5 -

Sample 12 (Forward read) _T. orientalis China 0Q507241 78.25%
Sample 12 (Reverse read) _T. buffeli Pakistan PP683107 94.82%


Sample 13 (Forward read) ae Thailand MN685115 95.40%

Sample 13 (Reverse read) _T. buffeli Pakistan _PP683107 98.90%

C. Detection of Homo sapiens Cytochrome B mtDNA in 7r. evansi and

Theileria/Babesia sp. positive samples

To determine the presence of residual human blood in tabanids, PCR was used to detect
the H. sapiens cytochrome B mtDNA from the proboscis (Figure 4.4). Electrophoresis
result shows the target band size for H. sapiens cytochrome B mtDNA is 157 bp. A total of
51 out of 277 (18.41%) tabanid proboscis with either Tr. evansi and/or Theileria/Babesia

sp. had detectable human blood (Table 4.6).

Among the samples positive for Tr evansi, 27.85% (44 out of 158) had detectable
human blood (Table 4.6). On the other hand, 6.25% (6 out of 96) tabanids positive for
Theileria/Babesia sp. were detected with human blood. One out of 23 tabanids with the

protozoans under study had human blood (Table 4.6).

Table 4.6. Occurrence of H. sapiens Cytochrome B mtDNA among samples positive for
Tr_evansi and Theileria/Babesia sp.

N No. of H. sapiens Occurrence of H.
o. of 5
Protozoan species samples Cytochrome Me sapiens
analyzed mtDNA-positive Cytochrome B
samples mtDNA

Tr. evansi 158 44 27.85%
Theileria/Babesia sp. 96 6 6.25%
Co-oceurrence of Tr.
evansi and 23 1 4.35%
Theileria/Babesia sp.

Total 277 51 18.41%


Lanes:

NTC - No template contro!
‘$1 -H. sapiens

L- 100bp ladder

‘$2- Sample (-)

‘$3- Sample (-)

$4 - Sample (+)

Figure 4.5. Agarose gel electrophoresis result showing the target band size for H. sapiens
cytochrome B mtDNA.

CHAPTER V

DISCUSSION

A total of 4,321 tabanids were collected in Brgy. Catalanacan, Science City of
Muijioz, Nueva Ecija from the period May 5 to June 5, 2023. Only two species, namely
Tabanus partitus Walker 1856 and Tabanus reducens Walker 1860, were captured using
the Nzi and carabao-baited traps. Ta. partitus is a species under the Ta. striatus species
complex that was initially identified as 7a. striatus Fabricius 1794 in early reports from the
Philippines (Mitzmain, 1913a, b; Philip, 1959). However, a taxonomic review by Burger
and Thompson (1981) revealed that, 7a. striatus from the Philippines were misidentified
Ta. partitus specimens. The immature stages of Ta. partitus (reported as Ta. striatus) are
hydrobionts and were reported concealed in the sand along the shores of freshwater bodies
(Mitzmain 1913a; Kelser, 1927). As this species was reported to be a hydrobiont, potential
breeding sites may be present along the river near the study area. Its lifecycle consists of
three larval instars lasting for more than a month prior pupation (Mitzmain, 1913a).

Information on its life history is scarce.

The relative abundance recorded for Ta. partitus and Ta. reducens were 99.95% and
0.05%, respectively. Yutuc (1949) has reported that, Ja. partitus and Ta. reducens are
among the common species of tabanids in the Philippines. In a survey of tabanids using nzi
traps conducted in Mindanao, 7a. partitus were highly abundant, while, Ta. reducens had
the lowest abundance reported (Dargantes, 2010). The characteristics of collection sites
may also reflect the diversity of tabanids in an area. All traps were set in unirrigated rice

fields characterized by homogeneous vegetation dominated by dry straws near backyard


farms. In Thailand, tabanid collections villages is lower as compared to forested areas
(Changbunjong ef al., 2018). Similarly, land use has been reported as a factor that
influences the diversity of tabanids in Europe, wherein the low diversity of tabanids in
grazing lands was reported (Baldacchino et al., 2017). This observation may be attributed
to the effect of disturbance in habitats (Wale & Yesuf, 2022) that favors generalist species
that are robust fliers (Baldacchino et a/., 2017). Tabanids with a wide range of niche show
a preference for human-inhabited areas due to the availability of hosts (e.g. livestock)

(Dérge et al., 2020).

A decrease in tabanid density was observed from weeks 1 to 5 of the sampling
period. Notably, the decrease and increase in temperature and relative humidity,
respectively, were recorded in the study site. Studies on the flight periodicity of tabanids
in Uganda (Harley, 1965; Kangwagye, 1973), United Kingdom (Service, 1973), and U.S.A.
(Dale & Axtell, 1975; Hollander & Wright, 1980) reveal variations in the seasonality and
daily activity patterns of different tabanid species. This may be attributed to the species-
specific response of tabanids to daily and seasonal fluctuations in meteorological factors
in the sampling site (Alverson & Noblet, 1977; Van Hennekeler ef al., 2011). In the
Philippines, Dargantes (2010) found a positive correlation between tabanid abundance and
rainfall. This confirms early observations by Yutuc (1949), reporting the increase in tabanid
populations throughout and after the wet season in Manila. Meanwhile, the influence of

other weather variables remains to be explored.

Tryopanosoma evansi was detected in 41.26% of Ta. partitus proboscis tested.
Both 7a. partitus and Ta. reducens are identified as vectors of Tr. evansi as both are capable
of transmitting the protozoan from infected to healthy animals under experimental


conditions (Mitzmain, 1913b; Kelser, 1927; Yutuc, 1949). In addition, 7+ evansi was
observed in the labellum and stomach of engorged 7a. partitus that successfully transmit
the hemoflagellate (Kelser, 1927). The presence of 7r. evansi in tabanids through PCR
detection has also been reported in several municipalities within Mindanao (Dargantes,
2010) and Luzon (Baticados, 2008). It is important to note that interrupted feeding in both
Ta. partitus and Ta. reducens has been described under natural and experimental conditions
(Mitzmain, 1913a, b; Kelser, 1927; Yutuc, 1949), a characteristic of tabanid vectors that
increases the odds of the mechanical transmission of trypanosomes from infected to
susceptible animals (Magnarelli and Anderson, 1980; Desquesnes and Dia, 2003a, b). The
evidence obtained in the present study further supports that Ja. partitus and Ta. reducens
are mechanical vectors of Tr. evansi in the Philippines. Additionally, early accounts on the
vectors of surra in the Philippines report the appearance of high numbers of tabanid
populations coinciding with outbreaks in the Philippines (Kelser, 1927). This is supported
by the findings of Dargantes (2010), who found a positive relationship between tabanid
density and risk for surra transmission in Mindanao (Dargantes, 2010). The evidence points
that the high density of tabanids in an area increases the risk of exposure of potential hosts
to Tr. evansi. Surra has caused a significant economic impact on the livestock sector of the
Philippines (Dobson et al., 2009). The parasite has been reported to infect buffaloes
(Bubalus bubalis) in Nueva Ecija (Baticados et al., 2011a; Villareal et al., 2013; Mingala
et al., 2020) with varying susceptibility to available treatment (Lazaro et al., 2019). As high
as a 25% prevalence among water buffaloes was reported in the Science City of Mufioz
(Mingala et al., 2020). Babesiosis in Nueva Ecija caused by B. bovis and B. bigemina had

a reported prevalence of 11.49% and 10.81% in cattle, respectively (Herrera et al., 2017).


A prevalence of 7.14% for Babesia sp. in dogs was also reported in the same province
(Corales et al., 2014). For theileriosis, there is no available information on the prevalence

of Theileria sp. infection among animals in the study area.

Theileria/Babesia sp. was also detected in 31.15% (119 out of 382) of the tabanid
proboscis tested. Sequencing revealed that the samples are similar to NCBI GenBank
sequences under the genus Theileria, with most samples identical to T: orientalis (74.44%
to 99.33% percentage similarity) from India, Pakistan, China, Thailand, and Spain. The
detection of T. orientalis in tabanids indicates their possible role as a vector, as other
hematophagous insects, such as lice (Fujisaki et al., 1993) and tabanids (Ta. trigeminus)
(Takahashi et al., 1983) have been demonstrated to transmit piroplasmids among livestock
under certain conditions. The capacity of tabanids and other blood-sucking insects to
transmit T. orientalis among animals under natural conditions is also supported by the
findings by Lakew et al. (2021), as the protozoan was detected among cattle and

hematophagous insects in farms where tick vectors are absent.

Among the tabanid proboscis examined, 18.41% (51 out of 277) were positive for
human blood. The detection of human blood in the tested proboscis establishes that
tabanids bite humans for a blood meal in the Philippines. In Mindanao, it was found that
humans constitute the largest proportion of tabanid blood meal sources, followed by
carabaos, chicken, goats, and swine (Dargantes, 2010). In addition, the presence of Tr.
evansi and Theileria sp. in tabanids that bite humans could indicate the possibility of
exposure to the parasites. This is noteworthy, as the infection route of Tr. evansi to humans
remains unknown. Although reports of human surra cases suggest wound contamination
with infected animal blood as the potential source of infections (Joshi et al., 2005; Van Vin


Chau ef al., 2016), the possibility that tabanids play a role in disease transmission cannot
be fully rejected until further investigation (Shegokar et al., 2006). While, for Theileria sp.,
only one human case has been reported, and the full documentation of the infection has not
been reported (Liu et al., as cited by Chen et al., 2014). Consequently, the potential routes

of transmission of Theileria sp. to humans remain unknown.

The findings of the study also support the potential of tabanids to be used as ‘flying
syringes’ that can be used in monitoring circulating zoonotic pathogens in an area
(Dargantes, 2010; Bitome-Essono et al., 2017). Although the study focused mainly on the
presence of human blood, tabanids bite a variety of hosts (Dargantes, 2010; Muzari et al.,
2010; Magnarelli & Anderson, 1980), and a single fly can engorge up to 0.649 mL per
blood meal (Hollander & Wright, 1980). Additionally, the persistent feeding behavior of
tabanids denotes that they will bite multiple hosts until replete (Mitzmain, 1913a;

Weisenhutter, 1975) increasing the pool of potentially infected hosts that can be ‘sampled’.

The presence of 7+ evansi and Theileria/Babesia sp. in tabanids demonstrate the
presence of potential sources of exposure to potentially zoonotic parasites in the study site
during the sampling period. Both parasites are of veterinary importance and livestock
infection with either Tr evansi or Theileria/Babesia sp. have economic implications for
backyard livestock-raising farms (Dobson et al., 2009; Perera et al., 2014). From a public
health perspective, the presence of Jr. evansi in tabanids that bite humans is a concern as
infections can be established in apparently healthy individuals (Van Vin Chau et al., 2016).
The detection of human blood in tabanids carrying Tr. evansi and Theileria/Babesia sp.

denote the potential exposure of humans through bites.


There is no human surra, theileriosis, or babesiosis case that has been reported in
the country to date. However, the results support that there is the possibility that humans
can become exposed to 7. evansi, Theileria sp., and Babesia sp. through bites, as tabanids
may show a preference for human hosts (Dargantes, 2010). A One Health Approach is
needed to reduce the risk of animal trypanosomiasis to humans as controlling surra
infection in animals could decrease the possibility of exposure for humans, hence
preventing or eliminating the risk of transmission (Kim et al., 2023). Identification of
potential disease vectors is just one step in understanding the role of arthropods in
transmitting pathogens, and the result in the present study is supplemental for strategies
that will be implemented to address Tr. evansi and Theileria/Babesia sp. infection in
animals. Figure 5.1 illustrates a proposed One Health approach in addressing the zoonotic
pathogens understudy. Activities such as the administration of prophylaxis and prompt
treatment of infected animals identified through active surveillance would reduce potential
sources of Tr. evansi, Theileria sp., and Babesia sp. (Dewi et al., 2019; Wise et al., 2018;
Niazi et al., 2008). In addition, limiting the exposure of livestock to tabanid bites through
the application of insecticides, repellents, the use of screened enclosures, or livestock
grazing management would prevent the exposure of hosts to bites of tabanids potentially
carrying the parasites understudy (Barros & Foil, 2007; Lang et al., 1981; Leprince et al.,
1992; Perich et al., 1986). Habitat alteration of tabanid breeding sites is known to reduce
the population of tabanids in an area (Anderson & Kneen, 1969; Weidemann et al., 2005).
This also entails the identification of species-specific larval habitats of tabanids to develop
a targeted approach in the control of tabanid vectors in the study area. Traps designed to

capture tabanids are also widely used to control populations and their impact on


communities (Wall & Doane, 1980). In humans, surveillance and the reduction of contact
with hosts and potential vectors would reduce exposure to Tr. evansi, Theileria sp., and
Babesia sp. (Kim et al., 2024; Kumar et al., 2021; Van Vin Chau et al., 2016; Shegokar et
al., 2006; Joshi et al., 2005). Lastly, the public health education of stakeholders towards
the impact and control of surra, theileriosis, babesiosis, and their potential vectors in the
study area is critical in the sustainability of interventions that will be implemented in the
study area. The implementation of the proposed interventions should be guided by the
Tripartite Guide to Addressing Zoonotic Diseases in Countries (WHO, FAO, and OIE,

2019) for effective coordination among concerned sectors in addressing the problem.


1. Brdedinisite™
identification),
@. Habitatalteration

Multi-sectoral
control strategies

1. Strategic planning and
emergency preparedness
2. Surveillance for zoonotic
diseases and information
sharing
3. Coordinated investigation and
response
4. Joint risk assessment
5. Risk reduction, risk
communication, and
community engagement
6. Workforce development
3.. Public. health (WHO, FAO, and
) OIE, 2019)

\
\

. Surveillance’

. Minimization.of
exposurétoector®
and infected ¢
animals

Figure 5.1. Proposed One Health approach in addressing surra, babesiosis and theileriosis.

Limitations of the Study

The research aimed to determine the species, relative abundance, and density of
tabanids near backyard raising farms, whether these tabanids carry Trypanosoma evansi,
Babesia sp., Theileria sp., and, and if these tabanids also have detectable human blood. In
consideration of time and budgetary constraints, a non-probabilistic sampling technique

was employed to satisfy the objectives of the study.


A large number of flies were captured using the Nzi trap. However, there were
substitutions to the materials used for trap construction. Ideally, phthalogen blue cotton
fabric is used as it has been shown to exhibit the highest performance in terms of catching
biting flies. The production of the fabric has greatly declined, and it has been increasingly
difficult to acquire (Mihok et al., 2006; Onju et al., 2020). Due to its inaccessibility, locally

available polyester fabrics were used.

Tabanids are known mechanical vectors of various pathogens, especially parasites,
through contamination of puncture wounds with the organisms present in their proboscis
as the route of infection. Due to this reason and resource constraints, tabanid proboscis
samples were prioritized over gut samples in determining the occurrence of 7r. evansi and
Theileria/Babesia sp. The parasites detected in the proboscis of tabanids demonstrate the
presence of infected animals in the study area. However, the researcher was not able to
note the presence of potential tick vectors for Theileria/Babesia sp. in the livestock animals
in the backyard farms which could provide additional information regarding the

transmission of the piroplasmids in the study area.

In the present study, the researcher was not able to successfully determine the
proportion of Babesia sp. and Theileria sp. among samples positive for the piroplasmid
genera using the utilized in Theileria/Babesia sp. detection due to close band size of the
target gene in both genera. To address this limitation, the researcher opted to sequence a
few samples positive for Theileria/Babesia sp. selected through systematic random
sampling. As a result, the data obtained on the presence of the piroplasmids in Ta. partitus
proboscis is reported as Theileria/Babesia sp. It is important to note that the human
cytochrome B gene could be detected up to 168 hours post-ingestion of an insect (Vergara


et al., 2017). Therefore, the exposure of humans to tabanids carrying these parasites should
be evaluated with caution as it cannot be determined whether the tabanids are already
carrying the protozoans prior to biting humans in the study site. Additionally, a limitation
of the MightyAmp DNA Polymerase Ver. 3 used in this study is that it can amplify crude
samples, and contamination with human cells during sample preparation may overestimate
the results. Another important consideration is the degradation of DNA in tabanid
proboscis, and amplifying only one site in the target gene may lead to underestimated
results if taken into consideration (Kornkaew et al., 2016). Lastly, due to time
considerations, the replication of each sample for PCR was not conducted, which may

result in errors because of stochastic events.


CHAPTER VI
CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Summary and Conclusion

The presence of Trypanosoma evansi, Theileria/Babesia sp., and human blood were
detected in the proboscis of Zabanus partitus collected from Brgy. Catalanacan, Science
City of Mufioz, Nueva Ecija. The target parasites are primarily studied due to their
veterinary and economic importance in the Philippines, but in the present study, their public
health importance is also emphasized. A total of 4,321 tabanids were captured using
animal-baited and Nzi traps in Brgy. Catalanacan, Science City of Mufioz, Nueva Ecija
from May 5 to June 5, 2023. All tabanids caught were from the genus Tabanus: Ta. partitus
(relative abundance = 99.95%) and Ta. reducens (relative abundance = 0.05%). Using PCR,
Tr. evansi was detected in 181 out of 383 samples (47.26%), while Theileria/Babesia sp.
was detected in 119 out of 382 samples (31.15%). The co-occurrence of 7r. evansi and
Theileria/Babesia sp. in tabanid proboscis was recorded in 23 out of 382 samples (6.01%).
The presence of human blood was also tested in 277 tabanid samples positive for the
parasites. Human blood was detected in 44 out of 158 (27.85%) samples positive for 7.

evansi and 6 out of 96 (6.25%) samples were positive for Theileria/Babesia sp.

A high number of tabanids were caught using Nzi traps in Brgy. Catalanacan,
Science City of Mufioz, Nueva Ecija. The detection of Tr. evansi and Theileria/Babesia sp.,
and human blood in tabanid proboscis establishes that establishes the possibility of
exposure the protozoans. The results of the study support the findings of earlier research

that Ta. partitus and Ta. reducens are vectors for Tr. evansi in the Philippines. While, to the


researcher’s knowledge, this is the first report on the presence of piroplasmids in tabanids.
The result of this study serves as a baseline for the formulation and implementation of
interventions through the One Health approach to reduce the burden caused by tabanids,

Tr. evansi and Theileria/Babesia sp. in the study site.
Recommendations

The present study emphasizes the need for an integrated approach to address the
presence of 7r. evansi and Theileria/Babesia sp. through identification of potential vectors
in the study area. A One Health approach is needed to address the potential impact of the
protozoans under study, as both 7+ evansi and Theileria/Babesia sp. are potentially
zoonotic parasites that also affect humans as livelihood, economic and food security
threats. The results provide information at the level of the human-animal-environment
interface that may serve as a baseline for risk analysis, policy development and early
detection mechanisms of the Philippine Inter-agency Committee on Zoonoses (PhilCZ). At
the level of the Local Government Unit, the result of the study provides surveillance
information on the occurrence of Tr. evansi and Theileria/Babesia sp. in livestock hosts,
that can be used for the formulation of policies and interventions to address the problems.
The identification of tabanid vectors of Tr evansi, and potentially Theileria/Babesia sp.,
serves as basis for the implementation of targeted control measures to reduce or stop

disease transmission.

The direction of future researches could focus on longitudinal surveys that would
give a better understanding of the seasonal dynamics and relationship of weather variables

with tabanid populations in the study area. Furthermore, observations on the species-


specific behavior in terms of habitat preference and flight periodicity would provide
evidence that can be used for targeted control measures to reduce vector populations and
their contact with hosts in the study site. Focusing not only on human blood, but a complete
profile of the host preference of tabanids in an area could give insights regarding the
possible host range of 71 evansi and Theileria/Babesia sp. Since only a portion of the
samples with Theileria/Babesia sp. were subjected to genus identification in this study, the
occurrence of Babesia sp. and Theileria sp. in tabanids should be further studied especially
there is evidence that piroplasmids can be transmitted under experimental conditions. In
addition, the relationship between the population dynamics and occurrence of the other
pathogens in tabanids could be further explored in developing a non-invasive surveillance
system in an area. The results warrant a follow-up study on the prevalence of 7r. evansi and
Theileria/Babesia sp. in potential hosts in the area. Moreover, the risk and exposure of
humans to 7r. evansi should be further evaluated due to its public health threat as a zoonotic

parasite.


REFERENCES

Adao, D. E. V., Herrera, C. M. T., Galarion, L. H., Bolo, N. R., Carlos, R. S., Carlos, E. T.,
... & Rivera, W. L. (2017). Detection and molecular characterization of Hepatozoon
canis, Babesia vogeli, Ehrlichia canis, and Anaplasma platys in dogs from Metro
Manila, Philippines. Korean Journal of Veterinary Research, 57(2), 79-88.
doi:10.14405/kjvr.2017.57.2.79

Ailes, M. C., Brown, L. J., Church, C., French, D. P., & Gale, W. (1992). Mechanical
control of greenhead flies (Diptera: Tabanidae) in a marsh environment. Journal of
Medical Entomology, 29(2), 160 — 164.

Al Dhafer, H.M. Dawah, H. A., & Abdullah, M. A. (2009). Tabanidae (Diptera) of Saudi
Arabia. Saudi Journal of Biological Sciences, 16, 77-83.

Alhassan, A., Pumidonming, W., Okamura, M., Hirata, H., Battsetseg, B., Fujisaki, K., ...
& Igarashi, I. (2005). Development of a single-round and multiplex PCR method
for the simultaneous detection of Babesia caballi and Babesia equi in horse blood.
Veterinary Parasitology, 129(1-2), 43-49.

Al-Hosary, A. A. (2017). Comparison between conventional and molecular methods for
diagnosis of bovine babesiosis (Babesia bovis infection) in tick infested cattle in
upper Egypt. Journal of Parasitic Diseases, 41(1), 243-246. doi:0.1007/s12639-
016-0785-2

Altunsoy, F., & Kilig, A. Y. (2012). Seasonal abundance of horse fly (Diptera: Tabanidae)
in Western Anatolia. Journal of the Entomological Research Society, 14(1), 95 —
105.

Alverson, D. R., & Noblet, R. (1977). Activity of Female Tabanidae (Diptera) in Relation
to Selected Meteorological Factors in South Carolina Journal of Medical
Entomology, 14(2), 197-200.

Anderson, J. F., & Kneen, F. R. (1969). The temporary impoundment of salt marshes for
the control of coastal deer flies. Mosquito News, 29(2).

Andreeva, R. (1989). The morphological adaptations of horse fly larvae (Diptera:
Tabanidae) to developmental sites in the Palearctic Region and their relationship to
the evolution and distribution of the family. Canadian Journal of Zoology, 67,
2286-2293.

Aparna, M., Ravindran, R., Vimalkumar, M. B., Lakshmanan, B., Rameshkumar, P.,
Kumar, K. A., ... & Ghosh, S. (2011). Molecular characterization of Theileria
orientalis causing fatal infection in crossbred adult bovines of South India.
Parasitology International, 60(4), 524-529.


Awuoche, E. O., Weiss, B. L., Vigneron, A., Mireji, P. O., Aksoy, E., Nyambega, B., ...
Aksoy, S. (2017). Molecular characterization of tsetse’s proboscis and its response
to Trypanosoma congolense infection. PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases, 11(11),
e0006057. doi:10.1371/journal.pntd.0006057.

Azza, F., Lucas, E., & Gérard. (2020). Seasonal abundance of Tabanidae (Diptera) on a
farm in Southern France. Agriculture and Natural Resources, 54, 158 — 164.
doi:10.34044/j.anres.2020.54.2.06

Badan, M., Danesi, P., Cassini, R., Tessarin, C., Barberio, A., Bonato, O., ... & Capelli, G.
(2007). Iatrogenic transmission of multiple babesiosis in a confined dairy cattle
herd in Veneto region. Parasitology, 49, 75-75.

Badia-Rius, X., Betts, H., Molyneux, D. H., & Kelly-Hope, L. A. (2019). Environmental
factors associated with the distribution of Loa loa vectors Chrysops spp. in Central
and West Africa: seeing the forest for the trees. Parasites & Vectors, 12(1).
doi:10.1186/s13071-019-3327-9

Baldacchino, F., Desquesnes, M., Mihok, S., Foil, L. D., Duvallet, G., & Jittapalapong, S.
(2014). Tabanids: Neglected subjects of research, but important vectors of disease
agents! Infection, Genetics and Evolution, 28, 596-615.

Baldacchino, F., Krémar, S., Bernard, C., Manon, S., & Jay-Robert, P. (2017). The impact
of land use and climate on tabanid assemblages in Europe. Agriculture, Ecosystems
and Environment, 239, 112 — 118. doi:10.1016/j.meegid.2014.03.029

Baltazar, C. (1990). An inventory of Philippine insects. Laguna, Philippines: University of
the Philippines Los Bafios, University Publications Office.

Barros, A. T. (2001). Seasonality and relative abundance of Tabanidae (Diptera) captured
on horses in the Pantanal, Brazil. Memorias do Instituto Oswaldo Cruz, 96(7), 917
— 923. doi:10.1590/S0074-02762001000700006

Barros, A. T. M., & Foil, L. D. (2007). The influence of distance on movement of tabanids
(Diptera: Tabanidae) between horses. Veterinary Parasitology, 144(3-4), 380-384.
doi:10.1016/j.vetpar.2006.09.041

Barros, A. T., Koller, W. W., & Teodoro, P. E. (2019). Diversity and population dynamic of
Tabanidae (Insecta: Diptera) in the Cerrado-Pantanal ecotone. Bioscience Journal,
35(5), 1390 — 1398. doi:10.14393/BJ-v35n5a2019-39502

Baticados, A. M., Baticados, W. N., Villarba, L. A., Carlos, E. T., Carlos, S. M., & Fajardo,
P. V. (2011c). PCR assay and microscopy for examination of mixed Ehrlichia canis
and Babesia spp. infection in Bomb-sniffing dogs and other canines in National
Capital Region, Philippines. Eurasian Journal of Veterinary Sciences, 27(2), 111-
116.


Baticados, W. N., Fernandez, C. P., & Baticados, A.M. (201 1a). Molecular detection of
Trypanosoma evansi in cattle from Quirino Province, Philippines. Veterinarski
Arhiv, 81(5), 635-646.

Baticados, W.N. (2008, June 30). Trypanosome infection in arthropod fly vectors detected
by PCR: a reliable indicator of active trypanosomosis in livestock. San Miguel
Corporation. Professorial Chair Lecture.
url: https://www.ukdr.uplb.edu.ph/professorial_lectures/276

Baticados, W.N., Castro, D.L., & Baticados, A.M. (2011b). Parasitological and PCR
detection of Trypanosoma evansi in buffaloes from Luzon, Philippines. Ceylon
Journal of Science, 40(2), 141-146. doi:10.4038/cjsbs.v40i2.3930

Belontidos, L. P., Lazaro, J. V., Villanueva, M. A., & Mingala, C. N. (2014). Molecular
detection and characterization of Theileria species in the Philippines. Acta
Parasitologica, 59(3), 448 — 453. doi:10.2478/s11686-014-0256-9

Benfodil, K., Biischer, P., Abdelli, A., Reet., N. V., Mohamed-herif, A., Ansel, S. ... Ait-
Oudhia, K. (2020). Comparison of serological and molecular tests for detection of
Trypanosoma evansi in domestic animals from Ghardaia district, South Algeria.
Veterinary Parasitology, 280, 109089. doi:10.1016/j.vetpar.2020.109089

Bigalke, R. D. (1968). New concepts on the epidemiological features of bovine besnoitiosis
as determined by laboratory and field investigations. Onderstepoort Journal of
Veterinary Research, 35(1), 3 — 138.

Birhanu, H., Fikru, R., Said, M., Kidane, W., Gebrehiwot, T., Hagos, A. ...Biischer, P.
(2015). Epidemiology of Trypanosoma evansi and Trypanosoma vivax in domestic
animals from selected districts of Tigray and Afar regions, Northern Ethiopia.
Parasites & Vectors, 8, 212. doi:10.1186/s13071-015-0818-1

Bitome-Essono, P. Y., Ollomo, B., Arnathau, C., Durand, P., Mokoudoum, N. D., Yacka-
Mouele, L., ... & Paupy, C. (2017). Tracking zoonotic pathogens using blood-
sucking flies as' flying syringes’. Elife, 6, e22069.

Blaho, M., Egri, A., Bahid szki, L., Kriska, G., Hegedus, R., Akesson, S., & Horvath, G.
(2012). Spottier targets are less attractive to tabanids: on the tabanid-repellency of
spotty fur patterns. PLOS One, 7, 8, e41138. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0041138

Borst, P., Fase-Fowler, F., & Gibson, W. C. (1987). Kinetoplast DNA of Trypanosoma
evansi. Molecular and Biochemical Parasitology, 23(1), 31-38. doi:10.1016/0166-
6851(87)90184-8

Bose, R., & Heister, N. C. (1993). Development of Trypanosoma (M.) theileri in Tabanids.

Journal of Eukaryotic Microbiology, 40(6), 788 — 792. doi:10.1111/j.1550-
7408.1993.tb04475.x


Buse, R., & Heister, N. C. (1993). Development of Trypanosoma (M.) theileri in tabanids.
Journal of Eukaryotic Microbiology, 40(6), 788-792.

Boushaki, D., Adel, A., Dia, M. L., Biischer, P., Madani, H., Brihoum, B. A. ... Issad, N.
K. (2019). Epidemiological investigations on Trypanosoma evansi infection in
dromedary camels in the South of Algeria. Heliyon, 5, 02086.
doi:10.1016/j.heliyon.2019.e02086

Bracken, G. K., Hanec, W., & Thorsteinson, A. J. (1962). The orientation of horse flies and
deer flies (Tabanidae: Diptera): II]. The role of some visual factors in the
attractiveness of decoy silhouettes. Canadian Journal of Zoology, 40(S), 685—
695. doi:10.1139/z62-064

Brun, R., Hecker, H., & Lun, Z.-R. (1998). Trypanosoma evansi and T. equiperdum:
distribution, biology, treatment and phylogenetic relationship (a review). Veterinary
Parasitology, 79(2), 95-107. doi:10.1016/s0304-4017(98)00146-0

Burger, J. F., & Thompson, F. C. (1981). The Jabanus striatus complex (Diptera:
Tabanidae): A revision of some Oriental horse fly vector of surra. Proceedings of
the Entomological Society of Washington. 83(2), 339 — 358.

Camacho, A. T., Pallas, E., Gestal, J. J., Guitian, F. J., Olmeda, A. S., Telford III, S. R., &
Spielman, A. (2003). Ixodes hexagonus is the main candidate as vector of Theileria
annae in northwest Spain. Veterinary parasitology, 112(1-2), 157-163.
doi:0.1016/s0304-4017(02)00417-x

Campigotto, G., Da Silva, A. S., Volpato, A., Balzan, A., Radavelli, W. M., Solda, N. M.
...-Lopes, S. (2015). Experimental infection by Trypanosoma evansi in sheep:
Occurrence Of transplacental transmission and mice infection by parasite present
in the colostrum and milk of infected ewes. Veterinary Parasitology, 212(3-4), 123
— 129, doi:10.1016/j.vetpar.2015.07.007

Campigotto, G., Volpato, A., Galli, G. M., Glombowsky, P., Baldissera, M. D., Miletti, L.
C. ...Da Silva, A. S. (2017). Vertical transmission of Trypanosoma evansi in
experimentally infected rats. Experimental Parasitology, 174, 42 - 44.
doi:10.1016/j.exppara.2017.01.012

Carn, V. M. (1996). The role of dipterous insects in the mechanical transmission of animal
viruses. British Veterinary Journal, 152(4), 377-393. doi:10.1016/s0007-
1935(96)80033-9

Carpenter, L. R., & Englund, P. T. (1995). Kinetoplast maxicircle DNA replication in
Crithidia fasciculata and Trypanosoma brucei. Molecular and Cellular Biology,
15(12), 6794-6803. doi:10.1128/MCB.15.12.6794

Centeno-Lima, S., Do Rosario, V., Parreira, R., Maia, A. J., Freudenthal, A. M., Nijhof, A.
M., & Jongejan, F. (2003). A fatal case of human babesiosis in Portugal: molecular


and phylogenetic analysis. Tropical Medicine & International Health, 8(8), 760-
764.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2020). Biosafety in Microbiological and
Biomedical Laboratories. Retrieved from CDC website.

Changbunjong, T., Sedwisi, P., Welunwanarak, T., Nitiyamatawat, E., Saringwongchan, R.,
& Chareonviriyaphap, T. (2018). Species diversity and abundance of Tabanus spp.
(Diptera: Tabanidae) in different habitats of Thailand. Journal of Asia-Pacific
Entomology, 21, 134 — 139. doi:10.1016/j.vetpar.2018.07.002

Chavez-Larrea, M.A., Cholota-Iza, C., Cueva-Villavicencio, J., Yugcha-Diaz, M., Ron-
Roman, J. W., Rodriguez-Cabezas, A., ... & Reyna-Bello, A. (2023). Molecular
identification of Trypanosoma theileri (Laveran, 1902) in cattle from two
slaughterhouses in Ecuador and its relation with other haemotropic
agents. Frontiers in Veterinary Science, 10. doi:10.3389/fvets.2023.1153069

Chen, Z., Liu, Q., Jiao, F. C., Xu, B. L., & Zhou, X. N. (2014). Detection of piroplasms
infection in sheep, dogs and hedgehogs in Central China. Infectious Diseases of
Poverty, 3(1), 1-7. doi:0.1186/2049-9957-3-18

Claes, F., Radwanska, M., Urakawa, T., Majiwa, P., Goddeeris, B & Biischer, P. (2004).
Variable Surface Glycoprotein RoTat 1.2 PCR as a specific diagnostic tool for the
detection of Trypanosoma evansi infections. Kinetoplastid Biology and Disease, 3,
3. doi:10.1186/1475-9292-3-3

Colwell, R. K., Mao, C. X., & Chang, J. (2004). Interpolating, extrapolating and comparing
incidence-based species accumulation curves. Ecology, 85(10), 2717-2727.
doi:10.1890/03-0557

Connal, A., & Connal, S. L. M. (1922). The development of Loa Loa (Guyot) in Chrysops
Silacea (Austen) and in Chrysops Dimidiata (van der Wulp). Transactions of the
Royal Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, 16(1-2), 64-89.

Conrad, P. A., Kelly, B. G., & Brown, C. G. D. (1985). Intraerythrocytic schizogony of
Theileria annulata. Parasitology, 91(1), 67-82.

Corales, J. M. I., Viloria, V. V., Venturina, V. M., & Mingala, C. N. (2014). The prevalence
of Ehrlichia canis, Anaplasma platys and Babesia spp. in dogs in Nueva Ecija,
Philippines based on multiplex polymerase chain reaction (mPCR) assay. Annals of
Parasitology, 60(4).

Crane, S. (2011).DNA Extraction From Archival Museum Insect Specimens. Retrieved 10

May 2024, https://s3-eu-west-1.amazonaws.com/pfigshare-u-
files/1114092/extractionmuseum.pdf


Cruz-Flores, M. J., Garcia Claveria, F., Verdida, R., Xuan, X., & Igarashi, I. (2008). First
detection of Babesia gibsoni infection in Philippine stray dogs by
immunochromatographic test (ICT). Veterinarski Arhiv, 78(2), 149-157.

Da Silva, A. S., Campigotto, G., Sczesny, T. R., Pazinato, R., Albani, K. D., Klauck, V.
..-Leal, M. L. (2016). Experimental infection with Trypanosoma evansi in rams:
presence of parasite in semen, investigation of sexual transmission, hematological,
and biochemical alterations. Comparative Clinical Pathology, 25(4), 841 — 846.
doi:10.1007/s00580-016-2271-8

Dale, W. E., & Axtell, R. C. (1975). Flight of the salt marsh Tabanidae (Diptera), Tabanus
nigrovittatus, Chrysops atlanticus and C. fuliginosus: correlation with temperature,
light, moisture and wind velocity. Journal of Medical Entomology, 12(5), 551-557.
doi:10.1093/jmedent/12.5.551

Damayanti, R., Graydon, R. J., & Ladds, P. W. (1994). The pathology of experimental
Trypanosoma evansi infection in the Indonesian buffalo (Bubalus bubalis). Journal
of Comparative Pathology, 110(3), 237-252. doi:10.1016/s0021-9975(08)80277-0

Dargantes, A. (2010). Epidemiology, control and potential insect vectors of Trypanosoma
evansi (surra) in village livestock in southern Philippines (Unpublished Doctoral
Thesis). Murdoch University, Australia.

Dargantes, A. P., Mercado, R. T., Dobson, R. J., & Reid, S. A. (2009). Estimating the impact
of Trypanosoma evansi infection (surra) on buffalo population dynamics in
southern Philippines using data from cross-sectional surveys. International Journal
for Parasitology, 39(10), 1109-1114. doi:10.1016/j.ijpara.2009.02.012

Department of Social Welfare and Development. (2013). Database of Poor Households
Nueva Ecija. Retrieved from https://fo3.dswd.gov.ph/wp-
content/uploads/2013/11/NUEVA-ECIJA.pdf.

De Vos, A. J., Stewart, N. P., & Dalgliesh, R. J. (1989). Effect of different methods of
maintenance on the pathogenicity and infectivity of Babesia bigemina for the vector
Boophilus_ microplus. Research in Veterinary Science, 46(2), 139-142.
doi:0.1016/s0034-5288(18)31135-4

Deborggraeve, S., Koffi, M., Jamonneau, V., Bonsu, F. A., Queyson, R., Simarro, P. P.
...Biischer, P. (2008). Molecular analysis of archived blood slides reveals an
atypical human Trypanosoma infection. Diagnostic Microbiology and Infectious
Disease, 61, 428 — 433. doi:10.1016/j.diagmicrobio.2008.03.006

Dehkordi, F. S., Parsaei, P., Saberian, S., Moshkelani, S., Hajshafiei, P., Hoseini, S. R., ...
& Ghorbani, M. N. (2012). Prevalence study of Theileria annulata by comparison
of four diagnostic techniques in Southwest Iran. Bulgarian Journal of Veterinary
Medicine, 15(2), 123-130.


Del Valle, F. P., Baticados, A. M., & Baticados, V. N.. (2011). Evaluation of Babesia spp.
infection among native horses in Quezon Province, Philippines, using molecular
and microscopical examination. Iranian Journal of Veterinary Science and
Technology, 3(1), 23-30.

Department of Agriculture. (2018). Amendment to DA Administrative Order no. 1, series
of 2012 on devlaring the list of notifiable animal diseases (Administrative circular
no. 03, series of 2018). Diliman, Quezon City, Philippines.

Department of Health (DOH), Department of Agriculture (DA), Department of
Environment and Natural Resources (DENR). (2020). Guideliness to
operationalize the Philippine inter-agency committee on zoonosis (PhilCZ) (Joint
DOH-DA-DENR Administrative order no. 2020-02). Philippines.

Desquesnes, M., & Dia, M. L. (2003a). Trypanosoma vivax: mechanical transmission in
cattle by one of the most common African tabanids, Atylotus agrestis. Experimental
Parasitology, 103, 35 — 43. doi:10.1016/S0014-4894(03)00067-5

Desquesnes, M., & Dia, M. L. (2003b). Mechanical transmission of Trypanosoma
congolense in cattle by the African tabanid Atylotus agrestis. Experimental
Parasitology, 105, 226 — 231. doi:10.1016/j.exppara.2003.12.014

Desquesnes, M., & Dia, M. L. (2004). Mechanical transmission of Trypanosoma vivax in
cattle by the African tabanid Atylotus fuscipes. Veterinary Parasitology, 119, 9 —
19. doi:10.1016/j.vetpar.2003.10.015

Desquesnes, M., Biteau-Coroller, F., Bouyer, J.. Dia, M. L., & Foil, L. (2009).
Development of a mathematical model for mechanical transmission of
trypanosomes and other pathogens of cattle transmitted by tabanids. International
Journal for Parasitology, 39(3), 333-346. doi:10.1016/j.ijpara.2008.07.004

Desquesnes, M., Dargantes, A., Lai, D.-H., Lun, Z.-R., Holzmuller, P., & Jittapalapong, S.
(2013b). Trypanosoma evansi and Surra: A Review and Perspectives on
Transmission, Epidemiology and Control, Impact, and Zoonotic Aspects. BioMed
Research International, 2013, 1-20. doi:10.1155/2013/194176

Desquesnes, M., Holzmuller, P., Lai, D.-H., Dargantes, A., Lun, Z.-R., & Jittaplapong, S.
(2013a). Trypanosoma evansi and Surra: A Review and Perspectives on Origin,
History, Distribution, Taxonomy, Morphology, Hosts, and Pathogenic Effects.
BioMed Research International, 2013, 1-22. doi:10.1155/2013/194176

Desquesnes, M., Kocher, A., Pumhom, P., Saetiew, N., Yangtarra, S., Herder, S.,
.Jittapalapong, S. (2015). Current investigations on human and animal
trypanosomes and related diseases and their vectors in Southeast Asia. In Asian
Association of Veterinary School Congress “Veterinary Education and Veterinary
Challenges in One Health/Aging Pets”. Hua Hin, Thailand, December 2015/13
December 2015. Retrieved from https://agritrop.cirad.fr/591935/.

Desquesnes, M., McLaughlin, G., Zoungrana, A., & Davila, A. M. (2001). Detection and
identification of Trypanosoma of African livestock through a single PCR based on
internal transcribed spacer 1 of rDNA. Jnternational Journal for
Parasitology, 31(5-6), 610-614. doi:10.1016/S0020-7519(01)00161-8

Dewar, C. E., MacGregor, P., Cooper, S., Gould, M. K., Matthews, K. R., Savill, N. J., &
Schnaufer, A. (2018). Mitochondrial DNA is critical for longevity and metabolism
of transmission stage Trypanosoma brucei. PLOS Pathogens, 14(7), e1007195.
doi:10.1371/journal.ppat.1007195.

Dewi, R. S., Wardhana, A. H., Soejoedono, R. D., & Mulatsih, S. (2019). Evaluation of
surra treatment strategies attacking horses and buffaloes in East Sumba District,
Nusa Tenggara Timur Province of Indonesia (2010-2016). Jurnal Ilmu Ternak dan
Veteriner, 24(1).

Dijeteye, A., Diarra, M., Ouattara & Traore, D. (1998). Comparison of the efficacy of
different traps and attractants for Tabanidae and Stomoxys in Mali. Journal of
Protozoology Research, 8, 263 — 273. doi:10.32268/jprotozoolres.8.4_263

Dobson, R. J., Dargantes, A. P., Mercado, R. T., & Reid, S. A. (2009). Models for
Trypanosoma evansi (surra), its control and economic impact on small-hold
livestock owners in the Philippines. International Journal for Parasitology, 39(10),
1115-1123. doi:10.1016/j.ijpara.2009.02.013

Donnelly, J., & Peirce, M. A. (1975). Experiments on the transmission of Babesia divergens
to cattle by the tick Ixodes ricinus. International Journal for Parasitology, 5(3),
363-367. doi:0.1016/0020-7519(75)90085-5

Dérge, D. D., Cunze, S., & Klimpel, S. (2020). Incompletely Observed: niche estimation
for six frequent European horsefly species (Diptera, Tabanoidea,
Tabanidae). Parasites & Vectors, 13, 1-10. doi:10.1186/s13071-020-04316-7

Dorman, S. E., Cannon, M. E., Telford III, S. R., Frank, K. M., & Churchill, W. H. (2000).
Fulminant babesiosis treated with clindamycin, quinine, and whole-blood exchange
transfusion. Transfusion, 40(3), 375-380. doi:0.1046/j.1537-
2995.2000.40030375.x

Duarte, S. C., Parente, J. A., Pereira, M., Soares, C. M. D. A., & Linhares, G. F. C. (2011).
Phylogenetic characterization of Babesia canis vogeli in dogs in the state of Goias,
Brazil. Revista Brasileira de Parasitologia Veterindria, 20, 274-280.
doi:0.1590/s1984-29612011000400004

Elhaig, M. M., Youssef, A. I., & El-Gayar, A. K. (2013). Molecular and parasitological

detection of Trypanosoma evansi in Camels in Ismailia, Egypt. Veterinary
Parasitology, 198, 214 — 218. doi:j.vetpar.2013.08.003


Ellis, J., Hefford, C., Baverstock, P.R., Dalrymple, B. P., & Johnson, A. M. (1992).
Ribosomal DNA sequence comparison of Babesia and Theileria. Molecular and
Biochemical Parasitology, 54(1), 87-95

Elobaid, N. I., Daffalla, O. M., Elhasan, S. S., Noureldin, E. M., Ali, F. F., & Abdalla, M.
A. Morphological, molecular identification of Tabanidae (Diptera) and assessment
of their seasonal abundance in Southwestern, Saudi Arabia. International Journal
of Current Microbiology and Applied Sciences, 10(4), 485 - 499.
doi:10.20546/ijcmas.2021.1004.050

Elshafie, E. I., Sani, R.A., Hassan, L., Sharma, R., Bashir, A., & Abubakar, I.A. (2013).
Seroprevalence and risk factors of Trypanosoma evansi infection in horses in
Peninsular Malaysia. Research in Veterinary Science, 94, 285 — 289.
doi:10.1016/j.rvsc.2012.09.004

Erster, O., Roth, A., Wolkomirsky, R., Leibovich, B., Savitzky, I., & Shkap, V. (2016).
Transmission of Babesia ovis by different Rhipicephalus bursa developmental
stages and infected blood injection. Ticks and tick-borne diseases, 7(1), 13-
19.doi:0.1016/j.ttbdis.2015.07.017

Escalante, A. A., & Ayala, F. J. (1994). Phylogeny of the malarial genus Plasmodium,
derived from rRNA gene sequences. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 91(24), 11373-11377.

Escarlos, J. A., Cane, J. F., & Dargantes, A. P. (2016). Knowledge, attitudes, practices, and
financial losses of buffalo raisers due to Surra among selected villages in Southern
Philippines. Indonesian Journal of Animal Veterinary Sciences, 21(3), 190 — 203.

Fawcett, D. W., Conrad, P. A., Grootenhuis, J. G., & Morzaria, S. P. (1987). Ultrastructure
of the intra-erythrocytic stage of Theileria species from cattle and waterbuck.
Tissue and Cell, 19(5), 643-655. doi:0.1016/0040-8166(87)90071-1

Figueroa, J. V., Chieves, L. P., Johnson, G. S., & Buening, G. M. (1993). Multiplex
polymerase chain reaction based assay for the detection of Babesia bigemina,
Babesia bovis and Anaplasma marginale DNA in bovine blood. Veterinary
Parasitology, 50(1-2), 69-81.

Filstein, M. R., Benach, J. L., White, D. J., Brody, B. A., Goldman, W. D., Bakal, C. W., &
Schwartz, R. S. (1980). Serosurvey for human babesiosis in New York. Journal of
Infectious Diseases, 141(4), 518-521.

Foil, L. D. (1983). A mark-recapture method for measuring effects of spatial separation of
horses on tabanid (Diptera) movement between hosts. Journal of Medical
Entomology, 20(3), 301 — 305. doi:10.1093/jmedent/20.3.301

Foil, L. D., Adams, W. V., McManus, J. M., & Issel, C. J. (1987). Bloodmeal residues on
mouthparts of Tabanus fuscicostatus (Diptera: Tabanidae) and the potential for


mechanical transmission of pathogens. Journal of Medical Entomology, 24(6),
613-616. doi:10.1093/jmedent/24.6.613

Foil, L. D., Leprince, D. J., & Church, G. E. (1989). Changes in the parity rate of Tabanus
Juscicostatus (Diptera: Tabanidae) populations associated with controlling
available hosts. Journal of Medical Entomology, 26(4), 306-310.
doi:10.1093/jmedent/26.4.306

Franke, C. R., Greiner, M., & Mehlitz, D. (1994). Investigations on naturally occurring
Trypanosoma evansi infections in horses, cattle, dogs and capybaras (Hydrochaeris
hydrochaeris) in Pantanal de Poconé (Mato Grosso, Brazil). Acta Tropica, 58, 159
— 169. doi:10.1016/0001-706X(94)90055-8

Fujisaki, K., Kamio, T., Kawazu, S., Shimizu, S., & Shimura, K. (1993). Theileria sergenti:
experimental transmission by the long-nosed cattle louse, Linognathus
vituli. Annals of Tropical Medicine & Parasitology, 87(2), 217-218.
doi:10.1080/00034983.1993.11812757

Gabrielli, S., Calderini, P., Cassini, R., Galuppi, R., Tampieri, M. P., Pietrobelli, M., &
Cancrini, G. (2014). Human exposure to piroplasms in Central and Northern Italy.
Veterinaria Italiana, 50(1), 41-47. doi:10.12834/vetit.1302.13

Galay, R. L., Manalo, A. A. L., Dolores, S. L. D., Aguilar, I. P. M., Sandalo, K. A. C., Cruz,
K. B., ... & Tanaka, T. (2018). Molecular detection of tick-borne pathogens in
canine population and Rhipicephalus sanguineus (sensu lato) ticks from southern
Metro Manila and Laguna, Philippines. Parasites & Vectors, 11(1), 1-8.

Galon, E. M., Moumouni, P. F., Ybafiez, R. H., Ringo, A. E., Efstratiou, A., Lee, S. ...Xuan,
X. (2019). First molecular detection and characterization of tick-borne pathogens
in water buffaloes in Bohol, Philippines. Tick and Tick-borne Diseases, 10, 815 —
821. doi:10.1016/j.ttbdis.2019.03.016

Galuppi, R., Bonoli, C., Aureli, S., Cassini, R., Marcer, F., Foley, J. E., & Tampieri, M. P.
(2012). Comparison of diagnostic methods to detect piroplasms in asymptomatic
cattle. Veterinary Parasitology, 183(3-4), 364-368. doi:0.1016/j.vetpar.2011.07.037

Ganeva, D. & Milena, K. (2012). The tabanid fauna (Diptera: Tabanidae) of the Chirpan
Eminences (Bulgaria). Entomologia Hellenica, 21(2), 45 —- 53.
doi:10.12681/eh.11517

Gardner, M. J., Bishop, R., Shah, T., De Villiers, E. P., Carlton, J. M., Hall, N., ... & Nene,
V. (2005). Genome sequence of Theileria parva, a bovine pathogen that transforms
lymphocytes. Science, 309(5731), 134-137. doi:0.1126/science.1110439

Gauer, M., Mackenstedt, U., Mehlhorn, H., Schein, E., Zapf, F., Njenga, E., ... & Morzaria,
S. (1995). DNA measurements and ploidy determination of developmental stages


in the life cycles of Theileria annulata and T. parva. Parasitology Research, 81(7),
565-574. doi:0.1007/bf00932023

Gibson, W. (2003). Species concepts for trypanosomes: from morphological to molecular
definitions? Kinetoplastid Biology and Disease, 2(1), 10. doi:10.1186/1475-9292-
2-10

Gonzaga, E. A., & Garduque, R. J. (2016). A survey of Philippine Tabanidae in North
Cotabato, Philippines. Asia Pacific Higher Education Research Journal
(APHERJ), 3(1).

Gonzales, C. R., & Flores, P. (2004). Comparative study of mouthparts of three species of
horse flies of the tribe Pangoniini of Chilean distribution (Diptera: Tabanidae).
Zootaxa, 5791), 1 — 15. doi:10.11646/zootaxa.579.1.1

Guan, G., Ma, M., Moreau, E., Liu, J., Lu, B., Bai, Q., ... & Yin, H. (2009). A new ovine
Babesia species transmitted by Hyalomma anatolicum anatolicum. Experimental
Parasitology, 122(4), 261-267. doi:0.1016/j.exppara.2009.05.001

Gubbels, J. M., De Vos, A. P., Van der Weide, M., Viseras, J., Schouls, L. M., De Vries, E.,
& Jongejan, F. (1999). Simultaneous detection of bovine Theileria and Babesia
species by reverse line blot hybridization. Journal of Clinical Microbiology, 37(6),
1782-1789. doi:10.1128/JCM.37.6.1782-1789.1999

Gubbels, M. J., Hong, Y., van der Weide, M., Qi, B., Nijman, I. J., Guangyuan, L., &
Jongejan, F. (2000). Molecular characterisation of the Theileria buffeli/orientalis
group. /nternational Journal for Parasitology, 30(8), 943-952. doi:10.1016/S0020-
7519(00)00074-6

Guimaraes, A. M., Lima, J. D., & Ribeiro, M. F. B. (1998). Sporogony and experimental
transmission of Babesia equi by Boophilus microplus. Parasitology Research,
84(4), 323-327. doi:0.1007/s004360050404

Haddow, A. J., & Corbet, P. S. (1960). Observations on nocturnal activity in some African
Tabanidae (Diptera). In Proceedings of the Royal Entomological Society of London.
Series A, General Entomology (Vol. 35, No. 1-3, pp. 1-5). Oxford, UK: Blackwell
Publishing Ltd. doi:10.1111/j.1365-3032.1960.tb00654.x

Haddow, A. J., Gillett, J. D., Mahaffy, A. F., & Highton, R. B. (1950). Observations on the
biting-habits of some Tabanidae in Uganda, with special reference to arboreal and
nocturnal activity. Bulletin of Entomological Research, 41(1), 209-221.
doi:10.1017/S0007485300027577

Hammer, J. F., Jenkins, C., Bogema, D., & Emery, D. (2016). Mechanical transfer of
Theileria orientalis: possible roles of biting arthropods, colostrum and husbandry
practices in disease transmission. Parasites & vectors,9(1), 1-9.
doi:0.1186/s13071-016-1323-x


Hansens, E. J. (1981). Resmethrin and permethrin sprays to reduce annoyance from a deer
fly, Chrysops atlanticus. Journal of Economic Entomology, 74(1), 3-
4. doi:10.1093/jee/74.1.3

Harley, J. M. B. (1965). Seasonal abundance and diurnal variations in activity of some
Stomoxys and Tabanidae in Uganda. Bulletin of Entomological Research, 56(2),
319-332. doi:10.1017/S0007485300056418

Harrington, J. M., Howell, S., & Hajduk, S. L. (2009). Membrane permeabilization by
Trypanosome Lytic Factor, a cytolytic human high density lipoprotein. Journal of
Biological Chemistry, 284(20), 13505-13512. doi:10.1074/jbc.M900151200

Hashem, M., Neamat-Allah, A. N., & Gheith, M. A. (2018). A study on bovine babesiosis
and treatment with reference to hematobiochemical and molecular diagnosis.
Slovenian Veterinary Research, 55(Supp| 20), 165-173. doi:10.26873/SVR-643-

Hawking, F. (1978). The resistance of Trypanosoma congolense, T. vivax and T. evansi to
human plasma. Transactions of the Royal Society of Tropical Medicine and
Hygiene, 72(4), 405-407. doi:10.1016/0035-9203(78)90136-0

Henker, L. C., Lorenzett, M. P., Fagundes-Moreira, R., Dalto, A. G. C., Sonne, L.,
Driemeier, D., ... & Pavarini, S. P. (2020). Bovine abortion, stillbirth and neonatal
death associated with Babesia bovis and Anaplasma sp. infections in southern
Brazil. Ticks and Tick-borne Diseases, 11(4), 101443.
doi:0.1016/j.ttbdis.2020.101443

Herrera, H. M., Davila, A. M. R., Norek, A., Abreu, U. G., Souza, S. S., D’Andrea, P. S.,
& Jansen, A. M. (2004). Enzootiology of Trypanosoma evansi in Pantanal, Brazil.
Veterinary Parasitology, 125(3-4), 263-275. doi:10.1016/j.vetpar.2004.07.013

Herrera, H. M., Norek, A., Freitas, T. P. T., Rademaker, V., Fernandes, O., & Jansen, A. M.
(2005). Domestic and wild mammals infection by Trypanosoma evansi in a pristine
area of the Brazilian Pantanal region. Parasitology Research, 96(2), 121-126.
doi:10.1007/s00436-005-1334-6

Herrera, P. C. T., Viloria, V. V., Balbin, M. M., & Mingala, C. N. (2017). Prevalence of
babesiosis (Babesia bovis and Babesia bigemina) in cattle and water buffalo in
Nueva Ecija, Philippines using Nested Polymerase Chain Reaction. Annals of
Parasitology, 63(4), 309-316.

Hilali, M., Abdel-Gawad, A., Nassar, A., Abdel-Wahab, A., Magnus, E., & Biischer, P.
(2004). Evaluation of the card agglutination tests (CATT/T. evansi) for detection of
Trypanosoma evansi infection in water buffaloes (Bubalus bubalis) in Egypt.
Veterinary Parasitology, 121, 45 — 51. doi:10.1016/j.vetpar.2004.02.009


Hill, G. F. (1921). The Bionomics of Tabanus aprepes, and other Australian Tabanidae.
Bulletin of Entomological Research, 12(01), 41. doi:10.1017/S0007485300044849

Hoare, C., & Trevan, J. (1956) Morphological and Taxonomic Studies on Mammalia
Trypanosomes. VIII. Revision of Trypanosoma evansi. Parasitology, 46(1-2), 130-
172. doi:10.1017/S003 1182000026408

Holland, W. G., Claes, F., My, L. N., Thanh, .N. G., Tam, P. T., Verloo, D. ... Vercruysse, J.
(2001). A comparative evaluation of parasitological tests and a PCR for
Trypanosoma evansi diagnosis in experimentally infected water buffaloes.
Veterinary Parasitology, 97, 23 — 33. doi:10.1016/S0304-4017(01)00381-8

Hollander, A. L., & Wright, R. E. (1980). Daily Activity cycles of eight species of
oklahoma Tabanidae (Diptera). Environmental Entomology, 9(5), 600-604.
doi:10.1093/ee/9.5.600

Hollander, A. L., & Wright, R. E. (1980). Impact of Tahanids on Cattle: Blood Meal Size
and Preferred Feeding Sites. Journal of Economic Entomology, 73(3), 431-433.
doi:10.1093/jee/73.3.431

Hong, M., & Simpson, L. (2003). Genomic Organization of Trypanosoma brucei
Kinetoplast DNA Minicircles. Protist, 154(2), 265-279.
doi:10.1078/143446103322166554

Horvath, G., Majer, J., Horvath, L., Szivak, I., & Kriska, G. (2008). Ventral polarization
vision in tabanids: horseflies and deerflies (Diptera: Tabanidae) are attracted to
horizontally polarized light. Naturwissenschaften, 95, 1093 —- 1100.
doi:10.1007/s00114-008-0425-5

Horvath, G., Szérényi, T., Pereszlényi, A., Gerics, B., Hegediis, R., Barta, A., & Akesson,
S. (2017). Why do horseflies need polarization vision for host detection?
Polarization helps tabanids to select sunlit dark host animals from the dark patches
of the visual environment. Royal Society Open Science, 4, 170735.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1098/rsos.170735.

Howell, J. M., Ueti, M. W., Palmer, G. H., Scoles, G. A., & Knowles, D. P. (2007).
Transovarial transmission efficiency of Babesia bovis tick stages acquired by
Rhipicephalus (Boophilus) microplus during acute infection. Journal of Clinical
Microbiology, 45(2), 426-431. doi:0.1128/jcm.01757-06

Inokuma, H., Raoult, D., & Brouqui, P. (2000). Detection of Ehrlichia platys DNA in brown
dog ticks (Rhipicephalus sanguineus) in Okinawa Island, Japan. Journal of Clinical
Microbiology, 38(11), 4219 — 4221. doi:10.1128/JCM.38.11.4219-4221.2000

Inokuma, H., Yoshizaki, Y., Shimada, Y., Sakata, Y., Okuda, M., & Onishi, T. (2003).

Epidemiological survey of Babesia species in Japan performed with specimens
from ticks collected from dogs and detection of new Babesia DNA closely related


to Babesia odocoilei and Babesia divergens DNA. Journal of Clinical
Microbiology, 41(8), 3494 — 3498. doi:10.1128/JCM.41.8.3494-3498.2003

Jakes, K. A., Donoghue, J. O., & Adlard, R. D. (2001). Phylogenetic relationships of
Trypanosoma chelodina and Trypanosoma binneryi from Australian tortoises and
platypuses inferred from small subunit rRNA analyses. Parasitology, 123(05).
doi:10.1017/S003 1182001008721

Johnson, P. D. (1933). A case of infection by Trypanosoma lewisi in a child. Transactions
of the Royal Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, 26(5), 467—
468. doi:10.1016/S0035-9203(33)90105-4

Jones, K.E., Patel, N.G., Levy, M.A., Storeygard, A., Balk, D., Gittleman, J.L., & Daszak,
P. (2008). Global trends in emerging infectious diseases. Nature, 451(7181):990-3.
doi:10.1038/nature06536

Joseph, J. T., Purtill, K., Wong, S. J., Munoz, J., Teal, A., Madison-Antenucci, S., ... &
Wormser, G. P. (2012). Vertical transmission of Babesia microti, United States.
Emerging Infectious Diseases, 18(8), 1318. doi:0.3201/eid1808.110988

Joshi, P., Shegokar, V., Powar, R., Herder, S., Katti, R., Salkar, H., Dani, V., Bhargava, A.,
Jannin, J., & Truc, P. (2005). Human trypanosomiasis caused by Trypanosoma
evansi in India: The first case report. American Journal of Tropical Medicine and
Hygiene, 73(3), 491-495. doi:10.4269/ajtmh.2005.73.491

Kangwagye, T. N. (1973). Diurnal and nocturnal biting activity of flies (Diptera) in Western
Uganda. Bulletin of Entomological Research, 63(1), 17-29.
doi:10.1017/S0007485300050859

Kelser, R. A. (1927). Transmission of Surra among animals of the equine
species. Philippine Journal of Science, 34(2), 115 - 142.

Khalafalla, R. E., & Al Mawly, J. H. (2020). Biometrical and morphological description of
Trypanosoma evansi among one-humped camel (Camelus dromedarius) in Oman.
Journal of _ the Saudi Society of Agricultural Sciences,
doi:10.1016/j.jssas.2020.03.002.

Kidambasi, K. O., Masiga, D. K., Villinger, J., Carrington, M., & Bargul, J. L. (2019).
Detection of blood pathogens in camels and their associated ectoparasitic camel
biting keds, Hippobosca camelina: the potential application of keds in
xenodiagnosis of camel haemopathogens. AAS Open Research, 2.
doi:10.12688/aasopenres. 13021.2

Kim, J., Alvarez-Rodriguez, A., Li, Z., Radwanska, M., & Magez, S. (2023). Recent
Progress in the Detection of Surra, a Neglected Disease Caused by Trypanosoma
evansi with a One Health Impact in Large Parts of the Tropic and Sub-Tropic
World. Microorganisms, 12(1), 44. doi:10.3390/microorganisms12010044


Kirvar, E., Ilhan, T., Katzer, F., Hooshmand-Rad, P., Zweygarth, E., Gerstenberg, C., ... &
Brown, C. G. D. (2000). Detection of Theileria annulata in cattle and vector ticks
by PCR using the Tams! gene sequences. Parasitology, 120(3), 245-254.

Knaus, R. M., Foil, L. D., Issel, C. J., & Leprince, D. J. (1993). Insect blood meal studies
using radiosodium 74Na and Na. Journal of the American Mosquito Control
Association, 9(3), 264 — 268.

Konnai, S., Imamura, S., Nakajima, C., Witola, W. H., Yamada, S., Simuunza, M., ... &
Onuma, M. (2006). Acquisition and transmission of Theileria parva by vector tick,
Rhipicephalus appendiculatus. Acta Tropica, 99(1), 34-41.

Kornkaew, A., Naknim, V., & Lomthaisong, K. (2016). Co-amplification of human specific
and conserved region in cytochrome b gene confirms human bloodstains. Genomics
and Genetics, 9(1), 31-41.

Krause, P. J., Lepore, T., Sikand, V. K., Gadbaw Jr, J., Burke, G., Telford, S. R., ... &
Spielman, A. (2000). Atovaquone and azithromycin for the treatment of babesiosis.
New England __ Journal of Medicine, 343(20), 1454-1458.
doi:0.1056/nejm200011163432004

Krémar, S, Radoli¢, V., Lajo3, P., & Lukatevié, I. (2014). Efficiency of colored modified
box traps for sampling of tabanids. Parasite, 21,67. doi: 10.105 1/parasite/2014068

Krémar, S. (2005). Seasonal abundance of horse flies (Diptera: Tabanidae) from two
locations in eastern Croatia. Journal of Vector Ecology, 30(2), 316 — 321.

Krémar, S., Merdi¢, E., & Kopi, M. (2005a). Diurnal periodicity in the biting activity of
horsefly species in the Kopacki rit Nature Park, Croatia (Diptera: Tabanidae).
Entomologia Generalis, 28(2), 139 — 146. doi:10.1127/entom.gen/28/2005/139

Krémar, S., Mikuska, A., & Merdi¢, E. (2006). Response of Tabanidae (Diptera) to
different natural attractants. Journal of Vector Ecology, 31(2), 262-
65. doi:10.3376/1081-1710(2006)3 1[262:ROTDTD]2.0.CO;2

Krenn, H. W., & Aspiéck, H. (2012). Form, function and evolution of the mouthparts of
blood-feeding Arthropoda. Arthropod Structure & Development, 41(2), 101-118.
doi:10.1016/j.asd.2011.12.001

Kumar, H., Gupta, M. P., Sidhu, P. K., Mahajan, V., Bal, M. S., Kaur, K., ... Singla. (2012).
An outbreak of acute Trypanosoma evansi infection in crossbred cattle in Punjab,
India. Journal of Applied Animal Research, 40(3), 256-259.
doi:10.1080/09712119.2012.667651

Kundu, K., Tewari, A. K., Kurup, S. P., Baidya, S., Rao, R. J., & Joshi, P. (2013). Sero-
surveillance for surra in cattle using native surface glycoprotein antigen from
Trypanosoma _evansi. Veterinary ‘Parasitology, 196, 258 -— 264.
doi:10.1016/j.vetpar.2013.04.013


Kuriakose, M., & Ittyachen, A. M. (2018). An investigation into the high prevalence of
hepatitis B in a rural area of Kerala State, India: hypothesis on Chrysops sp.
(Diptera: Tabanidae) transmission. BioMed Research International, 2018.

Lai, D., Hashimi, H., Lun, Z., Ayala, F., & Lukes, J. (2008). Adaptations of Trypanosoma
brucei to gradual loss of kinetoplast DNA: Trypanosoma equiperdum and
Trypanosoma evansi are petite mutants of T. brucei. PNAS, 105(6), 1999-2004.
doi:10.1073/pnas.0711799105

Lai, D.-H., Wang, Q.-P., Li, Z., Luckins, A. G., Reid, S. A., & Lun, Z.-R. (2010).
Investigations into human serum sensitivity expressed by stocks of Trypanosoma
brucei evansi. International Journal for Parasitology, 40(6), 705-710.
doi:10.1016/j.ijpara.2009. 11.009

Lakew, B. T., Kheravii, S. K., Wu, S., Eastwood, S., Andrew, N. R., Nicholas, A. H., &
Walkden-Brown, S. W. (2021). Detection and distribution of haematophagous flies
and lice on cattle farms and potential role in the transmission of Theileria orientalis.
Veterinary Parasitology, 298, 109516. doi:10.1016/j.vetpar.2021.109516

Lane, R. S., & Anderson, J. R. (1983). Multiple autogeny and burrow oviposition by a
marine horse fly (Diptera: Tabanidae). Journal of Medical Entomology, 20(2), 212—
213. doi:10.1093/jmedent/20.2.212

Lang, J. T., Schreck, C. E., & Pamintuan, H. (1981). Permethrin for Biting-Fly (Diptera:
Muscidae; Tabanidae) Control on Horses in Central Luzon, Philippines. Journal of
Medical Entomology, 18(6), 522-529. doi:10.1093/jmedent/18.6.522

Laveissiére, C., & Grébaut, P., 1990. The trapping of tsetse flies (Diptera: Glossinidae).
Improvement of a model: the Vavoua trap. Tropical Medicine and Parasitology, 41,
185192.

Lawson, F. A. (1983). SEM studies of insect mouthparts 1. The stylets of deer flies
(Diptera: Tabanidae). Journal of the Kansas Entomological Society, 56(2), 253 —
260.

Lazaro, J. E. H., Bascos, N. A. D., Tablizo, F. A., Abes, N. S., Paynaganan, R. I. D., Miguel,
M. A., ... & Center, P. G. (2019). Genome-wide analysis for variants in Philippine
Trypanosoma evansi isolates with varying drug resistance profiles. Philippine
Journal of Science, 148(S1), 219-233.

Leak, S., Ejigu, D., & Vreysen, M. (2008). Collection of Entomological Baseline Data for
Tsetse Are-wide Integrated Pest Management Programmes. Rome: Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.

Leprince, D. J., Hribar, L. J., & Foil, L. D. (1992). Evaluation of the toxicity and sublethal
effects of lambda-cyhalothrin against horse flies (Diptera: Tabanidae) via bioassays


and exposure to treated hosts. Bulletin of Entomological Research, 82(04),
493. doi:10.1017/S0007485300042565

Li, F. J., Gasser, R. B., Lai, D. H., Claes, F., Zhu, X. Q., & Lun, Z. R. (2007). PCR approach
for the detection of Trypanosoma brucei and T. equiperdum and their differentiation
from 7. evansi based on maxicircle kinetoplast DNA. Molecular and Cellular
Probes, 21(1), 1-7. doi:10.1016/j.mcep.2006.03.009

Liu, Q., Zhao, J. L., Zhou, Y. Q., Liu, E. Y., Yao, B. A., & Fu, Y. (2005). Study on some
molecular characterization of Babesia orientalis. Veterinary Parasitology, 130(3-
4), 191-198. doi:0.1016/j.vetpar.2005.03.021

Lucas, M., Krolow, T. K., Riet-Correa, F., Barros, A. T., Kruger, R. F., Saravia, A., &
Miraballes, C. (2020). Diversity and seasonality of horse flies (Diptera: Tabanidae)
in Uruguay. Scientific Reports, 10, 401. doi:10.1038/s41598-019-57356-0

Lun, Z. R., Wen, Y. Z., Uzureau, P., Lecordier, L., Lai, D. H., Lan, Y. G., ... & Pays, E.
(2015). Resistance to normal human serum reveals Trypanosoma lewisi as an
underestimated human pathogen. Molecular and Biochemical Parasitology, 199(1-
2), 58-61. doi:10.1016/j.molbiopara.2015.03.007

Lun, Z., & Desser, S. (1995). Is the Broad Range of Hosts and Geographical Distribution
of Trypanosoma evansi Attributable to the Loss of Maxicircle Kinetoplast DNA?
Parasitology Today, 11(4), 131-133.

Lun, Z., Wen, Y., Uzureau, P., Lecordier, L., Lai, D., Lan, Y. ...Pays, E. (2015). Resistance
to normal human serum reveals Trypanosoma lewisi as an underestimated human
pathogen. Molecular & Biochemical Parasitology, 199, 58 - 61.
doi:10.1016/j.molbiopara.2015.03.007

Mackenstedt, U., Gauer, M., Mehlhorn, H., Schein, E., & Hauschild, S. (1990). Sexual
cycle of Babesia divergens confirmed by DNA measurements. Parasitology
Research, 76(3), 199-206. doi:0.1007/bf00930815

Mackerras, IM. (1956). The Tabanidae (Diptera) of Australia. 1. General review.
Australian Journal of Zoology, 4(3), 376.

Magnarelli, L. A., & Anderson, J. F. (1980). Feeding Behavior of Tabanidae (Diptera) on
Cattle and Serologic Analyses of Partial Blood Meals. Environmental Entomology,
9(5), 664-667. doi:10.1093/ee/9.5.664

Manresa, M., & Mondonedo, O. (1935). Studies on Surra: III. A survey of the incidence of
surra in the vicinity of the College of Agriculture with observations on numerical
fluctuations of tabanid flies. Philippine Agriculturist, 24(2).

Manuel, M. F. (1998). Sporadic outbreaks of surra in the Philippines and its economic
impact. Journal of Protozoology Research, 8, 131 — 138.

Masiga, D. K., Smyth, A. J., Hayes, P., Bromidge, T. J., & Gibson W. C. (1992). Sensitive
detection of trypanosomes in tsetse flies by DNA amplification. International
Journal of Parasitology, 22(7), 909 — 918. doi:10.1016/0020-7519(92)90047-O

Matsuda, H., Seo, Y., Kakizaki, E., Kozawa, S., Muraoka, E., & Yukawa, N. (2005).
Identification of DNA of human origin based on amplification of human-specific
mitochondrial cytochrome b region. Forensic Science International, 152, 109 —
114.

Mehlhorn, H., & Schein, E. (1998). Redescription of Babesia equi Laveran, 1901 as
Theileria equi Mehlhorn, Schein 1998. Parasitology Research, 84(6), 467-475.
doi:10.1007/s004360050431

Mehlhorn, H., Schein, E., & Warnecke, M. (1979). Electron-Microscopic Studies on
Theileria ovis Rodhain, 1916: Development of Kinetes in the Gut of the Vector
Tick, Rhipicephalus evertsi Neumann, 1897, and Their Transformation Within
Cells of the Salivary Glands. The Journal of Protozoology, 26(3), 377-385.
doi:0.1111/j.1550-7408.1979.tb04640.x

Metri, R.B., Puttalakshmamma, G. C., Dhanalakshmi, H., David, K. J., Venkatesan, T.,
Anand, K. J., ...Satyanarayana, M. L. (2020). Seasonal abundance of horseflies
(Diptera: Tabanidae) in the Western Ghats of Karnataka. Journal of Entomology
and Zoology Studies, 8(3), 983 — 990.

Mihok, S. (2002). The development of a multipurpose trap (the Nzi) for tsetse and other
biting flies. Bulletin of Entomological Research, 92, 385-403.
doi:10.1079/BER2002186

Mihok, S., & Carlson, D. A. (2007). Performance of painted plywood and cloth Nzi traps
relative to Manitoba and Greenhead traps for tabanids and stable flies. Journal of
Economic Entomology, 100(2), 613-618. doi:10.1603/0022-
0493(2007)100[613:POPPAC]2.0.CO;2

Mihok, S., & Carlson, D. A. (2021). New materials for improving catches of horseflies
(Diptera: Tabanidae) in Nzi traps. Medical and Veterinary Entomology, 35(4), 580-
594. doi:10.1111/mve.12535

Mihok, S., & Mulye, H. (2010). Responses of tabanids to Nzi traps baited with octenol,
cow urine and phenols in Canada. Medical and Veterinary Entomology, 24, 266 —
272. doi:10.1111/).1365-2915.2010.00889.x

Mihok, S., Carlson, D. A., Krafsur, E. S., & Foil, L. D. (2006). Performance of the Nzi and

other traps for biting flies in North America. Bulletin of Entomological
Research, 96(4), 387-397. doi:10.1079/BER2006443


Mihok, S., Carlson, D. A., Krasfur, E. S., & Foil, L. D. (2006). Performance of the Nzi and
other traps for biting flies in North America. Bulletin of Entomological Research,
96, 387 — 397. doi:10.1079/BER2006443

Mihok, S., Sakolsky-Hoopes, G., Morris, B., Dargantes, A., & Mohamed-Ahmed, M. M.
(2022). Tests of durable Nzi traps for horseflies (Diptera: Tabanidae) in the United
States of America, the Sudan, and the Philippines. The Canadian
Entomologist, 154(1), 34. doi:10.4039/tce.2022.18

MikuSka, A., Krémar, S., Radovic, A., & MikuSka, T. (2012). The influence of temperature,
precipitation and floods on the development of horse fly populations (Tabanidae)
in the Alluvial habitats of the Danube River in Croatia. Polish Journal of Ecology,
59(1), 381 — 389.

Minchin, E. A., & Thomson, J. D. (1910). The Transmission of Trypanosoma lewisi by the
rat-flea (Ceratophyllus fasciatus). Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological
Sciences, 82(555), 273-285. doi:10.1098/rspb.1910.0017

Mingala, C. N., Abenoja, J. A., Rivera, C. V., Balbin, M. M., Venturina, V. M., &
Villanueva, M. A. (2020). Trypanosoma evansi and Neospora caninum among
water buffaloes (Bubalus bubalis) in the Philippines. Archives of Veterinary
Science, 25, 20-34. doi:10.5380/avs.v25i1.67943

Misra, K. K., Roy, S., & Choudhury, A. (2015). Biology of Trypanosoma (Trypanozoon)
evansi in experimental heterologous mammalian hosts. Journal of Parasitic
Diseases, 40(3), 1047-1061. doi:10.1007/s12639-014-0633-1

Mitzmain, M. B. (1913a) The biology of Zabanus striatus Fabricus, the horsefly of the
Philippines. The Philippine Journal of Science, 8B(3), 197 — 220.

Mitzmain, M. B. (1913b). The mechanical transmission of surra by Jabanus striatus
Fabricus. The Philippine Journal of Science, 8B(3), 223 — 234.

Moltmann, U. G., Mehlhorn, H., & Friedhoff, K. T. (1982). ultrastructural study of the
development of Babesia ovis (Piroplasmida) in the ovary of the vector tick
Rhipicephalus bursa. The Journal of protozoology, 29(1), 30-38. doi:0.1111/j.1550-
7408.1982.tb02877.x

Mooring, M. S., Blumstein, D. T., Reisig, D. D., Osborne, E. R., & Niemeyer, J. M. (2007).
Insect-repelling behaviour in bovids: role of mass, tail length, and group size.
Biological Journal of the Linnean Society, 91(3), 383 — 392. doi:10.1111/j.1095-
8312.2007.00803.x

Morch, K., Holmaas, G., Frolander, P. S., & Kristoffersen, E. K. (2015). Severe human

Babesia divergens infection in Norway. International Journal of Infectious
Diseases, 33, 37-38. doi:0.1016/j.ijid.2014.12.034


Moreau, C., Wray, B. D., Czenkanski-Moir, J. E., & Rubin, B. E. R. (2013). DNA
preservation: a test of commonly used preservatives for insects. Invertebrate
Systematics. 27(1), 81 - 86. doi:10.1071/1S12067

Morita, S. I., Bayless, K. M., Yeates D. K., & Wiegmann, B. M. (2016). Molecular
phylogeny of the horse flies: a framework for renewing tabanid taxonomy.
Systematic Entomology, 41,56 — 72. doi:10.1111/syen.12145

Morse, S. S., Mazet, J. A., Woolhouse, M., Parrish, C. R., Carroll, D., Karesh, W. B., ...
Daszak, P. (2012). Prediction and prevention of the next pandemic zoonosis. The
Lancet, 380(9857), 1956-1965. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(12)61684-5

Mullens, B. (2019). Horse flies and deer flies (Tabanidae). In G. Mullens and L. Durden
(eds.), Medical and Veterinary Entomology (3 ed., pp. 327-343). United Kingdom:
Charlotte Cockle.

Mustafa, U. E. H., Jongejan, F., & Morzaria, S. P. (1983). Note on the transmission of
Theileria annulata by Hyalomma ticks in the Sudan. Veterinary Quarterly, 5(3),
112-113. doi:0.1080/01652176.1983.9693883

Muzari, M. O., Burgess, G. W., Skerratt, L. F., Jones, R. E., & Duran, T. L. (2010). Host
preferences of tabanids based on identification of blood meals by ELISA.
Veterinary Parasitology, 174(3-4), 191-198. doi:10.1016/j.vetpar.2010.08.040

Narnaware, S. D., Ghorui, S. K., Kumar, S., & Patil, N. (2016). Vertical transmission of
Trypanosoma evansi in dromedary camels and studies on fetal pathology, diagnosis
and treatment. Acta Parasitologica, 61(2), 329 — 336. doi:10.1515/ap-2016-0043

Ngaira, J. M., Olembo, N. K., Njagi, E. N., & Ngeranwa, J. J. (2005). The detection of non-
RoTat 1.2 Trypanosoma evansi. Experimental Parasitology, 110, 30 — 38.
doi:10.1016/j.exppara.2005.01.001

Nguyen, Q. D., Nguyen, T. T., Pham, Q. P., Le, N. M., Nguyen, G. T., & Inoue, N. (2013).
Seroprevalence of Trypanosoma evansi infection in water buffaloes from the
mountainous region of North Vietnam and effectiveness of trypanocidal drug
treatment. Journal of Veterinary Medicine Science, 75 (9), 1267 — 1269.
doi:10.1292/jvms. 12-0533

Niazi, N., Khan, M. S., Avais, M., Khan, J. A., Pervez, K., & Ijaz, M. (2008). A study on
babesiosis in calves at livestock experimental station Qadirabad and adjacent areas,
Sahiwal (Pakistan). Pakistan Journal of Agricultural Sciences, 45(2), 209-211.

Nunes, J. T., Silva, A. S., Dorneles, F. S., Tonin, A. A., Lazzarotto, C., Miletti, L. C., &
Monteiro, S. G. (2012). Occurrence of Trypanosoma evansi in horses in the state of
Minas Gerais, Brazil. Journal of Equine Veterinary Science, 32, 205 — 207.
doi:10.1016/j.jevs.2011.08.023


Ochirkhuu, N., Konnai, S., Mingala, C. N., Okagawa, T., Villanueva, M., Pilapil, F. M. I.
R., ... & Ohashi, K. (2015). Molecular epidemiological survey and genetic analysis
of vector-borne infections of cattle in Luzon Island, the Philippines. Veterinary
Parasitology, 212(3-4), 161-167.

Onju, S., Thaisungnoen, K., Masmeatathip, R., Duvallet, G., & Desquesnes, M. (2020).
Comparison of blue cotton and blue polyester fabrics to attract hematophagous flies
in cattle farms in Thailand. Journal of Vector Ecology, 45(2), 262-268.
doi:10.1111/jvec.12397

Osman, A. S., Jennings, F. W., & Holmes, P. H. Therapid development of drug-resistance
by Trypanosoma evansi in immunosuppressed mice. Acta Tropica, 50, 249 — 257.
doi:10.1016/0001-706X(92)90081-8

Osorno, B. M., Vega, C., Ristic, M., Robles, C., & Ibarra, S. (1976). Isolation of Babesia
spp. from asymptomatic human beings. Veterinary Parasitology, 2(1), 111-120.

Ota, N., Mizuno, D., Kuboki, N., Igarashi, I., Nakamura, Y., Yamashina, H., ... &
Yokoyama, N. (2009). Epidemiological survey of Theileria orientalis infection in
grazing cattle in the eastern part of Hokkaido, Japan. Journal of Veterinary Medical
Science, 71(7), 937-944.

Otartics, M. Z., Altbicker, V., Solymosi, K., Matics, R., Romvari, R., & Farkas, S. (2019).
Efficacy of H-traps is affected by exposure to sunshine. Natura Croatia, 28(1), 52
— 61. doi:10.30302/NC.2019.28.5

Pancewicz, S., Moniuszko, A., Bieniarz, E., Pucito, K., Grygorczuk, S., Zajkowska, J., ...
& Swierzbiriska-Pijanowska, R. (2011). Anti-Babesia microti antibodies in
foresters highly exposed to tick bites in Poland. Scandinavian Journal of Infectious
Diseases, 43(3), 197-201. doi:0.3109/00365548.2010.538930

Pape, T., Blagodervov, V., & Mostovski, M. (2011). Order DIPTERA Linnaeus, 1758. In
Zhang, Z.-Q. (Ed.) Animal biodiversity: An outline of higher-level classification
and survey of taxonomic richness. Zootaxa. doi:10.11646/zootaxa.3148.1.42

Perera, P. K., Gasser, R. B., Firestone, S. M., Anderson, G. A., Malmo, J., Davis, G., ... &
Jabbar, A. (2014). Oriental theileriosis in dairy cows causes a significant milk
production loss. Parasites & Vectors, 7, 1-8. doi:10.1186/1756-3305-7-73

Perich, M. J., Wright, R. E., & Lusby, K. S. (1986). Impact of Horse Flies (Diptera:
Tabanidae) on Beef Cattle. Journal of Economic Entomology, 791), 128-
131. doi:10.1093/jee/79.1.128

Phasuk, J., Tharawoot, T., Beaver, R. A., & Jittapalapong, S. (2011). Seasonal Abundance

of Tabanidae (Diptera) on Dairy Farms in Saraburi Province, Thailand. Thai
Journal of Agricultural Science, 44(3): 175 — 181. doi:


Philip, C. (1959). The Philippine Zoological Expedition 1946 — 1947: Tabanidae (Diptera).
Fieldiana: Zoology, 33.

Philip, C. B. (1931). The Tabanidae (Horseflies) of Minnesota with special reference to
their biologies and taxonomy (pp. 5-8). University of Minnesota Technical Bulletin
80.

Philippine Atmospheric, Geophysical and Astronomical Services Agency. (2014). Climate
Map of the Philippines (1951 — 2010). Philippines.

Philippine National Health Research Systems. (2017). National Unified Health Research
Agenda 2017 — 2022.

Philippine Statistics Authority. (2018). Quikstat Nueva Ecija (Monthly Update of Most
Requested Statistics) as of June 2018. Retrieved from
https://psa.gov.ph/content/nueva-ecija-quickstat-june-2018.

Philippine Statistics Authority. (2019). Regional Social and Economic Trends, Region III
Central Luzon. San Fernando, Pampanga.

Philippine = Statistics | Authority. (2020). | Catalancan. Retrieved = from
https://www.psa.gov.ph/classification/psgc/brygydetail/0304917008.

Philippine Statistics Authority. (2020). Science City of Mujfioz. Retrieved from
https://www.psa.gov.ph/classification/psgc/barangays/0304917000.

Piesman, J., Karakashian, S. J., Lewengrub, S., Rudzinska, M. A., & Spielmank, A. (1986).
Development of Babesia microti sporozoites in adult Ixodes dammini. International
Journal for Parasitology, 16(4), 381-385. doi:0.1016/0020-7519(86)90118-9

Pruvot, M., Kamyingkird, K., Desquesnes, M., Sarataphan, N., & Jittapalapong S. (2010).
A comparison of six primer sets for detection of Trypanosoma evansi by
polymerase chain reaction in rodents and Thai livestock. Veterinary Parasitology,
171 (3-4), 185-93. doi:10.1016/j. vetpar.2010.04.001

Purnell, R. E., & Joyner, L. P. (1968). The development of Theileria parva in the salivary
glands of the tick, Rhipicephalus appendiculatus. Parasitology, 58(3), 725-732.
doi:0.1017/s003 1182000029036

Raina, A. K., Kumar, R., Rajora, V. S., Sridhar & Singh, R. P. (1985). Oral transmission of
Trypanosoma evansi infection in dogs and mice. Veterinary Parasitology, 18, 67 —
69. doi:10.1016/0304-4017(85)90009-3

Raper, J., Fung, R., Ghiso, J., Nussenzweig, V., & Tomlinson, S. (1999). Characterization

of a novel trypanosome lytic factor from human serum. Infection and Immunity.
67(4), 1910-1916. doi:10.1016/0304-4017(85)90009-3


Razmi, G., Pourhosseini, M., Yaghfouri, S., Rashidi, A., & Seidabadi, M. (2013).
Molecular detection of Theileria spp. and Babesia spp. in sheep and ixodid ticks
from the northeast of Iran. The Journal of Parasitology, 99(1), 77-81.
doi:0.1645/GE-3202.1

Reddy, G. R., Chakrabarti, D., Yowell, C. A., & Dame, J. B. (1991). Sequence
microheterogeneity of the three small subunit ribosomal RNA genes of Babesia
bigemina: expression in erythrocyte culture. Nucleic Acids Research, 19(13), 3641-
3645.

Reid, S. A., Husein, A., Hutchinson, G. W., & Copeman, D. B. (1999). a possible role for
Tusa deer (Cervus timorensis russa) and wild pigs in spread of Trypanosoma evansi
from Indonesia to Papua New Guinea. Memorias do Instituto Oswaldo Cruz, 94(2),
195 — 197. doi:10.1590/S0074-0276 1999000200013

Rifkin, M. R. (1978). Identification of the trypanocidal factor in normal human serum: high
density lipoprotein. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 75(7), 3450—
3454. doi:10.1073/pnas.75.7.3450

Rios, L., Alvarez, G., & Blair, S. (2003). Serological and parasitological study and report
of the first case of human babesiosis in Colombia. Revista Da Sociedade Brasileira
de Medicina Tropical, 36, 493-498. doi:0.1590/s0037-86822003000400010

Rizk, M. A., Salama, A., El-Sayed, S. A. E. S., Elsify, A., El-Ashkar, M., Ibrahim, H., ... &
El-Khodery, S. (2017). Animal level risk factors associated with Babesia and
Theileria infections in cattle in Egypt. Acta Parasitologica, 62(4), 796-804.
doi:0.1515/ap-2017-0096

Rovie-Ryan, J. J., Zainuddin, Z. Z., Marni, W., Ahmad, A. H., Ambu, L. N., & Payne, J.
(2013). Blood meal analysis of tabanid fly after it biting the rare Sumatran
rhinoceros. Asian Pacific Journal of Tropical Biomedicine, 3(2), 95-99.
doi:10.1016/S2221-1691(13)60031-3

Rudzinska, M. A., Spielman, A., Riek, R. F., Lewengrub, S. J., & Plesman, J. (1979).
Intraerythrocytic 'gametocytes' of Babesia microti and their maturation in ticks.
Canadian Journal Oof Zoology, 57(2), 424-434. doi:0.1139/z79-050

Rudzinska, M. A., Trager, W., Lewengrub, S. J., & Gubert, E. (1976). An electron
microscopic study of Babesia microti invading erythrocytes. Cell and tissue
research, 169(3), 323-334. doi:0.1007/bf00219605

Saidu, S. N. A., Abdulkadir, I. A., & Akerejola, O. O. (1984). Theileria mutans infection in
Nigerian cattle. Tropical Animal Health and Production, 16(3), 149-152.
doi:0.1007/bf02252781

Salah, A. A., Robertson, I., & Mohamed, A. (2015). Estimating the economic impact of
Trypanosoma evansi infection on production of camel herds in Somaliland.


Tropical Animal Health and Production, 47(4), 707-714. doi:10.1007/s11250-015-
0780-0

Santiago-Alarcon, D., Havelka, P., Schaefer, H. M., & Segelbacher, G. (2012). Bloodmeal
analysis reveals avian Plasmodium infections and broad host preferences of
Culicoides (Diptera: Ceratopogonidae) vectors. Plos one, 7(2), 31098.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0031098

Sarataphan, N., Vongpakorn, M., Nuansrichay, B., Autarkool, N., Keowkarnkah, T.,
Rodtian, P., ...& Jittapalapong, S. (2007). Diagnosis of a Trypanosoma lewisi-like
(Herpetosoma) infection in a sick infant from Thailand. Journal of Medical
Microbiology, 56, 1118 — 1121. doi:10.1099/jmm.0.47222-0

Sawitri, D., Wardhana, A., Sadikin, M. and Wibowo, H. (2019). Detection of surra
(trypanosomiasis) positivity in humans in an outbreak area of Indonesia. Medical
Journal of Indonesia, 28(2), 196-202. doi:10.13181/mji.v28i2.1767

Scasta, J. D., Engle, D. M., Talley, J. L., Weir, J. R., Fuhlendorf, S. D., & Debinski, D. M.
(2015). Drought influences control of parasitic flies of cattle on pastures managed
with patch-burn grazing. Rangeland Ecology & Management, 68, 290 — 297.
doi:10.1016/j.rama.2015.03.001

Schnittger, L., Yin, H., Qi, B., Gubbels, M. J., Beyer, D., Niemann, S., ... & Ahmed, J. S.
(2004). Simultaneous detection and differentiation of Theileria and Babesia
parasites infecting small ruminants by reverse line blotting. Parasitology
research, 92(3), 189-196. doi:10.1007/s00436-003-0980-9

Schreck, C. E., Kline, D. L., Williams, D. C., & Tidwell, M. A. (1993). Field evaluations
in malaise and canopy traps of selected targets as attractants for tabanid species
(Diptera: Tabanidae). Journal of the American Mosquito Control Association, 9(2),
182 — 188.

Schultz, G. (1992). Biting activity of mosquitoes (Diptera: Culicidae) at a malarious site in
Palawan, Republic of the Philippines. Southeast Asian Journal of Tropical
Medicine and Public Health.23(3), 464 - 469.

Scoles, G. A., & Ueti, M. W. (2013). Amblyomma cajennense is an intrastadial biological
vector of Theileria equi. Parasites & Vectors, 6(1), 1-9. doi:0.1186/1756-3305-6-

Scoles, G. A., Miller, J. A., & Foil, L. D. (2008). Comparison of the efficiency of biological
transmission of Anaplasma marginale (Rickettsiales: Anaplasmataceae) by
Dermacentor andersoni Stiles (Acari: Ixodidae) with mechanical transmission by
the horse fly, Tabanus fuscicostatus Hine (Diptera: Muscidae). Journal of Medical
Entomology, 45(1), 109-114. doi:10.1093/jmedent/45.1.109


Seidle, A., Moraes, A., & Silva, R. (2001). Trypanosoma evansi Control and horse
mortality in the Brazilian Pantanal. Memorias do Instituto Oswaldo Cruz, (96(5):
599-602. doi:10.1590/S0074-02762001000500002

Service, M. W. (1973). Observations on the flight activities of Chrysops caecutiens
L. Annals of Tropical Medicine & Parasitology, 67(4), 445-454.
doi:10.1080/00034983.1973.11686913

Sevidzem, S. L., Koumba, A. A., Yao-Acapovi, G. L., & Mavoungou, J. F. (2021). A
nationwide survey of the tabanid fauna of Cameroon. Parasites & Vectors, 14(1),
392. doi:10.1186/s13071-021-04894-0

Sevidzem, S. L., Mamoudu, A., Woudamyata, A. F., & Zoil, P. A. (2015). Contribution to
the knowledge of ecodiversity and density of tsetse (Glossinidae) and other biting
flies (Tabanidae and Stomoxyinae) in the fly controlled-infested livestock/wild life
interface of the Adamawa plateau-Cameroon. Journal of Entomology and Zoology
Studies, 3(5), 329 — 333.

Shah, I., Ali, U. S., Andankar, P., & Joshi, R. R. (2011). Trypanosomiasis in infant from
India. Journal of Vector Borne Diseases, 48, 122 — 123.

Sharma, A., Singla, L. D., Tuli, A., Kaur, P., & Bal, M. S. (2014). Detection and assessment
of risk factors associated with natural concurrent infection of Trypanosoma evansi
and Anaplasma marginale in dairy animals by duplex PCR in eastern Punjab.
Tropical Animal Health and Production, 47, 251 — 257. doi:10.1007/s11250-014-
0710-6

Shaw, M. K. (1996). Theileria parva sporozoite entry into bovine lymphocytes involves
both parasite and host cell signal transduction processes. Experimental
Parasitology, 84(3), 344-354. doi:0.1006/expr.1996.0123

Shaw, M. K., & Tilney, L. G. (1992). How individual cells develop from a syncytium:
merogony in Theileria parva (Apicomplexa). Journal of Cell Science, 101(1), 109-
123.

Shaw, M. K., & Tilney, L. G. (1995). The entry of Theileria parva merozoites into bovine
erythrocytes occurs by a process similar to sporozoite invasion of
lymphocytes. Parasitology, 111(4), 455-461.

Shegokar, V. R., Powar, R. M., Joshi, P. P., Bhargava, A., Dani, V. S., Katti, R., ... Truc, P.
(2006). Short report: Human trypanosomiasis caused by Trypanosoma evansi ina
village in India: preliminary serologic survey of the local population. American
Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, 75(5), 869-870.
doi:10.4269/ajtmh.2006.75.869


Shrivastava, K. K., & Shrivastava, G. P. (1974). Two cases of Trypanosoma (Herpetosoma)
species infection of man in India. Transactions of the Royal Society of Tropical
Medicine and Hygiene, 68(2), 143 — 144. doi:10.1016/0035-9203(74)90188-6

Singh, B., Kalra, I. S., Gupta, M. P., & Nauriyal, D. C. (1993). Trypanosoma evansi
infection in dogs: seasonal prevalence and chemotherapy. Veterinary Parasitology,
50(1-2), 137-141. doi:10.1016/0304-4017(93)90014-E

Sivakumar, T., Altangerel, K., Battsetseg, B., Battur, B., AbouLaila, M., Munkhjargal, T.,
... & Igarashi, I. (2012). Genetic detection of Babesia bigemina from Mongolian
cattle using apical membrane antigen-1 gene-based PCR assay. Veterinary
parasitology, 187(1-2), 17-22.

Sivatohji, S., Rayulu, V. C., & Reddy, B. S. (2014). Detection of Trypanosoma evansi by
different methods in bovines in Andhra Pradesh. Journal of Advanced Parasitology,
1(3), 35 — 38. doi:10.14737/journal.jap/2014/1.3.35.38

Sloboda, M., Jirki, M., LukeSova, D., Qablan, M., Batsukh, Z., Fiala, I., ... & Lukeé, J.
(2011). A survey for piroplasmids in horses and Bactrian camels in North-Eastern
Mongolia. Veterinary Parasitology, 179(1-3), 246-249.

Smith, A., Esko, J., & Hajduk, S. (1995). Killing of trypanosomes by the human
haptoglobin-related protein. Science, 268(5208), 284-286.
doi:10.1126/science.7716520

Stekhoven, J. H. S. (1932). The bloodsucking arthropods of the Duch East Indian
Archipelago. X. Archiv fur Naturgeschichte,(NS), 1, 57-94.

Stevens, J., Noyes, H., & Gibson, W. (1998). The evolution of trypanosomes infecting
humans and primates. Memorias do Instituto Oswaldo Cruz, 93(5), 669-679.
doi:10.1590/S0074-0276 1998000500019

Stoffolano, J. G., & Yin, L. R. (1983). Comparative study of the mouthparts and associated
sensilla of adult male and female Tabanus nigrovittatus (Diptera: Tabanidae).
Journal of Medical Entomology, 20(1), 11 — 32. doi:10.1093/jmedent/20.1.11

Sugisaki, H., & Ray, D. S. (1987). DNA sequence of Crithidia fasciculata kinetoplast
minicircles. Molecular and Biochemical Parasitology, 23(3), 253-263.
doi:10.1016/0166-685 1(87)90032-6

Sumba, A. L., Mihok, S., & Oyieke, F. A. (1998). Mechanical transmission of Trypanosoma
evansi and T. congolense by Stomoxys niger and S. taeniatus in a laboratory mouse
model. Medical and Veterinary Entomology, 12, 417 — 422. doi:10.1046/j.1365-
2915.1998.00131.x

Sumbria, D., Singla, L. D., Sharma, A., Moudgil, A. D., & Bal, M. S. (2014). Equine
trypanosomosis in central and western Punjab: Prevalence, haemato-biochemical


response and associated risk factors. Acta Tropica, 138, 44 -— 50.
doi:10.1016/j.actatropica.2014.06.003

Swei, A., O'Connor, K. E., Couper, L. I., Thekkiniath, J., Conrad, P. A., Padgett, K. A., ...
& Kjemtrup, A. (2019). Evidence for transmission of the zoonotic apicomplexan
parasite Babesia duncani by the tick Dermacentor albipictus. Jnternational Journal
Sor Parasitology, 49(2), 95-103. doi:0.1016/j.ijpara.2018.07.002

Swilks, E., Fell, S. A., Hammer, J. F., Sales, N., Krebs, G. L., & Jenkins, C. (2017).
Transplacental transmission of Theileria orientalis occurs at a low rate in field-
affected cattle: infection in utero does not appear to be a major cause of abortion.
Parasites & Vectors, 10(1), 1 — 9. doi:10.1186/s13071-017-2166-9

Taioe, M. O., Motloang, M. Y., Namangala, B., Chota, A., Molefe, N. I., Musinguzi, S. P.,
... Thekisoe, O. M. M. (2017). Characterization of tabanids (Diptera: Tabanidae)
in South Africa and Zambia and detection of protozoan parasites they are
harbouring. Parasitology, 144(09), 1162—1178.doi:10.1017/S0031182017000440

Takahashi, K., Wada, A., Kawai, S., Yokota, H., Kurosawa, T., & Sonoda, M. (1983).
Investigations of isolation, transmission and virulence of bovine Babesia sp. in
Hokkaido [Japan]. Journal of the College of Dairying. Natural Science
(Japan), 10(1).

Tapdasan, E. P., Baldrias, L. R., Mingala, C. N., Divina, B. P., Bajenting, G. P., & Salces,
C. B. (2020). Prevalence and risk factors of Trypanosoma evansi infection in watter
buffaloes (Bubalus bubalis) of Ubay, Bohol, Philippines. Philippine Journal of
Veterinary Medicine, 57(2), 164 — 175.

Taylor, L. H., Welburn, S. C., & Woolhouse, M. E. (2002). Theileria annulata: virulence
and transmission from single and mixed clone infections in cattle. Experimental
Parasitology, 100(3), 186-195. doi:0.1016/s0014-4894(02)00017-6

Tehseen, S., Jahan, N., Desquesnes, M., Shahzad, M. I., & Qamar, M. F. (2017). Field
investigation of Trypanosoma evansi and comparative analysis of diagnostic tests
in horses from Bahawalpur, Pakistan. Turkish Journal of Veterinary and Animal
Sciences, 41,288 — 293.

Tehseen, S., Jahan, N., Qamar, M. F., Desquesnes, M., Shahzad, M. I., Deborggraeve, S.,
& Biischer, P. (2015). Parasitological, serological and molecular survey of
Trypanosoma evansi infection in dromedary camels from Cholistan Desert,
Pakistan. Parasites & Vectors, 8, 415, doi:10.1186/s13071-015-1002-3

Thorsteinson, A. J., Bracken, G. K., & Hanec, W. (1965). The orientation behaviour of
horse flies and deer flies (Tabanidae, Diptera) III. The use of traps in the study of
orientation of tabanids in the field. Entomologia Experimentalis et Applicata, 8(3),
189-192. doi:10.1139/262-064


Timms, P., Stewart, N. P., & De Vos, A. J. (1990). Study of virulence and vector
transmission of Babesia bovis by use of cloned parasite lines. Infection and
Immunity, 58(7), 2171-2176.

Truc, P., Biischer, P., Cuny, G., Gonzatti, M. I., Jannin, J., Joshi, P., ... Desquesnes, M.
(2013). Atypical human infections by animal trypanosomes. PLoS Neglected
Tropical Diseases, 7(9), €2256. doi:10.1371/journal.pntd.0002256

Truc, P., Jamonneau, V., N’Guessan, P., N’Dri, L., Diallo, P. B., & Cuny, G.
(1998). Trypanosoma brucei ssp. and T. congolense: mixed human infection in
Céte d’Ivoire. Transactions of the Royal Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene,
92(5), 537-538. doi:10.1016/S0035-9203(98)90904-X

Tsuji, N., Miyoshi, T., Battsetseg, B., Matsuo, T., Xuan, X., & Fujisaki, K. (2008). A
cysteine protease is critical for Babesia spp. transmission in Haemaphysalis ticks.
PLoS Pathogens, 4(5), €1000062. doi:10.1371/journal.ppat. 1000062

Tunnakundacha, S., Desquesnes, M., Masmeatathip, R. (2017). Comparison of Vavoua,
Malaise and Nzi traps with and without attractants for trapping of Stomoxys spp.
(Diptera: Muscidae) and tabanids (Diptera: Tabanidae) on cattle farms. Agriculture
and Natural Resources, 51(4), 319 — 323. doi:10.1016/j.anres.2017.07.002.

Tuntasuvan, D., Jarabrum, W., Viseshakul, N., Mohkaew, K., Borisutsuwan, S.,
Theeraphan, A., & Kongkanjana. (2003). Chemotherapy of surra in horses and
mules with diminazene aceturate. Veterinary Parasitology, 110(3-4), 227-
233. doi:10.1016/s0304-4017(02)00304-7

Van Hennekeler, Jones, K., Skerratt, R. E., Fitzpatrick, L. A., Reid, S. A., & Bellis, G. A.
(2008). A comparison of trapping methods for Tabanidae (Diptera) in North
Queensland, Australia. Medical and Veterinary Entomology, 22(1), 26-31.
doi:10.1111/j.1365-2915.2007.00707.x

Van Hennekeler, K., Jones, R. E., Skerratt, L. F., Muzari, M. O., & Fitzpatrick, L. A. (2011).
Meteorological effects on the daily activity patterns of tabanid biting flies in
northern Queensland, Australia. Medical and Veterinary Entomology, 25, 17 — 24.
doi:10.1111/).1365-2915.2010.00900.x

Van Hennekeler, K., Skerratt, L. F., Spratt, D. M., & Fitzpatrick, L. A. (2006). Seasonal
variation in Trypanosoma evansi vectors in Northern Australia. Proceedings of the
11" International Symposium on Veterinary Epidemiology and Economics.

Van Vinh Chau, N., Buu Chau, L., Desquesnes, M., Herder, S., Phu Huong Lan, N.,
Campbell, J. I., ... Baker, S. (2016). A clinical and epidemiological investigation of
the first reported human infection with the zoonotic parasite Trypanosoma evansi
in Southeast Asia. Clinical Infectious Diseases, 62(8), 1002-1008.
doi:10.1093/cid/ciw052


Van Xong, H., De Baetselier, P., Pays, E., & Magez, S. (2002). Selective pressure can
influence the resistance of Trypanosoma congolense to normal human serum.
Experimental Parasitology, 102(2), 61-65. doi:10.1016/S0014-4894(03)00032-8

Vanhamme, L., Paturiaux-Hanocq, F., Poelvoorde, P., Nolan, D. P., Lins, L., Van Den
Abbeele, J., ... Pays, E. (2003). Apolipoprotein L-I is the trypanosome lytic factor
of human serum. Nature, 422(6927), 83-87. doi:10.1038/nature01461

Vanhollebeke, B., Truc, P., Poelvoorde, P., Pays, A., Joshi, P. P., Katti, R., ... Pays, E.
(2006). Human Trypanosoma evansi infection linked to a lack of apolipoprotein L-
Il New England Journal of Medicine,  355(26), | 2752-2756.
doi:10.1056/NEJMoa063265

Verloo, D., Holland, W., My, L. N., Thanh, N. G., Tam, P. T., Goddeeris, B., Vecruysse, J.,
& Biischer, P. (2000). Comparison of serological tests for Trypanosoma evansi
natural infections in water buffaloes from north Vietnam. Veterinary Parasitology,
92, 87 — 96. doi:10.1016/S0304-4017(00)00284-3

Verma, A., Manchanda, S., Kumar, N., Sharma, A., Goel, M., Banerjee, P. S. ...Puliyel, J.
(2011). Case Report: Trypanosoma lewisi or T. lewisi -like Infection in a 37-Day-
Old Indian infant. American Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, 85(2), 221
— 224, doi:10.4269/ajtmh.2011.11-0002

Villareal, M. V., Mingala, C. N., & Rivera, W. L. (2013). Molecular characterization of
Trypanosoma evansi isolates from water buffaloes (Bubalus bubalis) in the
Philippines. Acta Parasitologica, 58(1), 6 — 12. doi:10.2478/s11686-013-0110-5

Wale, M., & Yesuf, S. (2022). Abundance and diversity of soil arthropods in disturbed and
undisturbed ecosystem in Western Amhara, Ethiopia. International Journal of
Tropical Insect Science, 42(1), 767-781.

Wall, W. J., & Doane, O. W. (1980). Large scale use of box traps to study and control
saltmarsh greenhead flies (Diptera: Tabanidae) on Cape Cod, Massachusetts.
Environmental Entomology, 9(4), 371 — 375. doi:10.1093/ee/9.4.371

Weisenhutter, E. (1975). Research into the relative importance of Tabanidae (Diptera) in
mechanical disease transmission II. Investigation of the behaviour and feeding
habits of Tabanidae in relation to cattle. Journal of Natural History, 9, 385 — 392.
doi:10.1080/00222937500770281

Weiss, R. A. & McMichael, A. J. (2004). Social and environmental risk factors in the
emergence of infectious diseases. Nature Medicine, 10(12 Suppl.), S70 — S76.
doi:10.1038/nm1150

Whittle, R. K. (1979). The Tabanidae associated with white-tailed deer in different habitats
of Oklahoma and the prevalence of trypanosomes resembling Trypanosoma theileri
Laveran in selected species (Unpublished Doctoral Thesis). Oklahoma State
University, United States of America.


Wiedmann, H. T., Slosser, J. E., & Ansley, R. J. (2005). Tabanus abactor Philip responses
to chaining and burning Redberry Juniper Stands. Southwestern
Entomologist, 30(4).

Williams, P. (1962) The bionomics of the tabanid fauna of streams in the rain-forest of the
Southern Cameroons. Annals of Tropical Medicine & Parasitology, 56(2), 149-160.
doi:10.1080/00034983.1962.11686102

Wise, L. N., Kappmeyer, L. S., Silva, M. G., White, S. N., Grause, J. F., & Knowles, D. P.
(2018). Verification of post-chemotherapeutic clearance of Theileria equi through
concordance of nested PCR and immunoblot. Ticks and Tick-borne Diseases, 9(2),
135-140. doi:0.1016/j.ttbdis.2017.08.007

Wittner, M., Rowin, K. S., Tanowitz, H. B., Hobbs, J. F., Saltzman, S., Wenz, B., ... &
Healy, G. R. (1982). Successful chemotherapy of transfusion babesiosis. Annals of
Internal Medicine, 96(5), 601-604. doi:0.7326/0003-4819-96-5-601

Wolkmer, P., da Silva, A. S., Traesel, C. K., Paim, F. C., Cargnelutti, J. F., Pagnoncelli, M.
...Lopes, S. T. (2009). Lipid peroxidation associated with anemia in rats
experimentally infected with Trypanosoma evansi. Veterinary Parasitology, 165,
41 — 46. doi:10.1016/j.vetpar.2009.06.032

Woolhouse, M. E., & Gowtage-Sequeria, S. (2005). Host range and emerging and
reemerging pathogens. Emerging Infectious Diseases, 11(12), 1842-1847.
doi:10.3201/eid1112.050997

World Health Organization (WHO), Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations (FAO) and World Organisation for Animal Health (OIE). (2019). Taking a
Multisectoral, One Health Approach: A Tripartite Guide to Addressing Zoonotic
Diseases in Countries.

World Health Organization. (2005). Asia Pacific Strategy for Emerging Diseases and
Public Health Emergencies (APSED III): Advancing implementation of the
International Health Regulations (2005). Manila, Philippines. World Health
Organization Regional Office for the Western Pacific.

Ybafiez, A. P., Sivakumar, T., Ybafiez, R. H. D., Vincoy, M. R. B., Tingson, J. A., Perez, Z.
O., ... & Yokoyama, N. (2013). Molecular survey of bovine vector-borne pathogens
in Cebu, Philippines. Veterinary Parasitology, 196(1-2), 13-20.
doi:10.1016/j.vetpar.2013.02.013

Ybafiez, A. P., Ybafiez, R. H. D., Talle, M. G., Liu, M., Moumouni, P. F. A., & Xuan, X.
(2017). First report on Babesia vogeli infection in dogs in the Philippines.
Parasitology International, 66(1), 813-815. doi:0.1016/j.parint.2016.10.001

Ybafiez, R. H. D., Ybafiez, A. P., Arado, L. L. A., Belarmino, L. M. P., Malingin, K. G. F.,
Cabilete, P. B. C., ... & Kuan, X. (2018). Detection of Ehrlichia, Anaplasma, and


Babesia spp. in dogs of Cebu, Philippines. Veterinary World, 11(1), 14.
doi:10.14202/vetworld.2018.14-19

Yin, H., Luo, J., Schnittger, L., Lu, B., Beyer, D., Ma, M., ... & Ahmed, J. (2004).
Phylogenetic analysis of Theileria species transmitted by Haemaphysalis
qinghaiensis. Parasitology Research, 92(1), 36-42. doi:0.1007/s00436-003-0900-z

Young, K. M., Corrin, T., Wilhelm, B., Uhland, C., Greig, J., Mascarenhas, M., & Waddell,
L. A. (2019). Zoonotic Babesia: A scoping review of the global evidence. PLoS
One, 14(12), €0226781. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0226781

Yu, L., Terkawi, M. A., Cruz-Flores, M. J., Claveria, F. G., Aboge, G. O., Yamagishi, J., ...
& Xuan, X. (2013). Epidemiological survey of Babesia bovis and Babesia bigemina
infections of cattle in Philippines. Journal of Veterinary Medical Science, 75(7),
995-998. doi:0.1292/jvms. 12-0425

Yutuc, L. M. (1949). Observations on the prevalence of tabanids and surra-transmission
experiments. Philippines Journal of Science, 78(4): 379 — 388.

Zanet, S., Trisciuoglio, A., Bottero, E., De Mera, I. G. F., Gortazar, C., Carpignano, M. G.,
& Ferroglio, E. (2014). Piroplasmosis in wildlife: Babesia and Theileria affecting
free-ranging ungulates and carnivores in the Italian Alps. Parasites & Vectors, 7(1),
1-7. doi:10.1186/1756-3305-7-70

Zhang, Z. Q., Giroud, C., & Baltz, T. (1992). In vivo and in vitro sensitivity of
Trypanosoma evansi and T. equiperdum to diminazene, suramin, MelCy,
quinapyramine and isometamidium. Acta Tropica, 50, 101 - 110.
doi:10.1016/0001-706X(91)90002-2
