Factors Affecting the Performance of Barangay Nutrition Scholars (BNS) During the Pandemic in Laguna, Philippines

MARIA JUDITH ANDREA M. BARBOZA

UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES LOS BAÑOS

Master of Science in Applied Nutrition

JUNE, 2022

ABSTRACT

The COVID-19 pandemic occurred unexpectedly, which inevitably affected the
daily lives of people, including efforts by BNSs in eradicating malnutrition in the
barangays. This study determined the factors affecting the performance of Barangay
Nutrition Scholars (BNS) in Laguna, Philippines during the COVID-19 pandemic. Face-
to-face survey using semi-structured interview schedule was used to understand the
experiences of the BNSs. Results revealed that the frequency of performance of all roles
and functions became less frequent during the pandemic, with coordination and
implementation having significant changes. Specific personal-related factors found to have
association with performance change included BNSs’ marital status, household income and
health and well-being, while work-related factors found to have association included
training or preparedness, workload, community participation, guidelines, and resources.
Identified facilitators to success in performance during the pandemic were supportive
supervision from the barangay and the MNAO and teamwork and unity among colleagues.
Meanwhile, barriers to performance were COVID-19-related factors and lack of
community participation. Findings from this study showed that the performance of BNSs
were affected by different factors during the pandemic, thus these factors as well as the
facilitators and barriers identified should be considered in planning and delivery of
nutrition services in the community during similar events in the future.

Keywords: Barangay Nutrition Scholars, BNS, COVID-19 pandemic, facilitators, barriers,
performance

CHAPTER I

INTRODUCTION

Background of the Study

The Barangay Nutrition Scholar (BNS) Program is “a human resource development
strategy of the Philippine Plan of Action for Nutrition (PPAN), which involves the
recruitment, training, deployment and supervision of volunteer workers or barangay
nutrition scholars (BNS)” (DOH, 2017). Presidential Decree 1569 mandated the
deployment of a BNS in every barangay in the country to monitor the nutritional status of
children and supervise in the implementation of nutrition and related services in the
community, in cooperation with the local government units (DOH, 2017). The role of

BNSS is crucial in maintaining optimum nutritional status of the people in their community.

The world is currently facing a global crisis, one that is infecting and spreading
~ among humans, affecting the global economy and afflicting people’s lives. On 30
December 2019, the World Health Organization (WHO) identified coronavirus disease
(COVID-19), an infectious disease caused by a new strain of coronavirus, after an outbreak
began in Wuhan, China (WHO, 2020a). In January, the first three cases of COVID-19 were
confirmed in the Philippines, all with confirmed travel history to Wuhan City, and on 5

March 2020, a first case of COVID-19 with no travel history abroad was confirmed,

indicating local transmission (WHO, 20206). As of writing, there are already 137.2 million

total cases and 2.95 million deaths related to COVID-19 worldwide (Worldometer, 2021).

Proper nutrition is important to maintain good health and well-being. It is also
important before, during and after infection. While no foods can be preventive of COVID-
19 infection, maintaining a healthy diet is important in having a strong immune system.
This is especially important among vulnerable groups such as pregnant and lactating which
include children under five, pregnant and lactating women and elderly. Their health and
nutritional status are crucial especially during emergencies and disasters where the

community may be displaced.

According to the 2018 Expanded National Nutrition Survey, generally, there has
been a decrease in the prevalence of undernutrition among children under five years old.
According to the results, prevalence of underweight decreased from 21.5% in 2015 to
19.1% in 2018, stunting decreased from 33.4% to 30.3 and wasting decreased from 7.1%
to 5.6% (DOST-FNRI, 2019a). These improvements show that efforts made to improve
the nutritional status of the people are becoming fruitful. However, due to the sudden onset
of pandemic, improvements may be put in vain, Current malnutrition status of vulnerable
groups may further worsen if their nutritional status is not monitored and addressed during
abnormal conditions or emergencies. This is crucial since malnutrition during these times
of pandemic may put vulnerable groups at risk to further health deterioration, increase their

tisk to infections or COVID-19 and may even lead to their death. Having these risks

therefore implies the important role of community health workers, specifically the

Barangay Nutrition Scholars (BNS).

Problem Statement

Meeting the required nutritional requirements and optimal feeding practices among
infants and young children and other vulnerable groups should be a routine part of any
emergency relief response. However, due to the unexpected occurrence of COVID-19
pandemic, many activities are compromised including implementation of nutrition
interventions in the ground level or in the barangays. Social distancing and other
restrictions may have also limited the BNSs in delivering nutrition services to target
groups. These pose a threat on the nutritional status of vulnerable groups and especially

those already malnourished before the pandemic occurred.

Currently, there are already several studies which focus on the nutrition and well-
being of the people in the community. However, studies which focus on the implementers,
the BNSs, in the community are scant, Internationally, there are research which identify
factors affecting the performance of roles and functions of community health workers,
while locally, there is limited. Little is still known about the BNSs in the community.
Studies which focus on the pandemic are also still developing. Furthermore, factors
affecting the performance of roles and functions of BNSs during emergencies and

pandemic in the Philippines, are yet explored. These limitations may influence the

successful provision of nutrition services, especially since the end of pandemic is still

unknown.

Significance of the Study

The conduct of this study could provide additional knowledge on how the BNSs
are performing their roles and functions during pandemic and identify facilitators and
barriers affecting their performance. It would specifically identify which roles and
functions were affected by the pandemic and which factors are associated with the changes.
The results may thus help in improving the BNS Program during unexpected times like the
pandemic by identifying which areas should be maintained or improved based on the
facilitators, barriers and suggestions/recommendations identified. With these, the

community would be able to receive proper nutrition services despite abnormal conditions.

Objectives of the Study

The main objective of this study is to determine the factors affecting the performance
of Barangay Nutrition Scholars (BNS) in Laguna, Philippines during the COVID-19

pandemic. Specifically, it will:

1, describe personal and work-related characteristics of the BNSs;

2. determine the changes in roles and functions performed by the BNSs before and
during pandemic;

3. analyze the association between the personal and work-related factors and the
changes in the roles and functions performed by the BNS; and,

4. explain facilitating factors and barriers experienced by the BNSs in performing

their roles and functions during quarantine.

Scope and Limitations

This study included Barangay Nutrition Scholars (BNSs) from different
municipalities in Laguna, BNSs who have already served before the pandemic occurred
where included in the study. Background information obtained from the BNSs include their
age, sex, civil status, educational attainment, household size, household income and length
of service. List of roles and functions as a BNS that used in the study were based on the
Trainer's Manual on Basic Course for Barangay Nutrition Scholars by the National
Nutrition Council (NNC) and UP Los Bafios (2013). Questionnaires were administered

face-to-face to the BNSs while observing proper safety protocols.

CHAPTER I

REVIEW OF LITERATURE

The Barangay Nutrition Scholars (BNS) Program

Background of BNS Program

The Barangay Nutrition Scholar (BNS) Program is “a human resource development
strategy of the Philippine Plan of Action for Nutrition (PPAN), which involves the
recruitment, training, deployment and supervision of volunteer workers or barangay
nutrition scholars (BNS)” (DOH, 2019). Presidential Decree No. 1569 (PD 1569)
mandated the deployment of one BNS per barangay to monitor the nutritional status of
children and link communities with nutrition and related service providers (DOH, 2019).
Also, PD 1569 mandated the National Nutrition Council (NNC) to deliver the program in
cooperation with the LGUs (DOH, 2019). The program is being implemented to address
the country’s issue in malnutrition that especially affects children 0 to 5 years old, pregnant
and lactating women and families with children under 5 and those with pregnant and
lactating women. Basic tasks of a BNS include caring for the malnourished, mobilizing the
community, linkage-building, other forms of BNS assistance and keeping records (Aganan,
2020). Currently, there are a total of 49,779 BNS deployed in 39,942 barangays in the

country (PNVSCA, 2020).

Roles and Functions of BNSs

BNSs have important roles in the community. NNC and UPLB (2013) enumerated
specific roles and functions of a BNS, categorized into seven: planning, coordination,
advocacy and promotion, implementation, monitoring and evaluation, resource
mobilization/generation and documentation and record keeping. In planning, BNSs assist
the barangay chairperson in organizing or reactivating the Barangay Nutrition Committee
(BNC) and initiates and assists the BNS in formulating the Barangay Nutrition Action Plan
(BNAP). In coordination, BNS’s roles include initiating meetings of the BNC and
submitting minutes of the meeting; facilitating nutrition-related meetings; coordinating
implementation of nutrition activities; and referring families to appropriate service
providers. A BNS also has a role of promoting and advocating nutrition programs in the
community. Furthermore, BNSs have important roles in the implementation of nutrition

programs

BNSs counsel mothers regarding their child’s weight. They locate and identify
malnourished children through regular Operation Timbang Plus (OPT Plus) which involves
weighing and measuring the length and height of all preschoolers and interviewing their
caregivers on how the children are cared for, available resources in the family and their
household’s participation in nutrition-telated activities. They also regularly weigh all
undernourished children, monitor the growth of all 0- to 23-month-old children and do
regular weighing of children 24 to 59 months old to monitor their growth in reference to

the growth standards (Aganan, 2020). Furthermore, BNSs provide basic nutrition and

health information to mothers; refer sick and undernourished children to health center,
clinic or hospital; refer eligible targets to feeding programs; distribute food commodities
and vitamin/mineral supplements; and conduct or assist to conduct nutrition education
classes (NNC and UPLB, 2013). A BNS also has important role in promoting construction,
proper and continued use of sanitary toilets; campaigning for eradication of breeding places
of pests that carry diseases; referring household water sources of doubtful quality to the
Rural Health Unit (RHU); distributing available seeds and seedlings; advising families of
possible resources for food production; and informing, monitoring, and conducting follow-
up visit to mothers/caregivers/parents of children and resource persons to participate in

nutrition-related activities (NNC and UPLB, 2013).

In terms of monitoring and evaluation, BNSs monitor implementation of nutrition
and nutrition-related laws, ordinances and policies; provide feedback/updates to the BNC,
C/MNAO and D/CNPC through meeting; and prepare monthly and quarterly reports. For
resource mobilization/generation, a BNS mobilizes and generates resources for the
nutrition programs in coordination with the BNC. Finally, in terms of documentation and
record keeping, BNSs prepare minutes or highlights of BNC meetings; prepare brief write-
ups and diaries (BNS diary) and take pictures of important activities; and ensure
preservation of data for evidential purposes, accurate and efficient updating, timely
availability and control of access to them by the Local Nutrition Committee (LNC)

members (NNC and UPLB, 2013).

BNSs also help in engaging the community to action in to improve the nutrition
situation among the vulnerable groups. They are also important in linking the people who
need nutrition intervention and the barangay who provides the needed services (Aganan,
2020). Ever since, BNSs have been important in delivering nutrition services to the people
since they are the ones who conduct house-to-house visits. They serve as nutrition
information source in every barangay since they have all nutrition-related data which
include list of malnourished children and nutrition interventions implemented in the
barangay. They are an important agent in maintaining proper nutrition among households
in the community and preventing malnutrition among children by being part in preventing

the basic causes of malnutrition (Figure 2), especially during these times of the pandemic.

Inset cation

‘

i

Figure 1. Conceptual framework of the causes of malnutrition (UNICEF, 1998)

Basie causes



The Philippine Plan of Action for Nutrition (PPAN)

The Philippine Plan of Action for Nutrition (PPAN) is the blueprint for an
integrated program of nutrition interventions, which is formulated by the National
‘Nutrition Council (NNC), the coordinating body for the implementation of nutrition
programs and project, as well as in charge of monitoring and evaluation (Barba, 2000). The
current plan of action, PPAN 2017-2022 is an integral part of the Philippine Development
Plan of 2017-2022 and is consistent with the 10-point Economic Agenda of the Duterte
Administration, the Philippine Health Agenda and the development pillars of malasakit,
pagbabago and kaunlaran, and the vision of Ambisyon 2040. It is also in line with the
commitments to the global community embodied in the 2030 Sustainable Development
Goals, the 2025 Global Targets for Maternal, Infant and Young Child Nutrition and the
2014 Intemational Conference on Nutrition (NNC, 2018). In addition, it has outcome
targets which include: to reduce levels of child wasting and stunting; to reduce
micronutrient deficiencies to levels below public health significance; no increase in
overweight among children; and to reduce overweight among adolescents and adults

(WHO, 2017).

To fully operationalize the PPAN, there are assigned nutrition committees in the
different governing levels. Under the NNC governing board and NNC secretariat, the
Regional Nutrition Committee (RNC), which include a representative from the national
level and is headed by the regional director, coordinates nutrition action or Regional Plans

of Action for Nutrition (RPAN) in the regional level. Under the regional level are the

a

Provincial Nutrition Committee (PNC), headed by the governor and the City Nutrition
Committee (CNC), headed by the city mayor, who operationalizes the PPAN in the
provincial (Provincial Nutrition Action Plan or PNAP) and city (City Nutrition Action Plan
or CNAP) levels. Furthermore, under the provincial level is the Municipal Nutrition
‘Committee (MNC), headed by the municipal mayor, who formulates the Municipal
Nutrition Action Plan (MNAP). Finally, under the city and municipal levels are the
respective Barangay Nutrition Committee (BNC), headed by the barangay chairman, who
formulates the nutrition plan in the barangay level. Each chair and nutrition committees are
assisted by designated Nutrition Action Officers (NAO) in planning, coordinating and
managing nutrition programs in their respective areas. Programs and interventions included
in the PPAN aim to promote proper nutrition of the people. One intervention that is
important during these times of the pandemic and abnormal condition is Nutrition in

Emergencies.

‘The Nutrition in Emergencies (NiE)

According to National Nutrition Council (2014), Nutrition in Emergencies (NiE)
are nutrition services part of emergency preparedness, response and recovery to prevent
further deterioration of nutritional status and death. It includes nutrition services such as
nutritional assessment; Infant and Young Child Feeding (IYCF) promotion, protection and

support; management of acute malnutrition (PIMAM); micronutrient supplementation and


other food or non-food-based interventions. Because of the abnormal conditions this

pandemic, NiE is essential to preserve the health and nutritional status of the people.

Nutrition in emergencies is important to prevent mortality and to protect the right
of people to nutrition (Dale ef al., 2012; NNC, 2014). People who are already malnourished
before the emergency are more vulnerable to illness and death, while people affected
during emergencies have risk of being malnourished due to lack or inadequate access to
food and health services, civil insecurity and/or inadequate delivery of assistance (NNC,
2014). Furthermore, NiE is also important because there is already a preexisting problem
of malnutrition in the Philippines which can worsen when emergencies and disasters
happen (NNC, 2014). Currently, there is the COVID-19 pandemic that has greatly affected

the lives and threatens the health and nutritional status of the people.

The COVID-19 Pandemic

Coronaviruses are family of viruses that circulate among animals such as camels,
cattle, cats and bats, and can cause respiratory illness in people (OSHA, 2020). On 30
December 2019, the World Health Organization (WHO) identified coronavirus disease
(COVID-19), an infectious disease caused by a new strain of coronavirus, after an outbreak
began in Wuhan, China (WHO, 2020a). In January, the first three cases of COVID-19 were
confirmed in the Philippines, all with confirmed travel history to Wuhan City, and on 5
March, a first case of COVID-19 with no travel history abroad was confirmed, indicating

local transmission (WHO, 2020b). The most common symptoms of COVID-19 include


fever, dry cough and fatigue, while other less common symptoms which include loss of
taste, nasal congestion, conjunctivitis and sore throat among others (WHO, 2020c). On the
other hand, severe symptoms of COVID-19 include shortness of breath, loss of appetite,
confusion, persistent pain or pressure in the chest and high body temperature (above 38 °C)

(WHO, 2020c)

Worldwide, there has been a total of 137,252,621 COVID-19 cases as of writing.
Among these, there has be a total of 2,958,629 deaths and 110,433,163 recoveries
(Worldometer, 2021). In the Philippines, as of April 13, 2021, there are a total of 851,756
COVID-19 cases. Among these cases, most (44.38%) are from the National Capital Region
(NCR), followed by CALABARZON (17.07%) and Central Luzon (7.51%). In addition,
of the total cases, most are from the 25 to 29 age group (7.1% women and 8.0% men). Most
recoveries are also from the same age group (7.2% women and 8.2% men). On the other
hand, largest percentage of COVID-19-related deaths are among 60 to 74 years old
(Worldometer, 2021). With the severity of the pandemic, the government and other

organizations have declared a state of public health emergency.

Nutrition during COVID-19 Pandemic

COVID-19 pandemic has greatly affected people’s lives in many ways. It had great
impact on the economy of countries and had significantly affected food security and
nutrition. The changes brought by the pandemic threatened people’s access to food via

multiple dynamics, which also undermines the right to food and slowing the efforts in


achieving Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 2 which is “Zero hunger”. High Level
Panel of Experts (2020) enumerated a number of overlapping and reinforcing dynamics
caused by the pandemic that are affecting the food systems and food security and nutrition
(Figure 1). Due to the lockdown and quarantine imposed, there is a disruption in the supply

chai

loss of income and livelihoods; worse inequalities; disruption to social protection;
uneven food prices in the market; altered food environments and change in food
productivity and production as the pandemic continues in the future (HLPE, 2020). In an

online forum conducted by DOST-FNRI, they presented the country’s nutrition situation

Deepening Ti
inequalities

before COVID-19 pandemic.

Change in
production

protection

Figure 2. Dynamics of COVID-19 that threaten food security and nutrition (HLPE,
2020)

Based on the results of the Expanded National Nutrition Survey (ENNS), food
insecure households were higher in rural areas, with male household head, lower wealth
status, lower educational attainment of household head, engaged in agriculture and without
financial assistance from family members working abroad (Gumaru, 2020). There was a


slight, although not statistically significant, decrease in stunting prevalence from 30.3% in
2018 to 28.8% in 2019 and underweight prevalence from 19.1% in 2018 to 19% in 2019

among preschool children under-five years old.

Furthermore, there was a slight increase in the prevalence of underweight, stunting
and wasting among school-age children 5 to 10 years old, although also not statistically
significant. On the other hand, prevalence of overweight and obesity among the same age
group declined from 11.6% to 8%, while anemia prevalence also decreased from 13.5% to
10.7% from 2018 to 2019. In adolescents, 26.8% were stunted in 2019, which was more
prevalent among the poor, and prevalence of overweight and obese decreased from 11.6%

to 9.8% from 2018 to 2019 (Gumaru, 2020).

In addition to these, only 9.9% of 6 to 23 months old children met the minimum
acceptable diet (MAD). Anemia prevalence among children 6 to 23 months old decreased
from 14.3% in 2018 to 12.5% in 2019 but is still considered of moderate public health
problem, while anemia prevalence among pregnant and lactating women decreased from
from 26.1% to 19.9% among pregnant women, and 14.4% to 11.6% among lactating
women from 2018 to 2019 (Gumaru, 2020). Moreover, there was a slight increase in the
prevalence of chronic energy deficiency (CED) among the elderly, 60 years and over, from
13.4% to 15.2% from 2018 to 2019, while prevalence of anemia declined from 20.2% in

2018 to 16.9% in 2019 (Gumaru, 2020).

On 17 April 2020, a joint statement by Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO),

United Nations Intemational Children’s Emergency Fund (UNICEF), World Food


Programme (WFP), and World Health Organization (WHO) on nutrition on the context of
the COVID-19 pandemic in Asia and the Pacific was released. In their statement, they
mentioned the severity of the pandemic and urged the government, donors and partners to
take action in order to protect the nutritional status of the most vulnerable groups in Asia
(UNICEF, 2020). Also, according to the statement, at the start of crisis, there was an
estimated 10.5 million children under five who are wasted in Asia, 78 million were stunted,
17 million were overweight and 400 million women were anemic (UNICEF, 2020). With
the current situation difficulties experienced by families in terms of access to affordable
and healthy diet are aggravated or worsened. With these, strategies or actions were
formulated to protect the nutritional status of the vulnerable groups. The actions formulated
include six domains of healthy diets; maternal, infant and young child nutrition;
management of wasting; micronutrient supplementation; school feeding and nutrition; and,
nutrition surveillance (UNICEF, 2020). In relation to this, the National Nutrition Council
(NNC) under the Department of Health (DOH) in the Philippines also released a

declaration regarding efforts to address nutrition problems during the pandemic.

On 23 March 2020, NNC released an advisory which include further information
to Promotion No. 922 on “Declaring a State of Public Health Emergency throughout the
Philippines”. In the advisory, recommendations on providing nutrition services to people
affected by COVID-19 were enumerated to all local goverment units (LGUs), non-
government organizations (NGOs), business companies and other civic-oriented

organizations. Recommendations include promoting good nutrition to the public through


the “Ten Kumainments”, providing assistance to locations with high rates of undernutrition

and promoting exclusive breastfeeding for infants 0 to 6 months old (NNC, 2020).

With occurring pandemic and current nutritional status, the Department of Health
(DOH) urges the continuous provision of essential health services during the COVID-19
pandemic, as what is indicated in their Department Circular No. 2020-0167. According to
the provision, the COVID-19 pandemic or any form of disaster or calamity does not remove
the requirement for essential health services which exist during normal circumstances,
rather, these should continue both in the community and health facilities in parallel with
the activation of an emergency response plan (DOH, 2020a). Health services that are
required to still be provided include nutrition-related programs such as promotion of
exclusive breastfeeding, routine immunization for children 0 to 12 months, management
of malnutrition and micronutrient supplementation (DOH, 2020a). In line with this, DOH
released another memo that includes guidelines on the delivery of nutrition services during
the pandemic. From the Department Memorandum No. 2020-0237 by DOH, they presented
implementing guidelines on specific nutrition programs which include prevention of
micronutrient deficiencies, Infant and Young Child Feeding (IYCF), Management of Acute
Malnutrition (MAM), growth and development monitoring and promotion, promotion of
healthy diet for the prevention or management of Non-Communicable Diseases (NCDs),
including overweight and obesity and promotion of hygiene and food safety. Because of
the need to continue delivering nutrition services during the pandemic, BNSs are especially

needed during these times.

The Barangay Nutrition Scholars during Pandemic

Malnutrition and other co-morbidities are risk factors for complications for persons
with COVID-19 due to their compromised immune system (DOH, 2020b). The nutrition
of infants and children and vulnerable groups which include pregnant and lactating women,
adolescent girls and older persons are also of utmost concern during these times. Due to
the pandemic, community quarantines are imposed. With the quarantine, people have
limited movement; hence, their access to food, basic needs and access to health and
nutrition services are hampered. As previously discussed, despite the pandemic, health and
nutrition services are still required to be conducted. Because of these, it is crucial that health
workers, such as the BNSs are still able to perform their roles and are still able to deliver

necessary interventions in the community.

According to NNC Region 7 (2020), in addition to the given roles and functions of
a BNS, during this pandemic, BNSs have important role in ensuring that health and
nutrition services still reach target groups. As the pandemic continues, so should be the
provision of health and nutrition services especially to vulnerable groups to prevent any
negative effects of limited mobility, such as further deterioration of health and nutritional
status of at-risk individuals (NNC Region 7, 2020). However, since there are restrictions,
such as following social distancing, BNSs find it difficult to perform some activities such
as weighing and measuring children (NNC Region 7, 2020). Because of the limitations in

movement, it is inevitable that some activities performed by the BNSs are also affected.


The government recognize the bulk of responsibilities that BNSs and other health
workers perform, especially during this pandemic since they are the frontline workers on
health, wellness and nutrition in the community. This is also why they recognize that their
allowance does not really compensate for all of their efforts and so gave effort to increase
their allowance as what the city council in Baguio did (See, 2020). Factors that affect the
performance of roles and functions of BNSs during different situations are yet explored by
studies. In addition to the limited movement and allowance, there may still be other factors
that affect the performance of BNSs and the success of implementing nutrition activities

and services, especially during these abnormal times.

Factors Affecting Roles Performed by Community Health Workers

As mentioned, the role of Community Health Workers (CHW) such as BNSs is
crucial. It is important that they are able to perform their roles and functions. However,
there are different factors that may affect their performance or roles they perform in the

community. There are studies that identify these factors.

According to a few studies, the socioeconomic and demographic profile of CHWs
may affect their performance of roles. There are findings that reveal that age can affect the
performance of roles of CHWs in that CHWs over 40 years old were more likely to display
good performance of their job (Kawakatsu ef al., 2012). In addition, Sharma et al. (2014)
found out from their study that CHWs belong to the reproductive age group (25 to 40 years)

are more likely to exhibit absenteeism due to frequent pregnancies and other maternal


health issues. This behavior affected the delivery of health services as the health workers
request for maternity leave. In another study, it was found out that CHWs aged 40 to 50
years are more likely to show good record keeping and appropriate use of job aids among
others, followed by CHWs aged 30 to 40 years (Crispin et al., 2012). Furthermore, Alam
et al. (2011b) reported that older community health workers in Bangladesh were more
active in performing roles than younger colleagues. On the other hand, however, Sarma ef
al. (2020) leamed from their study that younger CHWs were perceived to have performed
better in implementing interventions than the older ones. Aside from age, gender,

educational status, civil status and income were also found to affect performance of CHWs.

Study has shown that gender was statistically significant in relation to the
performance of CHWs (Mulingwa, 2016). A study on CHWs in Kenya by Crispin et al. in
2012 found out that gender affects performance in that male CHWs were 1.6 times more
likely to keep better records than females, while females were more likely to counsel and
convince their clients to adopt interventions than men. Furthermore, another study by
Alamo et al. (2012b) found that female CHWs were less likely to lose patients for follow
up of treatment than males. These studies show that there are roles that males or females

are better at doing than the other gender.

Furthermore, education was also found to affect the performance of roles of CHWs.
According to studies, having better or higher education (secondary education and above)
is a positive factor and is associated to better performance of roles (Kawakatsu et al., 2012;

Musoke ef al., 2019; Sarma ef al., 2020). Having higher level of education was also


associated with good record-keeping, appropriate use of job aids and proper counselling,
although lower literacy CHWs were still able to satisfy and convince clients to adopt
intervention (Crispin ef al., 2012). In a study in Madagascar, Community Health
Volunteers (CHV) with more years of education perform better in correctly executing their
tasks in diagnosis and treatment of childhood illnesses, reproductive health and family
planning (Smith et al., 2013). More years of education leads to better performance of roles;
however, it was also associated with higher rate of dropping out from position (Alam et

al., 20116).

‘Aside from the aforementioned characteristics of CHWs, some studies also found
association of performance with marital status. CHWs were found to be likely to perform
roles highly (Kawakatsu ef al., 2012) or less likely (Musoke ef al., 2019) if they were
married. A study in Tanzania reported that CHWs have higher chance of dropping out if
they were married women because girls getting married follow their husbands to live
somewhere else or their husbands do not allow them to continue their work as CHW (Simba
and Kakoko 2009). In contrast, Alam ef al. (201 1b) found that single CHWs in Bangladesh

were more likely to drop out than married peers.

Monthly income of CHWs may also affect performance of roles (Mulingwa, 2016).
CHWs who are richer and those with other source of income were found to be more likely
to drop out from position compared to those of lower wealth status (Alam ef al., 201 1a;
2011b). In addition to these factors, training/refresher trainings and having more

experience were found to be positively associated with better performance of roles


(Kawakatsu et al., 2012; Mulingwa, 2016; Sharma et al., 2014; Musoke et al., 2019; Sarma
et al., 2020). Specifically, in Kenya, a study reported that more years of experience as
CHW was associated with appropriate use of job aids, client satisfaction and client

enablement.

These are just some of the studies that showed that certain socioeconomic and
demographic characteristics of CHWs can affect their performance. This study will identify
how certain socioeconomic and demographic characteristics can affect the performance of
roles by BNSs during times of pandemic. In addition to the BNSs’ profile other external

factors may also affect their performance of roles.

Community Health Workers like the BNSs play a critical role during emergencies
like this pandemic. It is important that they are able to perform well despite the current
situation and factors affecting their performance be identified. However, limited
implementation research on CHWs during emergencies are yet conducted. There are few
studies which discussed on the experiences of health workers during emergencies and

disasters.

A study by Harrell ef al. (2020) aimed to provide an overview of and timeline of
hazards and injuries health workers face during crises. According to them, there are the
failures of healthcare infrastructures and institutions which include shortage of CHWs, lack
of medical supplies, medications, poor compensation for health workers, security concerns
and absence of firm guidance in health policy. There are also the occupational hazards of

CHWs which include supply deficiencies, transmission of infectious disease, long working


hours, shortage of staff, financial reimbursements, mental and physical fatigue and
inconsistent access to clean water, electricity and internet (Harrell ef al., 2020). On the
other hand, factors that helped health workers perform their duties during crisis include
traits like adaptability, resilience, high level of motivation, flexibility, emotional stability,
ability to work in teams and a multidisciplinary background. Also, collaboration with local
authorities and health workers and other sectors involved predicted success on program
implementation by health workers during crisis (Harrell ef al., 2020). These long lists are
just some of the factors that affect the health and well-being of health workers which may

cause stress or could help during disasters and abnormal conditions.

In another study by Bhaumik ef al. (2020) which is related to this study, they
conducted a rapid synthesis of global evidence that aimed to understand the key roles,
issues, barriers and enablers for Community Health Workers for pandemic response and to
develop an inventory of resources which could provide guidance, training manuals and
Information, Education and Communication (IEC) materials related to COVID-19 for
CHWs. According to their findings, CHWs were often stigmatized and socially ostracized
during pandemic which affected their delivery of service. Changing roles during the
pandemic can also affect service delivery because of lack of knowledge on what to do
during the change in conditions. Because of this and their important role during the
pandemic, clear guidance, training, role clarity, and supportive supervision were required
for the CHWs during the pandemic. Providing PPE housing allowance, equal opportunities,
transportation allowance and improved salaries are other factors found that can affect the

motivation and performance of roles of CHWs during the pandemic. In addition to the


factors affecting the roles performed by CHWs during emergencies or crises, there could

also be other factors that can affect programs they implement during these times.

Factors Affecting the Implementation of Nutrition Services during Emergencies

During emergencies such as disasters, normal operations are compromised.
Additional burdens are also placed on frontline workers in responding to all the people's
needs. Because of compromised conditions during emergencies, workers experience
barriers or challenges in effectively implementing interventions. On the other hand, there
are also facilitating factors that help support the implementation of nutrition interventions
during emergencies or disasters. Although limited, there have been studies that enumerated
facilitating factors and barriers in implementing Nutrition in Emergencies based on the

experiences of the implementers.

‘A case in Bangladesh shows experiences on preparedness during emergencies.
Through the years, challenges were experienced by the nutrition cluster in Bangladesh in
implementing Nutrition in Emergencies (NiE). These were identified and enumerated by
Musyoki and Narayan (2016). Challenges experienced in Bangladesh, according to them,
include gaps in capacity of the health workers, funding for building preparedness, lack of
Severe Acute Malnutrition (SAM) coverage due to lack of facilities and means, sustaining
interest in the cluster mechanism and preparedness efforts, additional funding for
sustaining treatment of SAM and cross-sectoral engagement and advocacy (Musyoki &

‘Narayan, 2016). On the other hand, facilitating factors identified that could help in


implementing nutrition interventions during emergencies include nutrition coordination
among partners and with the national level, standardized guideline for nutrition surveys for
easier assessment and monitoring of nutritional status, improved availability and utilization
of nutrition information, capacity development on NiE, support on the nutrition program

and cross-sectoral engagement and collaboration (Musyoki & Narayan, 2016).

In another study by Maclaine & Corbett (2006), they described their experiences in
infant feeding in emergencies in Indonesia and Lebanon. According to them, a major issue
during infant feeding during emergencies is that children under two years are vulnerable
groups and at high risk of malnutrition, morbidity and mortality during disasters; however,
during emergencies, they become silent minorities since they are kept indoors. Because of
this, they are rarely assessed during early needs assessment (Maclaine & Corbett, 2006).
This is a problem since infant feeding practices must be address as early as possible,
especially during emergencies to promote appropriate practices among the infants. On the
other hand, Maclaine and Corbett (2006) also mentioned that nutrition program support
from partners, nutritional assessment prior to any emergencies to identify vulnerable
‘groups, funding from donor NGOs, capacity building for implementers and policy on infant
feeding in emergencies are recommended to have a more effective and efficient
implementation of infant feeding in emergencies. In a related study by Ververs and Hwang
in 2019, they enumerated barriers to infant feeding in emergencies in middle- and high

income countries.


According to Ververs and Hwang’s findings, barriers to optimal infant and young
child feeding in emergencies (IFE) are as follows: lack of understanding of a changing risk
profile during disasters; lack of awareness that infants are a vulnerable group; infant
feeding not seen as lifesaving during emergencies; lack of experience and understanding
of the response needed during IFE; lack of knowledge on risks of breastmilk substitutes
used in disasters; perception that global guidelines on infant feeding are not necessarily
applicable to middle- and high-income countries; perception that maternal choice and
autonomy supersede increased public health risks; lack of clear indicators to show impact
of IFE program; and, lack of understanding that infant feeding is not just a food issue
(Ververs & Hwang, 2019). The long list of barriers discovered by the researchers show that
implementation of childcare during emergencies are not easy and barriers are present
regardless of the economic status of the country. In the Philippines, challenges during

emergencies are also inevitable.

In an article by Garg ef al. in 2016, they described their experiences and lessons
learned from the response to Typhoon Haiyan (Yolanda) in the Philippines. According to
the results, key challenges identified include limited government capacity for coordination
(due to recent shift in leadership during that time); high tumover of position after response;
situational analysis in strategic response plan did not reflect the breadth of nutrition
challenges; focus of partners on Community-based Management of Acute Malnutrition
(CMAM); Supplementary Feeding Programs (SFP) were ended early due to lack of
funding; and, large number of breastmilk substitute donations due to lack of knowledge of

implementers on how to report violations. In addition to these, there were IYCF-specific


challenges experienced such as lack of national guidelines on IYCF in emergencies, lack
of reporting and monitoring system, lack of skilled staff support on IYCF and large focus
‘on supporting breastfeeding at the expense of provision of support to complementary
feeding (Garg et al., 2016). Furthermore, on the other hand, Garg ef al. (2016) mentioned
that the social media and existing mother support groups were a valuable resource for the
government during disasters. These groups helped augment the local health workers and

the government responders.

Because of the unexpected occurrence of COVID-19 pandemic, it is inevitable that
normal daily activities are compromised. Barriers and challenges in the implementation of
roles and functions and nutrition interventions in the barangays during these times are
inevitable. It is important that community health workers be able to continue delivering
service especially during these times; however, studies on CHWs involvement in pandemic
response and programs initiated during pandemics are still scant. Knowing factors that
could affect the successful implementation of the BNSs program during the pandemic may

help in addressing same problems in the future.

Theoretical Framework

There are different factors that may affect the performance of BNSs. Framework
by Kok ef al. (2014) will be used as basis of the factors that may affect the BNSs in
performing their roles and functions during the COVID-19 pandemic. Kok et al. (2014)

conducted a systematic review on interventions design factors influencing performance of


CHWs as a guide for policymakers in developing CHW programs. From their study, many
factors were identified that influence CHW performances. Summary of factors can be seen
in the figure below. As seen, it includes different categories: tasks and time spent on
delivery, human resource management, quality assurance, community, health system links
and resource and logistics. The framework shows how these factors influence CHW

performance and the resulting impact on the community.

CHW Performance

Figure 3. Adapted framework on factors influencing CHW performance (Koko et al.,
2014)

On the other hand, there are also different factors that can affect the success of
implementing nutrition interventions. The theoretical framework presented by Ouedraogo
et al. (2020) will be used as reference in identifying factors that affected the
implementation of nutrition programs in the community during COVID-19 pandemic, as
experienced by the BNSs. It enumerates seven key factors (facilitators and challenges)

influencing the implementation of multisectoral nutrition programs in the community.


These factors include multisectoral participation and collaboration, which include
coordination, collaboration and communication with various sectors involved; geographic
convergence and integration of interventions, which involves having the same target for
the intervention; capacity of actors and availability of resources, which involves matters
on human, financial and other essential resources for the intervention; monitoring,
evaluation and social accountability, which include, but not limited to, the use of database
and information system for the intervention; context, which include taboos and situation of
the community which affect the implementation of interventions; sustainability, which
include factors that help sustain the intervention; and community participation, which
includes the involvement, engagement and acceptance of the community to the

intervention.

>

eZ

Pa

Figure 4. Theoretical framework for analyzing factors influencing the implementation
of multisectoral nutrition programs in the community level (Quedraogo et al.,
2020)


Conceptual Framework of the Study

From the identified factors, relevant ones are adapted to construct the conceptual
framework for the study (Figure 5). The conceptual framework shows the changes in the
performance of BNSs during COVID-19 pandemic as affected by different factors. Factors
are divided into two: personal-related and work-related characteristics. Personal-related
characteristics are individual characteristics or those that define the BNSs which include
their age, sex, educational attainment, household income, length of service as BNS and
health and well-being. On the other hand, work-related factors are those involved in
performing their roles and functions as BNS which include role clarity, training, supportive
supervision from higher authority, etc. The study will identify how the factors (independent
variable) affected the performance of roles and functions by the BNSs (dependent
variable), Results of the study would show any changes in the roles and functions
performed by the BNSs and any priority programs that are conducted during a pandemic.
The operational definition of terms of all the variables used in this study is presented in

Table | below.

Personal-related factors
Age
Sex
Marital status

Educational attainment

Other job
Household size
Household income
Length of service

Health and well-being

Monitoring and evaluation
OS

Work-related factors
Role clarity

+ Training/preparedness
* Supportive supervision
* Work satisfaction

* Allowance/Transportation
+ Resources

+ Guidelines

+ Workload

+ Community participation
+ Multisectoral coordination

(CHANGES IN PERFORMANCE OF BNS DURING THE PANDEMIC


Figure. Conceptual framework of the study
Table 1. Variable-Indicator matrix of the study
DATA
VARIABLE INDICATOR DEFINITION COLLECTION
Personal- Age * Current age of BNS as the pandemic Face-to-face
related occurs interview
factors # Sex * Biological difference: male or
female
© Marital starus ‘Status of the BNS in relation to
marriage
© Educational attainment © Highest level of education the BS.
has completed
© Other job ‘© Other occupation of BNS aside from
being a BNS
© Household size * Total number of persons residing in
a household
© Monthly household * Average amount of money eamed in

Length of service

Health and well-being

a month by every member of the
BNS’ household

Length of time the BNS has served
as BNS in their barangay

Presence of illness or current
physical and mental state



Table 1. Continuation...
DATA
VARIABLE INDICATOR DEFINITION COLLECTION
‘Work- * Role clarity ‘Aware of their roles during the Face-to-face
related pandemic interview
factors * Training/Preparedness * Equipped with skills and knowledge
they need in delivering services
‘* Supportive supervision * Guided by the local health authorities
© Work satisfaction © Motivation and willingness to
perform work tasks
Allowance! ‘* Financial support to aid in performing
Transportation tasks
© Resources ‘Availability of Personal Protective
Equipment (PPE) and other supplies
needed in nutrition activities
* Guidelines ‘© Availability of clear guidelines on
what tasks to perform
© Workload ‘* Amount of work done
© Community ‘* Community engagement, involvement
participation and acceptance of intervention; local
support groups
© Multisectoral * Coordination, collaboration and
coordination communication with various sectors
involved
‘© Monitoring and Available database and information
evaluation system for monitoring the
interventions
Changesin _ Frequency of performing © How often the BNSs perform the _ Face-to-face
performance roles and functions before _roles and functions before and —_interview
ofroles and = and during quarantine during quarantine

functions as
BNS


CHAPTER II

METHODOLOGY

Study Area

Laguna is a province in CALABARZON (Region IV-A), the second most densely
populated region in the country. The province is situated southeast of Metro Manila and is
surrounded by Rizal at its north, Quezon at its east, Batangas at its south and Cavite at its
west (DTI, 2021). It has a total land area of 1,917.85 square kilometers (740.49 square
miles) and a total population of 3,035,081 (as of 2015), having Laguna’s population density
of 1,583 per square kilometer (PSA, 2020 & PhilAtlas, 2021). The province is comprised

of six cities and 24 municipalities, with a total of 681 barangays.

According to the 2018 Expanded National Nutrition Survey (eNNS), from 2015 to
2018, the prevalence of undernutrition among children under five in Laguna has generally
decreased. For children under five who are underweight, prevalence decreased 20.4% in
2015 to 13.9% in 2018; prevalence for stunting decreased from 27.7% in 2015 to 24.0% in
2018 and prevalence of wasting among children under five in Laguna decreased from 7.7%
in 2015 to 3.7% in 2018 (DOST-FNRI, 2019b). For children 5 to 10 years old, the
prevalence of underweight, stunting, and wasting have also decreased from 2015 to 2018
(DOST-FNRI, 2019b). As observed, there has been improvements in the nutritional status

of children under five which means that the efforts conducted have fruitful. However, these


improvements may be in vain now that the sudden pandemic occurred may displace the
vulnerable groups in the community. Provincial report on mortality-morbidity diseases in
2018 showed that there was a total of 20 mortality cases among children under five (5)
years old attributed to malnutrition alone: six (6) of which were caused severe
undernutrition while 14 cases were caused by fetal malnutrition (DOH Region IV-A,

2018).

Figure 6. Map of the province of Laguna showing the different cities and
municipalities


Study Design and Participants

Quantitative method using semi-structured questionnaire was used to identify
factors affecting the performance of BNSs during the pandemic. A complete list of the
BNS in the municipalities of Laguna was obtained from the Provincial Nutrition Office.
From the list of BNSs, simple random sampling was employed to select the barangays to
be included. All BNSs with signed informed consent were included in the study. Sample
size was computed based on the total number of BNSs, using 90% level of confidence and
5% margin of error. Sample size was computed using the formula below:

Npq

poe ee
N/p. + pq

‘Where: N = total number of BNSs in Laguna

p= perceived value of the population proportion

q=l-p
Za,
p=-2%
e

Za, = standard normal variate with area to the right of 4/,

B = error estimation

Preparation for data collection
Coordination was conducted with the Provincial Nutrition Action Officer (PNAO),
stating the objectives of the study and the brief background of what data will be collected.

Respective Municipal Nutrition Action Officers (MNAO) from the selected municipalities


were visited and informed about the study and the needed data from the BNSs. Once the
request was approved, proposed schedule of the interview with the BNSs was
communicated with the MNAO. To make the data collection easier and safer for all (less
exposure), one-time group meeting with all the involved BNSs in each municipality was
requested. Questionnaires (Annex B) used were pretested and modified before the actual
data collection. Informed consent was obtained from the participants who agreed to be part
of the study.
Data collection

Information from the respondents were gathered through face-to-face interview.
Data collection took place in designated areas for each municipality. A total of 16 out of
the 24 municipalities in Laguna were visited for the data collection from March to April
2022.

A semi-structured questionnaire was used in obtaining information from the
selected Barangay Nutrition Scholars. The first part of the questionnaire included
socioeconomic and demographic background of the BNSs. The second part included work-

related factors and how these factors affected the performance of roles and functions of the

BNSs. In the next section, checklist of roles and responsibilities of BNSs and how often
they performed those before and during pandemic were asked. Furthermore, other
facilitators and barriers encountered during the pandemic were asked. Suggestions and

recommendations which can help the BNSs during possible similar events in the future

were also obtained.


Ethical considerations

‘The BNSs were asked for their consent using an informed consent form which states
the brief background and objectives of the study and that if they sign the consent form, they
voluntarily accept to be included in the study and that they can withdraw from participating
any time they wished to. In addition, data to be obtained from them and the roles of the
participants and researchers were discussed.

Study participants were not identified individually in any paper or publication that
results from the study. Confidentiality of the data was observed and will only be available
to the participants and the researcher. Furthermore, subjects were only identified by their

subject code to maintain anonymity.

alysis

All questionnaires were initially encoded by the researcher into Microsoft Office
Excel. Completed data was entered and analyzed using Statistical Package for Social
Sciences (SPSS). Descriptive statistics such as frequency, percentage distribution, mean
and standard deviation were used to analyze the socioeconomic and demographic profile
of the BNSs. Wilcoxon Signed Rank test was used to compare the frequency of
performance of roles and functions before and during the pandemic. To measure the
association between the personal- or work-related factors and the change in frequency, Eta
coefficient was used to determine the degree of association between the quantitative and
qualitative variables, while Cramer’s V was used to measure the association between two

categorical variables.


For the facilitators, barriers and suggestions/recommendations, thematic analysis
was employed, and data analysis was performed using QDA Miner Lite, This software is
a free and easy-to-use computer-assisted qualitative analysis software which can be used
in analyzing textual data such as interviews and news transcripts, open-ended responses,
etc, as well as analyzing still image (Provalis Research, 2020). This software was used to
analyze and find patterns from the answers of the BNSs on their perceived facilitators and
barriers to successful performance of roles and functions during the pandemic, as well as
their major suggestions and recommendations. Answers from the survey were read
multiple times to become familiar with the data and enable identification of pattems and
recurring themes. Table 2 shows the objectives of the study, the method used to obtain the
information and the data analysis conducted for each

Table 2. Data collection and analysis by objectives of the study

OBJECTIVES DATA COLLECTION DATA ANALYSIS
T. Describe personal and work- Face-to-face Interview Frequency
related characteristics of the Percentage
BNSs Mean
Standard deviation
2. Determine the changes in roles Face-to-face Interview Wilcoxon Signed Rank test

and functions performed by Checklist of how often roles and
the BNSs before and during _ functions were performed before

pandemic and during quarantine
3. Analyze the association Face-to-face interview Eta Coefficient
between the personal and using semi-structured Cramer's V

work-related factors andthe questionnaire
changes in the roles and
functions



Table 2. Continuation...

OBJECTIVES DATA COLLECTION DATA ANALYSIS
4. Explain facilitating factors and Face-to-face interview Thematic analysis
barriers experienced by the using semi-structured

BNSS in performing their roles questionnaire
and functions during
quarantine.

For each role and function listed on the third part of the questionnaire used (Annex
B), the BNS tallied using codes how often they did the following before and during the
pandemic, zero (0) being “no experience” or ‘not doing” and three (3) being “always”

(Table 3).

Table 3. Codes used in the questionnaire in measuring the frequency of performance

CODE FREQUENCY
0 No experience yet/Not doing
1 Seldom
Frequent

Always


CHAPTER IV

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Profile of the Barangay Nutrition Scholars (BNS)

Personal-related characteristics

The mean age of the BNSs during the conduct of the survey was 48.91 (£10.9)
years. There were more older BNSs than the younger ones; the youngest of them was 24
years old while the oldest was 73 years old. All BNSs included in the study were women.
One (1) in three (3) BNS were high school graduate (35%) and had other job (34%). For

those with other job, most of them were service and sales workers (53%) (Table 4).

Table 4. Sociodemographic characteristics of the Barangay Nutrition Scholars (BNS)

‘VARIABLE NUMBER PERCENTAGE

‘Age (in years)
<30 6 46
30:39 2 168
40-49 34 26.0
50-59 48 36.6
60 above 2 16.0
Mean + SD 48.94 109
Median (Range) 50( 24-73)

Sex
Male 0 00

Female 134 100.0


Table 4. Continuation...

VARIABLE NUMBER PERCENTAGE
Civil status
Single 2 15.7
Married 1 679
ivorced 20 149
Widow/er 2 15
Educational attainment
Elementary undergraduate/graduate 2 14
High School undergraduate 15 n2
High School graduate 47 35.1
College undergraduate 37 216
College graduate 2 16.4
Vocational n 82
With Other job 45 336
Specific other job
Service and sales worker 25 55.6
Clerical support worker 4 89
Craft and related trades worker 3 67
Elementary occupations 2 44
Skilled agricultural, forestry and fishery worker 2 44
Manager 1 22
Did not mention 8 178
Household size
<4 37 2716
4106 n 53.0
T above 18 134
Mean + SD 4742.0
Median (Range) 4.0 (2-11)
Monthly household income
Less than P25,000 yn 90.3
25,001 to 50,000 2 9.0
50,001 and above 1 07
Length of service as BNS (years)
<10 n 54.2

10-19 29 224



Table 4. Continuation...

VARIABLE NUMBER PERCENTAGE
20-29 3 176
30 above 8 61
Mean +SD 123498
Median (Min-Max) 9.0 (2-43)
Health and well-being
Had illness/COVID 22 164

On average, the household size of the BNSs was 4.7 (£2) members. Minimum
household size was two, while the maximum was 11 members. Almost all of the BNSs
have an average household monthly income of less than PhP 25,000 (90%). With regards
to length of service as a BNS, on average, the BNSs has served for 12.3 (49.8) years. The
least experienced among them has served for two years, while the most experienced has
already been a BNS for 43 years. Furthermore, majority of the BNSs did not have any
illness or COVID-19 in the past which could have affected their performance of roles and

functions as BNS in the community (Table 4).

Work-related characteristics

The work-related characteristics of the BNSs are presented in Table 6. Majority of
the BNSs mentioned that their role during this pandemic was clear to them (96%). More
than half of them said that they had training before related to emergencies or disasters
(93%). For those who had trainings, the training was conducted mainly by a municipal
trainer (43%) and most of it were conducted in 2020, during the early months of the
pandemic (26%). For those who were trained, only almost half of them said that the training

was enough (46%).


Majority of the BNSs said that during the pandemic, they were supervised and
supported by the authorities in their barangay such as the barangay chairman (93%). Also,
majority of the BNSs said that they were satisfied in doing their job during the pandemic
(96%). Regarding allowance and transportation, almost all BNSs received different
allowances during the pandemic. Only 3.7 percent said that they did not receive any.
Furthermore, majority of the BNSs had enough resources needed, such as face mask and
face shield, during the conduct of activities during the pandemic (98%). Majority of the
BNSS also said that there were clear guidelines on the activities that they had to do in their

barangays during the pandemic (90%).

With regards to the workload of the BNSs during the pandemic, about half of them
said that the workload was bearable (58%), while only 3.0 percent said that the workload
was not bearable. Majority of the BNSs said that the community participated well during
the activities conducted during the pandemic (91%). Moreover, majority mentioned that
multisectoral coordination during the pandemic was not a problem (93%) and there was a
proper monitoring and evaluation of activities conducted during the pandemic (84%). In
terms of number of children under-five, on average, a BNS handles about 173 (#206)
children. The least number of children under-five in a barangay was 10, while the most was

1200 children.

Table 5. Work-related characteristics of the Barangay Nutrition Scholars (BNS)

"WORK-RELATED FACTORS NUMBER. PERCENTAGE,
Knew thelr roles clearly 129 96.3
With NIE Training 1 53.0
Trainer
‘National Trainer 16 16.2
Regional Trainer G 61
Provincial Trainer B 134
MunicipalCity Trainer 43 434
NGO Trainer 3 30
Trainer of international organization 4 40
Others 4 wa
Date of Training
2010 1 07
2017 4 3.0
2018 3 22
2020 35 26.1
2021 4 179
2022 7 5.2
Sufficient training for NIE 62 463
Experienced Supportive Supervision 125 933
Satisfied with work as BNS 129 96.3
Allowance/Transportation
Municipal allowance 13 843
Provincial allowance 109 813
Barangay honorarium 109 813
NNC insurance & allowance 86 642
Transportation allowance from brgy 18 4
Others (Hazard) 9 67
Training 8 6
None 5 37
Study trip 1 07
‘With resources (supplies) for nutrition aa era

activities

‘With Known Guidelines During pandemic 121 90.3


Table 6. Continuatio
WORK-RELATED FACTORS NUMBER PERCENTAGE
Workload
Not bearable (Hindi kinakaya) 4 3.0
Slightly bearable (Medyo kinakaya) 26 19.4
Bearable (Kaya) 1 575
Very bearable (Kayang-kaya) 27 20.1
Experienced Community participation 122 91.0
Experienced Multisectoral coordination 125 933
‘Conducted Monitoring and evaluation 12 83.6
Number of under-five children monitored
Mean + SD 172.74 205.6
Median (Minimum-Maximum) 108 (10-1200)

Frequency of Performance of Different Roles and Functions of BNSs

Before and During the COVID-19 Pandemic

Before the pandemic, specific roles and functions were always performed by

majority of the BNSs. BNSs always initiated and assisted the BNC in the formulation of

BNAP before the pandemic (51%) (planning). They always coordinated implementation

of nutrition activities (52%) (coordination), and always promoted and advocated nutrition

programs (61%) (advocacy and promotion). Furthermore, before the pandemic, BNSs

always counseled mothers of children whose weights have decreased or whose children

have not gained weight and also visits beneficiaries who fail to attend weighing (69%);

conducted annual weighing of all children, 0-71 months old Operation Timbang (OPT)


(73%); conducted follow-up weighing to monitor child growth (72%); provided basic
nutrition and health information to mothers (61%); referred sick and underweight children
to health centers, clinics or hospitals (60%); and, referred eligible targets to feeding
programs (69%) (all under implementation). Finally, majority of the BNSs also always
mobilized and generate resources for the nutrition programs in coordination with the BNC
(53%) (resource mobilization/generation); prepared minutes or highlights of BNC
meetings brief write-ups and diaries (e.g., BNS diary), and took photos of important
activities (61%) (documentation and record keeping); and, ensure the preservation of data
for evidential purposes, accurate and efficient updating, timely availability, and control of

access to them by the LNC members (52%) (documentation and record keeping).

During the pandemic, performance of most of the roles and functions by the BNSs
became less frequent. Majority of the BNSs still always performed the enumerated roles
and functions from the listed roles and functions above, except initiating and assisting the
BNC in the formulation of BNAP (44%) (planning) and coordinating implementation of
nutrition activities (49%) (coordination). On the other hand, however, there were some
roles and functions that the BNSs did more frequently during the pandemic. These include
(1) distribution of food ration to target groups (implementation); (2) referral of household
water sources of doubtful quality to the Rural Health Units (RHU) (implementation); (3)
advising families of possible resources for food production (implementation); (4)
preparation of monthly and quarterly reports (monitoring and evaluation); and (5) ensuring

preservation of data for evidential purposes (documentation and record keeping). On the


other hand, there was a slight increase in frequency in mobilizing and generating resources

for nutrition programs (resource mobilization/generation) during the pandemic.

Changes in the Frequency of Performance of Roles and Function
Before and During the Pandemic

From the seven categories of roles and functions in the trainer’s manual by NNC
and UPLB (2013), the activities were regrouped as shown in Table 6. It also shows the
specific roles and functions that significantly changed in frequency of performance before
and during the pandemic. In terms of coordination, the frequency of initiating meetings of
the BNC and submitting minutes of the meeting (p=0.023) and facilitating of nutrition-
related meetings (p=0.034) significantly changed during the pandemic. Under nutritional
assessment, the frequency of conducting follow-up weighing to monitor child growth
(p=0.004) significantly decreased as well as informing, monitoring, and conducting
follow-up visits to mothers/caregivers/parents of children and resource persons to
participate in nutrition-related activities (p=0.009). On the other hand, in terms of
implementation, conducting or assisting in conducting systematic nutrition education
classes (p=0.001); campaigning for the eradication of breeding places of insects and
rodents that are carriers of diseases (p=0.046); and distributing available seeds and
seedlings, particularly to target families (p=0.037) significantly changed in frequency
during the pandemic. In all activities, the percentage of BNS who claimed they always

conducted the activity decreased.

Table 6. Comparison of frequency of roles and functions performed before and during


COVID-19
ROLES AND FUNCTIONS BEFORE(%) __DURING(%) _P-VALUE
PLANNING
Organizing the BNC 0.226
No experience yeNot doing 60 15
Seldom 30.6 29.1
Frequent 1719 26.1
Always 44.0 358
Assists in BNAP 0.130
No experience ye/Not doing 45 45
Seldom 23.1 28.4
Frequent 19.4 20.1
Always 50.7 44.0
NUTRITIONAL ASSESSMEN’
Conducts OPT 0.192
No experience yeUNot doing 22 3.0
Seldom 97 ng
Frequent 134 12.7
Always Ba 709
Follow-up weighing 0.004+
No experience yeVNot doing, 0.0 07
Seldom 9.0 16.4
Frequent 172 172
Always nA 49
RESOURCE MOBILIZATION/ GENERATION
Mobilizes and generates resources for 0.958
nutrition programs
No experience yeUNot doing 22 22
Seldom 24 216
Frequent 20.1 209
Always 53.0 53.0


Table 6. Continuation.


ROLES AND FUNCTIONS, BEFORE (%) _DURING(%) _P-VALUE
‘COORDINATION
Facilitates BNC meetings and pass minutes 0.023"
‘No experience yet/Not doing 16.4 18.7
Seldom 28.4 366
Frequent 24 209
Always 30.6 21.6
Facilitates nutrition meetings 0.034*
No experience ye/Not doing no 172
Seldom 29 246
Frequent 2.1 246
Always 39.6 313
Coordinates activity implementation 0.425
No experience yeNot doing 45 45
Seldom 16.4 18.7
Frequent 239 246
Always 515 48.5
IMPLEMENTATION: REFERRAL
Refers family to nutrition service 0.284
‘No experience ye/Not doing 3.0 4s
Seldom 23.1 18.7
Frequent 29 343
Always 48.5 41.0
Refers children to health center 0.179
No experience yevNot doing, 15 22
Seldom ng 149
Frequent 25.4 Ba
Always $9.7 59.0
Refers children for feeding 0.206
No experience yeNot doing, 0.0 07
Seldom 1s 82
Frequent 21.6 2.1
Always 68.7 68.7


Table 6. Continuation...


ROLES AND FUNCTIONS BEFORE (%) DURING (%) _P-VALUE
Refers suspicious water source 0.529
No experience yet/Not doing 1719 216
Seldom 28.4 25.4
Frequent 29.1 26.9
Always 23.1 246

IMPLEMENTATION: ADVOCACY, PROMOTION, CAMPAIGN, AND NUTRITION

EDUCATION
Advocate and promote nutrition programs

‘No experience yet/Not doing
Seldom

Frequent

Always

Advises families about possible food
production source
‘No experience yetNot doing

Seldom
Frequent
Always

Promotes proper sanitary toilet
No experience yet/Not doing
Seldom
Frequent
Always

Campaigns for eradication of breeding
grounds
No experience yet/Not doing

Seldom
Frequent
Always

Provides basic information to mothers
No experience yeNot doing
Seldom
Frequent
Always

0.0
20.1
61.2

20.9
35.8
32.8

20.9
29.1
38.8

18.7
19.4
28.4
30.6

2.4


14.2
25.4
56.0

24.6

20.1
29.1
38.1

20.9
20.9
29.1
29.1

23.1
56.7

0.228

0.730

0.592

0.046"

0.084


Table 6. Continuation...


ROLES AND FUNCTIONS BEFORE (%) DURING (%) __P-VALUE
‘Counsel mothers 0.205
‘No experience yet/Not doing 07 0.0
Seldom 82 10.4
Frequent 209 246
Always 68.7 64
Conducts systematic Nutrition education DONIE
classes
No experience yevNot doing 127 209
Seldom 36.6 39.6
Frequent 149 1719
Always 33.6 194
IMPLEMENTATION: DISTRIBUTION OF GOODS,
Distributes food commodities 0.860
No experience yet/Not doing 52 45
Seldom 142 49
Frequent 313 29.9
Always 470 48.5
Distributes available vitamins and minerals 0.067
‘No experience yetNot doing 60 82
Seldom 149 149
Frequent 28.4 33
Always 493 44.0
Distributes available seedlings 0.037"
No experience ye/Not doing 97 104
Seldom 19.4 269
Frequent 313 28.4
Always 38.1 32.8
MONITORING AND EVALUATION
Monitors implementation of law/policies 0.401
No experience yeUNot doing, 104 n2
Seldom 29 254
Frequent 32.8 313
Always 30.6 29.9


Table 6. Continuation...
ROLES AND FUNCTIONS BEFORE (%) DURING (%) _P-VALUE
Follow-ups mothers 0.009
No experience yetNot doing 22 52
Seldom 172 216
Frequent 29.9 28.4
Always 493 433
Provides feedback/updates 0.106
No experience yet/Not doing 37 45
Seldom 20.1 2.1
Frequent 26.1 28.4
Always 48.5 418
Prepares monthly and quarterly reports 0.964
No experience yet/Not doing 0.0 0.0
Seldom 60 52
Frequent n2 10.4
Always 813 828

DOCUMENTATION AND RECORD KEEPING
Prepares minutes/highlights of BNC

0.182
meetings

No experience yet/Not doing 3.0 3.0

Seldom 90 142

Frequent 25.4 21.6

Always 612 59.7
Ensures preservation of data for evidential Oe
purposes

‘No experience yevNot doing. 13 3.0

Seldom ng 12.7

Frequent 313 239

Always 515 575

“Significant at p<0.05


Association of Personal-Related Factors with the Different
Roles and Functions of BNSs

This section shows the personal-related factors and its association with the changes
in frequency of performance of roles and functions by the BNSs. Personal-related roles and
specific roles and functions with associations are summarized and tabulated with their
coefficient and p-value in Table 7 (planning), Table 8 (coordination and referral), Table 9
(implementation) and Table 10 (implementation, M&E, and record keeping). Among the
personal factors, only marital status, household income, and health and well-being had
association with specific roles and functions. On the other hand, no significant associations

between personal-related factors and roles and functions under coordination .

Health and well-being was found to have moderate association with changes in the
frequency in assisting the BNC in the formulation of the BNAP (p=0.031); in referring
household water sources of doubtful quality to the Rural Health Units (RHU) (p=0.048) ;
in campaigning for the eradication of breeding places of insects and rodents that are carriers
of diseases (p=0.027); in conducting or assisting in conducting systematic nutrition
education classes (p=0.050) ; and in distributing available seeds and seedlings, particularly
to target families (p=0.046) and in monitoring implementation of law/policies (p=0.026).
Research associating health and well-being of community health workers with
performance were scant as most studies focus on the health and well-being of the

community and not the workers.


$00>d 10 moryfiudis,
(966°) L200 (££60) Ls0°0 (968°0) p90°0 (e1£0'0) £070 (6810) LL1'0 Suroq- 124 pure yea
(Lovo) £10 (€sv'0) 8200 (p9¥'0) L910 (osv'o) ost'0 (865'0) S610 ‘sotaaas Jo p82]
(bo0'0) £670 (6070) €07'0 (6660) bL0'0 (ovo) szz0 (ose 0) o81'0 suroou ployasnoH,
(16¢0) 1800 (i9¢0) 710 (evo) 9110 (Zev) 8E1'0 (es€'0) LEO ‘zis ployssnoH
(6s8'0) 1L0°0 (0160) 7900 (o9r'0) 211-0 (276 0) 6s0°0 (e910) 2610 got 3310
(s81'0)  8pz0 (2p9°0) 1610 (£610) 970 (oss'0) sor'0 (zp8" 0) 891°0 ——-waurureye [puoneonpy
(99z°0) | 1L1'0 (p0L'0) oz1'0 (p67'0) 991°0 (so¢0) soto (zse'0) 7€1'0 snyeig EWEN
(94r'0)_oz1'0 (629'0) €L1'0 (z9s'0) Z€70 (cos'0) r91'0 (429'0) 1170 ay
Re ee LHSOW _LNaIWSSASSY IVNOLLPLLAN ONINNVTA

nS

Suyuuea

Jepun souentsojiod uy a3ueqs ay) WE SNE Jo Soys}s2}2ese99 payeras-jeuosiad pus sajod Jo uoHE|DossE Jo SaAMSeIP *L AGEL


S0'0>d 10 wosyudisy
(48600) 1610 (b89'0) b60°0- (Lev'O)OZI'O (LEO) FHO'|D EHO) H9T'O (LITO) 6PI'O(ZS0'0) 0610 BuIAq-119m pure EAH
(ssp'0) 8010 (SISO) sbI'0 — (Lbv'0) POT —(66F'0) BLOOD (I9¥'0) [L0'|0 —(LOS'0) L600 (6E'0) £600 ‘sotasas Jo BUST]
(1800) 0€7'0(LL6'0) 0600 © (IL60) £600 (SEO) HLTO (STO) 6610 (6zI'OVBITO —(ZST0) HIZO. ‘suroour ployssnoH
(geo) orlo == (ovo) gore = (Sze ooo §«6IEO)IErO (B8TO) LITO = (I9TO)z9T'0. (ETE O)LSTO ‘zis ployasnoH
(€L6'0) prO'O (1590) L600 (688'0) 990°0 (96L'0) 640.0 (6rL'0) 980°0—(E9E'0) 8710 (0960) 6r0'O gol 210
(se) P90 AZBOOLIO —(HISO)9070 LL9EOZZO SCO) IDO (ETO)OEO LerO)siIzo  MoMNNHEINUOHoNPA
(asco) ssio (sto) 681'0 (6 E6'0) 7800 (8090) 1EI'O (760) 8800 © (OLSO) SEI. (EP9'O) LZ" smuRIS [EW
(uesoozio (lego) acto (uas'0) 8bz10_ (S950) 9L00__(8I9O)6sz~O__(ss9'0) zEI'0 (0990) ze" oy
FOMOH yn so) sso EL OL a sine ed pt
Saag SAPINPSIIH uOMPUYD HO; AMIE OFOY TT a supe ona OMSriaovavEo
Tsar NOLLYNIGHOOD

SSS

Jeuzajaa pue aoyeups00)

sopan souemuopsod wy afueys ay) Ysa SNA Jo SoNs}19}9eLeq9 payejas-feuosiad pue sajo4 Jo UOHEIDOSSE Jo saANsEaW “BAGEL.


(40S0°0) 161'0

(@zs0) zrr'0

(peo) 1€1°0

(capo) se1'0

(988°0) 90°0
(180) 9910

(+£0°0) 902°0

150) 781°0

(594'0) p80°0
(o'0) per'0

(S190) 1010

(or'0) 991'0

(sez'0) 6€1'0

(zev'0) 8€1°0

$0'0>4 10 uosyiusis,

‘unoq-{19m pur WUeH

201498 Jo BUST

(49000) 9870 (8500) E710 (SzL'O) ZHI (LELO) BIZ (ePOO'O) C6z © (ZOI'0) Szz’0—(wBT'O) ET. ‘susoou! ployasnoH
(6pz'0) L910 (IYO) ShI'O— (L6EO) LEO (Spv'0) FOI'0 (E870) 9600 (6770) 8L0'0—(90F'0) 1600 ‘21s ployssnoyy
(911'0)891'0 — (Le6'0) ss0°0-—(wbL'0) 9800 (BESO) E010 (ZoEO)9EI'0 (SEL) 8800 (6090) ZOI'0 of 2310
(ies'0) 8910 (Zig) sero (9L9'.O) 680 (EDO) EIZO (SOE) ETO (669.0) 98I°0 — (9SE0) 9770 aUTUFEHE jeuoNEoNPA
(9cr0) c61'0 (GLO) EZI'0 —(LP6'0) 0800 Tyo) Esto (SOO) IZ —(SPSO)BEI'0 — (ZzE0) s9T'O smyeis [NEW
(0z9'0) 90z'0__(o9v'0) 6uI'0_(€85°0) E10 ILO) 87z0__(8zS'0)091'0_(115'0) 980°0_(sos'0) ps0 By
‘S9SSeI0 S1995U ‘amos
suresBoud
‘woneonpe sioqjou 910) Aseyures
siotpow vontany
wonmnaN, yoasn sodord
hs fesunod aseq soprano soyou sour’ | SULSTAaLOVAVHO
sigan Ar oo! ue a1e00npy
stonpuos sostapy

NOILVONGd NOLLRILAN GNV ‘NOIVAWV9 ‘NOLLOWOUd ‘ADVIOATY

:NOLLVINANG 141

udjedurey pue uoyomtozg ‘49e20apy
aopun sonemoysad uy a3ueqs 947 TULA SNA JO Sops|9;9e1849 payejes-jeuossad pus sojod Jo WoHEpPOSSe Jo SamNsEaIA — “6 GEL.

s7

S0'0>d 1 mo2yudis,
(1s6°0) (6EL'0) (zsb'0) (49200) 9r0'0)-——((668°0) Bu2q
zso'0 1800 sino 9070 +900 seo em pur Wes
(ror'0) (o6r'0) (sps'o) (v0) (90r'0)
610 9st'0 zero oro a
(44000) (389°0) (sto) (9900) (ovo) (oz1'0) ‘auoout
$870 9v1'0 ozo Lz0 Izzo ProyasnoH
(ssz0) (9pz'0) (ree'0) (9870) (9ve'0)
0800 vs'0 sero sero ‘2218 ployasnoH,
(z99°0) (96¢'0) (90¢'0) (8¢L'0) (160)
9600 710 sero 9800 poo gol N10
(696'0) (€09°0) (L6y'0) (s86°0) yoouurene
€1z0 esv0 wero 0770 61z0 zo feuouesnpy
(610) (oreo) (vou'0) (¢6z'0) (vivo) (y6e'0)
zor'0 ro oz" i910 810 sso smyers EW
(80s'0) (azs'0) (6z9°0) (s¢9°0) (ue9'0) (099°0)
9810 zo evo 970 z6r0 aso aay
ssodmd —_— sauyeour Sa1oqjo0
Tenuapina Nao WOW fyoyrenb ——_sayepdn yee, sBurpaas sompourwos
Joy evep jo swyBYSIY sanos pue pioegpasy = jouon- —aiqeyteaes —sotureyta pooy
uonearssoxd —soynurur Ayyuowm —sapraoig —eIuauTajdun ainquusiqg —ayqelreae —sainqunsiq
somsug __samdaig “TU saredong SuOITUOW seinquasi OUST LOVEYHD
ONIGIaH
@iooTH aNY NOLLVATVA ONY ONTIOLINOW, eee

OLLYNGWATdAI
-Nouvinawogog Cee
“Sujdaey p1os9y pue voyejuauns0g pue uoHENjeAg pus Supoyuoy ‘dopesusuajdwy
azopun asueursojiad uy aueys aq) WIM SN Jo SOPS}19;9e1849 payeyas-jeuossad PUE Safo4 Jo UOWEIPOSSe Jo soANseaA “OL AGEL



Household income was found to have a moderate association with the changes in
the frequency of mobilization and resource generation for nutrition program (p=0.004); of
promoting the construction, proper and continued use of sanitary toilets, giving priority to
households with preschool children (p=0.004); of conducting or assisting in the conduct of
systematic nutrition education classes (p=0.006); and of ensuring preservation of data for
evidential purposes. Studies have shown that the household income or wealth of the
community health workers can affect their performance in the community. A study in
Bangladesh reported that community health workers who were dependent on their income
eamed from work for their family’s needs were more active and were more likely to
perform well compared to their colleagues with other jobs (Ahmed, 2008 and Alam et al.,
2012b in Kok et al., 2014). On the other hand, community health workers who were
wealthier more often drop out of the program (Alam et al., 2012a, 2012b in Kok et al.,
2014).

For monitoring and evaluation, marital status was found to have a moderate
association with the changes in the frequency of preparation of monthly and quarterly
reports (p=0.009). From similar studies conducted, marital status was found to have mixed
relationship with performance of roles and functions. There were studies which identified
that married community health workers were more likely to have higher performance than
others (Kawakatsu et al., 2012). This may be because they have their partner and family
members who support and help them with household duties, leaving them more time to
engage in their work in the community (Kok et al., 2014; Kawakatsu et al., 2015). On the

other hand, some studies found that married community health workers were less likely to


have high performance and tend to have higher dropout rate (Simba & Kakoko, 2009;
Musoke et al., 2019). This was mainly because of health workers following the demands
of their husbands or following them to live somewhere else (Simba & Kakoko, 2009;
Sharma et al., 2014).

In addition to marital status, health and well-being was also found to have moderate
association with monitoring implementation of nutrition and nutrition-related laws,
ordinances, and policies (p=0.026). From the interviews conducted, being ill during the
pandemic was hard for some of the BNS due to the protocols needed to be followed. BNSs
experiencing possible symptoms of the virus was required to be tested and quarantined for
about two weeks. This greatly affected their performance of roles and functions in the
community, especially to those who were not only quarantined once, but multiple times. In
addition to this, as shared by some of the BNSs, as they were already a senior citizen, going
out and participating in nutrition activities such as implementation and monitoring of
nutrition programs were not possible. Thus, affecting their performance of roles and
functions during the pandemic.

For resource mobilization, household income was found to have a moderate
association with mobilizing and generating resources for the nutrition programs in
coordination with the BNC reports (p=0.004). Finally, for documentation and record
keeping, only household income was found to have a moderate association with ensuring
the preservation of data for evidential purposes, accurate and efficient updating, timely
availability, and control of access to them by the LNC members (p=0.007). Similar

findings from literature were not available; however, poor performance may also be


associated with the wealth of the BNSs in that BNSs who are dependent on their job for
support are more likely to perform well compared to wealthier BNSs (Ahmed, 2008 and
Alam et al., 2012b in Kok et al., 2014).

The relationship of household income with the performance of roles by the BNSs
may also be related to the perceived barriers of the BNSs regarding lack of funds and
transportation and the poor barangay support. According to the BNSs, there were times
when nutrition activities in their barangay were not sufficiently supported and funded by
their barangay. During these times, they had no choice but to get funds for transportation
and supplies from their own pockets. With the minimal average household income of the
BNSs and the difficult times during the early months of the pandemic, they were not able
to fund for the resources needed and were not able to implement nutrition activities in their
barangay, especially to those households from hard-to-reach areas, as transportation cost
was significantly more expensive according to the BNSs.

Other results, however, concur with related studies in that age (Kok et al., 2014;
Mulingwa, 2014), marital status (Mulingwa, 2014), educational attainment (Kebriaei &
Moteghedi, 2009 in Kok et al., 2014; Mulingwa, 2014), occupation, average household
income and length of service (Mulingwa, 2014) were not associated with performance of
roles and functions of the community health workers. In contrast with these results, there
was a research which identified that age was associated with record-keeping. According to
Crispin et al. in 2012, older community health workers were found to be better at record-
keeping and using job aids. Similarly, there was, a study which found that the more

educated the community health workers were better at making reports because they can


more effortlessly understand how to write and submit monthly reports (Kawakatsu et al.,
2015).
Association of Work-Related Factors with the Different
Roles and Functions of BNSs

This section shows the work-related factors and its association with the changes in
frequency of performance of roles and functions by the BNSs. Work-related factors and
specific roles and functions with associations are summarized and tabulated with their
coefficient and p-value.

For planning, coordination and advocacy and promotion, no significant association
between the work-related factors and changes in the frequency of performance was
observed. For implementation, training or preparedness was found to have a moderate
association with providing basic nutrition and health information to mothers (p=0.020);
referring eligible targets to feeding programs (p=0.036); and conducting or assisting in
conducting systematic nutrition education classes (p=0.023). Related studies suggest that
lack of training was a significant barrier to effective service delivery during pandemic
outbreaks (Selveraj et al., 2018; Boyce & Katz, 2019; Mc Kenna et al., 2019; Mello et al.,
2022). On the other hand, appropriate training, led to improved knowledge, confidence,
skills, service quality and well-being (Bhaumik et al., 2020). Trained community health
workers also tend to become more credible to community members as they are able to
respond to questions and they are more effective in delivering services properly (USAID,

2015; Sarma et al., 2020; Do Rosario Costa et al., 2021; Méllo et al., 2022).


$0'0>d w juoryfiudis,

(pc8°0) €£0°0 (068'0) p81'0 (9680) 7S7'0, (6160) 1500 (68.0) SOTO —_ SM HANPIIYD Jo-s9quNN
(6990) L600 (uz0) 161.0 (cor o)6tr0 — (66s'0) oro (ssso) sz Ppasircter
(s88°0) 990°0 18°0) L400 (6z1'0) 91.0 (6040) (Iz0)

(2180) 820°0 (sz9'0) 660°0 Gstoo)91z0 —(1zs'0) (ozs'0) uoyedionred Anunurio3
(pe8'0) coro (£060) 160°0 (zeo) 7910 (szu'0) (oL8'0) PROPHON,
(6ev'0) 021-0 (g9s'0) 9010 (4zv'0) 8800 (2910) zr0) SaMT|2pIN
(s86°0) Le0°0 (090°0) s81'0 (sp6'0) €s0°0—(6s1°0) (peo) Soamosoy,
(s8°0) 9910 (c69'0) 891'0 (s960)9110 (0750) (s8'0) wonevodsaenaouemoyly
(6L6°0) pro'o (5180) L100 (9060) z90°0-—((£p8°0) (sso) WOHEISHES HOA
(zs9'0) 080°0 (zze0) 1£1'0 (9190) 9800 (L610) (seo) worstassdns saroddng
(y6s'0) Ee (988'0) p60°0 (LL) 11110 (Ze8'0) (880) ssouparedasd/Suuyes
(€£L'0) 6900 (682'0) 090°0 (990) ¢80°0 __(6z0°0) (g09'0) Aue] 20%

Eo eee LNAWSSASSV TVNOLLRLLAN ONINNVTE

gounosaa

Suyuueg sapun aouemsopsad uy afueqo ayy WIM SNE Jo SoNsTa}IIEYD pazEax-y10M Jo VOBEIPOSSE Jo SINE “11 AGEL


S0-0>d 18 two UaIS,,

(978'0) pEz'0-—(6L8'0) €P0'0.-—(B6'0) L>O'|D-(68'0) SOZ'O (8060) 190°0 (0160) 6s0'0-(LZ6'0) L500 SN UoupItYo Jo oquMN

ay 7 g are ; uowenyens
(oseoicro (s9s'0) 80110 (ZIPO) ZI (91H O)¥ZI.O  wPE'D) Ss0'0-—(wyRO) pLO'| —(SsL'0) 980°0 poe Suuoiuoyy
(1280) 940°0(SZL'0) 6800 (8ZB'0) SLOT (z90;0) ¥BI'O (EBLOO) 7800 © (vATO) BEI'O (£870) 6EI'0
(pero Ello —(Ov9'0) 8600 6EFOVGITO (vB90) E600 (ZoSO)FIT'O §—(LLEO) 9zI'0-—COOv'0) PzI0
(ysoo)9zt'0 (L680) 2600 (2690) 1210 (9PF.OVLZI'O COBTOVOLTO = (L9TO)OLI'O —(OIT'0) 6610
(8€9'0) 860°0 (0SS'0) 8010 (LLS'0) SOI (wZH'O)IZI.O (0190) 960°0 (1690) Z60"0 COBH'0) StI'0 SOMT|SPIN
(2160) 190°0 (9900) "810 (OS O)s0'|0 (9BrO)ESI'O —GzI'O)991'0 — (Sez'0) LEL'0(BzH'0) 1Z1'0 saounosay

0) 827" 7 7 0) for ae vonenodsuen
(ooz'0) azz (sst'O)IZz'0—(EIH'O) 0070 © (9PS'0) BHI.0 UwrH'O) 8610 (669'0) 891°0 (90) LOZO powensonly
(5800) LL1'0 (z90'0) 9810 (6800) 9410 (8x0) 780.0 (SLO) 9800 —(£6L'0) 0800 (108'0) 6L0'0 ‘Wor DejSHES 20%,
(Ler'0) cO1'0 (EIS) IOV‘ CE9TO)ZHI'O (I9EO)HzI.O SOLO) LBT.O (0650) 680°0(BIv'0)STI'O —_woystazadns anmsoddns
(9870) L91'0 (49E00) L770 (EEO) I9T'O (LLO'0)B07;0 (ESTO) LTO —_(948'0) 960°0 (Lh6'0) 0800 —_—ssouporedaud /Stmuyesy,
(seg) e800 (Szs'0) z60°0 _(SSS'0) pEo'|0 (BBR) ZHO'|D —(EETOOSIO —(ZsO;O)IIZ0__(vL0'0) 0070 AES OU

soynurar
aa

snoridene _ RUP22330}—_TO}URD Bayo —_2>4AI95 oF Piped so rae ssed pur

S135 UaspIrYD siqJoy_—UDIpIIYD SIQJoY—Aysurey 19}9y syaurp100> areqtseg a one OLLSRYTLIVAVHD

‘AMAA NOLLVNITYOOD

Jessajaa pue

uopeayp1003 sapun souewsoy sad uy a3ueqo ays WHA SNE JO SOSA} DeIeYD payejas-yx0M Jo MoHEIIOSSE Jo SOANSEDA

Tae


From the experiences of the BNSs, being trained improved their knowledge and
skills which helped them in performing their roles and functions in the community. This
was most evident among BNSs who had more experiences and who had already attended
more trainings. On the other hand, the performance of less experienced BNSs may have
been affected during the pandemic, especially if they have not yet attended any trainings
related to emergencies and disasters. Because of these, as part of their suggestions, the
BNSs thought that having more trainings related to emergencies and disasters, as well as
refresher trainings of the basics, would be a big help to them in performing better for the
community, especially during unpredicted times like the pandemic.

Workload also has a moderate association with distributing available
vitamin/mineral supplements (p=0.045). According to studies, in implementing nutrition
activities, high workload among community health workers impact their performance
which may lead to underperformance, poor patient care and poor quality of service (Heunis
et al., 2011; Yan et al., 2012 & Vichayanrat et al., 2013 in USAID, 2015; Sarma et al.,
2020). Increased workload and responsibilities can also cause confusion to the community
health workers regarding their priority activities (USAID, 2015).

As narrated by several BNSs, their workload during pandemic undeniably
increased as the needs of the community also increased, especially during the early months.
of the pandemic. As mentioned by them, their priority activities during the pandemic
differed since they acted as frontliners and helped in managing the needs of their
community. During the early months of pandemic, the BNSs helped in the distribution of

food packs, cooked meals for the frontliners and even assisted in the checkpoint of their

6S

barangay. Because of the increased workload and change in priorities, the roles and
functions of the BNSs changed and some of the nutrition activities were suspended.

Furthermore, community participation has a moderate association with conducting
annual weighing of all children, 0-71 months old Operation Timbang (OPT) together with
the BHW under the supervision of a Midwife (p=0.015). As observed from related studies,
the lack of community participation during the pandemic can cause insecurity among BNSs
in carrying out their activities (Do Rosério Costa et al., 2021). On the other hand, however,
community support and involvement are found to enhance their performance and reduce
their insecurity and fear in performing their duties (Kok et al., 2014; Do Rosario Costa et
al, 2021). As the BNSs experienced being denied and stigmatized by some of the
community, this affected their performance of roles and functions, which includes the
weighing of children, during the pandemic.

For roles and functions under monitoring and evaluation, only having clear
guidelines was found to have a moderate association with preparing monthly and quarterly
reports (p=0.013). Abnormal conditions during the pandemic entails new guidelines that
the BNSs should follow in delivering services in the community. Provision of clear and
adequate guidelines during the pandemic is essential as it is found to affect performance
(Dambisya & Matinhure, 2012; Javanparast et al., 2012; Bhaumik et al., 2020). Lack of it
was found to lead to uncertainty, poor performance and low confidence in the community
health workers in carrying out their roles and functions (Kok et al., 2014; Lotta et al., 2022).
On the other hand, no significant association between work-related factors and roles and

functions under resource mobilization/generation was identified.


S00>d ve weaytusis,
(1880) €p1'0 (86810) 6110 (ZIGO)ZITO (EGO) GEO. (L88'0) 7S0;0- (98E'0) BIO (99810) BHO SN waspliyo Jo s9quIIN,
(39¢0) 0610 (ybz'O) 9PI'0 §—(1OL'0) 60:0 (9P'O)IZI'O (BLS0) 90110 uszO) ZHI‘ (ser'0) 9IT'O JPA? pur BULOUUOW
(yy6'0) pSO'0—(1SL'0) $80°0-(LES'0) GOI (1940) $80.0 (ZEB'O) SLO'O (BIO) ZZI-O —(LSL'0) 980°0-_ONEMpro0D JeIO}925HININ

(izo erro (ZzsO)O1V'0 (LO) PEO (Isso) B00 (6L¥O)SII'O (Eo6'O) 160°0 (Eze) SEI'O nediaqued Ayunusut0y

(060'0) poz'0 (ISTO) ZLV'O (ESO) GET'O —(LsE'0) 0910 (E060) 1600 (aP9'0) L600 (LL9'0) SzI'O PROPLON
(L190) p60'0 (E6v'OV ELI (209.0) ZOL' (S650) O10 (£O9'0) ZOI'0 (EzE'O) 6S0'0 (€H9'0) 6600 SouNapIND
(0zL'0) 6800 (£680) 59010 (INTO) S10 (960) 80.0 (ZI6;O) 1900 (L9T'O) SEO (1E60) Ls0'0 soomosoy
(S6s'0) 181'0 (w6L0) 951.0 C196 O)OZIO (SPO) LEI'0  (LIL'0) 99T°0 ZLB’) 690° (B6T'0) 1€7'0__ONBHOdsuEN jaouEMoITY
(zpe0) ZE1'0 (p80) EL0'0 (ESO) ZLO|O —(BEG'O 9S0°0 (s98'0) 0400 —(095'0) F600 (b68'0) 9900 WoRsRysHeS OA

(e910) S910 (SLYO)z9V'0 (LETO)BPIO § (HEEOOZI.O (SIFO)SII'O  (OrL') 8010 (w66'0) 0100 uorsiaradns anmoddng,
(s€Z0'0) LEZ’ (L6L'0) 8OI'0 (40Z0'0) 6ETO (ZL) 6IT'0 (6800) POZO (9980) 8600 (O90) 6zI'0 ssauposedaad fAunuresy,

(zee'o) o€t'0 _(o9S'0) ve0'0 (evo) EIT'O (9090) B80'0 (899.0) BLO] (R690) FLO (ELS"0) £600 ATED OU
$9859]9 ‘s98ut DaanOs —
voneanpa susinout sroqiour Jo punosd  Areyues —_wor}onpoxd sues i
wouUynN mae eruoyeuojur —-Butpasiq —«goasmtadosd pos aqqissod ee
onewtaisAs PSU srseq soptaorg JouotesIpers —ssjoworg —ynoge sayruey usriaiovevHo
pure a1eo0apy
sionpuo3 Joy suByeduresy SOStApY
NOLLVONGd NOLLILLAN GNY ‘NOIVAIV9 ‘NOLLOWOUd ‘ADVIOAGY

!NOLLVINGNG 141

adyedue) pus uoyomosg
‘Aovsoapy s9pun aoueutsojsad uy aueqo ay) YA SNE JO S9BS}I2}IeIEqD payEIas-Y1OM Jo UoBETDOSSE Jo soansea — “ET IGE.


(s20'0) (8670) (y66'0)—(tS6'0) (L160) (6L8'0) (e210) (£560)
607'0 90 6x00 1500 0900 1900 9910 tso0 soounosay
(os6'0) (sbu'0) (seo) = (a0) (zsz'0) (16s°0) (zs8'°0) (8260) (y98'0) woneuodsren,
sero zr0 6070 iso ozz0 180 Ler ome sero pouEMOILY
(¢90°0) (s98°0) (€6'0) (0660) (8z6'0) (€98°0) (yo8'0) (y160) (oz6'0)
1810 0100 0800 reo = 8500 100 600 1900 0900 wonDeysttes 20M
(se9°0) (zzz) (90¢'0) (ovo) (Z6v'0) (6e¢0) (6v8'0) (zzv'0) (0190) ‘woysyasadns
800 ost'o ver0 e200 = pro 8710 oso0 v10 8100 ‘aayuoddns
220°) Gazz") 19!) ~— (S160) (9ES'0) (e1¢'0) (eeL'0) (e010) (e9L'0) ssouparedaid
6€z0 Lev0 oer0 e800 =e" 90 410 o0z'0 e110 Aayuresy,
(ss9'0) (yis'0) (gov) = (uz#'0)—(198°0) (Lpr'0) (y9r'0) (sps'0) (sss‘0)
130'0 z60°0 £900 ys00 600 ure sore 960°0 60° Aue 310m
ssodmd Bayou suodaz syerouru
Teguspisa = NGO newt Auouenb—sovpdn OPO, SHupo9s pue ——-samipouruioo
sop erep jo siySysty somoney pu PIPeGPIAg oud 21GEeAR SUTUTEHA pooy
woneniasoud soma 7 Aiqquow —sapinoig “Son sainglasi] «—aygeyeae —samnquasia va
saimsug _sasrdarg TOUT soredaug ous soinquisia aL STaa Iv)
‘ONIGAIA
1a
@iooTd ANY NOLLVN'1VAd GNV ONRIOLINOW arent ona
NOLLVINSWN900

—NQULV ENN

uoyeymaurapduny
aopun aaucusojied uy aBueq> 24) WIA SNe JO S9ySt19}98.6YD PazE]2.-91.10M Jo MOYwIDOSSE Jo SaaNseIA “pI FITEL

(318°0) (806°0) (sz60) (9s'0) (880) (us8'0) (188'0) (1.80) (698°0) sn
soo v0 suvo 9200 tro wsz0 6810 70 EO ——_UBUPIEYD Jo soquinyy
(6tv'0) (290) (6st'0) (sso) (g0L'0)—(€08'0) (806'0) (sz8°0) (cero) ‘souenjeAa
zo oer 610 v0 = 7600 0800 £900 3900 ro Pure Sursomuoyy
(zo6'0) (1ts‘0) (sps'0) (0s6'0) (6040) —(6ss'0) (yb6'0) (8¢6°0) (soz'0) ‘woneuTps009
900 8100 sor zso0 0600 coro $500 sso 1600 Tesoto9st yy
(L09'0) (yoe'0) (s6z'0) (S160) (6950) (o8s'0) (£900) (yps'0) (zo) uonedioured
oro sero cero 0900 soro soro 810 8010 oro ‘Aunarw0y
(se60) (yoo) (960) (6060) (o0z'0) (cro) (4Sp0'0) (coe'0)
£800 asro zero 0600 1810 sero io 9910 PeOPHOAK
(uL8'0) (e820) (19p'0) (#100) (zs'0) (S80) (sor'o) (002'0) (61s°0)
3900 1300 uo ozo oro Ean e210 1600 10 saumjopm
Bsodind _ sSuyaaur ‘suodaz sjexoura
Tenuopins = QNGJO somo Aouenb —sovepdn sBupoos pure sampourtios
Joy eiep jo swyBUBIY —juosiog pue —yoeqpa9y aiqejreae —— sururmta oo}
uoyeatssod —soynurus = s0mosoy = AIMMWOUL —sapIAIg eINoW|dUN saInqusiq’ —_aIqutEAR —_saINquUSICT
somstg __somedaiq__dqy-moyjog__sosedasa SHOUNUOW samngusia TT)
‘DNIdTIH
sd009 dO NOLLNERLsIa
q@aoosa GNV NOLLVA'1VAd GNV ONRIOLINOW TROLLVANSIGa aval

NOLLV.LN3W1900
“wonenupuoy ‘pt 148L


As experienced by some of the BNSs, they had difficulty preparing the needed
reports during the pandemic. Some even mentioned that they did not know how to answer
the forms. Because of the difficulty in making reports, some of the BNSs identified the
supportive supervision of MNAO as facilitating factor during the pandemic. Other BNSs
were glad that their MNAO helped and assisted them in completing reports.

For documentation and record keeping, training or preparedness was found to have
a moderate association with preparing minutes or highlights of BNC meetings dutifully

and promptly, preparing brief write-ups and diaries (e.g., BNS diary), and taking photos of

important activities (p=0.022) and ensuring the preservation of data for evidential
purposes, accurate and efficient updating, timely availability, and control of access to them
by the LNC members providing basic nutrition and health information to mothers
(p=0.022). This is in conjunction with related studies stating that with increased knowledge
and skills from training, community health workers improve at record-keeping (Joos et al.,
2016; O’Donovan et al., 2018).

Furthermore, resources has a moderate association with ensuring the preservation
of data for evidential purposes, accurate and efficient updating, timely availability, and
control of access to them by the LNC members providing basic nutrition and health
information to mothers (p=0.024). According to studies, availability of resources and
supplies needed resulted to community health workers more confident in performing
activities related to managing the outbreak of disease in the community (McMahon et al.,
2016; Witter et al., 2017; Englert et al., 2018; Selvaraj et al., 2018; Bhaumik et al., 2018).

On the other hand, unavailability of necessary resources results to stress, low performance


and less motivated community health workers, as it is considered a significant barrier to
them in fulfilling their responsibilities (Kok et al. 2014; Maiorano et al., 2020; Lotta et al.,
2022; Méllo et al., 2022). In some cases, lack of resources, such as PPEs, even increase
their risk to being infected by the virus (Do Rosério Costa et al., 2021). In addition,
resources in terms of availability of mobile technology was also determined to have an
effect performance of community health workers. As stated, use of mobile phones and
internet connection had wide range of benefits for the community health workers, which
include reduction in workload, improvement in data collection, reporting and monitoring
and provision of quality services among others (Braun et al., 2013; Feroz et al., 2020). This
is relevant today since communication, especially during the early months of pandemic
was mostly through texts or online means.

With regards to other work-related factors and associations not mentioned, there
were studies which found associations between some of the work-related factors and
performance of community health workers. A study by Kok et al. in 2014 suggests that
clarity of roles affected the performance and motivation of community health workers, in
that the lack of it demotivates them to perform their roles and functions in the community.
Supportive supervision was also found to motivate community health workers into
performing because they feel part of the team (Martinez et al., 2008 in Kok et al. 2014).
On the other hand, insufficient supervision demotivates them (Kok et al., 2014).
Furthermore, CHWs who receive monetary incentives or allowances were found to
perform better and would be unmotivated by unmet promises of allowances or stipends

(Kok et al., 2014). In terms of transportation, performance of CHWs is limited if there is


lack of bicycles and if they have to pay for their transportation (Kok et al., 2014). Finally,
studies have also shown that adequacy and constant delivery of supplies in the community
‘was not associated with performance and delivery of services (Kok et al., 2014; Mulingwa.

2014).

ing Factors to Successful Performance of Roles and
Funetions during the Pandemic

From the qualitative research implemented, facilitating factors which contributed
to the success of performing roles and functions by the BNSs during the pandemic were
identified. Explanation for each facilitator is explained below.

Table 15, Facilitating factors to successful performance of roles and functions during
the pandemic as identified by the BNSs

FACILITATING FACTORS NUMBER PERCENTAGE,
‘Supportive supervision 67 54.0
Teamwork/Unity 16 129
Personal factors 9 73
Multisectoral coordination 7 5.6
Manpower 6 48
Community participation 5 40
Training/seminars 4 32
‘Online means 4 32
Easy to reach mothers/caregivers 3 24
Resources (PPE) 3 24


R

With supportive supervision

Since the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic was a new experience for everyone,
supportive supervision from the authorities was a great facilitator according to majority of

the BNSs included in the study (54%).

Support from barangay authorities. Based on the experiences of the BNSs
included in the study, support from their respective barangays was a huge help to them
during the pandemic. According to them, barangay officials guided and assisted them in
accomplishing their tasks in the barangay, such as the distribution of food rations and
supplemental foods for children under-five. They provided needed transportation around
their barangay, which was especially a huge help during the early months of the pandemic
since available transportations during that time was scarce. As mentioned, “Our LGU and
municipality provided us alcohol and face mask before we do our OPT" (Resp. no. 68, 36
years old). In addition to these, a few BNSs mentioned that the Social Amelioration
Program (SAP) of the government was a big help to them since it was one way they can
provide for their family while they were fulfilling their duties in the barangay, away from

their families.

Support from MNAO. Guidance from the MNAO was also a great help to the
BNSs during the pandemic. According to the BNSs, their MNAO guided them on what
were the priority activities to be performed in the barangay. Someone also mentioned that
their MNAO assisted her in making the necessary reports. According to one BNS, “Our

MNAO also guided us on what activities we should perform" (Resp. no. 7, 46 y.0.).

3B

With teamwork/unity

Following the help from the local authorities and MNAO, teamwork and unity
among the local authorities and workmates of the BNSs were said to be a great aid for the
BNSs (13%). According to them, unity and cooperation of all the implementers in their
barangay made the performance of their tasks easier and faster. According to them, the
barangay police officers (tanod) helped them in distributing food rations to the households
around their barangay: “Unity among the whole barangay council and their support
especially in the implementation of nutrition programs was a great help for me--- the
immediate release of funds and teamwork in implementing the programs” (Resp. no. 86,
45 y.o.). They also helped in delivering the necessary nutrition programs to the community

such as the supplemental feeding for children.

Personal factors

Aside from the external help received by the BNSs during the early months of the
pandemic, personal factors (7%) also facilitated the success of implementation of their
roles and functions in the community. From the response of the BNSs, three factors were

identified: new learnings, dedication and good health.

‘New learnings. According to some of the BNSs, they learned new things during
the pandemic which added to their skills as BNS. Some BNSs mentioned that they learned
to implement “Gulayan sa Tahanan” which they shared to families with children under-

five to aid as additional source of food for their children. A BNS also mentioned that she


leamed something new from their Barangay Health Emergency Response Team (BHERT)
on what should be done during the pandemic and how to prevent the increase of COVID

cases.

Dedication to work. When asked what factors facilitated in the success of
performing of roles and functions during the pandemic, some BNSs mentioned that their
self-will and dedication to their work helped them in continuously performing their roles
and functions despite the pandemic. According to them, they were doing it for the
undernourished children: “Only strong self-will for the underweight children” (Resp. no.

134, 55 y.0.).

Good health. Having good health was also among the personal factors which
sustained the BNSs during the pandemic. According to them, good health and following

the safety protocol enabled them to perform their roles and functions.

With multisectoral coordination

Coordination within the local authorities and with the private sectors and NGOs
who helped their barangay were also considered as facilitating factors by some of the BNSs
in the study (6%). According to them, nutrition activities were implemented fast due to

effective coordination and donations from outside their community.

Coordination within barangay. According to the BNSs, with proper coordination

within their barangay, they were able to distribute food rations around their community


fast. They were able to set schedules and effectively implement the programs in their

barangay.

Private Sectors/NGO. 1n addition to coordination within the barangay,
coordination with private sectors and NGOs facilitated the implementation of nutrition
activities in the barangay during the pandemic. According to the BNSs, sponsorships and
donations from them were great help to them in the barangay as additional financial
assistance, logistics and food rations for the community, especially the families with infant

and young children.
Additional manpower

Due to the workload of BNSs during the pandemic, additional manpower (5%) was
one of the facilitators they identified. As explained by some of the BNSs, the formation of
BHERT and the delegation of contact tracer eased their workload because they helped them
in identifying and monitoring COVID positive people in the community. Also, they aided
the BNSs in monitoring households with infant and young children, especially those with

undernourished children.

With community participation

Community participation, specifically the cooperation of mothers and caregivers of
children were considered as facilitator by some of the BNSs (4%). As reported by them,
despite the pandemic and fear of the virus, some mothers/caregivers let them perform

anthropometric measurements to their children, as part of regular OPT, which eased their


work burden. Participation of such mothers and caregivers made their work faster and

easier.

Had training/seminar

Another facilitator identified by some of the BNSs was having training and
seminars (3%) related to emergencies and disaster such as the pandemic. As explained by
the BNSs, virtual seminars conducted about the pandemic provided them new knowledge
about the virus and guided them in the activities they need to perform: “In my experience,
the virtual seminar conducted was a great help for me because my knowledge and skills
were developed which I can use in performing nutrition activities and address problems of
families of children I weigh and obtain height” (Resp. no. 27, 53 y.0.). It also taught them

of the things they need and do not need to do.

Use of online means or technology

Since face-to-face interactions were limited during the early months of the
pandemic, through online was the means of communicating of the people. According to
some of the BNSs, this was one of the factors which enabled them to perform their roles
and functions in the community during the pandemic (3%). As mentioned by some of the
BNSs, although they were not able to visit personally, they were still able to counsel and
monitor the mothers and children courtesy to the use of cellular phones. There were also

some BNSs who are already senior citizens who were not allowed to go out due to the


protocols: Through virtual means, they were still able to communicate with target people

in their barangay.

Easy to reach mothers/caregivers

Due to the pandemic, people are prohibited to go out unless necessary. Because of
this, mothers and caregivers of children were always at home which enabled some of the
BNSs to reach them easily (2%). The availability of mothers/caregivers and children
facilitated the implementation of nutrition activities in the community during the pandemic.

Specifically, this made the house-to-house visit of BNSs to conduct OPT faster and easier.

Available resources (PPE)

Finally, availability of resources, specifically Personal Protective Equipment (PPE)
such as face mask and face shield, was a facilitator to successful implementation of roles
and functions during pandemic according to some BNSs (2%). As stated by them, wearing
of PPEs and the use of alcohol enabled them to conduct nutrition activities around the

community during the pandemic.

Perceived Barriers to Successful Performance of Roles and
Functions during the Pandemic

From the qualitative research implemented, barriers to the success of performing
roles and functions by the BNSs during the pandemic were identified. Identified factors

and the frequency the BNSs mentioned them are tabulated below.


Table 16. Barriers to successful performance of roles and functions during the pandemic

as identified by the BNSs
BARRIERS NUMBER PERCENTAGE
COVID-19-related 59 29.9
Lack of community participation 30 15.2
Stigmatized by community 29 147
Heavy workload 28 142
External threats and fear 21 10.7
Health and well-being 2 6.1
Weather 7 36
Distance 3 1s
Lack of transportation 2 10
Lack of funds 2 10
Lack of training 1 0s
Lack of logistics 1 0s
Poor barangay support 1 os
Workmates 1 0.5

COVID-19-related effect

Most of the barriers experienced by the BNSs were classified as related to the
pandemic (30%). These include following safety protocols, limited movement and being

quarantined. Specific explanation and sample for each are given below.

Safety protocol. According to the BNSs, the need to follow safety protocol such
as wearing of PPEs and observing social distancing prevented them from performing
activities easily. The wearing of face mask and face shield limited their movement such as
in measuring the height and weight of children during OPT. Also, the BNSs were not yet
used to wearing those during the early months of the pandemic. Wearing of PPEs also made

communication with the children difficult because they do not recognize the BNSs due to


the face mask and shield covering their face. The connection between the BNSs and the
community was also affected due to the safety protocols. Furthermore, social distancing
made the BNSs conscious in handling children during OPT as they are also afraid of the
possible spread of the virus. Some BNSs were not even able to conduct their weight and

height monitoring due to the protocols imposed in their barangay.

Limited movement. Another effect of COVID-19 in the barangays was the limited
movement due to curfews and the different levels of the quarantine, Because of this, limited
movement was one of the barriers identified by the BNSs in performing their job in the
community. As explained by the BNSs, due to the curfew and the quarantine imposed by
their barangays, they were not able to perform some of their functions such as the monthly
monitoring or OPT of the 0 to 23 months old children. Also, one of the BNSs mentioned

that her movement was limited due to her pregnancy.

Quarantine. As a consequence of performing their roles and functions in the
community during the pandemic, it was inevitable that some of the BNSs were quarantined
due to close contact with COVID positive people. Undergoing quarantine hindered some
of the BNS to perform their duties in their barangay. Some were even quarantined more
than once. In addition to the hassle in performing their duties, the BNSs’ families were also
affected due to the risk associated with the BNSs’ performance of roles in the community.
‘As mentioned by one BNS, “A challenge that I experienced during this pandemic was
when my whole family was quarantined due to my fulfillment of duty as a BNS” (Resp. no.

83, 46 y.0,).


Lack of community participation

‘As mentioned earlier, there were some BNSs who identified community
participation as a facilitating factor in successfully performing their roles and functions in
the community. There was, however, more BNSs who claimed that there was lack of
community participation which they considered as barrier during this pandemic (15%). As
stated by the BNSs, they had experiences where the mothers/caregivers of children refuse
to have their children measured for the OPT. There were even instances where some of the
mothers make different excuses just to prevent the BNSs from touching their child.
Furthermore, as mentioned by the BNSs, there were also some mothers/caregivers who do
not agree to the activities they were conducting during the pandemic. There were also a lot

of mothers who were scared that the BNSs will bring the virus to their house.
Stigmatized by the community

Due to the difficult situation during the early times of the pandemic when there was
strict quarantine and a lot of people lost their jobs, Social Amelioration Program (SAP) and
other support from the barangay were the only source of sustenance of some of the families.
Because of this, families who were not given ration often blame the BNSs even though
they were not the ones who decide who were included in the beneficiaries list. Because of
the amount of bullying experienced by the BNSs, this was one of the greatest barriers they
identified in performing their responsibilities in the barangay (15%). A number of BNSs
specifically mentioned that when some of the households were not able to receive ration,

they posted them, the BNSs, on Facebook, a social media platform, where they mock them


and rant about not being able to receive the ration. As stated by one BNS, “We experienced
too much during the pandemic, especially when we were distributing rations. People got
angry at us--we hear hurtful words. We just ignored them---we just do our duties” (Resp.

no. 80, 57 y.0.). This made some of the BNSs lose confidence and self-esteem while doing

their responsibilities in the community.

Heavy workload

Due to the different conditions during the pandemic, the roles of the BNSs in the
community also changed. There were additional tasks that the BNSs needed to accomplish.
Priority activities also changed during the surge of the pandemic. These include helping in
packing the food rations, distributing food rations to families, cooking meals for the
frontliners and assisting in guarding the barangay checkpoint. Because of the increased

workload during the pandemic, it was considered a barrier by some of the BNSs (14%).

External threats and fear

The BNSs identified threats which affected their performance of roles and functions
during the pandemic (11%). As mentioned by them, the fear of the virus impeded some of
their activities in the community. They fear, not only for their safety, but also for the safety
of their family. In addition to the fear of the virus, external threat identified by a number
of BNSs were the roaming dogs in their community. There were some BNSs who stated

that they were chased by the dogs while doing house-to-house visits. There was even


someone who was almost got bitten by a dog. Furthermore, another threat for the BNSs

was being in contact with COVID positive people while they were doing their duties.

Poor health conditions

The health and well-being of the BNSs were also mentioned by some as barrier to
their performance of roles and functions (6%). Some BNSs had COVID which affected
their performance. In addition to having COVID, some BNSs considered their being
member of the senior citizens as a barrier in performing during the pandemic: “During the
lockdown due to increased number of COVID positive cases, as a senior citizen, I was
prohibited to go out, so my performance of duty was hindered” (Resp. no. 45, 65 y.0.).
Family problem was also mentioned to have caused of poor performance during the

pandemic.

Changing weather

Weather disturbance was also mentioned as a hindrance in conducting activities in
the barangay (3.6%). Few BNSs complained about the severe heat while performing their
duties in the barangay. Someone also mentioned that despite typhoons, they still had to

continue conducting the activities.

Hard to reach target

The distance of households was one of the barriers identified by a few BNSs (2%).
According to them, there were households who live on the upland areas which were hard

to reach. Distribution of food ration to them was difficult for the BNSs.


Lack of transportation

In conjunction with the problem with the distance of some households, the
unavailability of transportation during the strict times of quarantine, was considered by
some BNSs as a barrier (1%). Due to lack of mode of transportation, some of the BNSs
had to use other means such as riding bicycle just to be able to reach the target households.
As stated by one BNS, “During distribution of food rations, transportation was prohibited
so we had to walk or ride a bike... only one person can ride a vehicle---the fare was

expensive” (Resp. no. 37, 56 y.0).

Lack of funds

Furthermore, some BNSs mentioned the lack of funds in their barangay which
impeded the provision of nutrition services to the community (1%). The lack of funds

prevented them from doing anything for the community.

Other barriers

Other barriers mentioned by few of the BNSs included the lack training related to
the pandemic (0.5%); lack of logistics in order to conduct activities (0.5%); poor support
from the barangay officials (0.5%); and problem with dealing with workmates in the

barangay (0.5%).


Suggestions and Recommendations of BNSs in Performing Roles and Functions
during Emergencies or Disasters Like the Pandemic

The BNSs interviewed were also asked of their suggestions and recommendations
on what would be helpful for them if ever same condition such as the pandemic occurs
again in the future. The table below lists the identified suggestions and recommendations

by the BNSs.

Table 17. Suggestions and recommendations identified by the BNSs which could help
during time like the pandemic

‘SUGGESTIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS, NUMBER PERCENTAGE
Provide trainings and conduct refresher training 26 19.1
Provide resources and other supplies 23 169
‘Supportive supervision from local barangay 7 125
Provide transportation 15 10
More benefits/incentives 1s 110
Unity/teamwork among workmates 6 44
Better communication and more meetings 5 37
Community participation 5 37
Clear guidelines 5 37
More feeding programs during similar events 5 37
Provide computer and online assistance 4 29
More manpower 4 29
Recognition of BNSs 2 15
Regularization of BNSs 1 07
Change of leadership 1 07
Have own Nutrition office 1 07
Activate BNC 1 07

According to the BNSs, top five suggestions and recommendations were providing

trainings and refresher training, resources and supplies, supportive supervision from local


barangay, available transportation and more benefits/incentives. With regards to training,
more training related to the pandemic would be helpful for them in dealing with similar
instances in the future (19.1%). This also includes refresher trainings for BNSs who have
been serving for a long time. It was mentioned that it would be better if they are retrained
on the basics, besides the training for cases like pandemic.

A number of BNSs also mentioned the need for additional resources and supplies
for the implementation of nutrition activities in their barangay (16.9%). There were a few
BNSs who requested for new measuring equipment, especially the height board. Many
BNSs mentioned that their height board was already deteriorating. PPEs such as face mask
and alcohol were also enumerated by some BNSs since PPEs they use are from their own
provision, not from the barangay. Other things requested by the BNSs were vitamins and
minerals for the children and other medical equipment such as sphygmomanometer.

Supportive supervision from the local barangay was also suggested by few BNSs
(12.5%). As explained by the BNSs, it would be better if the barangay continuously
supports the nutrition programs in the barangay. Also, the BNSs hoped that needed logistics
would always be provided to them by their barangay. In addition, available mode of
transportation would aid the BNSs in traveling around their barangay when delivering
nutrition services to the households (11.0%). Moreover, more benefits and incentives,

including insurance were specified by the BNSs as a facilitator or motivator (11.0%).

CHAPTER V

SUMMARY, CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS

Summary and Conclusion

This study was conducted primarily to determine the factors affecting the
performance of Barangay Nutrition Scholars (BNS) in Laguna, Philippines during the
COVID-19 pandemic. Specifically, it aimed to (1) describe personal and work-related
characteristics of the BNSs; (2) determine the changes in roles and functions performed by
the BNSs before and during pandemic; (3) analyze the association between the personal
and work-related factors and the changes in the roles and functions performed by the BNS;
and, (4) explain facilitating factors and barriers experienced by the BNSs in performing
their roles and functions and in implementing nutrition programs during quarantine. Data
collections were conducted from March to April 2022 in different municipalities in the
province of Laguna.

Quantitative method using semi-structured questionnaire was employed to
understand the situation of the BNSs in performing their roles and functions during the
pandemic. Descriptive statistics was used to describe the socioeconomic background and
work-related characteristics of the BNS. Wilcoxon Signed Ranked test was used to
compare the frequency of performance of the roles and functions before and during

pandemic. To determine the degree of association between the personal- and work-related


factors with the change in performance, Eta coefficient was used to determine association
between quantitative and qualitative, while Cramer’s V was used for the association
between two categorical variables. Furthermore, thematic analysis was used to identify
patterns for the facilitating factors, barriers and suggestions and recommendations from the
BNSs.

A total of 134 BNSs were included in the study (89% response rate). Based on the
results of the study it was found that majority of the BNS were between 50 to 69 years old,
female, married and high school graduate. Average household size was 5 members, with
average monthly income of less than PhP 25,000. Mean length of service as BNS was 12
years, the least with two (2) years of experience and the most with 43 years of experience.
Also, majority of the BNSs did not experience having illness or COVID-19 which could
have affected their performance. In terms of work-related factors, majority of the BNSs
claimed that during the pandemic, as of the interview, they were well aware of their roles,
trained and prepared, supported by their supervisors, satisfied with their work, given
allowance and transportation, given needed resources, given clear guidelines, capable of
performing despite the workload, supported by the community, well-coordinated with by
other sectors outside their barangay, and they have proper monitoring and evaluation of
activities conducted in their barangay during the pandemic. In addition, mean number of
children-under five covered by the BNSs in their barangay was 173 children.

With regards to the change in of performance before and during the pandemic, it
‘was found that performance of all roles and functions became less frequent during the

pandemic, with roles and functions under coordination and implementation having the


significant changes. Moreover, personal-related factors found to have significant
association with the change in performance include the BNSs’ marital status, household
income and health and well-being. On the other hand, work-related factors significantly
associated with change in performance were training or preparedness, workload,
community participation, guidelines and resources.

Top facilitating factors to successful performance of roles and functions during the
pandemic were supportive supervision from the barangay and the MNAO and teamwork
and unity among colleagues. On the other hand, top barriers to performance were COVID-
19-related factors, such as following of safety protocol, limited movement and quarantine,
and lack of community participation. Furthermore, major suggestions and
recommendations by the BNSs which they perceived can help their performance during
difficult times like the pandemic were having more emergency- and disaster-related
trainings and refresher trainings of the basics and being provided with resources and other
supplies they need.

As indicated by the results of this study, the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic did
affect the performance of the BNSs. There were specific personal- and work-related factors
identified which affected the change in performance of specific roles and functions. Based
on these findings, future research may want to focus on how the different personal- and
work-related affected the specific roles and functions of the BNSs. As the BNSs claimed
that they were trained on the events of emergencies and disasters, their level of
comprehension and preparedness for future similar incidents may also be assessed by

future studies. Furthermore, having experiencing being stigmatized and ostracized by the


community during the pandemic, possible effects on the mental health of the BNSs may
also be looked upon. Finally, similar research as this may be performed in other settings
such as in cities, which are more developed, to determine how severe the pandemic could

have affected the BNSs in the barangays.

Recommendations

From the findings of this research, recommendations formulated are as follows:

1. Since lack of training was found to have association with the change in performance
during the pandemic more trainings related to emergencies should be provided to the
BNSs also since some BNSs perceived that the trainings provided during the pandemic
were not enough because most were just conducted virtually. According to them,
physical or face-to-face training would make them understand and absorb the
information better. Also, it was known that new BNSs were recruited since the start of
the pandemic, and they are yet to be trained formally on the roles and functions of a
BNSs.

2. Since additional workload from being a frontliner during the pandemic affected the
performance of nutrition activities by the BNSs, additional manpower may be
considered by authorities so that implementation of necessary nutrition activities is not

hindered especially during emergencies.


3. Information dissemination about the importance of proper nutrition and its activities
may promote the participation of community members during uncertain times like the
pandemic.

4. Since guidelines affected the changes in performance during the pandemic, provision
of clear guidelines on the activities to be conducted and how to conduct them during
abnormal conditions would aid in better performance of BNSs.

5. As lack of resources affect performance, provision of mentioned needed resources
should be considered. Provision of PPEs would keep the BNSs safe in conducting
activities during the pandemic. Since the poor quality of measuring equipment was also
mentioned by the BNSs. provision of new measuring equipment, especially height
board for OPT may also facilitate better data collection. Also, as part of the “New
normal” era due to the pandemic, provision of devices such as computer or laptop in
the barangay for the use of the BNSs may facilitate faster communication and encoding
of necessary data, In line with this, training on using these technology and other online
platforms is recommended, especially for those elderly BNSs who are used to manual
operations.

6. Supportive supervision was found to be the greatest facilitator to successful
performance during the pandemic, thus should be continuously done to maintain proper

implementation of nutrition activities during normal and abnormal conditions.

CHAPTER VI

LITERATURE CITED

AGANAN, N. B. 2020. Barangay nutrition scholar (BNS) program. National Nutrition
Council. Available from: https://nnc.gov.ph/plans-and-programs/barangay-
nutrition-scholar-bns-program

AHMED, S. 2008. Taking health care where the community is: the story of the Shasthya
Sebikas of BRAC in Bangladesh. BRAC University Journal, 1, 39-45.
http:/Mdl handle.net/10361/415

ALAM, K., S. TASNEEM, & E. OLIVERAS. 201 1. Retention of female volunteer
community health workers in Dhaka urban slums: A case-control study. Health
Policy and Planning, 27(6), 477-486. https://doi.org/10.1093/heapoVczr059

ALAM, K., S. TASNEEM, & E OLIVERAS. 2012. Performance of female volunteer
community health workers in Dhaka urban slums. Social Science & Medicine,
75(3), 511-515. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.socscimed.2012.03.039

BANERJEE, C., N. SESSIONS, J. SHOHAM, & D. DOLAN. 2020. Multi-sector
programming at the sub-national level: A case study of Gingoog City and Diffun
and Saguday Municipalities, Philippines. Emergency Nutrition
Network. Available from: https://www.ennonline.nev/attachments/3340/MSP-
Philippines-Finalised-for-Dissemination-Version. pdf

BHAUMIK, S., S. MOOLA, J. TYAGI, D. NAMBIAR & M. KAKOTI. 2020.
Community health workers for pandemic response: A rapid evidence synthesis.
BMJ Global Health, 5(002769). Available from: https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjgh-
2020-02769

BOYCE, M. R., & R. KATZ. 2019. Community health workers and pandemic
preparedness: Current and prospective roles. Frontiers in Public Health, 7.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpubh.2019.00062


BRAUN, R., C. CATALANI, J. WIMBUSH, & D. ISRAELSKI. 2013. Community
health workers and mobile technology: A systematic review of the literature.
PLoS ONE, 8(6), €65772. https://doi.org/10.1371 /journal.pone.0065772

BROWN, J. E., J. S. ISAACS, U. B. KRINKE, E. LECHTENBERG, M. A. MURTAGH,
C. SHARBAUGH, P. L. SPLETT, J. STANG, & N. H. WOOLDRIDGE. 2011.
Nutrition Through the Life Cycle. 4th Edition. USA: Wadsworth

COVID-19 PH. (2020). Philippines Covid19 - Data and Case Tracker. COVID19
Philippines - Data and Case Tracker. Available from: https://covid19ph.com/

CHEMALLI, S., A. MARI-SAEZ, C. EL BCHERAOUI, & H. WEISHAAR. 2022.
Health care workers’ experiences during the COVID-19 pandemic: A scoping
review. Human Resources for Health, 20(1). https://doi.org/10.1186/s12960-022-
00724-1

CRISPIN, N., A. WAMAE, M. NDIRANGU, D. WAMALWA, G. WANGALWA, P.
WATAKO, & E. MBITI. 2012. Effects of selected socio-demographic
characteristics of community health workers on performance of home visits
during pregnancy: A cross-sectional study in Busia district, Kenya. Global
Journal of Health Science, 4(5). https://doi.org/10.5539/gjhs.v4nSp78.

DALE, N. M., M. MYATT, C. PRUDHON, & A. BRIEND. 2013. Using mid-upper arm
circumference to end treatment of severe acute malnutrition leads to higher
weight gains in the most malnourished children. PLoS ONE, 8(2), e55404.
https://doi.org/10.1371 journal.pone.0055404

DAMBISYA, Y. M., & S. MATINHURE. 2012. Policy and programmatic implications
of task shifting in Uganda: A case study. BMC Health Services Research, 12(1).
https://doi.org/10.1186/1472-6963-12-61

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH. 2017. Barangay nutrition scholar (BNS) program |
Department of Health website. GOVPH. Available
from: https://www.doh.gov.phvhealth-program/BNS


DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH. 2019. Barangay nutrition scholar (BNS) program |
Department of Health website. GOVPH. Available from:
https://www doh.gov.ph/health-program/BNS

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH. 2020a, DOH Department Circular No 2020-0167.
Available from: https://nne.gov.ph/component/phocadownload/category/2-

region-II-policies-plans-acti
2020-0167

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH. 2020b. DOH Department Memorandum No. 2020-0237.
Available from:

jes ?download=2467:doh-department-circular-no-

hitps://www.nnc.gov.ph/component/phocadownload/category/63-policies-plans-
activities?download=217 |:doh-department-memorandum-no-2020-0237

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH. 2020c. Updates on Novel Coronavirus Disease
(COVID-19). Welcome to Department of Health website | Department of Health
website. Available from: https://www.doh.gov.ph/2019-nCoV

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH. 2021. Department of Health website. Welcome to
Department of Health website | Department of Health website. Available from:
hitps://doh.gov.ph/2019-nCoV

DEPARTMENT OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY - FOOD AND NUTRITION
RESEARCH INSTITUTE. 2019. 2018 Expanded National Nutrition Survey.
FNRI Bldg., DOST Compound, Gen. Santos Avenue, Bicutan, Taguig City,
Metro Manila, Philippines. Available from:
http:/enutrition. fnri.dost gov.ph/site/uploads/2018_ENNS_Dissemination_Lagun
apdf

DEPARTMENT OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY - FOOD AND NUTRITION
RESEARCH INSTITUTE. 2019b. Nutritional Status of Filipino Pre-school
Children (2-5 years old). FNRI Bldg., DOST Compound, Gen. Santos Avenue,
Bicutan, Taguig City, Metro Manila, Philippines. Available from:
hitps://www.fnri.dost. gov.ph/images//sources/¢NNS2018/Pre-
school_and_School-Children.pdf


DEPARTMENT OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY. 2021. Profile of Region 4A.
Retrieved June 24, 2021, ftom https://www.dti.gov.ph/regions/region-4a/profile/

DO ROSARIO COSTA, N., H. P.R. BELLAS, P. V. DA SILVA, D. DE CARVALHO,
C. UHR, VIEIRA, & A. JATOBA. 2021. Community health workers’ attitudes,
practices and perceptions towards the COVID-19 pandemic in Brazilian low-
income communities. Work, 68(1), 3-11. https://doi.org/10.3233/wor-205000

DOH REGION IV-A. 2018. FHSIS Mortality Report. Available from:
https://ro4a.doh.gov.ph/images/Health_Statistics/Field_Health_Service_Informat
ion_Systen/FHSIS_Quarterly Report/3rd_Quarterly_Reports_2018/Motality-
Mobidity_Disease/FHSIStat_Mortality_Diseases_Jan-Sept2018.pdf

ENGLERT, E. G., R. KIWANUKA, & L. C. NEUBAUER. 2018. ‘When I die, let me be
the last.’ community health worker perspectives on past Ebola and Marburg
outbreaks in Uganda, Global Public Health, 14(8), 1182-1192.
hhttps://doi.org/10.1080/17441692.2018, 1552306

FEROZ, A., R. JABEEN, & S. SALEEM. 2020. Using mobile phones to improve
community health workers performance in low-and-middle-income countries.
BMC Public Health, 20(1). https://doi.org/10. 1 186/s12889-020-8173-3

GARG, A., A. BUCU, & R. GARELA. 2016. Philippines nutrition cluster: Lessons
leamt from the response to typhoon Haiyan (Yolanda). ENN. Available from:
https://www ennonline.net/fex/52/nutritionclusterphilippines

HARRELL, M., S. A. SELVARAJ, & M. EDGAR. 2020. DANGER! Crisis
HealthWorkers at Risk. International Journal of Environmental Research and
Public Health. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph17155270

HEUNIS, J. C., E. WOUTERS, W. E. NORTON, M. C. ENGELBRECHT, N. G.
KIGOZI, A. SHARMA, & C. RAGIN. 201 1. Patient- and delivery-level factors
related to acceptance of HIV counseling and testing services among tuberculosis
patients in South Africa: A qualitative study with community health workers and
program managers. Implementation Science, 6(1). https://doi.org/10.1186/1748-
5908-6-27


DEPARTMENT OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY. 2021. Profile of Region 4A.
Retrieved June 24, 2021, from https://www.dti.gov.ph/regions/region-4a/profile/

DO ROSARIO COSTA, N., H. P.R. BELLAS, P. V. DA SILVA, D. DE CARVALHO,
C. UHR, VIEIRA, & A. JATOBA. 2021. Community health workers’ attitudes,
practices and perceptions towards the COVID-19 pandemic in Brazilian low-
income communities. Work, 68(1), 3-11. https://doi.org/10.3233/wor-205000

DOH REGION IV-A. 2018. FHSIS Moriality Report. Available from:
hitps://ro4a.doh. gov.ph/images/Health_Statistics/Field_Health_Service_Informat
ion_System/FHSIS_Quarterly Report/3rd_Quarterly_Reports_2018/Motality-
Mobidity_Disease/FHSIStat_Mortality_Diseases_Jan-Sept2018.pdf

ENGLERT, E. G., R. KIWANUKA, & L. C. NEUBAUER. 2018. ‘When I die, let me be
the last.’ community health worker perspectives on past Ebola and Marburg
outbreaks in Uganda. Global Public Health, 14(8), 1182-1192.
hittps://doi.org/10.1080/17441692.2018.1552306

FEROZ, A., R. JABEEN, & S. SALEEM. 2020. Using mobile phones to improve
‘community health workers performance in low-and-middle-income countries.
BMC Public Health, 20(1). https://doi.org/10. 1 186/s12889-020-8173-3

GARG, A., A. BUCU, & R. GARELA. 2016. Philippines nutrition cluster: Lessons
learnt from the response to typhoon Haiyan (Yolanda). ENN. Available from:
bhtips://www ennonline.net/fex/52/nutritionclusterphilippines

HARRELL, M., S. A. SELVARAJ, & M. EDGAR. 2020. DANGER! Crisis
HealthWorkers at Risk. International Journal of Environmental Research and
Public Health. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph17155270

HEUNIS, J. C., E. WOUTERS, W. E. NORTON, M. C. ENGELBRECHT, N. G.
KIGOZI, A. SHARMA, & C. RAGIN. 201 1. Patient- and delivery-level factors
related to acceptance of HIV counseling and testing services among tuberculosis
patients in South Africa: A qualitative study with community health workers and
program managers. Implementation Science, 6(1). https://doi.org/10.1186/1748-
5908-6-27


HIGH LEVEL PANEL OF EXPERTS. 2020. Impacts of COVID-19 on food security
and nutrition: developing effective policy responses to address the hunger and
malnutrition pandemic. Rome. https://doi.org/10.4060/cb1000en

JAVANPARAST, S., F. BAUM, R. LABONTE, D. SANDERS, Z. RAJABI, & G.
HEIDARI. 2012. The experience of community health workers training in Iran:
A qualitative study. BMC Health Services Research, 12(1).
https://doi.org/10.1186/1472-6963-12-291

JOOS, O., R. SILVA, A. AMOUZOU, L. H. MOULTON, J. PERIN, J. BRYCE, & L.
C. MULLANY, 2016, Evaluation of a mHealth data quality intervention to
improve documentation of pregnancy outcomes by health surveillance assistants
in Malawi: A cluster randomized trial. PLOS ONE, 11(1), 0145238.
hitps://doi.org/10.1371 journal, pone.0145238

KAWAKATSU, Y., T. SUGISHITA, J. KIOKO, A. ISHIMURA, & S. HONDA. 2012.
Factors influencing the performance of community health workers in Kisumu
west, Kenya. Primary Health Care Research & Development, 13(04), 294-

300. https://doi.org/10.1017/s1463423612000138

KAWAKATSU, Y., T. SUGISHITA, J. TSUTSUI, K. ORUENIJO, S. WAKHULE, K.
KIBOSIA, E. WERE, & S. HONDA. 2015. Individual and contextual factors
associated with community health workers’ performance in nyanza province,
Kenya: A multilevel analysis. BMC Health Services Research, 15(1).
https://doi.org/10.1186/s12913-015-1117-4

KOK, M. C., M. DIELEMAN, M. TAEGTMEYER, J. E. BROERSE, S. S. KANE, H.
ORMEL, M. M. TUM, & K. A. DE KONING. 2014. Which intervention design
factors influence performance of community health workers in low- and middle-
income countries? A systematic review. Health Policy and Planning, 30(9), 1207-
1227. https://doi.org/10.1093/heapol/czu126

LOTTA, G., J. NUNES, M, FERNANDEZ, & M. GARCIA CORREA. 2022. The
impact of the COVID-19 pandemic in the frontline health workforce: Perceptions


of vulnerability of Brazil’s community health workers. Health Policy OPEN, 3,
100065. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.hpopen.2021.100065

MACLAINE, A., & M. CORBETT. 2006. Infant feeding in emergencies: Experiences
from Indonesia and Lebanon. ENN. Available from:
https://www ennonline.nev/fex/29/infantfeeding

MAIORANG, T., M. VAGNI, V. GIOSTRA, & D. PAJARDI. 2020. COVID-19: Risk
factors and protective role of resilience and coping strategies for emergency
stress and secondary trauma in medical staff and emergency workers—An
online-based inquiry. Sustainability, 12(21), 9004.
https://doi.org/10.3390/su12219004

MC KENNA, P., G. BABUGHIRANA, M. AMPONSAH, S. G. EGOEH, E. BANURA,
R. KANWAGI, & B. GRAY. 2019. Mobile training and support (MOTS)
service—using technology to increase Ebola preparedness of remotely-located
community health workers (CHWs) in Sierra Leone. mHealth, 5, 35-35.
https://doi.org/10.21037/mhealth.2019.09.03

MCMAHON, S. A., L. S. HO, H. BROWN, L. MILLER, R. ANSUMANA, & C. E.
KENNEDY. 2016. Healthcare providers on the frontlines: A qualitative
investigation of the social and emotional impact of delivering health services
during Sierra Leone’s Ebola epidemic. Health Policy and Planning, 31(9), 1232-
1239. https://doi.org/10.1093/heapoVezw055

MPEMBENI, R.N., A. BHATNAGAR, A. LEFEVRE, D. CHITAMA, D. P. URASSA,
C. KILEWO, R. M. MDEE, H. SEMU, P. J. WINCH, J. KILLEWO, A. H.
BAQUI, & A. GEORGE. 2015. Motivation and satisfaction among community
health workers in Morogoro region, Tanzania: Nuanced needs and varied
ambitions. Human Resources for Health, 13(1). https://doi.org/10.1186/s12960-
015-0035-1

MULINGWA, M. W. 2016. Performance among Community Health Workers in Njiru
District, Nairobi County, Kenya [Master's thesis]. Available from: https://ir-
library.ku.ac.ke/bitstream/handle/123456789/11 184/Performance%20among%20


community%20health%20workers%20in%20Njiru%20district%2C%20Nairobi
%20county%2C%20K enya. pdf?sequence= &isAllowed=y

MUSOKE, D., R. NDEJJO, E. ATUSINGWIZE, T. MUKAMA, C. SSEMUGABO, &
L. GIBSON. 2019. Performance of community health workers and associated
factors in a rural community in Wakiso district, Uganda. African Health
Sciences, 19(3), 2784-2797. https://doi.org/10.43 14/ahs.v19i3.55

MUSYOKI, A., & A. NARAYAN. 2016, Bangladesh nutrition cluster: A case in
preparedness. ENN. Available from:
https://www.ennonline.net/fex/52/bangladeshnutritioncluster

MELLO, L. M., R. C. SANTOS, & P. C. ALBUQUERQUE. 2022. Community health
workers in the COVID-19 pandemic: Scoping review. Saiide em Debate,
46(spel), 368-384. https://doi.org/10.1590/0103-11042022e125i

NATIONAL NUTRITION COUNCIL REGION 7. 2020. Barangay nutrition scholars:
Frontline heroes. Philippine Information Agency. Available from:
hitps://pia.gov.ph/news/articles/1044292

NATIONAL NUTRITION COUNCIL. 2014. Nutrition Month 2014 Kalamidad
Paghandaan: Gutom at Malnutrisyon Agapan! TALKING POINTS [PDF]. NNC.
Available from:
https://www.nne.gov.ph/phocadownloadpap/userupload/elavapie/2014_nm_talki
ng_points.pdf

NATIONAL NUTRITION COUNCIL, 2018. Philippine Plan of Action for Nutrition
2017-2022: A call to urgent action for Filipinos and its leadership. Available
from:
https://nne.gov.ph/phocadownloadpap/PPAN/8Sept_PPAN2017_2022Executiv
%20Summary pdf

NATIONAL NUTRITION COUNCIL. 2020. NUTRITION CLUSTER ADVISORY
NO. 01 Series 2020. Available from:
hittps://www.humanitarianresponse.info/sites/www.humanitarianresponse.info/fil

es/documents/files/final_march2020_nutrition_cluster_advisory.pdf


NGENY, F. K. 2015. Factors Influencing the Performance of Community Health
Workers in Nandi Hills Sub-County [Master's thesis}. Available from:
http://erepository.uonbi.ac.ke/bitstream/handle/1 1295/90619/Ngeny_Factors%20
influencing%20the%20performance%200f%20community%20health%20worker
8%20in%20Nandi%20hills%20sub-county.pdf?sequence=1

NGILANGWA, D. P., & G. S. MGOMELLA. 2018. Factors associated with retention of
community health workers in maternal, newbom and child health programme in
Simiyu region, Tanzania. African Journal of Primary Health Care & Family
Medicine, 10(1). https://doi.org/10.4102/phefm.v10i1 1506

OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH ADMINISTRATION. 2020. Safety and
health topics | COVID-19 - Medical information | Occupational safety and health
administration. Available from: https://www.osha.gov/SLTC/covid-
19/medicalinformation. html

OLATEJU, Z., T. OLUFUNLA YO, C. MACARTHUR, C. LEUNG, & B. TAYLOR.
2022. Community health workers experiences and perceptions of working during
the COVID-19 pandemic in Lagos, Nigeria—A qualitative study. PLOS ONE,
17(3), e0265092. https://doi.org/10.1371 joumal.pone.0265092

OUEDRAOGO, O., M. H. DOUDOU, K. M. DRABO, M. KIBURENTE, D. CISSE, C.
MESENGE, D. SANOU, N. M. ZAGRE, & P. DONNEN. 2020. Facilitating
factors and challenges of the implementation of multisectoral nutrition
programmes at the community level to improve optimal infant and young child
feeding practices: A qualitative study in Burkina Faso. Public Health Nutrition,
1-12, https://doi.org/10.1017/s136898002000347x

O'DONOVAN, J., C. O'DONOVAN, I. KUHN, S. E. SACHS, & N. WINTERS. 2018.
Ongoing training of community health workers in low-income andmiddle-
income countries: A systematic scoping review of the literature. BMJ Open, 8(4),
021467. https://doi.org/10.1136/omjopen-2017-021467

PHILATLAS. 2021. Laguna, Retrieved June 24, 2021,
from https://www philatlas.com/luzon/r04a/laguna.html

PHILIPPINE NATIONAL VOLUNTEER SERVICE COORDINATING AGENCY.
2020. Volunteers for healthier children: The Barangay nutrition scholars.
Philippine National Volunteer Service Coordinating Agency | Build Hope,
Change Lives: Volunteer! Available from: https://www.pnvsca.gov.ph/?p=583

Philippine Statistics Authority. 2020. Philippine standard geographic code (PSGC) |
Philippine Statistics Authority. Available
from: https://psa.gov. ph/classification/psge/?q=psge/citimuni/043400000

PROVALIS RESEARCH. 2020. Free qualitative data analysis software | QDA miner
lite. Available from: https://provalisresearch.com/products/qualitative-data-
analysis-software/freeware/

RIVAS, T. 2020. Barangay nutrition scholars: Our modern-day nutrition heroes.
National Nutrition Council. Available from: https://nne.gov.ph/regional-
offices/luzon/national-capital-region/3757-barangay-nutrition-scholars-our-
modem-day-nutrition-heroes

SALEHI ZALANI, G., M. BAYAT, A. SHOKRI, S. E. MIRBAHAEDDIN, V. RASI, S.
ALIREZAEI, & F. MANAFI. 2016. Affecting Factors on the Performance of
Community Health Workers in Iran’s Rural Areas: A Review Article. Iran J
Public Health, 45(11), 1399-1410.
hitps://ijph.tums.ac.ir/index.php/ijph/article/view/8341

SARMA, H., I. JABEEN, S. K. LUIES, M. F. UDDIN, T. AHMED, T. J. BOSSERT, &
C. BANWELL. 2020. Performance of volunteer community health workers in
implementing home-fortification interventions in Bangladesh: A qualitative
investigation. PLOS ONE, 15(4),

0230709. https://doi.org/10.137 1/journal.pone.0230709

SEE, D. A. 2021. City hikes monthly allowance of Barangay health workers, nutrition
scholars. City Government of Baguio. Available from:
hitps://www.baguio.gov. ph/content/city-hikes-monthly-allowance-barangay-

health-workers-nutrition-scholars


SELVARAJ, S. A., K. E, LEE., M. HARRELL, I. IVANOV, & B. ALLEGRANZI.
2018. Infection rates and risk factors for infection among health workers during
Ebola and Marburg virus outbreaks: A systematic review. The Journal of
Infectious Diseases, 218(suppl_5), S679-S689.
https://doi.org/10.1093/infdis/jiy435

SHARMA, R., P. WEBSTER, & S. BHATTACHARYYA. 2014. Factors affecting the
performance of community health workers in India: A multi-stakeholder
perspective. Global Health Action, 7(1),

25352. https://doi.org/10.3402/gha.v7.25352

SIMBA, D. O., & D.C. KAKOKO. 2009. Volunteerism among out-of-school adolescent
reproductive health peer educators: is it a sustainable strategy in resource
constrained countries? African Journal of Reproductive Health, 13(3), 99-110.
Available from: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20690265/

SMITH, S., A. AGARWAL, L. CRIGLER, M. GALLO, A. FINLAY, F. HOMSI, E.
LANFORD, C. WISKOW, & T. WULIJI. 2013. Community Health Volunteer
Program Functionality and Performance in Madagascar: A Synthesis of
Qualitative and Quantitative Assessments. USAID Health Care Improvement
Project. Available from: https://core.ac.uk/download/pdf/160561564.pdf

UNICEF. 2020. Joint statement on nutrition in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic
in Asia and the Pacific. Available from:
https://www.unicef.org/rosa/reports/joint-statement-nutrition-context-covid-19-
pandemic-asia-and-pacific

USAID. 2015. Factors Impacting the Effectiveness of Community Health Worker
Behavior Change: A Literature Review. http:/healthcommcapacity.org/wp-
content/uploads/201 5/06/Barriers-to-CH W-Svc-Provision-Lit-Review-
June2015.pdf

VERVERS, M., & C. HWANG. 2019. Barriers to infant feeding in emergencies
programming in middle and high-income countries. ENN. Available from:
hitps://www.ennonline.nev/fex/6 I /barrierstoinfantfeeding


VICHAYANRAT, T., A. STECKLER, & C. TANASUGARN. 2013. Barriers and
facilitating factors among lay health workers and primary care providers to
promote children’s oral health in Chon Buri province, Thailand. Southeast Asian
Journal of Tropical Medicine and Public Health, 44(2), 332-343.
https://pubmed.nebi.nIm.nih.gov/23691643/

WITTER, S., H. WURIE, P. CHANDIWANA, J. NAMAKULA, S. SO, A. ALONSO-
GARBAYO, F. SSENGOOBA, & J. RAVEN. 2017. How do health workers
experience and cope with shocks? Learning from four fragile and conflict-
affected health systems in Uganda, Sierra Leone, Zimbabwe and Cambodia.
Health Policy and Planning, 32(suppl_3), iii3-iiil3.
https://doi.org/10.1093/heapol/czx 112

WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION. 2010. Interpretation Guide. Available from:
https://www.who.inVautrition/nlis_interpretation_guide.pdf

WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION. 2017. Policy - Philippine plan of action for
nutrition (PPAN) 2017-2022 | Global database on the implementation of nutrition
action (GINA). WHO/OMS: Extranet Systems. Available from:
hitps://extranet.who.int/nutrition/gina/en/node/40375

WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION. 20202. Philippines: COVID-19 Response Plan
(03 April 2020). Available from:
hitps://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/files/resources/HCT%20Covid-
19%20Response%20Plan%20%283%20A pril%20update%29.pdf

WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION. 2020b. COVID-19 in the Philippines situation
report 62. WHO | World Health Organization. Available from:
https://www.who.int/philippines/internal-publications-detail/covid-19-in-the-
philippines-situation-report-62

WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION. 2020c. Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) in the
Philippines. WHO | World Health Organization. Available from:
https://www.who.int/philippines/emergencies/covid-19-in-the-philippines


WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION. 2020. Coronavirus. Available from:
https://www.who.invhealth-topics/coronavirus#tab=tab_1
WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION. 2020. Coronavirus disease (COVID-19).
WHO | World Health Organization. Available from:

https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel-coronavirus-201 9/question-

and-answers-hub/q-a-detail/coronavirus-disease-covid-19#:

‘text=symptoms
WORLDOMETER. 2021. Coronavirus update (Live): 13,953,344 cases and 592,778

deaths from COVID-19 virus pandemic. Worldometer - real time world
statistics. Available from: https://www.worldometers.info/coronavirus/
YAN, X., T. LIU, L. GRUBER, M. HE, & N. CONGDON. 2012. Attitudes of
physicians, patients, and village health workers toward glaucoma and diabetic

retinopathy in rural China. Archives of Ophthalmology, 130(6).
https://doi.org/10.1001/archophthalmol.2012.145
