Coastal Environmental Dynamics of Manamoc Island, Cuyo, Palawan, Philippines

MYLENE R. MARTINEZ

UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES LOS BAÑOS

Master of Science in Environmental Science

JUNE 2018

ABSTRACT

Manamoc Island was among the small islands in the Philippines experiencing
coastal retreat. With the threats of hydrometeorological hazards, coastal retreat could get
worse. It is therefore, imperative to enhance the resilience of Manamoc Island to
hydrometeorological hazards through enhancing coping mechanisms. To do so, this study
sought the following: 1) describe the coastal dynamics around Manamoc Island; 2) evaluate
the suitability and possibility of mangroves as mitigating measures for coastal retreat; and
3) enhance the community resiliency to withstand hydrometeorological hazards. In
describing the coastal dynamics of Manamoc Island, the following were done: time-series
analysis of shoreline change, longshore drift experiment, beach profiling and key informant
interview (KII). Results have shown an average of 38 - 64.5m coastal retreat from 1989 —
2016. Apparently, it was due to the compounding effect of both natural factors such as
monsoons, typhoons, and storm surge and anthropogenic factors such as livelihood
activities, physical development (inftastructures), lack of policy addressing coastal retreat, and weak enforcement of environmental laws. Mangrove was one of the viable mitigating measures to apprehend the negative
impacts of physical or natural factors triggering coastal retreat hence this study assessed
the distribution, physiognomy and the factors affecting the distribution of mangroves in
the island through vegetation sampling using plot method. Results have shown that among
the 11 species found in Manamoc Island, Rhizophora mucronata was the dominant species.
Rhizophora species are good land stabilizers because of their complex root system
adaptation. Moreover, this genus is resilient to typhoons. Cluster analysis of mangroves
resulted to 5 clusters: Cluster I — Avicennia marina (Forsk.) Vierh.; Cluster II — Bruguiera
sexangula (Lour.) Poi; Cluster II] — Rhizophora apiculata Blume and Rhizophora
mucronata Lam. Cluster TV — R. mucronata Lam, and Cluster V — Sonneratia alba J. Smith. Clustering followed the zonation of mangroves: landward, middleward, and
seaward. The distribution of mangrove vegetation was greatly influenced by soil pH, soil
texture and Nitrogen as evidenced by the Canonical Correspondence Analysis (CCA). Systems analysis of Manamoc Island in the context of coastal retreat recommended
enhancing coping mechanisms to hydrometeorological hazards through: establishment of
mangrove corridors; reforestation and planting of local beach forest species along the
coastline; polishing of local ordinances and empowering local enforcers; and education at
all levels to let the community understand that their activities negatively affected the
natural barriers against hydrometeorological hazards.

Keywords: anthropogenic factors, coastal retreat, hydrometeorological hazards,
mangrove corridor, natural processes

CHAPTER I

GENERAL INTRODUCTION

Coastal areas are among the most dynamic ecosystems involving the interaction of
the three spheres of the earth: lithosphere, hydrosphere, and the atmosphere. This
interaction is technically labelled as coastal dynamics. It imvolves several natural or
physical processes of which among the most prominent is coastal erosion.

Coastal erosion is a global problem (Cai et al, 2009; Zhang et al, 2004) considering
both natural processes and anthropogenic impacts. In the Philippines, it has been observed
and reported for many years m urban commumities situated along coastal areas ie. San
Fernando, La Union (Bayani et. al, 2009); Bataan and Cavite (Perez, Amadore, & Fei,
1999). Due to the geographical features of our country, coastal erosion is a given. The term
coastal erosion is commonly interchanged with coastal retreat. Technically, these two terms
are different since coastal erosion is a physical process of the earth referring to the wearing
away of soil or sand that results to coastal retreat. By this, the problem is not the coastal
erosion but the retreat of coastline or shoreline. From hereon, coastal retreat or shoreline
retreat will be used in this paper.

In very small islands such as Manamoc Island in Palawan, coastal retreat is a big
problem. Being a fishing community devoid of full understanding of the dynamics of the
coastal areas, majority ofthe inhabitants established their abode along the beaches. During

the occurrences of storms, big and strong waves are generated that when coupled with high

tide results in higher than normal seawater levels or storm surge. This causes coastal
erosion affecting the houses and other structures along the beach front according to the
locals. Around year 2000 or earlier, the locals planted mangroves along the beach to protect
their cemetery near the beach at the mouth of the lagoon. The planting was a successful
with mangroves continuously growing. However, in later years, the western shoreline was
observed to be receding hence the locals built a seawall for protection. Stones and rocks
from the hills in the island were extracted and sands from the beach were mined and used
in seawall construction. But seawalls not built in proper zones within the beach hindered
the dynamic coastal processes particularly the sediment transport that balances the
sediment budget in coastal areas (Tait & Griggs, 1990). Building a seawall is not an
assurance for a coastal protection especially for one that is built without consideration of
the coastal processes as implied in the study of Tait and Griggs (1990) on beach response
to seawalls. Thus, these actions may not actually help in the mitigation of coastal erosion
in the long run but instead the removal ofstones and rocks from the hills may trigger upland
erosion putting the community to more risk. In addition, building a seawall is costly and
consume scarce resources. Meanwhile, in the northwestern part of the island, the locals
attempted to plant mangrove in the nearshore area for many years but failed. The reasons

for failure were never investigated.

Currently, Manamoc Island is still threatened with coastal erosion. With the threat
of sealevel rise, the situation could get worse. Therefore, it was the objective of the study
to understand the coastal processes that caused coastal retreat and recommended possible

options for mitigation. Specifically, the study aimed to: (1) describe the coastal dynamics


shaping the coastline of Manamoc Island; (2) evaluate the suitability and possibility of
mangroves as mitigating measure for coastal retreat; and (3) enhance coping mechanisms
to hydrometeorological hazards in Manamoc Island, Cuyo, Palawan, Philippines.
Quantification and prediction of shoreline recession as well as erosion rate and
volume and sedimentology were not included in the study. Furthermore, geologic process

such as sealevel rise and land subsidence were not considered in this study.

Definition of Terms

Accretion is the gradual and imperceptible accumulation of land by natural causes, as out
of the sea or a river. This may be a result from a deposit of alluvion upon the
shore, or by a recession of the water from the shore (Shalowitz, 1964)

Biodiversity corridor are thm straps of habitat used to connect isolated patches of a
landscape (Tewksbury, et al, 2002)

Coastal environmental dynamics as used in this study refers to the interaction of the three
spheres of the earth: atmosphere, lithosphere, hydrosphere and the humans.

Coping capacity is the ability of people, organizations and systems, using available skills
and resources, to face and manage adverse conditions, emergencies or disasters
(UNISDR 2009).

Erosion is the process of wearing away material from a coastal profile due to imbalance in
the supply and export of material from a certain section (Marchand, 2010).

Hydrometeorological hazard is a process or phenomenon of atmospheric, hydrological or
oceanographic nature that may cause loss of life, injury or other health impacts,
property damage, loss of livelihoods and services, social and economic
disruption, or environmental damage (UNISDR, 2009).

Longshore current is a current located in the surf zone, moving generally parallel to the
shoreline, generated by waves breaking at an angle with the shoreline (NOAA

2017).


Monsoon is the wind in the general atmospheric circulation typified by a seasonal persistent
wind direction and by a pronounced change in direction from one season to the
next.

Resilience is the ability of a system and its component parts to anticipate, absorb,
accommodate or recover from the effects of a hazardous event in a timely and
efficient manner, incliding through ensuring the preservation, restoration, or
improvement of its essential basic structure and functions (IPCC 2012)

Sea level rise is the apparent rise in average sea level of the ocean measured relative to a
land mass. Can be the result of ice cap melting but also may be the result of land
submergence.

Shoreline is the intersection of the land with the water surface.

Shoreline retreat is the gradual landward movement of the sea/land boundary as defined
by the location of some tidal datum such as mean sea level.

Storm surge is a temporary increase, at a particular locality, in the height of the sea due to
extreme meteorological conditions (low atmospheric pressure and/or strong
winds).

Subsidence is the sudden sinking or gradual downward settling of the earth’s surface with

little or no horizontal motion.

Literature Cited

BAYANI-ARIAS, J. K., DORADO, M. A., & DORADO, R. A. (2012). Economic
Vulnerability and Analysis of Adaptation Options to Coastal Erosion in San
Fernando, La Union. JESM, 15(2): 35 - 49.

CAI, F., SU, X., LIU, J., LI, B., & LEI, G. (2009). Coastal erosion in China under the
condition of global climate change and measures for its prevention. Progress in
Natural Science, 415-426.

PEREZ, R. T., AMADORE, L. A., & FEIR, R. B. (1999). Climate Change Impacts and
Responses in the Philippine's Coastal Sector. Clim Res, 97-107.

TAIT, J. F., & GRIGGS, G. B. (1990). Beach response to the presence of a seawall Shore
and Beach, 11-28.

TEWKSBURY, J., LEVEY, D. J., HADDAD, N. M., SARGENT, S., ORROCK, J. L.,
WELDON, A., .. . TOWNSEND, P. (2002). Corridors affect plants, animals, and
their interactions in fragmented landscapes. Proceedings for the National Academy
of Science of the United States of America (pp. 12923 - 12926). Washington DC:
Kenneth R. Fullton.

ZHANG, K., DOUGLAS, B., & LEATHERMAN, S. P. (2004). Global Warming and
Coastal Erosion. Climatic Change , Kluwer Academic Publishers. The Netherlands.
64: 41-58.

CHAPTER I

REVIEW OF LITERATURE

Abstract

Coastal retreat is a problem affecting many places around the world and small islands are
especially vulnerable to this hazard. In the Philippines, only a number of research were
conducted on coastal retreat/erosion. This review aimed to discuss problems of coastal
retreat including the factors causing this retreat and the mitigating measures as well as the
best practices in this field. Coastal retreat could be attributed to natural and/or
anthropogenic factors. With the threat of climate change and sea level rise, small islands
will become more vulnerable and therefore needed to enhance their coping mechanisms.

Key words: adaptive capacity, coastal retreat, coastal vegetation, coping mechanisms,
hydrometeorological hazards

Introduction

Climate change, sea level rise, strong typhoons and storm surge are among the
common natural hazards that threaten coastal areas and small islands. Along with these
hazards are the problems of excessive coastal erosion that leads to coastal retreat. These
hazards amplify the effect of coastal erosion to the sandy beach and rocks. There have been
many studies on the protection of coastal areas ie. Tait and Griggs, 1990; Cai et al, 2009;
Duvat, 2009; Hashim et al, 2010; Bayani-Arias et al, 2012; Kobayashi et al, 2015 to cite
some. Among the most conventional mitigation is hard engineering. It is true that hard
structures such as seawall, jetties, groins, breakwater, and others can protect the shoreline

and sandy beaches from the impact of strong waves. However, it is also true that building

and maintaining these structures would take an immense amount of resources while its
protection span is not for a lifetime. For developed countries, the cost may not really be
significant however, for less developed countries such as the Philippines, it is significant.
An alternative and less costly mitigating measure in some ways is soft engineering. One of
this is the use of natural vegetation such as mangroves.

Generally, this review aimed to provide insights on coastal erosion/retreat as a
problem and the use of mangroves in mitigating coastal retreat. It endeavored to: (1)
understand why coastal retreat is a problem; (2) explain the causes of coastal retreat (natural
and anthropogenic); (3) elaborate coastal erosion management; and (4) show the merits of
mangrove in mitigating coastal erosion.

Literature including but not limited to journal articles, books, and thesis on coastal
dynamics, coastal erosion, and coastal retreat published local and international were

consulted, compared and synthesized.

2.1 The problems of coastal retreat

McLean, et al. (2001) reported that over the past 100 years about 70% of the world’s
sandy shorelines have been retreating, about 20-30% have been stable and less than 10%
bave been advancing. Coastal retreat, also referred to as coastal erosion in some papers, is
a problem in coastal areas around the world ie. Vietnam (Mazda, et al, 2002), Japan
(Kobayashi, et al, 2015), Algeria (Kermani et al, 2016), and China (Cai, et al, 2009) to

cite some. Coastal retreat entailed different problems such as loss of residences and

properties. This was the case in small island developing states such as Maldives (Sovacool,
2005); Seychelles and Mauritius (Duvat, 2009). In these places mentioned, structures such
as houses, jetties, hotels and other structures such as roads were all destroyed by coastal
erosion which is equivalent to loss of investments not only for private individuals but also
for the government. It cost them a lot especially that these countries are dependent on
tourism industry (Duvat, 2009). Loss of beach means reduced in the aesthetic value of their
coastline which equates to economic losses. Further, coastline retreat means loss of space
where houses can be built since small islands has very limited space.

In Europe, (Roebeling, Costa, Magalhies-Filho, & Tekken, 2013) estimated that
ecosystem service values drop down from €22.3 billion per year in 1976 to €21.6 billion
per year in 2006 due to coastal erosion. Loss of beach equates to loss of habitat, and
therefore loss of ecological services.

In the Philippines, coastal retreat was also one of the problems that the country
faces owing to its natural vulnerability to hydrometeorological hazards and due to its
geographical location (Bayani-Arias et. al, 2012). The Philippines being archipelagic in
nature has 34, 539km coastline (Bayani-Arias et. al, 2012) where most of its major cities
are located ie. Metro Manila, Cebu City, and General Santos City. Coastal retreat has been
reported in San Fernando, La Union (Berdin et al, 2004; Bayani-Arias et al, 2012), Bataan,
and Cavite (Perez et al, 1999). It could have been also happening in other parts of the
country but were not documented.

In Palawan, there was paucity of literature available that discussed coastal retreat.

Among the available literature was the study of Austin (2007) about the effects of climate

change and implications on land tenure in Palawan. The study revealed that coastal erosion
was a problem for fishers in coastal areas i securing land tenureship. The land they
occupied changed with rising tides and shifting seascapes. A house that was built in 1970’s
was approximately 30m from the high tide lime had become 15m from the high tide line
due to rising tides hence disqualifying the owner from Comprehensive Agrarian Reform
Program (CARP). To qualify in CARP, it should be within 20m inland from the high tide
lne. Coastal erosion somehow deprived fishers from claiming title for the land. There were
no published and available studies on coastal erosion in Palawan.

In Manamoc Island, the locals claimed that there was coastal erosion. An area once
part of the built-up area became under water. Houses and coconut trees were gone. Aside
from loss of houses and properties, coastal retreat caused anxiety to the people. During
high tide and storm surge event, portions of the beach eroded and thus making the locals
especially those with houses next to the beach front restless more so at night. These claims
were not documented and this study was the first one to do so. With the climate change
and sea level rise, storms will be more frequent and large portion of Manamoc Island built-
up area will be inundated. This is a problem for the people of Manamoc Island. This study
examined the dynamics at play in Manamoc Island considering both the natural and social
environment. This study also determined if there was coastal retreat, measured the extent

of the retreat, and examined the patterns that explain the phenomenon.

2.2 Causes of coastal retreat

This review emphasized that coastal retreat is part of the earth’s natural process
specifically coastal dynamics. Coastal area is the place on earth where the three spheres:
lithosphere, hydrosphere, and atmosphere meet and interact making it as one of the most
dynamic ecosystems. One example of the mteraction is wind and ocean interaction
resulting to wave climate. Wave climate on the other hand affects the shoreline or beach
through wave action, tidal currents, and storms among others. These interactions are called
coastal dynamics. Coastal dynamics is a natural process involving erosion, sediment
transport, and deposition or accretion. These natural processes result to either coastal
advance or retreat. Coastal retreat is the result of excessive and long term erosion while
coastal advance results from accretion of sand or sediments. The concern of this review is
coastal retreat.

It was previously mentioned that coastal erosion occurs around the world. Zhang et
al, (2004) in their study of the relation of global warming and coastal erosion argued that,
there are three possible reasons for worldwide occurrences of coastal erosion: sea level rise
(SLR), change of storm climate, and human interference (anthropogenic). According to
their paper, among the three, sea level rise is the most probable reason for this because it
acts as an enabler of erosion. High water levels allow waves to act further up the beach
profile and move sediment seaward. They argued further that based on records there is no
increased in storminess in this century and storm has episodic effect on barrier beach
erosion thus its impact is not much Anthropogenic activities on the other hand were

regional and not worldwide. This result supported the report of McLean, et al. (2001) that

one of the potential impacts of climate change and sea-level rise on coastal ecosystem was
increased coastal erosion. Furthermore, Cai et. al, (2009) reported also that sea level rise
has been identified as the principal forcing function in large-scale shoreline retreat.

Winterwerp et al, (2005) in their study of erosion and rehabilitation of a mangrove
mud coast in Thailand reported that there were eight processes governing the coastline
development of Bang Khun Thien. These were either erosion or sedimentation. For erosion,
the following are the coastal processes: (1) subsidence; (2) erosion by larger waves; (3)
erosion by smaller waves; (4) stormy events; and (5) transport by longshore currents. On
the other hand for the sedimentation, the coastal processes are the following: (6) sediment
supply from Chao Phraya River; (7) sediment mobilization and supply by the larger waves;
and (8) onshore sediment transport by tidal filling. Each of these components contributed
to the erosion and accretion of the coastline. However, the rapid coastal retreat was
attributed to the eighth process. The construction of dikes close to the coast resulted to the
loss of cross-shore sediment transport component. Therefore, coastal evolution was
dictated by the balance between sediment supply and demand: when supply is greater than
demand, the coast grows seaward, when demand equals supply, the coast stay in place, and
when supply is insufficient, the coast retreat (Marchand, 2010).

In Seychelles and Mauritius, both small island developing states (SIDS), sediment
budget was governed by changes in monsoon patterns and increased in frequency and
intensity of storms affecting the sand drifting and beach budgets resulting to rapid beach
erosion (Duvat, 2009). Changes in coastal currents affected the direction and vohime of

sediment transport. In addition, human factors such as sand extraction and coastal

reclamation caused sediment loss which resulted to coastline retreat (Duvat, 2009).
Furthermore, coastal erosion was exacerbated by ineffective environmental policies and
coastal planning. Both Mauritius and Seychelles lack human, financial, and technical
capacities for improving coastal management (Duvat, 2009).

In the Philippines, the factors that contributed to coastal erosion in San Fernando
Bay, La Union were: sea-level rise global tectonics which caused inundation of low-lying
areas; climate change which causes changes in precipitation and storminess; land cover
change which affected sediment yields of the river; shifting river mouth position which
leads to sediment budget deficits along the coast; and human activities which include
mining, construction of seawalls and ripraps, and destruction of coral reefs, mangroves,
and sand dunes (Bayani-Arias et. al, 2012).

In an earlier study by Sirmgan and Ringor (1996) in Zambales, they have shown
that the eruption of Mt. Pinatubo in 1991 changed the shoreline of Zambales due to the
excessive sediment loads resulting to progradation which was eventually followed by rapid
retreats because of the presence of underwater canyon attached to the mouth of the river.

In Manamoc Island, no published study has been conducted yet that describe the
coastal processes of the island. However, m Pamalican Island, a neighboring island and a
constituent of Barangay Manamoc, there had been a study on the coastal processes that
could serve as a reference. Pamalican Island is home to the world-class resort, Amanpulo.
As provided in PD 1586 or the Philippine Environmental Impact System, prior to the
establishment of large-scale resorts, environmental impact assessment should be conducted

hence the studies on the different component of the island including coastal dynamics.


According to the Environmental Performance Report and Management Plan
(EPRMP) report of Seastems, Inc. (the private agency that conducted the environmental
impact assessment in the island), durmng the initial environmental study in 1990, there was
a threat of coastal erosion. Further stated in their report was that the eroded sands were
deposited in the southeastern end of the island and an approximately 280 meters was added
to the length of the island which implies that there was accretion. Erosion and accretion in
the island was due to natural processes. They also reported that there was a severe coastal
erosion in the northern part of the southwestern shoreline. A 3-5m retreat of vegetation line
was observed. This side of the island was facing exactly the western side of Manamoc
Island.

As discussed above, the balance between sediment supply and demand was dictated
by the different environmental factors (ie. waves, currents, tides, prevailing winds, and
storms). In the case of Pamalican Island, it was not explicitly stated in the report what
drives the erosion and accretion. However, based ftom the oceanography and
meteorological data, the direction of the currents were dominated by the prevailing winds.
As stated in the report, ‘surface currents in the open waters around Pamalican-Manamoc-
Quiniluban Island Group area are largely dominated by the prevailing winds’ (Seastems,
Inc., 2007). The prevailing winds are westward and southwestward during Northeast
monsoon season (November to April) and eastward and northeastward during the
southwest monsoon season (June to October) (Seastems, Inc., 2007). Hence, erosion was
observed at the northwestern part of the island while accretion was observed at the

southeastern side of the island.


The coastal processes in Manamoc Island may be similar to that of Pamalican Island
given that most of the factors governing the coastal dynamics are the same in both islands
except for vegetation. Manamoc Island had mangroves in some parts of the island. That is
why it was very important to know the coastal dynamics in Manamoc Island to have a basis
for the coastal management.

Clearly, coastal retreat is caused by natural and/or anthropogenic activities. So far
in the discussion, it was obvious that coastal erosion is viewed as a problem while accretion
as a desirable process. In relation to this, coastal communities prefer to have either a stable
coastline or an accreting coastline. However, this is not possible as coastal areas will
naturally evolved and erosion and accretion were part of this coastal evolution and
therefore inevitable. That is why it is very important to understand first the coastal
dynamics, in particular the long-term erosion rate or trend and the causes for this trend. It
was recognized that coastal retreat was inevitable however it is also possible to manage

this retreat such that only few people will be negatively affected.

2.3 Coastal retreat management

There are two types of measures used to mitigate coastal erosion: Structural and
non-structural measures. Structural measures are either hard or soft structures (Cai et. al,
2009). Others refer to these as hard engineering and soft engmeering. Hard structures used
seawalls, gros, jetties, breakwater, and other concrete structures to protect the beach from
erosion. Meanwhile, soft structures involved the use of natural protection such as

vegetation and sand enrichment. Non-structural measures on the other hand include land-

use controls, setting warning lines and prohibition of unreasonable sand mining. Each of
these measures have their strengths and weaknesses and applicable depending on the
objective of the implementer and more importantly, the physical features of the area.

Aside from hard engineering, beach nourishment was also a form of coastal
protection. Beach nourishment is an effective adaptation strategy especially for shorelines
with significant development or tourist visitation (Dean & Houston, 2016).

Another important mitigating measure for coastal protection is policy. As shown in
the study of Duvat (2009), strong policies based on science provides a better coastal
management. That is why in the case of Seychelles, they reframe their coastal management
policies because of the understanding of coastal or beach dynamics. Setback was extended
from 15 meters to 25 meters from the shore and hotels are built at 80 to 100 meters distance
from the high water mark. With these kind of policies, not only the people are protected,
the integrity of coastal zone are protected as well.

In relation to mitigation, McLean, et al, (2001) reported that several studies
suggested that disaster prevention facilities such as coastal dikes, water gates, and dramage
systems and coastal protections such as seawalls, breakwaters, and groins will become less
functional because of sea level rise and may lose their stability primarily because of the
bearing capacity of the soil foundation. They asserted that some natural features of the
shore zone provide significant coastal protection, including coral reefs (the most extensive,
massive, and effective coastal protection structures in the world); sand and gravel beaches,
which fimction as wave energy sinks; and barrier beaches, which act as natural

breakwaters. Coastal dunes form natural buffers and sand repositories, from which sand

may be extracted during storms without major shoreline retreat; coastal vegetation often
absorbs wind or wave energy, retarding shoreline erosion (McLean, et al, 2001). In
addition to the natural features are the mangroves. As Hashim and others (2010) put it,
planting mangroves provide the opportunity to mitigate erosion while at the same time
improve ecological and socio-economic aspects of coastal areas.

In Malaysia, they integrated the use of hard engineering with soft engineering
(Hashim et. al, 2010). Recognizing the role of mangroves in coastal stabilization, they
planted mangrove seedlings and built segmented breakwater in the offshore to protect the
saplings from strong waves and to accumulate sediments. Likewise in Thailand, the
western and northern coastlines have been observed to be eroding primarily because of
large losses of mangrove area (Winterwerp et. al, 2005). This means that with the absence
of mangrove, there will be no more vegetation that will trap the sediment hence low energy
waves and storm waves transported the sediments away resulting to coastal erosion. In the
study of Winterwerp et al, (2005), they recommended the establishment of intertidal
mangrove belt of 300 to 500m to re-iitiate sedimentation processes. In addition to the
establishment of the intertidal mangroves, groins perpendicular to the coastline were
constructed to protect it from lateral transport of sediment which is the main cause of
coastal erosion in those areas.

In Manamoc Island, there has been no published document on the initiatives of the
community for coastline protection. However, the locals recognized coastline retreat as
early as 2000. This was manifested in the mangroves planting initiated by the locals along

the western beach at the mouth of the lagoon. Planting was done primarily to protect the

community cemetery. In around 2009 or 2010, an approximately 50 m riprap was built at
the western beach of the island to stabilize the shoreline. On 2016, a 1 km seawall was built
to reinforce the mitially constructed riprap. This hurried technical intervention was in
response to the threats of extreme typhoons as Manamoc Island also experienced the lash
of Tyhoon Haiyan in 2013. In fact, the seawall was government sponsored project, part of
the accelerated program by Department of Social Welfare and Development (DSWD)
which aimed to provide immediate assistance to areas stricken by Typhoon Haiyan.

Indeed, hard structures are usually the most common coastal retreat mitigation
which is costly. If not maintained and not properly designed and constructed, they will not
last for long. They also interrupt the natural processes and natural cycle of the sand as in
the case in Mauritius and Seychelles (Duvat, 2009). That is why it is critical to explore
other alternative mitigating measures that are less costly and practical such as mangrove.
A plethora of studies have shown that mangroves served as greenbelt against storm and

helped mitigate coastal erosion.

2.4 Mangrove in mitigating coastal retreat

Mangrove are the most effective at protecting the coast under non-storm and storm
conditions (Guannel et al, 2016). Fully-grown mangroves provide natural protection by
acting as buffer zones during typhoon and storm surges, mitigating the erosion of
shorelines and riverbanks (Cruz, Primavera, & Santos, 2011) even at coastal areas not
directly adjacent to the mangroves (Mazda, et al, 2002).

Mangrove forests are effective in surface wave attenuation and the wave reduction

for area with mangroves is about twice larger than area without mangroves (Ahmad and

Pheng, 2013). They found out that in area protected by mangroves, the wave impact on
shore is minimal and the arrangement of the mangrove trees did not exhibit significant
effect on wave reduction with difference of less than 10%. Furthermore, both tandem and
staggered arrangement can attermate high waves. They also reported that a mangrove width
of 80m with density of 0.11 trees m is sufficient to reduce wave height by 80%. Moreover,
mangrove forest reduces the impact of waves on shore during normal day.

Horstman, et al, (2014) showed in their study that mangroves between sea and land
attenuate incident waves and consequently trap sediments. They observed a maximum
energy reduction of 79% over 141m while significant wave heights were reduced up to
54%. Furthermore, they observed that wave attenuation was most efficient for short sea
waves (<10s) while sea swell (10-20s) tended to maintain their energy or even gamed
energy by the attenuation of the shorter waves.

However, Lee et al (2014) stressed that although mangroves can attenuate waves
and storms, only unspoiled mangroves forest provide that protection and remnant or
fragmented mangrove forest may not (Lee et. al, 2014). Mangrove corridor may serve as
leeway to connect mangrove patches and to reforest, in particular, coastal areas that are
prone to coastal erosion. ‘Mangroves in the form of biodiversity corridor are used as barrier
against typhoon and tsunami (Doydee and Buot, 2014)’. ‘Corridor is any narrow swath of
land connecting two habitat patches where the patches and corridor share a land cover
dissimilar from the surrounding matrix’ (Beier and Gregory, 2012).

Other studies on mangrove have shown that some particular species of mangroves

are really effective in providing protection from tsunami damage. Although this study was

for tsunami, the impact is similar. Tanaka et al (2007) reported that R apiculata and R
mucronata kinds of mangroves and Pandanus odoratissimus that grows in beach sand,
were found to be especially effective in providing protection from tsunami damage due to
ther complex aerial root structure.
In the Philippines, there were plenty of studies on mangroves ie. Primavera et al,
2008; Almazol et al, 2013; Lillo & Buot, 2016; Melana et al, 2005 among others.
However, most of these studies are either taxonomical or biodiversity in nature. A handful
of studies discussed mangrove in the context of coastal erosion/retreat ie. Cruz, Primavera,
& Santos, 2011. In Palawan there were also plenty of mangrove studies, ie. Becira, 2005;
Galon et al, 2016 to cite some The entire province of Palawan is a mangrove sanctuary by
virtue of Presidential Proclamation No. 2152. There were also many studies done on
mangroves, ie. Becira, 2005; Galon et al, 2016 to cite some. However, none of these have
studied mangroves in the context of coastal erosion. Similarly, in Manamoc Island there
were only a few mangrove studies and most of it were biodiversity assessment. This study
is therefore very critical for the hydrometeorologically vulnerable Manamoc Island.
However, the use of mangroves for coastal retreat mitigation has its limitations. It can be
only planted in its habitat. In erosion prone places where mangroves are not suitable, other
measures should be applied.
As mentioned above, natural and anthropogenic factors caused coastal retreat. It
could be natural only or in tandem with anthropogenic factors. We can infer from here that
like most of the environmental problems, it crosses different components of a system. It is

not merely physical and natural, but it has also socio-cultural and economic component.

Therefore, Manamoc Island needs to be resilient in particular to hydro meteorological
hazards of which they are vulnerable not only in the context of coastal erosion but in
general. As a system, Manamoc Island has inherent characteristics that are critical in
becoming resilient to hydrometeorological hazards. One of which is the presence of the
mangroves. So in this study, the mangrove structure of the island was assessed and ways
on how to utilize them i mitigating coastal retreat in order to become resilient to

hydrometeorological hazards were proposed.

2.5 Community resilience to hydrometeorological hazards

In the Third Assessment Report (TAR) of Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change (IPCC), small islands were advised to focus their efforts in enhancing resilience
and implementation of appropriate adaptation measures to hydrometeorological hazards as
these remain an important stressor for them (Minura, et al, 2007). The term resilience is
a broad concept therefore to be clear this paper considers the definition of community
resilience in the context of disaster by Norris et al, (2008) as a process linking a set of
adaptive capacities to a positive trajectory of functioning and adaptation after a disturbance.

From here we can infer that adaptive capacity is central and essential in resilience
to disaster or m the case of this study resilience to hydrometeorological hazards. However,
Mimura, et al (2007) pointed out that enhancing adaptive capacity will only be successful
when it is integrated with other policies such as disaster preparedness, land-use planning,
environmental conservation, coastal planning, and national plans for sustainable

development. In the Philippines, resilience have been integrated through mainstreaming in

the disaster risk reduction management as manifested by the adoption of Sendai
Framework. The framework is a proactive process that capitalizes on the adaptive capacity
of the communities.

However, Cutter, et al (2008) argued in their paper that while adaptive capacity is
aprominent theme in the global environmental change of resilience, it is less prevalent in
the hazards perspective hence the term hazard mitigation is used. From here on, adaptive
capacity, mitigation, coping strategies will be synonyms.

In small islands developing states such as Fiji and Vanuatu, De Souza et al (2015)
reported that the coping strategies or adaptation strategies against coastal erosion, sea level
rise, cyclones, flooding and drought by the island communities were acquired based on
their experience. They adopted the knowledge gained from their experience. For example,
prior to cyclone events, women of the villages collect preserve canned foods, emergency
items such as torches, radio and kerosene. Men on the other hand secure the houses,
livestock and plantation crops. Matured crops and fruits are collected and cooked to
preserve for a week. Crops that mature quickly are planted immediately after the cyclone
to help in food shortage. These are only some of the coping strategies of the island
communities.

Meanwhile, Berkes and Ross (2013), in their study of community resilience, have
shown nine characteristics of community that indicate resiliency: people-place
connections; values and beliefS; knowledge, skills, and learning; social networks; engaged
governance; diverse and innovative economy, community infrastructures; leadership; and

positive outlook and readiness to accept change.


In the Philippines, there are plenty of studies on resilience ie. Uy et al (2012);
Castonguay et al (2016); Hilvano et al (2016); and Walch (2018) to cite some. These were
all studies on resilience but on different contexts ie. climate change and disaster and on
different scale ie. household, community, and system. The study of Hilvano et al. (2016)
on household disaster resiliency on Typhoon Haiyan showed that capital are important in
coping with disasters. This may be true in Manamoc Island. However, since communities
are unique and have their own culture, maybe the community of Manamoc Island have
their own unique coping mechanisms. Furthermore, unlike in Manicani Island which is
used to typhoons, Manamoc Island may not be as resilient in hydrometeorological hazards.
That is why it is very important to enhance the resilience of Manamoc Island to

hydrometerological hazards through enhancing its coping mechanisms.


Conceptual Framework

Coastal retreat as a problem is physical in nature. It is a result of coastal erosion
resulting primarily from the interactions of tidal waves and ocean currents (generated by
prevailing winds ie. monsoons that produces the longshore and cross-shore currents) with
the cliffs, rocks, and sand along the shorelme. Aside ftom the interactions of waves and
currents, other natural processes that may cause coastal retreat are land subsidence, sea
level rise, and storms. However, systems theory states that it is not merely physical but
instead it is a complex problem emanating from the interaction of anthropogenic and
natural factors (Figure 2.1).

In addition to the earth’s natural processes, human activities also cause coastal
erosion. These activities include sand and gravel mining im coastal areas, removal of coastal
vegetation, and construction of coastal protection such as seawall, breakwater, groins, or
jetties.

Both natural processes and human activities affect the sediment or sand budget in
the shore zone. Coastal erosion occurs when sand export is greater than the sand supply.
Conversely, if sand supply is greater than sand export, there will be accretion. Coastline
stability, on the other hand, occurs when the volume of exported sand is replenished with
the same volume of sand supply. As a result, the shoreline or sand boundary may change

accordingly.

Sz

(L002) saew Aq wogoesoqt
JUSUTMONAUD-UU JO Yomauey ATojOd9 [RUO}S}] WOY payrpoul pue paydope Apms ap Jo pomaurey jenjdaouoD [°7 amst{

Gry eneeeneecnsenenennecnsnecscsescenensncnnenenenenenaencnencecnessensnsesancsssss D>

ayeos pue ouny,
spiezey
SOMIANOY ueUINY kq pose IVaULAA fq posney ]e0130]0J09}aWI0IpAY
S1OJORJ [LIONS TVLSVOO 2 siojoey yeNyeN,

(999 syjemeas ‘somal ‘surard 5 «
‘oT prey ‘dom S a [pag] Pag ‘oomapisqng
Pues) soqiampe jusmdojaaap s ‘uooydh) Suodsuen anoqea0]
“SOMIATe pooyraary 2, ‘aJEUID SABA ‘POI

osueys

Arepunog pues


Manamoc Island, like all small islands, have mherent disadvantages such as very
low-lying and isolated. With the impending threats of climate change and sea-level rise, it
makes the island more vulnerable to coastal retreat. Isolated and far from center, the
community exhaust the resources within their locality not only for food and livelihood but
also as building materials (ie. sand and rocks). Although Manamoc is isolated in terms of
distance, the community is not spared from the influence of outsiders especially in resource
exploitation. The locals do not utilize the resources for their consumption only but also for
commerce and trade. The pressure on the environment is therefore heightened. Relative to
this, the natural barriers against strong waves and storm such as corals, mangroves, and
seagrasses were greatly affected by these economic activities. This increases the risk of the
island to coastal retreat and as well as to hydrometeorological hazard.

It is therefore hypothesized that the coastal retreat observed will increase, posing
great risk to the locals. Hence it is imperative to study now the other possible measures that

can be done to mitigate coastal retreat.


Literature Cited

ADGER, N. W. (2000). Social and Ecological Resilience Are they related? Progress in
Human Geography, 347-364.

AHMAD, M. H., & PHENG, C. S. (2013). A Laboratory Study on Wave Reduction by
Mangrove Forests. Elsevier B.V. APCBEE Procedia, 27 — 32.

ALMAZOL, A. E., CERVANCIA, C. R, BUOT JR, I. E, GRUEZO, W. S., &
PAMPOLINA, N. M. (2013). Floristic Composition and Physiognomy of Pagbilao
Mangrove, Quezon Province, Philippines. JAMURE International Journal of
Ecology and Conservation, 725-39.

AUSTIN, R. L. (2007). Effects of Climate Change and Implications for Land Tenure: A
community case study from Palawan Island, Philippines. -, -.

BAYANI-ARIAS, J. K., DORADO, M. A., & DORADO, R. A. (2012). Economic
Vulnerability and Analysis of Adaptation Options to Coastal Erosion in San
Fernando, La Union. JESM, 15(2): 35 — 49.

BECIRA, E. (2005). State of mangrove in Tiniguiban Cove, Puerto Princesa City, Palawan.
Science Diliman, 17:2, 46-51.

BEIER, P., & GREGORY, A. J. (2012). Desperately Seeking Stable 50-Year-Old
Landscapes with Patches and Long, Wide Corridors. PLoS Biol , 10(1): e1001253.
doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.1001253.

BERDIN, R. D., REMOTIGUE, C. T., ZAMORA, P. B., & SACAT-STA. MARIA, M. Y.
(2004). Coastal erosion vulnerability mapping along the southern coast of La
Union, Philippines: Philippines. ResearchGate, 51-67.

BERKES, F., & ROSS, H. (2013). Community resilience: toward an integrated approach.
Society and Natural Resources, 5-20.

CAI, F., SU, X., LIU, J., LI, B., & LEI, G. (2009). Coastal erosion in China under the
condition of global climate change and measures for its prevention. Progress in
Natural Science, 415-426.

CAPILI, E., IBAY, A., & VILLARIN, J. (2005). Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation
on Philippine Coasts. Proceedings of International Oceans (pp. 1-8). Washington
D.C.: -.

CASTONGUAY, A., BURKHARD, B., MULLER, F., HORGAN, F., & SETTELE, J.
(2016). Resilience and stability of rice-terrace socio-ecological systems: a case
study of a local commumity's perception in Banaue, Philippines. Ecology and
Society, 21(2):15.


COMFORT, J., & SINGLE, M. (1997). Literature review on the effects of seawall on
beaches. Wellington, New Zealand: Department of Conservation Head Office.

CRUZ, E., PRIMAVERA, J., & SANTOS, J. C. (2011). Engineering Analysis for a
mangrove planting site - towards a sustainable community-engaged coastal
protection program in the Philippines. Retrieved from www.irbnet.de:
www. irbnet.de/daten/iconda/CIB_DC26751.pdf Date accessed: August 2016

CUTTER, S., BARNES, L., BERRY, M., BURTON, C., EVANS, E., TATE, E., & WEBB,
J. (2008). A place-based model for understanding community resilience to natural
disaster. Global Environmental Change , 598-606.

DAS, S., & CREPIN, A.-S. (2013). Mangroves can provide protection against wind
damage during storms. Estuarine, Coastal and Self Science, 98-107.

DAVIDSON-ARNOTT, R. (2009). An Introduction to Coastal Processes and
Geomorphology. New York, USA: Cambridge University Press, pp. 3. .

De Souza, R., Henly-Shepard, S., & McNamara, K. a. (2015). Re-framing island nations
as champions of resilience in the face of climate change and disaster risk. UNU-
EHS Working Paper Series No. 9. Bonn. United Nations University Institute of.

DEAN, R., & HOUSTON, J. R. (2016). Determining shoreline response to sea level rise.
Coastal Engineering, 114 (2016) 1 — 8. www.elsevier.com/locate/coastaleng.

DEBENHAM, P. (2008). Background Paper on Cyanide Detection Tests for Live Fish.
Proceedings of the International Cyanide Detection Testing Workshop. (pp. 95-
116). Silver Sprng: NOAA Technical Memorandum NMFS-OPR-40.

DIDHAM, R. K. (2010). Ecological consequences of Habitat Fragmentation. In: eLS. John
Wiley & Sons Ltd, Chichester., http//www.els. net [doi:
10.1002/9780470015902.a0021904].

DOYDEE, P., & BUOT, I. J. (2014). Connecting Fragmented Mangrove Patches Using
Biodiversity of Ranong Coastal Landscape, Thailand. J. Wetlands Biodiversity,
4:7-15.

DUVAT, V. (2009). Beach Erosion management in Small Islands Developing States:
Indian Ocean case studies. Coastal Processes. WIT Transactions on Ecology and
the Environment, 126:149-160.

EISLER, R. (1991). Cyanidehazards to fish, wildlife, and invertebrates: a synoptic review.
US Fish and Wildlife Service Biological Report, 85(1.23).

ENGLISH, S., WILKINSON, C., & BAKER, V. (1997). Survey Manual for Tropical
Marine Resources. Townsville: Australian Institute of Marine Science.

ESLAVA, D. F., DIMALANTA, C., YUMUL, G. J., SERVANDO, N., & CRUZ, N.
(2013). Geohazards, Tropical Cyclones and Disaster Risk Management in the


Philippines: Adaptation in a changing climate regime. Journal of Environmental
Science and Management, 84-96.

GALON, F., DOLOROSA, R., SESPENE, J., & MENDOZA, N. (2016). Diversity and
structural complexity of mangrove forests along PPC Bay, Palawan Island,
Philippines. Journal of Marine Island and Cultures, 118-125.

GEDAN, K. B., KIRWAN, M. L., WOLANSKI, E., BARBIER, E., & SILLIMAN, B.
(2011). The present and future role of coastal wetland vegetation in protecting
shorelines: answering the challenges to the paradigm Climatic Change, 106:7-29.

GUANNEL, G., ARKEMA, K., RUGGIERO, P., & VERUTES, G. (2016). The Power of
three: coral reefS, seagrasses, and mangrove protect coastal regions and increase
their resilience. PLoS ONE, 11(7): e0158094. doi:10.1371/journalpone.0158094.

GUNDERSON, L. (2010). Ecological and Human Community Resilience in Response to
Natural Disasters. Ecology and Society.

HAN, W., MOORE, A. M., LEVIN, J., ZHANG, B., ARANGO, H., CURCHITSER, E., .
.. LIN, J. (2009). Seasonal surface ocean circulation and dynamics in the Philippine
Archipelago region during 2004-2008. Dynamics of Atmospheres and Oceans, 114-
137.

HASHIM, A. M., & CATHERINE, S. M. (2013). A Laboratory Study on Wave Reduction
by Mangrove Forests. JCESD, 27 — 32.

HASHIM, R., KAMALI, B., TAMIN, N. M., & ZAKARIA, R. (2010). An integrated
approach to coastal rehabilitation: Mangrove restoration in Sungai Haji Dorani,
Malaysia. Estuarine, Coastal and Shelf Science, 86 (2010) 118-124.
www.elsevier.com/locate/ecss. Date accessed: August 30, 2016. .

HILVANO, N., NELSON, G. L., COLADILLA, J., & REBANCOS, C. (2016). Household
disaster resiliency on typhoon Haiyan (Yolanda): The Case of Manicani Island,
Guiuan, Eastern Samar, Philippines. Coastal Engineering Journal, 1-25.

HOGARTH, P. J. (2015). The Biology of Mangroves and Seagrasses. York: Oxford
University Press.

Holling, C. (1973). Resilience and stability of ecological systems. Annual Review of
Ecosystems and Systematics, 1-23.

HORSTMAN, E., DOHMEN-JANSSEN, C., NARRA, P., BERG, N. V., SIEMERINK,
M., & HULSCHER, S. (2014). Wave attenuation in mangroves: a quantitative
approach to field observations. Coastal Engineering , 94 (2014) 47-62.
www.elsevier.com/locate/coastaleng.

IPCC Working Group III. (2007). Assessment Report: Mitigation. Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change.


ISRAEL, D. (2004). Economics and environment in the fisheries sector. In DA-BFAR,
Turbulent seas: The status oF Philippine marine fisheries. Coastal Resource
management project (pp. 90-95). Cebu City, Philippines: Department of
Agriculture-Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources.

JAMES, R. (2000). From beaches to beach environment: linking the ecology, human-use
and management of beaches in Australia. Ocean and coastal management , (43)
495-514.

JAYAGODA, D. D. (2012). Sustainable Community Based Mangrove Plantation Projects:
Three Case Studies from Palawan Island, the Philippines. GS7F International
Journal of Engineering Technology, 38-43.

KELMAN, I., & KHAN, S. (2013). Progressive Climate change and disasters: Island
perspectives. Nat Hazards, 69:1131-1136 Springer Science.

KELMAN, I., & WEST, J. J. (2009). Climate Change and Small Island Developing States:
A Critical Review. Ecological and Environmental Anthropology, Vol. 5, No. 1.

KERMANI, S., BOUTIBA, M., GUENDOUZ, M., GUETTOUCHE, M. S., &
KHELFANI, D. (2016). Detection and analysis of shoreline changes using
geospatial tools and automatic computation: Case of Jijelian sandy coast. Ocean
and Coastal Management, 132 (2016) 46 - 58.
www.elsevier.com/locate/ocecoaman date accessed: August 22, 2016.

KOBAYASHI, A., UDA, T., & NOSHI, Y. (2015). Shoreline devastation of Hota coast by
man-made causes. Procedia Engineering , 116 (2015) 171-178.
www.elsevier.com/locate/procedia. Date accessed: August 22, 2016. .

LASCO, R. D., PULHIN, F. B., SANCHEZ, P. A., GARCIA, K., & GERPACIO, R.
(2008). Mainstreaming Climate Change in the Philippines Working Paper nr 62.
Los Banos, Laguna, Philippines: World Agroforestry Centre.

LEE, S. Y., PRIMAVERA, J. H., GUEBAS, F., & RECORD, S. (2014). Ecological Role
and services of tropical mangrove ecosystems: areassessment. Global Ecology and
Biogeography, 23, 726-743, © 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. .

LILLO, E. P., & BUOT, I. J. (2016). Species Composition of Argao Mangrove Forest,
Cebu, Philippines. J. Wetland Biodiversity, 637 — 45.

MAIRS, K.-A. (2007). Islands and human impact: Under what circumstances do people
put unsustainable demands on island environments? Evidence from the North
Atlantic. Retrieved from North Atlantic Biocultural Organisation:
http//www.nabohome.org/postgraduates/theses/kam/. unpublished Thesis (Date
retrieved: May 11, 2018)

MARCHAND, M. (2010). Concepts and Science for Coastal Erosion Management.
Concise report for policymakers. USA: Dettares, Delft.


MAZDA, Y., MAGI, M., KOGO, M., & HONG, P. N. (1997). Mangroves as a coastal
protection from waves in the Tong King Delta, Vietnam Mangroves and Salt
Marshes, 127-135 .

MAZDA, Y., MAGI, M., NANAO, H., KOGO, M., MIYAGI, T., KANAZAWA, N., &
KOBASHI, D. (2002). Coastal erosion due to long-term human impact on
mangrove forests. Wetlands Ecology and Management, 1-9.

MCLEAN, R., TSYBAN, A., BURKETT, V., CODIGNOTT, J., FORBES, D., MIMURA,
N.,... ITTEKKOT, V. (2001). Coastal Zones and Marine Ecosystems. In Climate
Change 2001: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Contribution of Working
Group II to the Third Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change. Edited by James J. McCarthy, Osvaldo F. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press, 343 — 379.

MELANA, D., MELANA, E., & MAPALO, A. (2005). Mangroves management and
development in the Philippines. SEAFDEC, 39-47.

MERF. (2013). Vulnerability Assessment Tools for Coastal Ecosystem: A guidebook .
Quezon City, Philippines: Marine Environment Resources Foundation, Inc.

MIMURA, N., NURSE, L., MCLEAN, R., AGARD, J., BRIGUGLIO, L., LEFALE, P.,.
.. SEM, A. G. (2007). Small Islands. Climate Change 2007: Impacts, Adaptation,
and Vulnerability. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

MOBERG, F., & FOLKE, C. (1999). Ecological goods and services of coral reef
ecosystem. Ecological Economics, 215-233.

MUSTAFA, H. A., & CATHERINE, S. M. (2013). .2013.A Laboratory Study on Wave
Reduction by Mangrove Forests. APCBEE Procedia 5,27 — 32.

NORRIS, F., STEVENS, S., PFEFERRBAUM, B., WYCHE, K., & PFEFFERBAUM, R.
(2008). Community resilience as a metaphor, theory, set of capacities, and strategy
for disaster readiness. American Journal Community Psychology, 41:127-150.

NURSE, L., MCLEAN, R. AGARD, J., BRIGUGLIO, L., DUVAT-MAGNAN, V.,
PELESIKOTI, N.,. . . WEBB, A. A. (2014). Small Island In: Climate Change
2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part B: Regional Aspects.
Contribution of Working Group II to Fifth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge, United Kingdom:
Cambridge University Press.

PEREZ, R. T., AMADORE, L. A., & FEIR, R. B. (1999). Climate Change Impacts and
Responses in the Philippine's Coastal Sector. Clim Res, 97-107.

PRIMAVERA, J. H. (2000). Development and conservation of Philippine mangrove:
institutional issues. Ecological Economics , 35(1):91-106.


PRIMAVERA, J., & ESTEBAN, J. (2008). A review of mangrove rehabilitation in the
Philippines: Wetlands Ecology and Management, 16345-358. Springer
Science+Business Media B.V. 2008.

ROEBELING, P. C., COSTA, L., MAGALHAES-FILHO, L., & TEKKEN, V. (2013).
Ecosystem service value losses from coastal erosion in Europe: historical trends
and future projections. J Coast Conserv, 17:389-395 Springer Science+Business
Media Dordrecht 2013.

SEASTEMS, INC. (2007). EPRMP Report of Pamalican Island, Cuyo, Palawan. Quezon
City: Unpublished.

SINFUEGO, K. F., & BUOT, I. J. (2008). Floristic Compostion and Analysis of the True
Mangrove Vegetation in the Philippines Islands. Journal of Nature Studies, 7(2):
83-90.

SIRINGAN, F. P., & RINGOR, C. L. (1996). Change in the position of the Zambales
shoreline before and after the 1991 Mt. Pinatubo eruption: Controls of shoreline
change. Science Diliman, 1 - 13.

SOVACOOL, B. K. (2005). Perceptions of climate change and resilient island planning of
Maldives. Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change, Vol. 10, No.
2.

TANAKA, N., SASAKI, Y., MOWJOOD, M. I., JINADASA, K. B., & HOMCHUEN, S.
((2007). ). Coastal vegetation structures and their functions in tsunami protection:
experience of the recent Indian Ocean tsunami . Landscape Ecol Eng , 333-45.

UNISDR. (2009). 2009 UNISDR Terminology on Disaster Risk Reduction. Retrieved from
www.unisdr.org

UP-MSI. (2002). Ecological Habitat Assessment in Northern Palawan. PATH Foundation
Inc.

Uy, N., Takeuchi, Y., & Shaw, R. (2012). An ecosystem-based resilience nalaysis of
Infanta,Philippines. Environmental Hazards, 11:4, 266 - 282.

VILLAMAYOR, B. M., ROLLON, R, SAMSON, M., ALBANO, G. M., &
PRIMAVERA, J. (2016). Impact of Haiyan on Philippine mangrove: Implications
to the fate of the widespread monospecific Rhizopora plantations against strong
typhoons. Ocean and Coastal Management , 132 (2015) 1 —- 14;
www.e;esevier.com/locate.ocecoaman. Date accessed: August 22, 2016.

WALCH, C. (2018). Typhoon Haiyan: pushing the limits of resilience? The effect of
inequality on resilience and disaster risk reduction policies in the Philippines.
Critical Asian Studies, 122-135.


WINTERWERP, J. C., BORST, W. G., & DE VRIES, M. B. (2005). Pilot study on the
erosion and rehabilitation of a mangrove mud coast. Journal of Coastal Research,
21 (2), 223-230. West Palm Beach, Florida, ISSN 0749-0208.

WOODROFFE, C. (1992). Mangrove Sediments and Geomorphology. In A. Robertson, &
D. Alongi, Coastal and Estuarine Studies: Tropical Mangrove Ecosystems (pp. 7-
41 Vol 41). Washington D.C., USA: American Geophysical Union.

WOODROFFE, C. (2002). Coasts: Form, Process and Evolution. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.

CHAPTER II

GENERAL METHODOLOGY

Study area

The study was conducted in Manamoc Island, Cuyo, Palawan (Figure 3.1).
Manamoc is an island barangay located at the northeastern part of Palawan with
coordinates of 11°18’38” North and 120°41°05.3” East (Google et. al, 2016). The island
is part of the Quiniluban Group of Islands in northeast of Palawan. It lies in Sulu Sea in
between the Visayas and the mainland of Palawan. A total of 2,385 inhabitants reside in
the island as of 2014 (Barangay Census, 2014). The island has a land area of 516.31
hectares of which 60% was plain and the rest was hilly. The highest elevation was 216m
There are two major mangrove forests in the island: Caseledan Lagoon and Sitio Kanike.
Caseledan is an 80-hectare coastal lagoon surrounded by mangroves and Kanike is a small
embayment in the eastern part of the island bordered by frmging mangrove forest.
Manamoc Island has Type I climate which is characterized by distinct dry period ftom
November to April and wet season from May to October (Tolentino, et al, 2016). Average

annual precipitation is 2,136.80mm.


“Manamoc islanc

Municipality of Cuyo, Province of Palawan

'S: WGS 84 ! 2. c
OM, ASTER DEM, Google Earth Image 3
\dministrative boundaries are not authoritative

120°41'0"E 120°42'0"E

Figure 3.1 The map of Manamoc Island, Cuyo, Palawan. Inset map (right) shows the location of
the island with respect to the island municipalities of Cuyo, Magsaysay, and Agutaya. Inset map
(left) shows the location of Manamoc Island in the Philippines. This map was generated using
QGIS. Base map from Google Earth.

General Methodology
This study employed mixed method since the nature of this study involved social,

physical, and biological sciences.

Determination of coastal retreat in Manamoc Island

Time-series analyses of shoreline change of Manamoc Island was done using
remote sensing techniques. The landsat images of Manamoc Island on the following years:
1989, 1997, 2003, 2006, and 2016 were downloaded from USGS website. Images were
processed using QGIS software to produce maps of Manamoc showing the shoreline for
each year. Relevant to this, beach profiling, longshore drift experiment, determmation of
tide characteristics and prevailing winds, and climate analysis were done to help explain
the shoreline changes. To determine the factors contributing to coastal retreat and to
validate the extent of coastal retreat, key informant interview (KI) was employed with
fifteen (15) informants. Data were analyzed using thematic analysis described by Braun &

Clarke (2006).

Mangrove assessment for coastal retreat mitigation

To analyze the mangrove vegetation of Manamoc Island, plot method was
employed. Forty-two (42) 10 X 10 plots were established in two major mangrove forest in
the island. The following data were gathered: species, diameter-at-breast-height (dbh),
height (m), coordinates, soil texture, soil pH, N, P, and K. The data were analyzed using

cluster analysis and canonical correspondence analysis (CCA) (Jongman., Braak, &

Tongeren, 1987) with the aid of Paleontological Statistics (PAST) software (Hammer,

Harper, & Ryan, 2001).

Determining and enhancing the coping mechanisms to hydrometeorological hazards

In determining the coping mechanisms to hydrometeorological hazards, thematic
analysis of KI] and systems analysis using the data from KII were employed with focus on
coastal retreat as a problem. Remote sensing technique was employed in the design of

mangrove corridors and in mapping the vegetation sites.

CHAPTER IV

Monitoring the Shoreline Dynamics of Manamoc Island, Cuyo, Palawan

Abstract

Anthropogenic activities have impact to the coastal environment, even in small islands with
small population and little economic activities. This is evident in Manamoc Island, Cuyo,
Palawan. Knowledge and understanding of these impacts will enable policy makers to
formulate policies arresting the problem This study focused on establishing shoreline
trends using sand boundary as proxy and determination of specific physical or natural
processes and anthropogenic activities affecting coastal condition im Manamoc Island. Key
informant interview (KII), beach profiling, determination of longshore drift direction and
velocity, and time series analysis of shoreline were done. Manamoc Island coastline
retreated at an average of 38 — 64.5m for the period of 1989 — 2016. These were attributed
to the compounding effect of natural processes, hydrometeorological events, and
anthropogenic activities. The anthropogenic activities led to the destruction of natural
barriers ie. sand, rocks, coral reefs, seagrass, mangroves, and other coastal vegetation
resulting to coastal erosion With impending threats of climate change and sea level rise,
locals should consider relocation in their long term plan Furthermore, intensive IEC
campaign on coastal resource protection and reframing of coastal resource management
plan are imperative.

Keywords: anthropogenic activities, beach profile, coastal erosion, economic development,
man-made structures, monsoon, longshore drift, natural barriers

Introduction

Anthropogenic activities will always have the potential to harm the environment.
This of course, includes the coastal environment. Given the archipelagic nature of the
Philippines, majority of the population are concentrated in the coastal area. In fact, major

cities of the Philippines are located in coastal areas (Bayani-Arias et al, 2012). In these

major cities, it is expected that the anthropogenic activities will have great impact
aggravated by the major land conversion triggered by major economic activities. However,
in remote small islands inhabited by small population doing little economic activities, will
anthropogenic activities significantly affect the shoreline that would lead to disaster?

Manamoc is one of these small islands inhabited by relatively small population and
with few economic activities that are mostly conventional The major source of livelihood
are seaweed farming and fishing. Fishing is a major livelihood in the island since time
immemorial Seaweed farming on the other hand was introduced in Manamoc Island
around 1980’s (personal communication with a local elder) as an alternative livelihood for
fishing. As of the conduct of the study, seaweed production is low due to diseases and the
price is cheap.

This study sought to: (a) describe the meteorological and topographical setting; (b)
establish shoreline trends using time-series analysis of three beach sections of the island;
and (c) socio-economic factors affecting the shoreline evolution. This study may serve as
basis for policymakers in formulating and refining existing policies related to coastal

protection as well as in the formulation of coastal resource management plan.


Methods

Time-series analysis of the shoreline change of Manamoc Island

Satellite images for the year 1989, 1997, 2003, 2006, and 2016 were downloaded
from the USGS website. The images selected have 10% cloud cover and/or less with a
resolution of 30 meters per pixel These images were then atmospherically-corrected to
minimize the effect of atmospheric distortions in the pixel values. After this, subset of each
image that covered the area of interest was extracted to limit the extent of the data to be

processed.

This methodology utilized unsupervised classification method to produce a land
cover map of the island. Classes extracted in each image were the following: a.) built-
up/soil, b.) sand; c.) vegetation; and d.) water using various thresholds. After the
classification procedure, the respective outputs were then compared to each other to assess
the land-cover change across time. For instance, the changes in those areas initially
classified in 1989 as vegetation and what it has become in the succeeding periods were
examined to identify possible drivers of the changes. Area of these pixels were also

computed (in square meters).

The classification produced for each image and the results for the change detection
analysis done were further divided into three parts for the ease of analysis. These parts were
labeled as “Low, Upper_Left, and Upper_Mid_Right” due to the diversity of possible

dynamics for land-use change.


These classification maps for each detected change were then vectorized
(transformed from “raster? data type to “vector” data type) and polygon shapefiles for
paired years were produced for comparison. At this poimt, we extracted those polygons
classified as “Sand” since this is the highlight of this study. Using a geoprocess called
Buffer, another set of shapefiles for each area that extended to 100 meters from their
boundaries were produced. The buffered polygons were then used as clippers to select areas
within the limit to capture the land-cover changes within that vicinity that may contribute

to the possible receding or increase in extent of the shoreline areas.

Other land-cover change that involved this class (such as water-sand, sand-built-
up/soil, vegetation to sand) were also noted and computed for their areas. From this,
assumptions were drawn to the possible dynamics that played a part in the land-cover
change in the shorelines of Manamoc Island in Palawan. Figure 4.1 shows the summary of
the workflow for shoreline trend analysis. However, there were limitations in this method:
1) Coarse resolution of the image. Classification of outputs could have been of better
quality if the images used have higher or better resolution. It therefore restricted the choice
to unsupervised image classification over supervised classification. In addition, the
resolution used was not effectively used in this method because the width of the shoreline
strips was usually less than the pixel size (30m); 2) No accuracy assessment done. Without
better images, supervised classification could not be employed, thus, accuracy assessment
for the land cover produced could not be made; 3) Limited available images. The gaps
between the years/periods considered in the analyses have been brought by the observed

noise (cloud cover) in other time periods available for this area. The more available images,


Download
Landsat images

Unsupervised
Classification
‘Atmospheric
Correction

Change detection
analysis

Figure 4.1 Workflow of shoreline trend analysis using remote sensing.

the better the trend analysis will be, the more detailed the dynamics ofthe land cover in the

area of study.

The analysis focused on the changes involving sand as these were indicators of
coastal erosion and accretion. Land cover change of water to sand, sand to built-up/soil and
sand to vegetation were indicators of accretion or advancing shoreline. Land cover change
of built-up soil to sand, vegetation to sand and sand to water, on the other hand, indicated
erosion or coastal retreat. To quantify the shoreline displacement, sand boundary was used
as a proxy variable. To get the sand boundary, the boundary between sand and water were
outline for each representative year: 1989, 1997, 2003, 2006, and 2016. Each of this
outlined sand boundaries were added asa layer to produce one single map. Since Manamoc

Island was circular in shape, for ease of analysis, the beach has to be divided into three

sections: northeast, northwest and the southern beach. To estimate the average advance or
retreat per section, a parallel line to the shoreline was created. Six (6) minor lines labelled
A to F perpendicular and intersecting the major line and cutting across the outlined sand
boundaries were also created dividing the entire beach as shown in Figures 4.3A, 4.4A,
and 4.5A. The distances between sand boundaries per year were measured from line A to
F. Average displacement per year were computed by getting the average displacement of

AtoF.

Beach profiling

Beach profiling was done following the principle of stadia method or differential
survey or levelling described in the book of La Putt (1987). Figure 4.2 shows the sampling
points. The following instruments were used: a GPS, stadia rod, abney-hand-level and
Stanley Fatmax portable laser level instrument. Beach profiling was done during low tides.
Time, coordinates, mitial elevation per sampling point, height, and distances were
recorded. Succeeding elevations were computed and plotted in a graph using Microsoft

excel.

Determination of longshore drift

In determining the long shore drift, a simple experiment was performed using float
method as employed in several studies oflongshore transport ie. Esteves et al, (2009) and
streamflow measurement ie. Dyer (1970). The folowing materials and instruments were
used: orange weighing 200 grams, cellphone as timer, GPS, and a meter tape. The
experiment was done a few meters away ftom the shoreline and away from boats and other

obstructions. The experiment started by letting the orange float into the water for 1 minute.

iad

“(ques goon wog dew aseg) Sugord yoeaq 1q} padures sod uogesg, ayy SuMOYs puRs] soureueW Jo dey Zp omBy

Yyse3 ajBooc)



Time of the experiment, distance from the shoreline, direction and distance covered

by the orange in 1 minute, water depth, and coordinates of the area were noted and
recorded. It was done in five (5) locations (see Figure 4.13) and replicated 5 times per
location. The drift was obtained by getting the average distance covered by the orange in

1 mmnute.

Determining patterns of tide
The 12-year tide meta data (1998 — 2012) were downloaded from http//gesla.org.

The records were from Puerto Princesa tide station in Palawan, the nearest tide station to
the study area. Using excel, the mean highest high water (MHHW), mean high water
(MHW), mean tide level, mean low water (MLW), mean lowest low water (MLLW) were

calculated.

Determining socio-economic factors affecting coastal condition using key informant
interview (KII)

To determine the socio-economic factors that have affected the coastal condition of
Manamoc Island, 15 key informants were interviewed. The key informants included the
following: housewives (with houses directly affected by the shoreline retreat), youth,
elders, seaweed farmer, People’s Organization (PO) officer, Barangay Council member,
teachers, non-government (NGO) representative, MPDO (Municipal Planning
Development Office) representative, DRRMO (Disaster Risk Reduction Management
Office) representative, and personnel from KALAHI-CIDDS (Kapit-Bisig Laban sa

Kahirapan) assigned in Manamoc Island.


Necessary permit and consent were secured prior to the actual conduct of the
activity. A recorder was used to facilitate ease of recording. Results were transcribed using
the free trial version of Nvivo 11 and analyzed using thematic analysis described by Braun

& Clarke (2006). Hypothetical names were used to protect the personalities volved.

Results and Discussion

Results

Meteorological, oceanographic, and geographic setting of Manamoc Island

Analysis of 29-year rainfall data of the nearest PAG-ASA station in Manamoc
Island shows Climate Type 1 which was characterized by distinct dry period from
November to April and wet season from May to October as shown in Figure 4.3. Annual
precipitation was 2,136.8mm and average temperature was 28.5°C. Since typhoons rarely
visited this part of the country, most of the precipitation in the island was brought by the
southwest monsoon and the rest were due to typhoons. The wettest month was July and the
driest month was February. The hottest month was during month of April

The 29-year wind data revealed that there were three dominant wind systems
prevalent in the island (Figure 4.4). These were northeast, southwest, and north-northeast
winds. Northeast was the most prevalent among the three with total of 50.15%. This was
followed by southwest with total of 35.61%. Other direction of winds recorded were north-

northeast (NNE) and west (W). Generally, the wind velocity ranges from Imps to 12mps.


PAG-ASA Synoptic Station, Cuyo Island (~4m) 28.50°C 2,136.80 mm
(29,29)

Figure 4.3 Climogram for Manamoc Island using average monthly temperature and rainfall of 29
years (1985 — 2015) Note: data from the PAG-ASA, Quezon City.

N
40.00%
wsw 30.00% NE
20.00% :
£
10.00% wt
/ % ; NNE
W 0.00% ge E
é
Sw NW
s
@-02 1-2 +ee@ee 3-4 5-6 2ee@eee 7-8 s4e@ee+ 9-10 ++-@ee 11-12

Figure 4.4 Windrose diagram showing the direction and velocity (in mps) of wind dominant in
Manamoc Island using the average wind data of 29 years. Three prevailing winds: NE — northeast,
SW - southwest, and NNE- north-northeast. The diagram was generated using MS Excel. (Source
of data: PAG-ASA, Quezon City)

Tide characteristics of Manamoc Island

Another important physical process affecting the shoreline evolution was the tide
characteristics (Table 4.1). The type of tide was generally diurnal with mean tide level of

1.82m. The mean highest high water (MHHW) was 2.54m and the lowest low water (LLW)
was 1.19m. The flood and ebb currents produced by astronomical tides affect the transport
of sand. High flood, indicated by mean highest high water brings sand to the upper portion
of a beach profile and therefore contribute to accretion. However, ebbing tides on the other
hand may result to strong current that can erode and wash out sand from the beach off to

the sea.

Table 4.1 Tide characteristics for 1998 —2012 in meters (Tide station: Puerto Princesa City,
Palawan)

MHHW MHW Mean tide level MLW MLLW
2.54 2.21 1,82 1.49 1,19

Longshore drift affecting the shoreline of Manamoc Island

One of the physical processes affecting the dynamics of Manamoc shoreline was
longshore drift. During sampling, the prevailing wind was from northeast and the tide level
was 1.07 — 0.24m. Results revealed that the longest average drift was in Calampisao with
0.20ms"! going at N-NW direction and the shortest was in Luyo with 0.03ms"! at the same
direction as shown in Table 4.2 and Figure 4.5. This was due to the location of each site.

Since Calampisao (C) was exposed to NEM, longshore current were also strong in this

section and moving in the same direction as of NEM. The implication of this was that the
longshore current strengthen by NEM caused the sands in this section to be transported in
the direction of NEM. Whereas Luyo was relatively hidden from the influence of NEM
hence longshore current was weak in this section. The sands were deposited in this area
because of the weak influence of NEM and therefore had longer retention time for the
sands. Among the five sampling points, B and D seemed to be unusual (Figure 4.5) because
both did not follow the direction of the prevailing wind. This was due to refraction, the
bending of sea waves because of the change in the water depth. As waves approach the
shallow water in the nearshore area, both the speed and magnitude of the waves decrease

resulting to change in direction or bending.

Table 4.2 Average longshore drift in ms"! using orange method sampled in five (5) different
sides of Manamoc Island.

Average
Paciondo Do eosn 734am S-SE N-NW 40cm 0.08
Kanike bo eesen 8:17am E N-NE = 53cm 0.06
Calampisao 10 coe 9:22am N N-NW 45cm 0.20
Maliwanag bb crack 10:07am N-NW NE-N 25cm 0.09
Luyo )20447N — 1053am = SSW) NNW 30cm _—0.03

120.6808E



© Calan
(0.20m/s)

Maliwanag
¢ D (0.09m/s)..

ghee

250 0 250 S00 750 1000 m
+++—_+—_+—_ +4

Figure 4.5 Velocity of longshore current at different points of Manamoc Island. Shown
inside the red circle was the uneven seabed of the northwest beach indicating difference
in water depth. Map was generated using QGIS. Base map from Google Earth.

Beach profile of Manamoc Island
Manamoc Island had ca. 13km shoreline of which more than half (ca. 8km) is sandy

beach (Figure 4.2). Site E had the steepest slope with 14.5% indicating loss of sand as
shown in Table 4.3. This was followed by site D with 13.8% slope. Both sites D and E
were facing northeast monsoon (NEM) therefore during profiling, this section of the beach
was eroding and the sands were slowly transported and accreting at the opposite side of
Manamoc Island. Most of the sites with above 8% slope (site C, D, E, F, P, Q, R, and S)
were sites facing northeast monsoon (Figure 4.2). The remaining sites were relatively
hidden from the northeast monsoon. Meanwhile, the most flat was found in Site M with
2.05% slope. This was the sand bar located at the southern tail-end of the island where
most of the sand were deposited during NEM. This supported the claims of the locals that
the shape or profile of the beaches changes with monsoon. Sites facmg the NEM regressed
during this period whereas the other side increased. The reverse occurred during the period

of southwest monsoon. Sands eroded from one side were deposited on the opposite side.

Table 4.3 Summary of the attributes of the beach profile of Manamoc Island during the
month of November showing the width (m), slope height (m), and slope (%).

Site Beach width (m) Slope height (m) % slope
A 22 1.88 8.55
B 15 1.14 7.60
Cc 17 1.84 10.82
D 14.5 2 13.79
E 13 1.88 14.46
F 9.7 0.91 9.38
G 13 1.25 9.62
H 24 1.72 TAT
I 23.5 1.89 8.04


Site Beach width (m) Slope height (m) % slope
J 23 1.865 8.11
K 21 1.64 7.81
L 21 1,32 6.29
M 27.8 0.57 2.05
N 46 1.03 2.24
Oo 20 1.26 6.30
P 9.5 0.78 8.21
Q 11 1.2 10.91
R 8.4 0.91 10.83
S 11.7 1.33 11.37
T 15 0.99 6.60
U 13 0.96 7.38
Vv 27 0.9 3.33

Note: northeast monsoon was the prevailing wind during sampling

Time-series analysis of Manamoc Island sand boundary

There was coastal retreat in the three sections of Manamoc Island: northeast,
northwest, and southern beach as revealed in the displacement ofthe sand boundaries from
1989 to 2016. Northeast beach section had the highest average sand boundary retreat
among the three beach sections with 64.50m. This beach section of the island was exposed
to the northeast monsoon. Detailed discussion follows below in the following order:

northwest, northeast, and southern beach section of Manamoc Island.
Northwest Beach of Manamoc Island

Time series analysis of the northwest beach of Manamoc Island revealed that there
was an average of 38.24m sand boundary retreat in this section of the island from 1989 to

2016 (Table 4.4 and Figure 4.4). Note however that the trend ftom 1989 to 2016 was a

mixed of retreat and advance of sand boundary. From 1989 to 1997, there was an average
retreat of 38.32m with respect to 1989 sand boundary as shown in Table 4.1. In 2003, the
sand boundary displacement averaged to 32.42m which means that the sand boundary
advanced with respect to 1997. In 2006, the displacement was 13.03m. This means that the
sand boundary also advanced from 2003 although relative to 1989 it is still aretreat. It was
observed that 2006 had the shortest displacement from 1989 which implied greatest
advanced of sand boundary in just a span of three years. This could be attributed to
difference in time of image acquisition. Probably, 2006 landsat image was taken during
low tide and therefore more sand were exposed hence during analysis more pixels were
classified as sand resulting to the seemingly advancement of sand boundary. There may be
an actual advancement of the sand boundary but the magnitude was probably lesser. Other
images may have been captured during high tide therefore more pixels were classified as

water. Figure 4.6 shows how the sand boundary retreated and advanced through years.

Table 4.4 Sand boundary displacement in meters at the northwest beach section for 1997,
2003, 2006, and 2016 with respect to 1989 sand boundary (baseline).

SECTION 1997 2003 2006 2016
A 8.01 12.86 14.31 5.57
B 26.30 19.75 44.46 1.87
Cc 35.86 8.59 2.56 68.89
D 106.73 97.98 2.15 110.48
E 19.34 23.87 12.76 35.19
F 33.66 31.49 1,96 7.44

AVERAGE 38.32 32.42 13.03 38.24

‘Sand Boundary (Northwestern Portion)

Sand Boundary (Northwestern Portion)

Figure 4.6 Sand boundary of the northwest beach of Manamoc Island for the year 1989, 1997, 2003,

2006, and 2016. The map was generated using QGIS. Base map from Google Earth.



Further analysis showed that from 1989 to 2016 there were six notable land cover
changes observed involving sand (Table 4.5). Changed from sand to water was the highest
with a staggering 81,900 indicative of coastal retreat. This means that 8ha of beach in
1989 is now submerged underwater. It can also be observed that 2006 — 2016 had the
highest sand to water change. This was, as mentioned above, may be due to the tides.
Probably, the 2006 image was captured during low tide and hence when compared to 2016,
it appeared that 12ha of sand became submerged underwater. Table 4.5 shows the other

land cover changes observed that involved sand.

Table 4.5 Land cover changes observed in the northwestern beach of Manamoc Is. for the
year 1989, 1997, 2003, 2006, and 2016 in m?.

LAND COVER
CHANGES 1989 - 1997 1997 - 2003 2003-2006 2006-2016 1989 - 2016

Water-Sand 23,400 41,400 58,500 18,000 18,000
Built-up/Soil -Sand 11,700 - 6,300 4,500 17,100
Sand-Water 60,300 21,600 34,200 118,800 81,900
Sand-Built-up/Soil - 3,600 2,700 - -

Sand-Vegetation 1,800 9,000 1,800 8,100 3,600
Vegetation-Sand 12,600 2,700 15,300 24,300 16,200

Northeast beach of Manamoc Island

An average of 64.50m sand boundary retreat was observed in the northeast beach
of Manamoc Island ftom 1989 to 2016 (Table 4.6). Sand boundaries durng 1997, 2003,

and 2006 were all relatively closer compared to 2016 which was almost doubled.

Generally, ftom 1989 to 2016, the trend was retreatng. However, upon examining each

section, the trend was retreat and advanced of sand boundary as illustrated in Figure 4.7.

Table 4.6 Sand boundary displacement in meters at the northeast beach of Manamoc Island
for 1997, 2003, 2006, and 2016 with respect to 1989 (baseline).

SECTION 1997 2003 2006 2016
A 11.42 9.78 4.40 0.00
B 53.91 96.82 67.19 174.07
Cc 41.71 62.36 52.79 112.69
D 40.57 6.47 21.81 69.69
E 18.80 8.58 42.18 5.06
F 0.49 25.20 17.06 25.48
AVERAGE 27.81 34.87 34.24 64.50

Result of land cover change analysis (Table 4.7) have shown that sand to water had
the highest area with 181,800m indicating coastal retreat. This means that 18ha of sand in
1989 submerged underwater after 27 years. Similarly, 2006 — 2016 had the highest sand to
water change. For the same reason, the 2006 land sat image used in the analysis was maybe
taken during low tide therefore more pixels were classified as sand. When compared in
2016, it resulted to a staggering 21ha of sand that seemingly submerged under water in just
3 years. Other interesting land cover changes observed in relation to sand are shown in
Table 4.7. Rows without values means that such type of land cover change were not

observed on that particular period.

Ls

“queg 3300p woy dea aseg ‘SIO Susn poyeioued sem dew
MUL “9107 PUe “9007 “E007 “L661 “6861 180K om Joy purs] SoMEUW Jo Yoeaq yseaypON aI JO Arepunog pues a1p Jo sadueyD /y 2msy


Table 4.7 Land cover change observed in the northeast beach of Manamoc Island for the
year 1989, 1997, 2003, 2006, and 2016 in m?.

LAND COVER

CHANGES 1989 - 1997
Water-Sand 26,100
Sand-Water 115,200
Sand-Built-up/Soil 900
Sand-Vegetation 11,700

Vegetation-Sand 4,500

1997 - 2003 2003 - 2006

143,100
19,800
1,800
16,200

Southern beach of Manamoc Island

66,600
67,500

17,100

2006 -2016
8,100
213,300
4,500
45,900


1989 - 2016
11,700
181,800
6,300
19,800
11,700

At the southern beach, there was an average of 50.3m retreat of sand boundary

observed ftom 1989 — 2016 (Table 4.8 and Figure 4.8). The trend for the average sand

boundary displacement implied that there was a retreat. However, similar to other sections,

upon examining the displacement per section, it revealed that there was retreat and

advanced pattern implying a dynamic coastal area. This was illustrated in Figure 4.5. The

sand bar area was not included in the analysis since sand bars are naturally very dynamic.

Table 4.8 Sand boundary displacement in meters observed at the southern beach of
Manamoc Island for 1997, 2003, 2006, and 2016 with respect to 1989 (baseline).

SECTION 1997 2003 2006 2016
B 10.49 25.68 56.74 19.14
Cc 31.29 31.48 0.16 20.03
D 12.29 15.04 5.34 51.77
E 0.16 1.96 18.26 1.60
F 3.10 12.07 7.37 158.78

AVERAGE 11.46 17.25 17.57 50.26

EE

6S

‘yueg ao0p woy dew aseg “SEO Buisn poyesoued sem deus
SUL “9107 Pur “9007 ‘£007 ‘L661 “6861 4294 ay) JOY urls] SoWULP] Jo YoeDg WaYyINOS UN ye ArepuNog pues ay} Jo soduLYD gp aNw]



Analysis of the land cover change from 1989 to 2016 shown in Table 4.9 revealed

that sand to water change was the most remarkable. From 1989 to 2016, sand to water
change was 158,400 m2. However, this was relatively lower than 2006 to 2016 with 353,700
mn. This was due to the difference in the time of acquisition of land sat image as explained
above. Notable also were the land cover change from water to sand and the vegetation to
sand. The former implied deposition of sand and the latter may imply either removal of
vegetation or the deposition of sand to the vegetation. Most of the sand to vegetation land
cover change observed were attributed to the increase in mangrove cover. There was a
mangrove forest dominated by the Rhizophora species located at the mouth of the lagoon
colonizing the sand area. This was advantageous for Manamoc Island since mangroves
trapped sands and therefore encourage accretion Another notable land cover change,
although very small, was the sand to built-up/soil indicating encroachment in the area.

Rows with no values indicated that no conversion occurred during such period.

Table 4.9 Land cover change observed in the southern beach of Manamoc Island for the
year 1989, 1997, 2003, 2006, and 2016 in m?.

=
LAND COVER 1989 - 1997 1997-2003 2003-2006 2006-2016 1989 - 2016

CHANGES
Water-Sand 119,700 15,300 240,300 14,400 50,400
Built-up/Soil-Sand - 900 900 14,400 -
Sand-Water 23,400 159,300 10,800 353,700 158,400
Sand-Built-up/Soil 6,300 3,600 18,900 1,800 6,300
Sand-Vegetation 19,800 12,600 23,400 17,100 42,300
Vegetation-Sand 18,000 9,000 6,300 32,400 9,000



Natural processes and socio-economic factors affecting coastal dynamics of
Manamoc Island as perceived by the key informants

Results of the key mformant interview (KII) was summarized into two themes: (1)
Natural processes shaped the shoreline of Manamoc; and (2) Socio-economic factors

contributed to the shoreline retreat (Table 4.10).
Natural processes shaped the shoreline of Manamoc

One of the factors identified that affected the shoreline of Manamoc Island was the
natural processes. These refer to the earth’s physical processes resulting from the
interaction of the prevailing winds, waves, tides, and currents with the beach. This theme
summarized the observations of each participant based ftom their experience about how
the natural physical processes changed the shoreline. Ka Anton, one of the elders who lived

most of his life in the island, narrated what he had heard from their parents:

“Ito raw na pinagtayuan namin ng bahay ay tubig dagat na dahil sa isang
napakalakas na bagyo ay natambakan ng buhangin. Kung iyan tinambak ng dagat, ito rin
ang kukuha.”

(Once this built-up area was covered with seawater but due to an extremely strong
typhoon, it was covered with sand. They said that the sea will also claim what it gave.)

Changes in the coast and shores ie. coastal erosion and accretion were part of the
natural processes resulting ftom the interaction of the sea, tides, waves and prevailing wind
with the shore. The sand moved in its own cycle. The shoreline and the beach profile was
shaped by the natural processes such as wave action, ocean current, tides, and the prevailing
winds. From this main theme, sub-themes were derived and these were: (1) seasonal change
of coastline as dictated by the monsoons; and (2) hydro-meteorological hazards caused

coastal erosion.


(4)

Aves Suisn no Alea sonossueur

Jo Augd sim ss0y) Inq uOYse UE JYBNeD a19M DUON,,
.ducae uooydyy e Suump

Poysem A]jerquans jnq pus Joyo ay Je UOWsodep
Pure pus au0 je uasola poouatadxe Iajemyeoiq
PestAoidun yng oyM sjuapisos ay) JO oUC,,

«S2MNOY 3}9IHU0S JO WOIASUOD sse se

S1ayY ‘spoomeas oy) WO pue WOsol a WOY aAUOoU
aqqeis Aq qysnoiq juaWoAoIduM [eouRUy 2Ip 0} onq,,
«P2}0BHX9 Zulaq som spurs oy} Suoajo1d sraueq se
SAIOS JEYY SOIOYS BY} Suoje souojs ay} “‘Burysy say uy,
<S1OYSJO spues oy Aeme pags p ‘Suoys

00} are saaeMmeas oy} JO yOedu oy) ‘sucoyd”y SuLMG,,
,WOOSUOW JSSMYINOS ‘UOOSUOUL jseoyIOU

‘uoseas 24} 0} SuIprosoR saBueyd amjoid yoeaq oy],

waqoid a payeaeiade
UOISOID [eISBOD Sate oy Adod
JO YOu ay pue uoyosjo1d somosar

Jemyeu Jo sme Jo jusWsoIQFUD Yeon +

UGISOIA [BSED payeqiaoexa
Joyemyealg ‘91 voto easkyd

soourug poaoidun
Aq payedoid Surumu 4901 pue pues
SIoLUeq [eINeU JO uOCYSNASop ay) 0}

Pa SLO] SY JO SonIANSe POOY![oAr]
UOISOA [eSBO0D

Paesneo spiezey [esIZo|O10s;aWOIpAY *

suoosuow ayy Aq payejoip
Se oumseoo Jo adueys [euoseas

syuaUa}e}s Koy

e

sauralp-qng

yeonal
SuTSIOYS aq} 0}
Pemquyuos sioj}sy
QMUOUOII-O190G “7

OweURyA] JO
auyaioys ou podeys
sassaooid jemen “[

SOUL],

“MOTAIOU JURULOFU Ady Oy JO sisAjeue syeUsY] WO poaLiop sjuauajeys Aoy pue ‘saulayj-qns ‘sawp jo AreuMUNS OI’ AqeL


Seasonal change of coastline as dictated by the monsoons.

The theme encapsulated the ideas of the informants of how the shoreline changes
in shape and elevation with monsoon. Atong, a teacher who grew up in the island, described

it as follows:

“Pabagu-bago ang itsura ng baybay, dala ng panahon, pag amihan, habagat, paiba-iba.”

(It changes according to the season, northeast monsoon, southwest monsoon)

Like the rest of the country, northeast monsoon and southwest monsoon also
prevailed in Manamoc Island affecting the shape of its coastal area, in particular, the beach
profile. During NEM, the beach profile of the beaches facmg NEM and even those partly
exposed were relatively steep because of erosion. NEM greatly influenced the longshore
transport and therefore aid in transport of eroding sands to the opposite side of the island
resulting to accretion mostly at the sand bar. At the turn of southwest monsoon, sand

transport moved reversely.
Hydrometeorological hazards caused coastal erosion.

This theme summarized the insights of the informants regarding how the past
typhoons had affected the shoreline of Manamoc Island. Aside from monsoons, typhoons
and strong waves likewise greatly affected the sand along the beaches. Bong, a Tanod and

a fisherman in the barangay said that:

“Lalo't pag may bagyo, malakas yung impact ng dagat. Inaagay nya yung buhangin”

(Especially during typhoons, the impact of the sea waves are strong, it carried away the
sands offshore.)


During storms or typhoons, strong waves with immense energy occurred as a result
and the backwash caused the sand to drift away offshore losing portions of the beach. In
November 2013, Typhoon Yolanda, the strongest typhoon of the century that had ever hit
the country and caused devastation to many provinces also passed by Northem Palawan.
The Typhoon affected in particular, the Calamianes and the Quiniluban Group of Islands.
Luckily for Manamoc, it was low tide when Typhoon Yolanda passed by and thus sparing
the island from great damage. Chito, the council member, recalled his experience during

Yolanda:

“Kung nagkataon na dumating yung Yolanda ng alas singko y media at malalim ang dagat,
baka nagkaron ng storm surge siguro.”

(If typhoon Yolanda hit Manamoc Island by 5:30am and coincided with high tide, surely
there was storm surge.)

Sometimes, typhoons coincided with high tide and thus resulting to storm surge.
Even if the typhoon was not very strong, it caused coastal erosion. Atong, the school

teacher, said that:

“Kasi yung bagyong Lando hindi naman masyadong malakas ang hangin, ang alon lang
talaga yung waiting shed na iyan, wasak iyan eh.”

(During Typhoon Lando, the wind was not very strong, it was the waves; the waiting shed
was destroyed.)

Sometime about in 2010, a typhoon with low intensity hit Manamoc. The event
coincided with high tide causing a storm surge and affecting houses and other structures

within the 20-30m from the shoreline.


Socio-economic factors contributed to the shoreline retreat

Another factor affecting the coastal condition of Manamoc Island was socio-
economic factor. Four subthemes arise from this main theme. These clude: (1) Livelihood
activities of the locals led to the destruction of natural barriers; (2) Sand and rock mining
propelled by improved finances; (3) Physical intervention ie. breakwater exacerbated
coastal erosion; and (4) Weak enforcement of laws on natural resource protection and the
lack of policy to arrest coastal erosion aggravated the problem Some of the social and
economic activities of the locals significantly interrupted the natural processes resulting to

unwanted change: coastal retreat.

Livelihood activities of the locals led to the destruction of the natural barriers

This theme encapsulated the msights of the informants on how the social and
economic activities of the locals affected the shoreline of Manamoc Island. The following
economic activities have been identified to have directly or indirectly contributed to coastal

erosion: fishing using different methods, gleaning, seaweeds farming, and salt production.

One of the informants, Dodong, a Barangay Tanod and at the same time a
fisherman and seaweed farmer, explained how livefishing affected the shoreline of

Manamoc Island:

“yung pagbuhay-buhay, hinahakot yung mga bato sa baybay; dahil dito nawawala ang
mga bato na tumutulong sa pagsangga upang hindi madala ng alon ang mga baras”

(In live fishing, stones were extracted along the shores; therefore losing rocks and stones
that served as barriers protecting the sands from being washed out by strong waves.)


Live fishing used stones and rocks collected along the shores as weights. Rocks and

stones are barriers that buffer and shield the beach against strong waves. Aside from live
fishing, the use of spear in fishing had impact to the coastal erosion. Chito, the council
member explained how spear fishing destroy the corals, the natural barriers against strong

‘waves:

“halimbawa pagtilador, ag erek, hihilahin ang palaso, basag talaga. Mas importante sa
kanila ang pana”

(for example, a spear was shot and stuck into the crevices of the corals or rocks, they will
forcedly pull it breaking the corals as a result; the spear was more important for them.)

Another fishing method that contributed to coastal erosion was the use of fishnet.

Dodong, one of the Tanod explained how even just the use of fishnet damage corals:

“ang lambat kapag sumabit iyan, titirahin na lang yung corals para makuha ang lambat”

(when fishnet entangled with corals, they will break the corals just to retrieve the fishnet)

Spear fishing and use of fish nets can break corals making it susceptible to disease
and eventually may lead to death of corals. In addition to spear fishing and use of fishnets
were blast fishing and cyanide fishing. Although almost nobody uses this two method
nowadays, its negative impact still manifested. Fragments of dead corals washed up and
piled up forming several sandbar-like in front of the beach. It is called by the locals as
napgas. Atong, the school teacher explained that the pile of rubbles or dead corals formed
in some part of reef flats of Manamoc were the result of using both legal and illegal

methods of fishing in particular dynamite fishing:


“Yun na yung pinisa-pisa ng manigpanirador, manig cyanide, manigpanti, dynamite,
buhay-buhay, galing sa laot”

(those were the fragments from spear fishing, cyanide fishing, using fishnet, dynamite, live
fishing and were brought by the current and waves from off-shore)

However, Bong, one of the Tanod and like most of the men in the barangay was a
fisherman and seaweed farmer, had a different perspective regarding the use of dynamite
fishing:

“para sa akin, mas maige pa yung dinamita pa noon ang hanapbuhay, kasi sa laot lang
iyon. Hindi kagaya ng sodium na kung saan yun umabot, papatayin nya yung bato”

(Dynamite fishers before were better; because the blast was off-shore, not near the shore;
unlike sodium that can kill corals as far as it goes.)

This may be true but all the same, blast fishing kills corals. Similarly, cyanide can
kill corals along its path Corals were very critical for islands and coastal areas because
corals buffer incoming strong waves produced by storms and monsoon. Loss of corals
allows strong waves to directly hit the shores in full blast resulting to coastal erosion Fred,
a fisherman and seaweed farmer on the other hand, summarized how the destruction of

corals could lead to the erosion of the shoreline:

“Kasi pagkamatay ng bahura, isa ra sa nakacontribute sa pagkabkab, pagkankan.. kasi
pag wala ng bahurang haharang doon, paghampas ng alon sa baybay didiretso na lang..”

(Death of coral reefs was also one of the contributors to coastal erosion. Without the coral
reef to buffer offshore, strong waves directly hit the shores.)

The level of awareness and understanding of the locals on the role of natural

barriers was reassuring. In addition to fishing, gleaning also contributed to the destruction

of natural barriers and eventually to coastal erosion. Gleaning refers to the process of
collecting shells and other marine products such as seacucumber, sea urchin, and shells
along the seagrass flats during low tide. Ka Anton, one of the elders and considered as one
of the leaders in the community explained how gleaning activities damaged corals and

Seagrasses:

“kapag nanginginas ka, yung iba may naapakan ka na corals, syempre marurunot iyan..
may tinabtab kang baligok na.. yung baryaw baryaw nasisira din.. nawawala yung roots
ng seagrass, isa ivan sa maagnas din yung lupa kung magkaroon ng malakas na agos..””

(Other people stepped on the corals while gleaning, of course it will break; if you cut a
seacucumber, some seagrass will be destroyed too and it is one of the causes of coastal
erosion when a strong current comes in.)

During the gleaning activity, corals were stepped on and seagrass were inevitably
destroyed. Seagrass, like the corals are buffers against strong waves. Seagrass traps

sediments and sand.

Aside from fishing and gleaning, salt production also contributed in shoreline

regression. Atong, a school teacher shared his opinion on how salt production resulted to

clearmg patches of mangroves for salt pans:

“Meron diyang bakaw, kaya lang nung magstart na yung seran, pinutol”

(There were mangroves in that portion, but when salt production started, they cut it.)

In salt production patches of mangrove forest were cleared and replaced with salt-
pans. Mangroves help in stabilizing the shores by controlling coastal erosion and trapping
sediments through its complex root system Dina, the elementary school teacher, shared

her thoughts on how the mangroves help in the mitigation of coastal erosion:


“yung bakaw, siya din kasi ang kumokontrol nang pag-agnas ng lupa..’

(mangroves controls coastal erosion)

Similarly, seaweeds farming also had negative impact to the natural barriers
specifically mangroves and seagrass. Fred as a seaweed farmer shared his knowledge on

how the seaweeds farming activities destroyed seagrasses:

“Ang kabaryaw-baryawan ay inalis para gumanda ang sibol ng tambalang; kasi pag yung
tambalang, nagkakaron ng sugat yung tambalang..””

(The seagrass were removed so that seaweeds will grow healthy. Because seagrass can cut
seaweeds and this may lead to diseases.)

In seaweeds farming, seabed which supposed to provide support was broken and
cracked due to constant digging for post and stakes used in seaweed farming. In addition,
some seaweeds farmers illegally used mangroves as stakes or post for their mamline. In
areas with tall seagrass, some farmers used to totally eradicate seagrass to avoid cuts or
wounds from seagrass blades. Both mangroves and seagrass are natural barriers against

strong waves and storm surge.

Sand and rock mining propelled by improved finances.

This theme summarized the ideas of the informants of how the improved financial
capability of the community had contributed to the changes in the coastal condition of
Manamoc. Improved finances changed Manamoc, physically and socially. Physical change

pertained to the building of infrastructures i.e. houses, power house, and roads while social

change refers to provision of basic social services such as schools, day care center, health
center, barangay hall, plaza, multi-purpose hall, and water tank. Both of these changes

demanded sand and rock mining in Manamoc.

Chito, the council member shared his observations when coastal erosion began to
manifest:

“Napansin namin ang erosyon, matapos magbukas ang resort at nagkapera ang mga tao;
kasabay nito ang pagtaas ng presyo ng tambalang. Madami ang nagpagawa ng bahay”

(We noticed coastal erosion after the establishment of Amanpulo, people eamed much
money; price of seaweeds skyrocketed, people earned so much money; they build concrete
houses)

The improvement of the finances resulted from two significant economic activities:
the establishment of a five-star luxury resort and the growing seaweeds farming industry.
In 1993, Amanpulo commenced its operation as a world class resort n Pamalican Island,
aneighboring island under the political jurisdiction of Barangay Manamoc. This provided
job opportunities and stable income to the locals and to the comnumity as a whole through
the internal revenue allotment (IRA). This was followed by the growing seaweeds farming
industry in the area. Around mid-1990’s to early 2000, seaweeds farming was a growing
industry in the country because of the high income generated from it. Back then, there was
a high demand for seaweeds from the international market. Stable income and improved
finances paved way for development not only in local economy but in physical and social
component of the community. People improved their abode by building concrete houses.
Roads and other infrastructures ie. school buildings, health center, day care center,

barangay hall, and barangay plaza were also built. All these development were at the cost

of the environment. Sand and rocks had to be mined and extracted from the environment
and used in the construction. Due to its nature and practicality, raw materials ie. sand and
rocks were extracted locally. These put pressure on the natural resources that serve as
natural barriers against strong waves and storm surge. As of the conduct of the study, the
barangay had an on-going road concreting and seawall projects. Ironically, seawall was
meant to mitigate coastal erosion, but the construction itself aggravated the problem The
sand and rocks used for the construction were mined in the coastline. Chito furthered
explained on how coastal erosion was aggravated by the development projects of the

government:

“Ngayon grabe ang patrabaho, kalsada, seawall kaya nga pag may development, may
kaakibat na disadvantage. Gusto nating gumanda kalsada natin, kukuha ka ng buhangin.”

(We have plenty of construction going on, road concreting, seawall; if there’s development,
there is disadvantage. We wanted concrete roads, then we have to mine sand.)

Though the locals understand the negative repercussion of sand and rock miming,
the needs of the community left them with no choice. Bong explained his understanding of

the role of the rocks in coastal erosion:

“Yung bato ay kumbaga suporta sa buhangin para hindi siya madala ng agos kapag high
tide. Kapag wala na yung bato syempre yung buhangin patuloy na sa laot.”

(Rocks support the sand so that it will not be carried away by the ocean current and waves
during high tide. When the rocks are gone, of course the sand will be drifted offshore.)

Understanding alone the problem and mechanics of nature cammot spare the

environment from being exploited. It seemed that the needs of the people were being

prioritized over the environment. Apparently, the balance had been tipped over to the side

of human needs without realizing that these two are coupled.

Physical intervention ie. breakwater aggravated coastal erosion.

This theme encapsulated the statements of the informants that physical engmeering
or interventions such as breakwater had temporarily hold the sand but eventually
aggravated coastal erosion. Chito, imparted the experience of one of the residents m the

barangay who built improvised barrier to protect their house from strong waves:

“May naglagay ng bato sa palibot ng bahay pero mas lalong nakankan ang sa
kabila; kay Inday Timot, breakwater, nung bagyong Lando, nasira pero ligtas naman ang
bahay”

(One resident installed riprap around his house but the opposite side eroded; Inday
Timot built breakwater, but Typhoon Lando destroyed it, although the house was safe)

The people had been experiencing coastal retreat and were threatened by it
especially the residents whose houses were near the shore. In order to save their houses
and properties, they built a seawall of about 30 — 50m in length. They had observed that
indeed sands were maintained at the backshore. However, the front of the breakwater or
seawall had become steeper. Furthermore, at the end of the seawall, sand is eroding and
the seawall is slowly being destroyed due to the forces of the waves. Another resident also
built breakwater in front of their house. But during a strong typhoon it was washed out
although their house was luckily saved. Another resident also build a different style of

breakwater. Their problem was although at one side, sand was building up but on the other

side, the sand was eroding and became deeper. Sometime in 2014 or 2015, the barangay
received an assistance from DSWD through its KALAHI-CIDDS program. The program
aimed to provide immediate assistance to areas stricken by typhoon Yolanda. Based from
their assessment, source of water was the most priority need of the barangay hence the

source of water shall be protected.

From their analysis, the marshland served as the watershed therefore it should be
protected. With climate change and rising sealevel, it will just a matter of time before the
strip of land or beach that separates the marshland from the sea will be washed out allowing
the seawater to infiltrate. From this hypothesis, a seawall has become a necessary for the
barangay. A 1.5km seawall project was implemented of which only 1km was finished as
of the conduct of the study. The seawall had helped the residents in protecting their houses

and properties against the strong waves and storm surge.

Weak enforcement of laws on natural resource protection and the lack of policy to arrest
coastal erosion aggravated the problem

This theme summarized the opinion of the informants that the weak enforcement
of laws on natural resource protection and the lack of institutional policy against coastal
retreat aggravated coastal erosion. Bong shared his knowledge on the illegal cutting of
mangroves happening in their barangay:

“hindi maaktuhan; nangahoy ako noong isang araw, bakaw din pero yung tuyo yung
kinuha ko; marami akong nakuhang pinutol ng kabig.”

(Violators were not caught in action; yesterday, I went to gather dried mangroves for
firewood. most of those I gathered were cut through “kabig”, a kind of saw.)


Despite the law being implemented and the campaigns against the illegal cuttmg of
mangroves, there were still residents who violated and cut mangroves. It appears that there
was a lax implementation of the law against illegal cutting of mangroves. There were
evidences of illegal cutting and yet there is no apprehension recorded. Aside from the
illegal cutting of mangroves, the unregulated micro sand mining in the island was
persistent. Atong explained that the unregulated micro sand mining im the barangay had

aggravated coastal erosion:

“kasi almost araw-araw kumukuha tayo ng buhangin doon.. araw-araw tapos syempre
nababawasan yung amount nila..”

(almost everyday, we extracted sand.. of course the amount was decreasing..)

In an effort to lessen the impact of sand mining, the Barangay council designated a
place allowed for sand extraction. Chito, the council member explained the side of the

Barangay Council of Manamoc regarding sand extraction:

“Ang ginawa na lang, nagdesignate sila ng area na kung saan kukuha, kaya lang may mga
pasaway hindi natin ma-ano nag-iismug pa rin diyan.”

(What we did, we designated a specific area for sand mining however, there were some
delinquents who mined sand in non-designated areas)

Aside from sand, rocks are also being mined and used for constructions. Decades
ago, when the rocks were still abundant in the island, people just picked up the rocks and
stones they needed for construction. However, lately, the people had to excavate big rocks

for the constructions. Without any other source, the people carved out the rocks from the

hilly or slope sides of the hills. This was a dangerous move for the people as it will only
aggravate the problem Ka Anton, expressed his sentiments over the unregulated rock

extractions uphill:

“Kinukuha ang bato sa bukid, ginagamit sa seawall; samantala noon pinupulot lang,
ngayon ang bukid na ang binabakat”

(Rocks are mined uphill for the seawall; before, rocks were just picked up but now the hills
were cut to extract the rocks”

Illegal cutting of mangroves, use of illegal methods in fishing ie. sodium cyanide
and dynamite, unregulated sand and rock mining, unregulated cutting and removal of
coastal vegetation, and unregulated use of marine resources led to the degradation or loss
of these natural barriers which consequently led to coastal erosion. Local policies, ie.
regulating sand and rock mining by designating specific areas where sand and rock can be
mined, although implemented were not sufficient. Since the regulation was just an
agreement among the people, violators were not sanctioned. Therefore violations will

persist and render the regulation ineffective. This does not actually addressed the problem.

Sand boundary displacement versus socio-economic activities and natural events

This study tried to determme the cause of the displacements observed (Figure 4.9)
through historical timeline. The year 1989 was used as the baseline because this was the
earliest available image with relatively better quality. Prior to this year, the following
activities have occurred in the island: conversion of some parts of the mangrove forest for

salt ponds; Typhoon Titang struck Manamoc Island; and concrete construction started in

“PAS 3] W poLMoso yey} spars oy) sa Ske [eWOZOY I) Moog ‘suooes soy Ww JUaIIydSp ATepunog pues
Pomsea ap OM sxe [eMOZOY ap eaocqy ‘sourddmyg ‘uemMeY ‘oXnD ‘puys] SourEUR] JO OUTS [RUTH 6 ANBLT


1987. In 1997, in a span of 8 years, there was a net sand boundary retreat in the three
sections rangng 11m to 38m. The highest displacement was observed at the northwest
section which was next to the built-up area. Note that within the 8 years, significant events
occurred. A world-class resort started operating in the neighboring island providing
employment for the locals therefore improving their fmancial capability in particular
building concrete houses. This resulted to intensive small scale rock and sand mining in
the island not only for concrete houses for the infrastructure development in the community
as well Incidentally, according the locals, the site for sand extraction was also in the
northwest section of the island. By this, it seemed that the small scale sand extraction had
impact in the sand budget resulting to an average of 38m retreat. Six years later, there was
again a net retreat in the sand boundary in all three sections ranging from 17m to 35m, with
the highest displacement observed again at the northwest section Between 1997 and 2003
two crown-of-thorns (COT) outbreak occurred. This was very significant since COT killed
hard corals that served as buffer against high energy waves. In the reef check monitoring
of the locals, there was a dropped in the coral cover after the event. It was also during this
period that the locals recognized the severity of the negative impact of coastal retreat and
so annual mangrove planting activity commenced and the construction of the 30m riprap
at the northwest beach was started. Compared to the previous displacement of 8-year, this
was relatively smaller by 4m but note that this happened in 6 years only. It appeared that
retreat was still significant since, sand extraction was still not regulated and that the natural
barriers have reduced ie. corals, sand, and rocks. Although there was planting of

mangroves in 2000, only a portion of the northwest section was planted. The riprap may

have helped mitigate retreat in the northwest section of the island since ftom 38m away in
1989, it moved to 34m, which implied that there was accretion in this section of the island.

It should be noted that the other two sections showed retreat.

In 2006, three years later, there was a net sand boundary retreat in all three sections
ranging from 13m to 34m with respect to 1989. With respect to the previous year, there
was accretion. Within the three years, no significant event have been reported by the locals
(Figure 4.9). However, the previously mentioned anthropogenic activities were still on and
the lost buffers were not yet totally replaced or replenished by nature itself In addition to
all of these was the natural process of erosion. This was the shortest observation among the
time periods. So even at a span of three years, there was an average of less than 1m retreat
in the southern section. However, the other two section demonstrated accretion Partly
maybe the riprap and the mangroves planted at the northwest section enhanced the sand

deposition resulting to accretion.

In 2016, there was a net sand boundary retreat ranging from 38m to 65m with
respect to 1989. Even without comparing it to the previous period of observation, it was
apparent that there was a very huge retreat. Within ten years, two typhoons hit Manamoc
Island of which one was considered the strongest to hit the country in the century. The
aftermath of Typhoon Yolanda (International name Haiyan) triggered the community to
prioritize the protection of the shoreline. As a result, an additional 1.5km seawall was
constructed in the northwest section in early 2016. It was apparent that the extreme events
had great impact to the stability of the sand as pointed out by Duvat (2009). Compared to

other typhoons, Typhoon Lando was just an average typhoon. However, during its landfall

in Manamoc Island, it coincided with the high tide resulting to storm surge. Plenty of
houses were affected during that time as recalled by the locals. Typhoon Haiyan on the
other hand produced strong winds also affecting several houses. However, since it was low
tide when it hit the island, the beaches were not affected that much unlike during Typhoon

Lando.

Discussion

Shoreline retreats in Manamoc Island for the period of 1989 — 2016

The net displacement in the sand boundary from 1989 to 2016 indicated shoreline
retreat in Manamoc Island (Tables 4.4, 4.6, 4.8 and Figures 4.6 — 4.8). However, when
examined at shorter periods, it was apparent that the sand boundary oscillated. At some
point in time, sand boundary retreated and at another point it advanced, just like a natural
process. Maybe at some point in time, given the conditions favorable for the accretion,
sand boundary may reach or even surpass the sand boundary in 1989. Thom & Hall (1991)
in their study of the behavior of beach profile in Australia observed that erosion was more
rapid process than accretion. This implied that more retreat was observed. This could

explain perhaps why Manamoc’s coastline retreated.

Change in coastline is part of geologic process and this could be either short-term,
that is from few years to decades, or long-term, which could be hundreds of years or more

(Siringan & Ringor, 1996). This study was limited only to the observation of short-term

change. Among the three sections, the northwest section had the lowest net sand boundary
retreat for the period of 1989 — 2016. This seemed to be better however, it is noted that this
portion was also where the majority of the population in the island was concentrated.
Therefore, among the three sections, this portion was also the most critical for the locals.
A few meters retreat had significant impact to the commumity as what had transpired from
the interview with the locals. The locals estimated 30m retreat in this section of the island
which was coherent to the computed average displacement in time-series analysis. Several
houses were affected by the retreat. According to the locals, the lost portion was used to be
an area planted to coconut trees and there were few houses erected. The highest sand
boundary displacement was at the northeastern beach (Table 4.6 and Figure 4.7). The
retreat was almost double of that in the northwest beach. Only a few number of households
were in this area. Among the three sections, this was the most exposed to the NEM, a
predominant wind in this area. It was observed that during this season the waves were
relatively higher and with high energy that is capable of eroding sands. Wind speed during
this time ranges from | to 12 mps (Figure 4.4). Scientific studies have already established
that wind speed, wind duration, and fetch directly affect the wave height and direction.
Kumar et al (2016) reported that in the Arabian Sea, the average wave height during
monsoon was 2m, while c. 0.7m during non-monsoon period, c. 0.8m during pre-monsoon
(February — May), and c. 0.6m during post monsoon (October — January). In Southem La
Union, Philippines it was observed that the predominant winds was coming from northwest
and that the dominant ocean circulation was southerly currents (a wind-driven). This

clearly showed how prevailing winds affect the waves and ocean currents.


The southern beach also showed retreat (Table 4.8 and Figure 4.8). This portion of

the island was relatively hidden from the influence of NEM. It was also this portion of the
island where the mouth of the lagoon, a source of sediments, is located. According to the
locals, there used to be a small sand bar adjacent to the mouth of the lagoon decades ago.
Recently, it was observed to be slowly disappearing due to several natural and/or
anthropogenic factors (see Figure 4.8). Probably, this disappearing sandbar was a former
spit produced from the deposition of sediments ftom the lagoon and through longshore
drift, similar to Sto. Tomas spit in La Union, Philippines. However, due to several factors,
it is now disappearing. The sand supply was probably cut-off and therefore, through
constant actions of waves, tides and currents it slowly eroded. Furthermore, according to
the locals, the right end (Figure 4.8 section F) was also retreating which was in agreement
with the results of shoreline trend analysis. Relatively few number of households live in
this part of the island. However, this is where most of the seaweed farms in the island is
located. Some seaweed farm practices include the removal of the seagrasses as these were
distractive to the seaweeds growth. Seagrasses help dampen the impact of the wave energy

and therefore assisted in retaining the sand, similar to the role of the corals.

Relative to Manamoc Island, the neighboring island of Pamalican (Figure 4.10) was
also observed to be retreating. In the EPRMP report of Seastems, Inc. (2007) for Amanpulo
Resort, as early as 1990, the island experienced retreating coastline. However, it was
observed that the southern tip was accreting. It has been estimated that about 280m has

been added to the length of the island due to accretion from 1990 to 2007. It was suspected

that the sand deposited at the southern tip were from the other sides of the island in

particular those areas exposed to the NEM.

The influence of longshore current as affected by the prevailing winds in shaping
the shorelme of Manamoc Island was very clear. This was also observed in the neighboring
Pamalican Island. Since coastal dynamics is one that have pattern according to geological
time, it is highly possible that the observed retreat is part of a shoreline evolution. Although
retreat and accretion were all part of natural processes, however, this retreat were hastened

by the effect of anthropogenic activities in the area resulting to a compounding effect.

Compounding effects of natural and socio-economic factors contributed to coastal
retreat

The sand boundary displacements in Manamoc Island were due to the combined
effect of natural and socio-economic factors as revealed in the historical timeline analysis
(Figure 4.10). This was also similar in the reports of Berdin et al (2004) in the southern
coast of La Union, Philippines where both natural (ie. wind, ocean current and longshore
drift)) and anthropogenic forcing (ie. sand mining and coastal development) caused

changes in the shoreline.

Natural factors include longshore current, tides, monsoons, typhoons, and storm
surge. Longshore drift is one of the natural processes responsible for sand transport.
Seymour (2005) described longshore drift as the cumulative movement of beach and
nearshore sand parallel to the shore resulting from the combined action of tides, winds, and

wave and the shore-parallel current produced by them. The longshore drift in Manamoc Is.

Tinutuan oy C)

Tayay >» » Algeciras &

® i
Mandit “|

%

Pamalican

Manamoc

Google Earth

Figure 4.10 Quiniluban Group of Islands in northeast of Palawan. Composed of Manamoc Island
(lower left), Pamalican Island (center), Tinutuan Island, Tayay Island, Algeciras Island, Mandit
Island, and Quinluban Island (upper right). Image source: Google Earth.

was greatly influenced by the predominant wind (NE) and the shape of the island similar
to La Union, Philippines (Berdin et al, 2004). This was manifested in the beach profile
(Figures 4.11 — 4.12). The higher the slope, the steeper the profile and therefore,
represented a concave profile which is an indicator of erosion. This was observed in the
northwest and northeast beaches, both sections facing NEM. Conversely, the lower the
slope, the smoother the profile and therefore represented a convex profile is an indication
of accretion. This was observed in the southern beach profile, particularly in the sandbar.

The reverse occurred during SWM. Moreover, the presence of the sand bar at the southern


A B (e
an |° 100 ©. a iso eae
F150 > E 150 ‘
al ‘a 5 Xe ~ 100 By
g!00 “a f) 5 (50 ~e § ‘.
@ 50 ¢ 2 aa | 50 ba
5 oO, 3 0 a g be
20 o Bi ‘Ss & 0 °
0 1 5 10 15 22 30) 0 10 20
0 10 20

horizontal distance (m) horizontal distance (m)

horizontal distance (m)

D E F
300 200 © 100 6
5 200 © § 150% & o
5 9, & 100 a ze 50 ae
= 100 |e, & g
s Ong 3g 50 O,. 3 °
an) “0 & 0 ‘o & 0 ‘°
0 10 20 0 5 10 15 08 28 10° 18
horizontal distance (m) horizontal distance (m) horizontal distance (m)
G H I
150 5 200 5 _. 200 ©
5 100 § 150 7, E150
= “ ~ ° - +,
& 50 e-, Fae °e geod ‘a,
ws, i 50 ‘ 4 50 a,
5 0 ° 3 0 ‘o $0 “°
0 $s 0 15 0 10 20 30 0 10 2 30
horizontal distance (m) horizontal distance (m) horizontal distance (m)
7 K L
2 200 an)
& E 150 0, E10 ®..
& é = 100 %., § 50 ‘a,
3 °., 2 50 3 ‘a,
Bo "© 23,0 5 °... Ae) °
- "0 10 2 30 ce Neto oie tiomeez0% 30
peri 0 10 2 30 : :
jorizontal distance (m) horizontal distance (m) horizontal distance (m)

Figure 4.11 Beach profile of the different sections of Manamoc Island: A, B, and C comprise the
northwest beach; D, E, and F represent the northeast beach; and the rest represent the southern
beach of Manamoc Island,

_ 06
340 @
= 20 7 o.,
= 0 o °
3 0 10 20 30
horizontal distance (m)
P
E °
S
2 o
a2”, ‘o.
g “6
s 0 “9
2 0 5 10
horizontal distance (m)
S
e 150 °
£100 “»
"2,
e *
g 2,
3s 0 °
3 0 10 20
horizontal distance (m
Vv
100 6
E., e
aso Oo.5
2 .
3s 0 te)
2 0 20 40

horizontal distance (m

elevation (cm) elevation (cm)

elevation (cm)

N
100 ®,
50 | Orgs
0 i)
0 20 40 60
horizontal distance (m
Q
50 2°.
0 )


0 5 10 15
horizontal distance (m

%,
2,
°
0 10 20
horizontal distance (m


130 2
f°
foo ©
2 ‘e
0 *.
2 ‘e,
C20) "Org
0 10 20 30

horizontal distance (m)

R

100 ©

: “9

700) oe.

8 “a,

s 0 “©

2 0 ~] 10

horizontal distance (m)

U


5 100 0,

—* 9,

§ 50 M5

=z 0 a)

2 0 10 20

horizontal distance (r

Figure 4.12 Beach profile of the different sections of Manamoc Island: T, U, and V
comprised the northwest beach; Q, R, and S represent the northeast beach; and the rest
represent the southern beach of Manamoc Island.

tip of the island (Figure 4.5) strongly suggested that predommant wind greatly influenced
the longshore drift. The experiment on longshore drift validated this claims (Figure 4.5).
All points in Figure 4.5 except point E were exposed to NEM hence the extremely slow
speed. The velocity indicated the speed and direction of the drifting sands. In this case,
sand from these areas were transported downdrift towards the sandbar. Although points B
and D were both also exposed to the NEM, the longshore current was affected by refraction
explained earlier. Further, longshore current followed the contour of the island which in
the case of point B was a curve hence moving northeast. For poit D, it is noticed that in
Figure 4.5, the seabed facing the northwest beach was uneven or serrated-like compared to
other parts of the island which were relatively smooth. This was an indication of difference
in depth or bathymetry. These features acted like underwater headland that reduced the
speed and magnitude of the wave while the waves at the deeper channel approached the
beach at faster rate causing it to bend in the northwest direction as in pomt D. This was in
adherent to the report of Barut et al (2004) that the influence of monsoon to water

circulation was very pronounced in the western side of the Phikppines.

Another natural process affecting the beach as well as the longshore drift was the
tide. This was best explained by the unusual observation in longshore drift experiment in
Site B (Table 4.2 and Figure 4.5) wherein the orange was moving opposite to the wind-
driven current. So aside ftom wave refraction, the retreating tide or ebb also influenced the
longshore current at point B. Although the upper sea-surface appeared to be moving along
with NEM, the current moved opposite. Furthermore, since the sampling area was at the

near-end of the embayment, the longshore current trailed the contour of the island.

Generally, on high tides, more sand were subjected to longshore drift, whereas during low

tide less sand were subjected to longshore drift.

Another natural phenomenon affecting the shorelme evolution was typhoon.
Compared to other places in the country, particularly in the western part, Manamoc Island
was relatively not frequented by typhoons. However, when typhoons passed by, the island
was greatly affected due to its small size. Passing typhoons created large waves beating the
coastline of Manamoc Island and sometimes storm surge occurred as what have been
experienced by the locals in the past years. Even with a low intensity typhoon or a passing
storm, if it coincided with high tide, the probability of storm surge is high and the impact
is disastrous as what happened in Manamoc Island during Typhoon Lando (Figure 4.9). In
small islands in Indian Ocean, Duvat (2009) reported that sand drifting and sand budgets
were greatly affected by the mcrease in storm frequency and intensity. With climate

change, this is the new normal and Manamoc Island is definitely vulnerable.

Together with the physical processes, socio-economic factors had a compounding
effect to the shoreline, aggravating coastal retreat. In Manamoc, the major livelihood were
seaweed farming and fishing. Other livelihood activities include gleaning and salt
production. Each of these livelihood activities had impact on the environment particularly
to the natural barriers of the island: the mangroves, seagrass, coral reefs, sand or beach,

and rocks.

Mangroves were the most effective at protecting the coast under non-storm and

storm conditions (Guannel et al, 2016). Fully-grown mangroves provide natural protection

by acting as buffer zones during typhoon and storm surges, mitigating the erosion of
shorelines and riverbanks (Cruz, Primavera, & Santos, 2011). This was similar in
Manamoc Island as revealed in KII. The people had planted mangrove to mitigate coastal
retreat and protect their cemetery. Further, even the mangrove forest that was not directly
adjacent to coastal areas helped mitigate coastal erosion (Mazda Y. , et al, 2002).
Seagrasses regulated water flow and wave energy as coral reefS and mangroves did (Barut,
Santos, & Garces, 2004). However, efficiency of protection was better when the two
ecosystems complement with each other (Guannel et al, 2016). Rocks act as natural
barriers against the storm and waves (Bayani-Arias et al, 2012). Sand and rocks are both
natural barriers against waves and current (Berdin et al, 2004). Removal of rocks and other
materials from the coast was equivalent to the removal of natural barriers thus exposing
the sand to waves and wind forces as what happened in San Fermando, La Union (Bayani-
Arias et al, 2012). Unfortunately, this is happening in Manamoc Island as revealed in the
KII (Table 4.7). Sand extraction was one of the causes of beach erosion in small island
developing states (Duvat, 2009). Manamoc Island had the same fate. The sand absorbed
the impact of waves and currents. Removing it is tantamount to removal of shield.
Meanwhile, coral reefs act as natural wave buffers (McLean, et al, 2001; Berdin,
Remotigue et al, 2004) thus providing natural protection to shorelines (Israel, 2004).
Among the areas under the municipality of Cuyo, only Manamoc Island has relatively good
coral cover. However, based from standard criteria, its health is not in good condition and
therefore not sufficient to buffer strong waves. Therefore, removal of these barriers in

Manamoc Island is disastrous as evidenced in past (see Table 4.7).


Aside from the economic activities, the improved financial status of the locals
propelled sand and rock miming activities. Seaweeds farming and the establishment of
world-class resort in the neighboring island paved way to the improved social and
economic status of the comnmmity. Both of these increased the financial capacity of the
locals. Sievanen et al, (2005) reported that seaweeds farming in some areas in the
Philippines and Indonesia resulted to improvement to the quality of life. Local economic
development also brought basic services such as road concreting, building of schools,
barangay hall, health center, and plaza. Construction is everywhere propelling sand and
rock mining in the barangay which, as mentioned previously, undermined the protection of

the island.

Another social activity that contributed to the coastal retreat was the construction
of hard structures to mitigate coastal erosion. Some households, directly affected by the
shoreline changes, constructed riprap and similar hard structures. These resulted to further
local coastal erosion as observed by the locals. Studies (Le. Addo etal, 2008; Bayani-Arias
et al, 2012; Kobayashi et al, 2015; Kermani et al, 2016) have shown that man-made
structures such as seawall, groins, breakwater, jetties, revetments and the like contribute to
coastal erosion. However, Tait & Griggs (1990) argued there were no sufficient evidence
showing that seawall caused erosion and that beach response to seawall is variable and
appears to be influenced by a number of interdependent factors. Furthermore, the review
of Comfort & Single (1997) on the effects of seawall on beaches showed that that there is
no consensus whether a seawall can actively increase or decrease shoreline recession rates.

However, there are end effects of seawalls. This is when a seawall acts like a grom. There

are some accretion on the updrift side but more often erosion or beach displacement on the
downdrift side on the direction of wave approach (Comfort & Single, 1997). In the case of
Manamoc, one end of the seawall was slowly being destroyed by the waves and tides and
serving as outlet for sand previously hold by the seawall. Breakwaters showed similar
response as to end effect of seawall as mentioned by one of the informants. There was
sediment accretion on the updrift side of the breakwaters and erosion on the downdrift

(Sane et al, 2007).

In addition, the rock extraction propelled by the seawall construction had resulted
to over exploitation of limited rocks in the island. The people started to ‘tear down’ hill
sides to extract rocks for the construction and thus exposing the soil With the projected
increase in rainfall due to climate change (Eslava et al, 2013) the locals had just increased

their risk to erosion.

Coastal retreat in Manamoc Island is a complex problem emanating from different
factors of different nature. It was apparent in here the relationship of man to his
environment. Different theories of man-environment interactions could explain the
phenomenon in Manamoc Island. There is poverty, population, and environment (PPE)
wherein increasing population also resulted to mcreasing poverty rate and these two
resulted to environmental degradation. In the case of the Manamoc community, although
the population was very small, but because it is an island, the resources were relatively
scarce. Furthermore, as a small island that is geographically isolated, basic services were
scanty too, as well as the government support thus, poverty was also rampant in the area.

As aresult, the environment was under pressure for its resources. This is where Collective

Theory comes in. The tragedy of the commons explains how the natural resources are being
exploited. However, as complex as it is, there will be no single theory of man-environment
that best explain the phenomenon. Therefore, coastal retreat should be addressed in a

holistic manner.

There are many factors that have not been included in the study such as the
properties of waves, beach profile and longshore drift durmg southwest monsoon, sea level
rise, and parent material of Manamoc Island among others. These factors are equally

important in addressing coastal retreat.

Conclusion

Coastal erosion is occurring in Manamoc Island as a natural process and as stated
by (Thom & Hall, 1991), erosion was more rapid process than accretion therefore retreat
is expected as a natural process. However, due to compounding effect of natural processes
(longshore drift, monsoon, typhoons) and socio-economic activities (livelihood activities,
physical development, weak enforcement of law, lack of policies addressing coastal
retreat), coastal retreat has become prominent. This posed threat not only to those living
near the shoreline but to the whole commumity as well. The protection that the seawall
provides was temporary. As time goes by, with all the coastal retreat, it can just collapse
and the entire island can succumb to a disaster. The island needs a long term plan to the

problem of coastal retreat especially with the threats of climate change and sea level rise.


Recommendation

For the time being, the locals may resort to soft engineering as a means to mitigate
coastal retreat. Mangroves and other coastal vegetation should be planted in areas with
records of coastal retreat and where suitable. However, with the threats of climate change
and sea-level rise, it is strongly recommended that the locals should go for a long-term
planning of relocation to much bigger islands. Likewise, intensive IEC campaign on coastal
resource protection and reframing of coastal resource management plan should also be
implemented to protect the natural barriers. It is also recommended that another study be
conducted with focus on other geologic process such as the effect of sea level rise and

tectonic activities.


LITERATURE CITED

ADDO, K. A., WALKDEN, M., & MILLS, J. P. (2008). Detection, measurement and
prediction of shoreline recession in Accra, Ghana. JSPRS Journal of
Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing , 63 (2015)  543:558.
www.elsevier.com/locate/isprsjprs; date accessed: August 22, 2016.

BARUT, N., SANTOS, M., & GARCES, L. (2004). Overview of Philippine Marine
Fisheries, . In DA-BFAR, Jn turbulent seas: The Status of the Philippine-Marine
Jisheries. Coastal Resource Management Poject (p. p. 22.31. ). Cebu City: In DA-
BFAR (Department of Agriculture — Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources).

BAYANI-ARIAS, J. K., DORADO, M. A., & DORADO, R.A. (2012). Economic
Vulnerability and Analysis of Adaptation Options to Coastal Erosion in San
Fernando, La Union. JESM, 15(2): 35 — 49.

BERDIN, R. D., REMOTIGUE, C. T., ZAMORA, P. B., & SACAT-STA. MARIA, M. Y.
(2004). Coastal erosion vulnerability mapping along the southern coast of La
Union, Philippines: Philippines. ResearchGate, 51-67.

COMFORT, J., & SINGLE, M. (1997). Literature review on the effects of seawall on
beaches. Wellington, New Zealand: Department of Conservation Head Office.

CRUZ, E., PRIMAVERA, J., & SANTOS, J. C. (2011). Engineering Analysis for a
mangrove planting site - towards a sustainable community-engaged coastal
protection program in the Philippines. Retrieved from www.irbnet.de:
www. irbnet.de/daten/iconda/CIB_DC26751.pdf Date accessed: August 2016

DUVAT, V. (2009). Beach Erosion management in Small Islands Developing States:
Indian Ocean case studies. Coastal Processes. WIT Transactions on Ecology and
the Environment, 126:149-160.

ESLAVA, D. F., DIMALANTA, C., YUMUL, G. J., SERVANDO, N., & CRUZ, N.
(2013). Geohazards, Tropical Cyclones and Disaster Risk Management in the
Philippines: Adaptation in a changing climate regime. Journal of Environmental
Science and Management, 84-96.

GUANNEL, G., ARKEMA, K., RUGGIERO, P., & VERUTES, G. (2016). The Power of
three: coral reefS, seagrasses, and mangrove protect coastal regions and increase
their resilience. PLoS ONE, 11(7): e0158094. doi:10.1371/ournalpone.0158094.

ISRAEL, D. (2004). Economics and environment in the fisheries sector. In DA-BFAR,
Turbulent seas: The status oF Philippine marine fisheries. Coastal Resource
management project (pp. 90-95). Cebu City, Philippines: Department of
Agriculture-Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources.


KERMANI, S., BOUTIBA, M., GUENDOUZ, M., GUETTOUCHE, M. S., &
KHELFANI, D. (2016). Detection and analysis of shoreline changes using
geospatial tools and automatic computation: Case of Jijelian sandy coast. Ocean
and Coastal Management, 132 (2016) 46 - 58.
www.elsevier.com/locate/ocecoaman date accessed: August 22, 2016.

KOBAYASHI, A., UDA, T., & NOSHI, Y. (2015). Shoreline devastation of Hota coast by
man-made causes. Procedia Engineering , 116 (2015) 171-178.
www.elsevier.com/locate/procedia. Date accessed: August 22, 2016. .

KUMAR, V. S., GLEJIN, J., AMRUTHA, M. M., & SINGH, J. (2016). Characteristics of
long-period swells measured in the near shore regions of eastern Arabian Sea.
International Journal of Naval Architecture and Ocean Engineering 8, 312 - 319.

MAZDA, Y., MAGI, M., NANAO, H., KOGO, M., MIYAGI, T., KANAZAWA, N., &
KOBASHI, D. (2002). Coastal erosion due to long-term human impact on
mangrove forests. Wetlands Ecology and Management, 1-9.

MCLEAN, R., TSYBAN, A., BURKETT, V., CODIGNOTT, J., FORBES, D., MIMURA,
N.,...ITTEKKOT, V. (2001). Coastal Zones and Marine Ecosystems. In Climate
Change 2001: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Contribution of Working
Group II to the Third Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change. Edited by James J. McCarthy, Osvaldo F. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press, 343 — 379.

SANE, M., YAMAGISHI, H., TATEISHI, M., & YAMAGISHI, T. (2007). Environmental
impact of shore-parallel breakwaters along Nagahama and Ohgata, District of
Joetsu, Japan. Journal of Environmental Management, 399-409.

SEASTEMS, INC. (2007). EPRMP Report of Pamalican Island, Cuyo, Palawan. Quezon
City: Unpublished.

SIEVANEN, L., CRAWFORD, B., POLLNAC, R, & LOWE, C. (2005). Weeding
through assumptionsof livelihood approaches in ICM: Seaweeds farming in the
Philippines and Indonesia. Ocean and Coastal Management, Vol 48 297-313.

SIRINGAN, F. P., & RINGOR, C. L. (1996). Change in the position of the Zambales
shoreline before and after the 1991 Mt. Pinatubo eruption: Controls of shoreline
change. Science Diliman, | - 13.

TAIT, J. F., & GRIGGS, G. B. (1990). Beach response to the presence of a seawall. Shore
and Beach, 11-28.

THOM, B., & HALL, W. (1991). Behaviour of beach profiles during accretion and erosion
dominated periods. Earth surfaces and landforms, 113 - 127.

CHAPTER V

Mangrove assessment in Manamoc Island for coastal retreat mitigation

Abstract

Manamoc Island is experiencing coastline retreat and is in urgent need of economical
mitigating measures. This study explored the role of mangroves in the mitigation of coastal
retreat in Manamoc Island. Assessment of mangroves through standard vegetation analysis
was done in relation to the topography and coastal dynamics prevalent in Manamoc Island.
Time series analysis of sand and mangrove cover change was carried out to determine the
role of mangroves in coastal retreat mitigation Cluster analysis revealed five clusters
named after the dominant species: Cluster I - Avicennia marina (Forsk.) Vierh.; Cluster II
— Bruguiera sexangula (Lour.) Poir.; Cluster Il — Rhizophora apiculata Blume and
Rhizophora mucronata Lam. Cluster IV - Rhizophora mucronata Lam.; and Cluster V —
Sonneratia alba J. Smith. The clustering pattern followed that of typical mangrove
zonation landward, middleward, and seaward although with a relatively short width.
Canonical correspondence analysis (CCA) indicated that environmental factors like soil
texture, pH, N, and P influenced mangrove distribution in Manamoc Island. Time series
analysis of sand and mangrove cover change revealed that mangrove were responsible for
the accumulation of sand in the entrance of the studied lagoon. In areas with less sediments
and the very strong water currents, mangroves were not able to colonize.

Keywords: coastal dynamics, coastal retreat, hydrometeorological hazards, Manamoc
Island, mangroves

Introduction

The threat of coastal retreat has been disturbing the community of Manamoc Island.
It may be not much compared to large islands experiencing the same issue. However, the
retreat will progress if left unabated. With the impending impacts of sea level rise and

hydrometeorological hazards, disaster is inevitable (Capili, Ibay, & Villarin, 2005;

Roebeling, et al, 2013; Cinco, et al, 2016). To address the issue, the community built a
1km seawall with assistance ftom the national government. Maintenance for this kind of
structure, aside ftom being costly is also temporary and interrupts the natural processes ie.
sand budget. It was therefore imperative to design mitigating measures that are ecological,
practical, the least costly and proactive. Mangroves are among these least costly and
proactive soft structures. Duke (1992) described mangrove as group of trees and shrubs
that thrive in marine intertidal zone. Studies have proved that mangroves are important in
the stabilization of coastal areas (ie. Ahmad & Pheng, 2013; Cruz et al, 2011; Winterwerp
et al, 2005). In the Philippines, mangrove reforestation has been used as a strategy in
coastal resource management primarily because of the role of mangrove in the production

of fish and other seafood.

Recently, the role of mangroves in stabilizing coastline and protecting against
strong waves and winds has been recognized due to the risks of hydrometeorological
hazards such as typhoons and storm surge. This is especially critical in small islands like
Manamoc, Cuyo, Palawan. Generally, this study explored the suitability and possibility of
mangrove as mitigating measure for coastal retreat. Specifically, the objectives of this
study were: (a) assess the structure of the mangrove ecosystem on Manamoc Island; and
(b) analyze the environmental factors and coastal processes that influence the distribution

of mangroves on the island.


Methods

Assessing the mangrove structure

Using the plot method, forty-two (42) 10m X 10m sampling plots were laid-out
along the mangrove stretch of the two major mangrove forests on Manamoc Island:
Caseledan Lagoon and Kanike (Figures 3). Plots were distributed according to mangrove
zones: landward, middleward and seaward. Number of trees, species, diameter-at-breast
height (dbh), height, coordinates of each plot, and the disturbances observed were noted
and recorded per plot. The Field Guide to Philippine Mangroves by Primavera (2009) was
used in identifying the mangroves. Species names were validated by For. Carmgal a PhD

candidate and an expert from the University of the Philippines Los Bafios (UPLB).

Average height and relative basal area per plot were computed to describe the
physiognomy. Shannon’s index (Spellerberg & Fedor, 2003) was used to compute the
index. Importance value (IV) was computed using density, frequency, and basal area.

Dominance was computed using Ohsawa’s model (Ohsawa, 1984) as follows:

d = *{Sier(x: — ¥)? + Liev x7}

where d = the deviation, xi = the actual percent share (in this study, IV values are
used) of the top species (T), ie., the most dommant in the one-dommant model, or the two

most dommnant in the two-dominants model and so on; x is the ideal percent share based


(‘4asojdxa yjava 313003 wo som dow asvg ays puv SIO Buisn paipsauas som dou siy] :210N)
“OMULY OIE JOYD}aqS suT}seOd ay) Suge poyojd a19M sau Jy} JM ‘uoose’] uepgasey Jo yojoys oumaoys oy) Suge pamquysip 19M [Z
% | Slo “Joqumny yojd 94) sayeopur syofd ax OF 3xOU JoquNU aq ‘jo}d Suydues QT XOI & Sjasaidas auenbs run pas yoes ay suodAjod
ua018 oy) Aq pamasaidas st OAD aroUEW dy], ‘sISAfeue UOYe}IIIA 3) ul sjod Sumdures a SuIMoys puy[s] DoureuRp Jo dey [°¢ ody

3TOb-O2T

on the model as mentioned above; xj is the percent share of the remaining species (U); and
N is the total number of species. The vegetation data were supplemented with socio-
economic data from key informants to provide information on the disturbances in the
mangroves. Meanwhile, the total RBA was used in cluster analysis. A dendrogram was
constructed using unweighted pair group method with arithmetic (UPGMA) averaging
Inking algorithm (Jongman., Braak, & Tongeren, 1987) and Bray-Curtis similarity index
at 0.4. The resulting zones were named after the dominant mangrove species. The dominant
mangrove species were those with highest RBA. Following Ohsawa’s model of dommance,
if there were two co-dominant species, the name of the second dominant was combined

with the first dommant species and so on.

Analyzing the relationship between mangrove distribution and environmental factors
and coastal processes

In determining the environmental factors affecting the distribution of mangroves,
soil sampling was done following compositing sampling described by Tan (2005). Teacup
sized soil samples were collected and mixed thoroughly. Nitrogen (N), phosphorus (P),
potassium (K), and pH were analyzed using the soil test kit developed by Soil Science
Cluster University of the Phiippines, Los Bafios. Particle size were tested using the “feel

method” by Thien (1979).

To analyze the relationship of soil texture and pH, N, P, and K with the species
distribution of mangroves, canonical correspondence analysis (CCA) (Jongman., Braak, &

Tongeren, 1987) was employed. Further analysis was carried out by examming the

longshore transport, prevailing winds, rainfall pattern, temperature, and the geographic

features of Manamoc Island in relation to the species distribution of mangroves.

Assessing the role of mangrove in coastal retreat

To assess the role of mangroves in coastal retreat, time series analysis of land cover
change of Manamoc Island was used. Landsat images of Manamoc Island in 1989, 1997,
2003, 2006, and 2016 were downloaded from the USGS website and processed using
remote sensing techniques. The unsupervised classification (a method of classifying image
in remote sensing) was employed to produce a land cover map of the island. However, it
should be noted that there were limitations to this method: 1) coarse resolution of the
image; 2) no accuracy assessment; and 3) limited available images. This study focused on
two land covers: mangrove and adjacent sand. Changes in the area cover of these two were

computed. To support the results, key informant interviews were used.

Results

Structure of mangrove communities in Manamoc Island

Eleven true mangrove species from six families were found in the Manamoc Island
sampling plots (Table 1). Other species of true mangroves and mangrove associates were
also observed outside the sampling plots and these included: Nypa fruticans Wurmb.,

Bruguiera gymnorhiza (L.) Lam, Aegiceras floridum Roem and Schult, Pongamia


6 $90 8€0 080 920 8£000 L991 800'0 “Blusoy “f wnyounsd sndivs0j/Ay seooeT ON
b «OTT «S9BL OOZL «ZO $9810 Lb  ozI'0 “WS Dg]D DIDA9UUOg §—_aeaDEIYeIZUTOS
vaovjdydoapcy

Ul vE0 7200 080 70 2000 9%2zF 800'0 “UpBeD “YD Daonjdydoupdy psoydiydiog oeooriqny
8 €L0 O10 080 O€1 O100°:0 LS'8z 8000 “WUD vsojtis vsoydoziyy —_ sea ve10ydozyy
i @LLZ SST OO'PZ ISEE S9STO IL'SEL OF7'0 “wey DIDUOJoNU D4oydoztyy —_seades0ydozTyY
Z = -OS'SZ SS9T OFHZ JISZ Ss9TO BEZSS 870 sung vDjno1dv paoydoziyy —_seeveI0ydozTyY,
9 SSZ 980 O7E 85 98000 Ls8L £00 PIEAA Psowaovs DuazjuunT —- BRO DEIBIQUIOD
L ITT 810 OFZ 940 81000 L991 700 “QOU ‘A ‘D (ad) 1980) sdouay —_seaoe10ydozmy
s SS 7S OFOI 866 P7500 SO6IZ 010 Bog (-moq) vjn3uvxes puandrug seaoesoydozyy
Ol 9€0 900 080 70 90000 9% 8000 =X “UY pur 141M (qx0Y) DO/fiaid eehiag seeoeroydozyy
€  pOOt ZT OOO GLLI ZEZZO Bh OEE 0070 “WIA (S10) DUD DIuUaDIAy —_-seaTeTUUDOLAY
MNVa AI vad sa aa va a a Saloads ATINVA

“xopul (AJ) omjea soueyodut
pue Susosod ut (yey) vare jeseq oayejar “(y) Ausuop canes ‘(py) Aouonbey eanyjas ‘eore 2uOZy W AuO WI (vq) kare Jeseq
“(q aueyo0y Jad Agsuap ‘(4) Aouonbay Surpuodsoioo om) pue puyjs] soweuey] UW pungy sasods oaoiueU 9) JO IST] I'S AQUL


pinnata (L.) Pierre, and Dolichandrone spathacea (L.f£) Bail. ex K. Schum. Diversity
index was 1.71. Analysis of the importance value (Table 1) showed that Rhizophora
mucronata Lam. (R. mucronata hereafter) was the most important mangrove species,
followed by Rhizophora apiculata Blume, Avicennia marina (Forsk.) Vierh., Sonneratia
alba Sm, and Bruguiera sexangula (Lou) Poir. For convenience, the following
abbreviations will be used hereafter: R apiculata, A. marina, S. alba, and B. sexangula
hereafter. Dominance analysis following Ohsawa’s model and using IV resulted in four

dommant species: R. mucronata, R. apiculata, A. marina, and S. alba.

Height distribution analysis showed that eighty-eight percent (88%) of the
mangroves were <8.5m high and mostly consisted A. marina, R. apiculata and R.
mucronata (Figure 5.2). Very few tall trees (16m above high) were encountered and this
comprised only 1% of the total population. The tallest mangroves recorded were 20m high
and were from A. marina, R. apiculata, and S. alba. For the dbh distribution (Figure 5.3),
more than half of the trees (64%) were very small with dbh of <11.22cm Likewise, very
few (<1%) large-trunked mangroves, with 43.4cm dbh were. The highest dbh recorded was

54.11cm from an A. marina. Results of height and dbh distributions indicated disturbance

and therefore classify the mangroves as secondary growth forest.

Mangrove clusters

Hierarchical cluster analysis of plots resulted in five (5) distinct clusters as shown
in the dendrogram in Figure 5.4. These were: Cluster I — Avicennia marina (Forsk.) Vierh.;
Cluster II — Bruguiera sexangula (Lour.) Poir.; Cluster III — Rhizophora apiculata Blume
and Rhizophora mucronata Lam.; Cluster TV — Rhizophora mucronata Lam, and Cluster

V — Sonneratia alba J. Smith. The clusters were arranged according to mangrove zones.

£01

Suaoy “¢ unjouvs8 sndinzoj ky

Wg Dg]D DIDLaUUOS

aung vvjnaidp vsoydoziyy

PILIM DSOWAIDA DLdZIUUNT

OU “FD (Ata) O38 sdowuay

og (4noT) vjn3 piamsnig

13144 ig

ysaig (YS40.J) DULADUE DIUUADIAy

yot-s9l

y9L-STI

v8-Sb

‘saoods oaousueu
SOY) Sy) DIM WE DGD vIWDsaUUOS pue ‘aug DIVnIIdv Dsoydoziyy “YAA (YSIOJ) DuLADU DIUUaDIAy Ts wWS'g MOjIDq
D1OA SOACIBUBUI SY) JO ISOUI JET SMOYS PUBS] oMTENRY Ut (WI) TYSI9q 0} Suspsoose satsods axawBueU jo uoIMELASIG 7°¢ ams]

bpy-s0


Ov



juno)


al

Ori



vol

Wap

WOZZ Ue ssol pey ANSOM ye SMOYS Pus] SoMTENEY] WI (1D) YgP 0} Smpiooce sasods encwBuEM Jo UOIMaNS ¢'¢ aMsiy

Siuaoy ‘f wnjounss sndivs0jAy¥

[2 vaow)cy

[isp vsojAjs vaoydozyy

nunjg vivjnidv vsoydozayy

PILLM DSOwaIv« DéazpUUNT

qON G 2D (-Mad) [v80} sdouay

0g (AnO']) DjNnSupxas v.iansnig

1y81y (qxoy) vaopfiaind vaainsnig

ftO14 (YSAO.J) DULEDU DIMUAIIA f

pS - eb’ eh

Zp Eb - 69'7E

(ws) yqp

89°7E - $617



yuno

sol

“CLSVd) 1OOL 1esusHEIS JeaBoojoyeg Susn poyesouad sem gpa at en any
Suons Aaayyjor e Suyexpur paauiop sem /71g'0 JO UONyIL09 syousqdoo y ‘posn com 5) 3 scl sei, yh
-Keig pue unpuio3je Supyuy vWoan ay (purs] SoweUeEy Jo ased oy UI oUOZ pyeMpuY paidnds0 am = Es vem puns
poyeurop syd jo pasoduzoa 319M | JO}SN]D *97) yeBQeY sues oy] Jo a19M s}od oy) Aymonbosu0> 2 sop rm ie anna
sotsads JURUTOP sures ay) YBM S}o[q ‘sjojd premeas — ¢ gq pue ‘s}o[d premapPpr —Zq 10} cea mien ¥ ies andes
sorsads pue va ou UO paseq purjs] SoweURY] UI sjojd SAOIZULMT JO SID\STYD SAIJ aU) SuLMOY! h

Dg|D DUL.wuLOS

RIsTYD,

pipuawniu vsoyudo=njpy AI 351g - i

vipuaomu vioydoz-py — vrwynaide vioydo=npy 1 2351p

ynBuvxas vianBnig Tr sn

Quemung


Chusters I and II were commonly found in the landward zone. Meanwhile, Clusters
III and IV occupied a wide range of habitats but were commonly found in the middleward

or seaward zones. Cluster V, on the other hand, was mostly found in the seaward zone.
Cluster I: Avicennia marina (Forsk.) Vierh. Cluster

Cluster I was composed of nine plots (Figure 5.4), most of which were in the
landward zone (Figure 5.5). This cluster had two branches at a 0.65 similarity level: A.
marina and A. marina — R. apiculata. The A. marina branch was an A. marina dominated
zone mixed with L. racemosa, R. mucronata, R. apiculata, and C. tagal. On the other hand,
the A. marina — R. apiculata branch was dominated by both A. marina and R. apiculata
and was also mixed with other mangroves: B. sexangula, S. alba, and C. tagal. Substrate
for this cluster ranged from silty clay-loam to sandy substrate. There were 194 mangrove
individuals and 7 mangrove species found in this cluster: A. marina, B. sexangula, C.
tagal, L. racemosa, R. apiculata, R. mucronata, and S. alba. A majority (66%) of the
mangrove population in this cluster was 0 — 4m tall The highest height recorded was 11m
from an A. marina. Likewise, 73% of individuals had a dbh of 2.86 — 11.84cm. The highest
dbh recorded was 47.75 cm from an A. marina. The diversity index for this cluster was

2.67.


Figure 5.5, Cluster 1 Avicennia marina (Forsk.) Vierh. in the landward zone

Cluster II: Bruguiera sexangula (Lour.) Poi Cluster

This cluster was composed of only two plots and thus the smallest in terms of
number of plots (Figure 5.4). It was characterized by sandy loam to silty clay-loam
substrate and was located in the upper intertidal zone which was suitable for B. sexangula,
the dominant species in this cluster (Figure 5.6). There were only 51 mangrove individuals
and six (6) mangrove species found in this cluster: A. marina, B. parviflora, B. sexangula,
L. racemosa, R. apiculata, and S. hydrophylacea. Most (47%) of the trees in this cluster
stand | — 3.2m tall The highest height recorded was 7.5m from an A. marina. Most (45%)
individuals had a dbh of 3.18 —7.64cm (45%). The highest dbh recorded was 25cm from a

B. sexangula. The diversity index was 2.47.


Figure 5.6 Cluster II Bruguiera sexangula (Lour.) Poir. in the landward zone

Cluster III: Mixed Rhizophora apiculata Blume and Rhizophora mucronata Lam. Cluster

This cluster was composed of 14 plots and therefore the largest among the clusters
in terms of the number of plots (Figure 5.4). There were two distinct branches for this
cluster at a 0.55 level of similarity: R mucronata — R. apiculata — A. marina and R.
apiculata, Similar to Cluster I, there was an overlap of three mangrove zones: landward,
middleward, and seaward. A majority of the plots were in the middleward zone (Figure
5.7). There were 268 mangrove individuals and 7 mangrove species found in this cluster.
These were: A. marina, B. sexangula, R. apiculata, R. mucronata,S. alba, X. granatum and

C. tagal. A majority (63%) of the mangroves in this cluster were within the height range

of 0.8 —- 7.2m. The highest height recorded was 20m both from a R. apiculata and A.
marina. For the dbh distribution, 64% had dbh of 3.18 — 13.37cm The highest dbh

recorded was 54cm from an A. marina. The diversity index for this cluster was 2.61.

Figure 5.7 Cluster II] Mixed Rhizophora apiculata Blume and Rhizophora mucronata
Lam. in the overlapping middleward and seaward zones

Chster IV: Rhizophora mucronata Lam. Cluster

There were ten (10) plots in this cluster (Figure 5.4). There were also two distinct
branches in this cluster: R. mucronata — R. apiculata and R. mucronata at a 0.55 level of

similarity. Most of the plots in this cluster were located in the seaward zone (Figure 5.8)

with a few in the middleward which was characterized by sandy to silty clay-loam
substrate. There were 292 mangrove individuals and 6 species of mangroves found in this
cluster. These were: A. marina, B. sexangula, R. apiculata, R. mucronata, and R. stylosa.
Most of the mangroves in this cluster (68%) stood 1 — 5.3m high The highest height
recorded was 14m from a S. alba. Dbh distribution showed that 63% had a dbh of 2.55 —
9.55cm. The highest dbh recorded was 37.56cm from aR. mucronata. The diversity index

was 1.7.

Figure 5.8 Cluster IV Rhizophora mucronata Lam. in the muddy middleward zone


Cluster V: Sonneratia alba Sm. Cluster

There were seven plots comprising this cluster (Figure 5.4) and a majority were in
the seaward zone (Figure 5.9). Cluster V had two prominent branches at a 0.65 level of
similarity: S. alba and mixed of S. alba—A. marina-B. sexangula. Substrate in this cluster
was characterized as sandy, sandy loam to sandy clay-loam There were 117 mangrove
individuals from five (5) species of mangrove in this cluster: A. marina, B. sexangula, R.
apiculata, R. mucronata, and S. alba. A large portion (78%) were <7.4m tall and the highest
height recorded was 20m from a S. alba. 52% of the mangroves in this cluster had dbh of
0.48 — 10.76cm. The highest dbh recorded was 51.88cm from a S. alba. Diversity index

for this cluster was 3.05.

Figure 5.9 The seaward zone showing the cones (aerial roots) of
Sonneratia alba Sm. at Cluster V.


Relationship between physical processes and mangrove

Distance between plots and distribution of mangrove species across edaphic characteristics
of mangrove forest

The scatterplot diagram (Figure 5.10) shows the distance between plots and the
distribution of mangrove species across edaphic factors in Manamoc Island. Plots sharing
the same species composition were plotted close to each other and near to the shared
mangrove species. Plots in Cluster 1(S7_P1,S14_P1,S4_P2, and S9_P1) were plotted very
close to each other and grouped around A. marina. Similarly, plots in cluster III, IV, and V
were dominated by R. apiculata, R. mucronata, and S. alba respectively. Plots $11_P1,
S1_P2, S10_P2, $13_P1, and S6_P2 were plotted very close to each other and clustered
around R. apiculata. Plots $12_P3, S14_P2, S10_P3, S11_P3, and S8_P3 were plotted
close to each other and clustered around S. alba. Plots in Cluster II which had co-
dominants: R. apiculata and R. mucronata were plotted in between these species. Plots in
Cluster II however behaved differently. The plots did not cluster around the dominant
species, B. sexangula, but instead were plotted near to B. parviflora. Species plotted near

the edge of the diagram indicated rare distribution ie. B. sexangula.

Figure 5.10 also shows the edaphic factors affecting the distribution of mangrove
species specifically soil texture, pH, N, and P. Avicennia marina and R. stylosa were
positively correlated with pH and the macro nutrient Phosphorous (P) but were negatively
correlated with the macro nutrient N. Both R. apiculata and R. mucronata were positively
correlated with macro nutrient N but were negatively correlated with P and pH. L.

racemosa, R. stylosa, and R. mucronata were positively correlated with soil texture which

ell

‘(quay
PaMY-ORq) premess — Eq pue ‘(asrenbs poyy-y9%Iq) premapprus — 7 “(A909 payy YO"IQ) prempury — | q :Souoz oaosawul a1 JO} spueys ud
Sea1oyM PUrS] SOWEURY! UI sjojd ay} Jo UOKLIO] OY} Joy spurys US “s}ojd BY} JO VOLO] ay) DyemIpUl Oo} Ug US YM pouteu o19M sjojd ‘souoz
dao SsOIde s}ofd Jo UONedO] ayy SuLAJYUAPI JO 2Sed JOY “YOO oP UNI 0} pacojduso sem (LFV) [OOL [BuSUEIg [eATOOWUOIIeg ‘q pur
‘N ‘Hd ‘o1nyxe} [los :posn arom soysiisjoereyo oydepa moj (WOO) SIskfeuy sduapuodsa1io|D jeoTuOURD Bursn pazAjeue sem sty] “sotoods
SAOWBULUT JO UONNGLASP ayy Suyoaye soysuaj}oeseyo aydepo oy pue sod usaMjoq soUR\SIP ay) SuLMOYS WeIdeIp yoId-1oNedg Q'S 2MB]



means this species preferred coarse soil texture ie. sandy soil In contrast, S. alba, B.
parviflora, B. sexangula, and S. hydrophylacea were negatively correlated with soil texture
which means these species preferred fine soil texture ie. silty clay. Species plotted at the
edge of the diagram ie. B. sexangula, Ceriops tagal, Xylocarpus granatum, and L.
racemosa were either with rare distribution or occupying relatively extreme soil

parameters.

Other physical processes affecting the distribution of mangrove species

Aside from the edaphic characteristics of Manamoc Island, other physical processes
also affect the distribution of mangroves directly and indirectly. These are: wind, waves,
tides, rainfall, and temperature. As mentioned earlier, Manamoc has a Type I climate. It is
characterized by a dry season from the months of November to April and wet season ftom
the months of May to October (Figure 4.3). The average annual rainfall was 2,136 mm
which can be considered a median compared to the nationwide rainfall distribution that
ranges from 965mm to 4,064mm (PAG-ASA, 2016). Although mangroves can tolerate
salinity, fresh water is still needed for the physiological processes. During wet season, a
short-lived supply of run-off water flows downhill to the mangroves (locally known as
bangalog) and thus replenish the freshwater needed by the mangroves. Meanwhile, during
dry season, mangroves can only get water seeping from underground. This is only possible
during low tide where seawater retreats and thus fteshwater from the underground flows to
the mangroves. Therefore, aside from the rainfall, tides also play an important role for the

mangroves. Tide do not only help facilitate groundwater movement, tides also bring


nutrients and sediments necessary for the establishment of mangrove propagules. Being a
small island, Manamoc has a limited supply of nutrients coming from the terrestrial habitat.
It also lacks a river to supply sediments and nutrients to the mangroves like most of the
mangroves in other places. Tides and waves bring nutrients and sediments from offshore.
Mean tide level was 1.82m (Table 4.1). The mean highest high water (MHHW) Ievel was

2.54m and the mean lowest low water (MLLW) was 1.19m.

Another factor affecting the distribution of the mangroves was the prevailing wind.
There were three (3) prevailing winds affecting Manamoc Island: NE, SW, and NNE
(Figure 4.13). Normal wind speed ranged from 1-2ms"! to an extreme of 11-12 ms". Strong
winds resulted in high and forceful waves. Thus, in the mangrove area exposed to this, only
the frontliner species such as S. alba. This was the case in Kanike area where most of the

S. alba can be found.

Mangroves and coastal retreat

Analysis of sand cover change has shown that a total of 18, 000m?’ water to sand
change has been detected in the northwest beach section of Manamoc Island from 1989 —
2016 (Table 4.5 and Figure 5.11). Most of these changes were at the mouth of the lagoon,
the northwest section, which is adjacent to the mangrove forest. Similarly, a total of
50,400m of water to sand has been detected in the southern section of Manamoc Island
during the same span of time (Table 4.9 and Figure 5.12). Most of these changes were

observed at the mouth of the lagoon, adjacent to the mangrove forest.


Legend:

HBB Sana to Vegetation
> Sand to Water

BBB Buit-up/soil to sana
BBD Vegetation to sand

z (0 water to Sand : ie z

a a



Figure 5.11 Sand cover change ftom 1989 —2016 highlighting the northwest
beach of Manamoc Island.

Legend:

@® Sand-Built-up/Soil
@§ Sand-Vegetation
= Sand-Water

Figure 5.12 Sand cover change from 1989 - 2016 highlighting the southern
beach of Manamoc Island. Area in purple box shows increase in vegetation

cover.


Results from KII have revealed that the northwest beach (Figure 5.11 inside the
purple box) was already observed to be retreating way back in the 1990’s. Incidentally, the
communal cemetery was located at this area. Out of fear of losing the cemetery, the people
started to reforest this area by planting mangroves in front of the cemetery about fifteen
years ago or more. The mangrove cover increased in this area and incidentally, the sand
cover also increased. According to the locals, the sand stopped retreating and the sand
cover began increasing instead. Similar changes have been observed at the southem beach
section (Figure 5.12 inside the purple box). Although no reforestation has been done in this
area, the proclamation of the Province of Palawan as a mangrove reserve helped in the
increase of mangrove cover. Results of both sand cover change and KII implied that

mangrove mitigate coastal retreat and helped increased sand cover.

Discussion

Floristic character, species diversity, and human disturbances

Out of the 39 true mangrove species in the Philippines (Sinfuego & Buot, Floristic
Compostion and Analysis of the True Mangrove Vegetation in the Philippines Islands,
2008), 11 were found on Manamoc Island. This number was relatively high compared to
the results of previous studies conducted by UP-MSI in 2002 (unpublished) and the
Palawan Council for Sustainable Development (PCSD) in 2003 (Table 5.3). The former

reported 7 species whereas the latter reported 5 species of mangroves (Table 5.3). The


previous studies did not include the following species: C. tagal, S. hydrophylacea and L.

racemosa.

The diversity index shows that mangroves on Manamoc island were relatively more
diverse than those in Puerto Princesa City Palawan which had H’ values ranging from 0.35
— 0.91 (Galon et al, 2016) using the same diversity index. Dominance analysis shows that
R. mucronata Lam. was the most dominant mangrove species on the island. This was due

to the species’ high density and frequency.

Table 5.3 List of mangroves ftom the other studies conducted in Manamoc Island.

Mangrove species UP-MSI (2002) PCSD (2003)

Avicennia marina (Forsk.) Vierh. v v
Bruguiera gymnorhiza (L.) Lam.
Rhizophora apiculata Blume
Rhizophora mucronata Lam.

Rhizophora stylosa Griff.

NNN NN

Sonneratia alba Sm.

QS NN NNN

Xylocarpus granatum J. Koenig.
Note: Both studies were not published.

The diversity index was impressive given that Manamoc is a small island and very
isolated from possible sources of mangrove species. In the country, Palawan is among the
provinces with the largest remaining primary mangrove forest (Becira, 2005). In 1981

under the presidential Proclamation No. 2152, the entire province of Palawan was declared


as mangrove reserve along with other areas in the country (Melana et al, 2005), 2017).
This m particular has contributed to the preservation of mangroves in the entire province

including its island municipalities thus maintaining its diversity.

The mangroves in Manamoc Island were of secondary growth as indicated by the
dbh and height distribution (Figures 5.2 and 5.3). This is primarily because of
anthropogenic activities. Geographically, Manamoc and its neighboring islands are
isolated ftom the mainland of Palawan therefore, basic needs in particular fuel energy are
harvested ftom the island. Mangroves were used as fuel, charcoal, and for house
construction. Prior to the proclamation of the Province of Palawan as a mangrove reserve,
cutting of mangroves was rampant. Furthermore, during the 80’s and 90’s, salt-making was
among the major sources of income on the island. Areas of mangroves were cut and
replaced with salt ponds. Later, seaweed farming was also introduced to the island.
Mangroves were cut to use as posts for the mainline of seaweed farm Around that time,
fishpond was also considered as an alternative source of livelihood for the residents of
Manamoc. Approximately 2,500 sq. m of mangrove area was cleared. Unfortunately, the
plans did not materialize, and no efforts were made to restore area. Conversion of
mangroves to fishponds was the major cause of mangrove degradation in the country
(Melana, Melana, & Mapalo, 2005). All of these have contributed to the degradation of
mangrove forest on the island and resulting to low dbh and height. Because of the human
activities, some species may have become locally extinct. Currently, illegal cutting of

mangrove is still prevalent in the island.


Figure 5.13 Disturbances in mangroves such as illegal cutting (left) for seaweed posts or charcoal and
conversion to fishponds (right) reduces the ability of mangroves to buffer against strong winds and
waves.

Mangrove zonation as affected by the different environmental factors and coastal
processes

The clustering pattern of mangrove species in Manamoc Island was highly affected
by the island’s physical characteristics such as but not limited to edaphic, climatic, and
topographic features. CCA showed how edaphic characteristics have affected the
distribution of mangroves. Some species preferred clay soil such as the R. mucronata while
some preferred sandy soil such as L. racemosa and X. granatum. In Panay Island,
Philippines, both R mucronata and L. racemosa grow in sandy and muddy substrate as
reported by Primavera (2009). In Puerto Princesa, Palawan, R. apiculata and R. stylosa

were found ona muddy substrate (Becira, 2005). Further, other mangrove species preferred


basic soil while others tolerated acidic soil According to Hossain and Nuruddin (2016),
mangrove species had an optimum pH range except for A. marina. In this study, soil pH
ranged from 6.4 to 7.6. Hossain & Nuruddin (2016) reported that mangrove soils may be
either acidic or basic, ranging from 2.87 — 8.22 but typically acidic. Soil pH is among the
environmental factors that regulate the growth of species and zonal distributions of
mangroves (Wakushima, Kuraishi, & Sakurai, 1994). Some species were clustered with
other species while others do not. Some species were in the seaward zone such as S. alba
while others at the back or landwards such as Avicennia and Bruguiera species. Others

were in the middle zone such as the Rhizophora species.

According to Hogarth (2015) species distribution and zonation pattem of
mangroves are results of the iteraction between competition and a physical gradient.
Zonation of mangroves species reflects the ecophysiological response of the plants to one
or aseries of environmental gradients (Woodroffe, 1992). It is the combination of factors
such as frequency and duration of mundation, waterlogging of substrate, pore water salinity
and pore water potential, that determmes which plants grow where (Woodroffe, 1992).
These gradients respond directly or indirectly to the landform patterns and the physical
processes (Woodroffe, 1992). This was evident on Manamoc Island as shown in Figures
5.4 and 5.10. There were 5 distinct clusters. Despite the small size of the island and very
thin strip of mangroves, the zonation patterns on Manamoc still followed the usual
mangrove zonation pattern. Clusters I and II were dominated by landward species:
Avicennia and Bruguiera. A. marina however occupies a wide range of zones as it is known

to be a seaward species too. It occurs in low to middle tidal level and from sandy, muddy


or coralline substrate while B. sexangula is mostly found in high tidal level with substrate
hard mud, sandy-muddy (Primavera, 2009). Clusters II] and IV were composed of
middleward to seaward species: R. apiculata and R. mucronata. These two species occur
at low to mid intertidal marine and the substrate was muddy for R. apiculata and sandy to
muddy for R mucronata (Primavera, 2009). Cluster V was dominated by S. alba, a
frontline species with high salinity tolerance and found mostly in the low to mid-intertidal

in the seaward zone with coralline to muddy substrate (Primavera, 2009).

This zonation pattern was unexpected for a small island whose mangrove area was
just a thin strip that was usually imundated by seawater since this zonation pattern is
commonly observed in large mangrove forests where the zonation is very distinct. Though
differing by location and forest type, this was similar to the altitudinal zonation pattern
observed by Buot and Okitsu (1998). They observed that the zonation pattems of
mountains in the Philippines were the same although they differed in terms of distances or

coverage per zone.

Edaphic characteristics were not the only environmental factors that affected the
zonation of mangroves, but the climatic and the physical processes did so as well The
climatic factors, temperature, and rainfall were among the limiting factors for the
distribution of mangroves. Mangroves usually grow in a tropical environment and like most
of the plants, need freshwater for their physiological processes. Thus, sufficient rainfall is
needed. Also part of the climatic characteristics was the monsoon. The southwest monsoon
brings rains to the island and thus replenish the freshwater supply. The northeast monsoon

results to strong winds and waves, thus bringing sediments and nutrient from offshore and


other neighboring islands. Waves and tides also play a role in the distribution of nutrients.
The tide, as previously mentioned affects the underground freshwater supply for the

mangroves during the dry season.

In addition, topographic features of the island played a role in the distribution of
the mangroves. Noticeably, most of the mangroves grow in the embayment areas of the
island the largest of these being the perimeter of the lagoon. The lagoon was protected from
strong waves and winds, allowing the growth and reproduction of the mangroves. The
eastern part of the island was also an embayment which was partly protected against strong
waves and winds. The sediments and nutrients needed by the plants were trapped in the

embayment and thus became suitable for mangrove colonization.

Mangroves as agents in mitigating coastal retreat

Data shows that mangrove mitigated coastal retreat of Manamoc Island specifically
at the mouth of the lagoon. Studies of Horstman, et al (2014) and Mazda et al (1997) on
mangroves have shown that they can mitigate coastal retreat. The complex root system of
mangroves as well as the trunk reduced the impact of the waves. Moreover, the complex
root system effectively trapped the sediments. This may be the case with Manamoc Island.
The increased in sand cover may be due to the increased mangrove cover. However, the
mangroves of Manamoc Island are very thin in terms of cover and they are mostly young

trees as shown in Figures 5.2 and 5.3. According to Mazda et al, (1997), drag force in


young mangrove was barely effective. Therefore, the density of mangroves as well as their

height are critical factors for the effectivity of mangroves mitigating coastal retreat.
Conclusion

Rhizophora species dominated the mangrove in Manamoc Island which is good for
them because this species are good at attenuating waves and sediment trappers owing to its
complex root system. Mangroves as part of the coastal ecosystem are affected by the
physical processes such as tides, winds, waves and rainfall mvolved in shaping the
coastline. Mangrove species orient across the environmental gradient suitable for its
survival and reproduction and also follows the mangrove zonation even in small islands
with very thin mangrove forest. Other mangrove species that cannot tolerate hypersaline
and cannot withstand strong winds and waves grow towards the landward zone. Likewise
in areas with less sediments and the current is very strong, mangroves cannot colonize. But
data in this study showed that mangroves are effective agent in mitigating coastal retreat.
However, because the mangrove in Manamoc Island is fragmented, smaller as revealed in
height and dbh, and very thin in terms of cover, the ability of the mangrove to attenuate

waves and to mitigate coastal retreat was reduced.

Recommendation

This study would like to recommend the use of mangrove in coastal erosion
management using the dominant species. Further, mangrove cover of Manamoc Island
should be improved to enhance its ecological services in particular its protection service

against hydrometeorological hazards.


Literature cited

AHMAD, M. H., & PHENG, C. S. (2013). A Laboratory Study on Wave Reduction by
Mangrove Forests. Elsevier B.V. APCBEE Procedia, 27 — 32.

ALMAZOL, A. E., CERVANCIA, C. R, BUOT JR, I. E, GRUEZO, W. S., &
PAMPOLINA, N. M. (2013). Floristic Composition and Physiognomy of Pagbilao
Mangrove, Quezon Province, Philippines. J4MURE International Journal of
Ecology and Conservation, 725-39.

BARANGAY MANAMOC COUNCIL. (2003). Coastal Resource Management and
Development Plan. Manamoc, Cuyo, Palawan: ASF.

BECIRA, E. (2005). State of mangrove in Tiniguiban Cove, Puerto Princesa City, Palawan.
Science Diliman, 172, 46-51.

BUOT, I. J., & OKITSU, S. (1998). Vertica distribution and structure of the tree vegetation
in themontane forest of Mt. Pulog, Cordillera mountain range, the highest mountain
in Luzon Is., Philippines. Vegetation Science, 19-32.

CRASE, B., LIEDLOFF, A., VESK, P., BURGMAN, M., & WINTLE, B. (2013).
Hydroperiod is the main driver of the spatial pattern of dominance in mangrove
communities. Global ecology and biogeography, 806-817.

CRUZ, E., PRIMAVERA, J., & SANTOS, J. C. (2011). Engineering Analysis for a
mangrove planting site - towards a sustainable community-engaged coastal
protection program in the Philippines. Retrieved from www.irbnet.de:
www. irbnet.de/daten/iconda/CIB_DC26751.pdf Date accessed: August 2016

DIDHAM, R K. (2010). Ecological consequences of Habitat Fragmentation. In: eLS. John
Wiley & Sons Ltd, Chichester., http//www.els. net [doi:
10.1002/9780470015902.a0021904).

DOYDEE, P., & BUOT, I. J. (2014). Connecting Fragmented Mangrove Patches Using
Biodiversity of Ranong Coastal Landscape, Thailand. J. Wetlands Biodiversity,
4:7-15.

DUKE, N. C. (1992). Mangrove Floristics and Biogeography. In A. I. Robertson, & D. M.
Alongi, Tropical Mangrove Ecosystems (pp. 63-100). Washington D.C.: American
Geophysical Union.

ENGLISH, S., WILKINSON, C., & BAKER, V. (1997). Survey Manual for Tropical
Marine Resources. Townsville: Australian Institute of Marine Science.


GALON, F., DOLOROSA, R., SESPENE, J., & MENDOZA, N. (2016). Diversity and
structural complexity of mangrove forests along PPC Bay, Palawan Island,
Philippines. Journal of Marine Island and Cultures, 118-125.

GARCIA, J. E. (2012). Composition and distribution of macrobenthos in the mangrove
ecosystem along Hamilo Coast, Nasugbu, Batangas.

GEDAN, K. B., KIRWAN, M. L., WOLANSKI, E., BARBIER, E., & SILLIMAN, B.
(2011). The prsent and future role of coastal wetland vegetation in protecting
shorelines: answering the challenges to the paradigm. Climatic Change, 106:7-29.

HAMMER, O., HARPER, D., & RYAN, P. D. (2001). Paleontological Statistics Software
Package for Education and Data Analysis. Retrieved from Paleontologia
Electronica.

HASHIM, A. M., & CATHERINE, S. M. (2013). A Laboratory Study on Wave Reduction
by Mangrove Forests. JCESD, 27 — 32.

HASHIM, R., KAMALI, B., TAMIN, N. M., & ZAKARIA, R. (2010). An integrated
approach to coastal rehabilitation: Mangrove restoration in Sungai Haji Dorani,
Malaysia. Estuarine, Coastal and Shelf Science, 86 (2010) 118-124.
www.elsevier.comylocate/ecss. Date accessed: August 30, 2016. .

HOGARTH, P. J. (2015). The Biology of Mangroves and Seagrasses. York: Oxford
University Press.

HORSTMAN, E., DOHMEN-JANSSEN, C., NARRA, P., BERG, N. V., SIEMERINK,
M., & HULSCHER, S. (2014). Wave attenuation in mangroves: a quantitative
approach to field observations. Coastal Engineering , 94 (2014) 47-62.
www.elsevier.com/locate/coastaleng.

IPNI. (2012). The International Plant Names Index. Retrieved ftom www.ipni.org
(accessed August 2017)

JAYAGODA, D. D. (2012). Sustainable Community Based Mangrove Plantation Projects:
Three Case Studies from Palawan Island, the Philippines. GSTF International
Journal of ENGINEERING TECHNOLOGY, 38-43.

JONGMAN., R. H., BRAAK, C. J., & TONGEREN, O. V. (1987). Data analysis in
community and landscape ecology. Netherlands: Centre for Agricultural Publishing
and Documentation (Pudoc), Wageningen.

LEE. (2014). Ecological Role and services of tropical mangrove ecosystems: a
reassessment.


LEE, S. Y., PRIMAVERA, J. H., GUEBAS, F., & RECORD, S. (2014). Ecological Role
and services of tropical mangrove ecosystems: areassessment. Global Ecology and
Biogeography, 23, 726-743, © 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. .

LILLO, E. P., & BUOT, I. J. (2016). Species Composition of Argao Mangrove Forest,
Cebu, Philippines. J. Wetland Biodiversity, 6:37 — 45.

LINDGREN, J., & COUSINS, S. (2017). Island biogeography theory outweighs habitat
amount hypothesis in predicting ploant species richness in small grassland
remnants. Landscape Ecology, 1895-1906.

MAZDA, Y., MAGI, M., KOGO, M., & HONG, P. N. (1997). Mangroves as a coastal
protection from waves in the Tong King Delta, Vietnam Mangroves and Salt
Marshes, 127-135.

MAZDA, Y., MAGI, M., NANAO, H., KOGO, M., MIYAGI, T., KANAZAWA, N., &
KOBASHI, D. (2002). Coastal erosion due to long-term human impact on
mangrove forests. Wetlands Ecology and Management, 1-9.

MELANA, D., MELANA, E., & MAPALO, A. (2005). Mangroves management and
development in the Philippines. SEAFDEC, 39-47.

OHSAWA, M. (1984). Differentaiton of vegetation zones and species strategies in the
subalpine region of Mt. Fuji Vegetation, 15-52.

PAG-ASA. (2016, February 9). PAG-ASA. Retrieved from Philippine Atmospheric,
Geophysical and Astronomical Services Administration:
https//www1 .pagasa.dost. gov.ph/index.php/27-climatology-and-agrometeorology

PATH FOUNDATION PHILIPPINES, INC. AND THE MARINE ENVIRONMENT
AND RESOURCES FOUNDATION, INC. (2002). Resource Ecological Habitat
Assessment of Island-Ecosystems in Northern Palawan. Pasay City: The Andres
Soriano Foundation, Inc.

PRIMAVERA, J. H. (2000). Development and conservation of Philippine mangrove:
institutional issues. Ecological Economics , 35(1):91-106.

PRIMAVERA, J. H. (2009). Field Guide to Philippine Mangroves. Ilo-ilo City: Philipp ine
Tropical Forest Conservation Foundation, Inc. (PTFCF) and ZSL-Philippines and
Foundation for Communication Initiatives (FOCI).

REEF, R., FELLER, I., & LOVELOCK, C. (2010). Nutrition of mangroves. Tree
physiology, 1148-1160.

ROBERTSON, A. I., & ALONGI, D. M. (1992). Tropical Mangrove Ecosystems.
Queensland: American Geophysical Union.


SEASTEMS, INC. (2007). EPRMP Report of Pamalican Island, Cuyo, Palawan. Quezon
City: Unpublished.

SINFUEGO, K. F., & BUOT, I. J. (2008). Floristic Compostion and Analysis of the True
Mangrove Vegetation in the Philippines Islands. Journal of Nature Studies, 7(2):
83-90.

SINFUEGO, K. S., & BUOT, I. J. (2014). Mangrove zonation and utilization by the local
people in Ajuy and Pedada Bays, Panay Island, Philippines. Journal of Marine and
Island Cultures , 3:1-8.

SONGCUAN, A. J., BALOLOY, A. B., BLANCO, A. C., DAVID, L. T., GO, G. A.,
CADALZO, I.E., ... TAMONDONG, A. (2015). Mangrove forest extent mapping
in southwestern Luzonusing 2015 landsat imagery. 33-40.

SPELLERBERG, I. F., & FEDOR, P. J. (2003). Blackwell Science, Ltd A tribute to Claude
Shannon (1916-2001) and a plea for more rigorous use of species richness, species
diversity, and the 'Shannon-Weiner' Index. Global Ecology & Biogeography, Vol.
12, 177-179.

TAN, K. H. (2005). Soil sampling, preparation, and analysis 2nd edition. Florida, USA:
Taylor and Francis Group.

THE PLANT LIST . (2013). Retrieved from Version 1.1. Published on the internet
www.theplantlist.org.

THIEN, S. (1979). A flow diagram for teaching texture-by-feel analysis. Journal of
Agroeconomic Education, 8:54-55.

TOLENTINO, P. L., POORTINGA, A., KANAMARU, H., KEESSTRA, S., MAROULIS,
J., DAVID, C. P., & RITSEMA, C. J. (2016). Projected Impact of Climate Change
on Hydrological Regimes in the Philippines. PLoS ONE, 1-14.

UP-MSI. (2002). Ecological Habitat Assessment in Northern Palawan. PATH Foundation
Inc.

VILLAMAYOR, B. M., ROLLON, R, SAMSON, M., ALBANO, G. M, &
PRIMAVERA, J. (2016). Impact of Haiyan on Philippine mangrove: Implications
to the fate of the widespread monospecific Rhizopora plantations against strong
typhoons. Ocean and Coastal Management , 132 (2015) 1 - 14;
www.e;esevier.com/locate.ocecoaman. Date accessed: August 22, 2016.

WHITE, A. T., & DE LEON, R. (2004). Mangrove resource decline in the Philippines:
Government and Community look for new solutions, p. 84-89. In DA-BFAR, In
turbulent seas: The status of Philippine marine fisheries. Coastal Resource


management project (pp. 84-89). Cebu City: Department of Agriculture-Bureau of
Fisheries and Aquatic Resources.

WINTERWERP, J. C., BORST, W. G., & DE VRIES, M. B. (2005). Pilot study on the

erosion and rehabilitation of a mangrove mud coast. Journal of Coastal Research,
21 (2), 223-230. West Palm Beach, Florida, ISSN 0749-0208.

WOLANSKI, E., MAZDA, Y., & RIDD, P. (1992). Mangrove Hydrodynamics. In A. I.

Robertson, & D. M. Alongi, Tropical Mangrove Ecosystem (pp. 43-62).
Washington D.C.: American Geophysical Union.

WOODROFFE, C. (1992). Mangrove Sediments and Geomorphology. In A. Robertson, &
D. Alongi, Coastal and Estuarine Studies: Tropical Mangrove Ecosystems (pp. 7-
41 Vol 41). Washington D.C., USA: American Geophysical Union.

CHAPTER VI

Enhancing coping mechanisms to hydrometeorological hazards
of Manamoc Island, Cuyo, Palawan, Philippines

Abstract

Low lying small islands like Manamoc are vulnerable to hydrometeorological hazards such
as typhoons and storm surge. These hazards caused coastal retreat in the island. To mitigate
this, hard engineering was employed but it was proven to be temporary and costly both
financially and ecologically. Alternative measure is therefore imperative hence, this study.
The present study determined the coping mechanisms of commumity residents to
hydrometeorological hazards; and enhance these coping mechanisms using sustainable and
ecological measures. From KII, the following coping mechanisms to hydrometeorological
hazards were determined: mangrove planting, riprapping, regulating sand and rock
extraction, and seawall construction. However these were not enough and therefore coping
mechanism should be enhanced. Using systems thinking approach, aschematic diagram of
the underlying factors contributing to coastal retreat and strategies to address these factors
was generated. These resulted to the following copmg mechanisms: establishment of
mangrove corridors; and reforestation and planting of local beach forest species along the
coastline. Vegetation analysis of mangrove in the island and mapping using remote sensing
technique were employed in laymg out mangrove corridors and reforestation sites. It is
critical that local leaders and policy makers adopt these coping mechanisms to reduce
disaster risk.

Keywords: coping mechanisms, hydrometeorological hazards, mangrove corridors
network, Small Island

Introduction

Hydrometeorological hazards, specifically storm surge and typhoons, is one of the
major factors that causes coastal retreat in Manamoc Island. As a very small island, the
community is very vulnerable to it. Both hard and soft structures had been implemented to
mitigate the negative impact of these threats. In the late 1990’s, mangrove planting was

done in some parts of the island in an effort to protect the shoreline from coastal retreat.


Locals claimed that planted mangrove protected the community cemetery from coastal
retreat although in other parts of the island, mangrove planting failed. This was due to
haphazard planting and without consideration to the biology of mangroves like in most
cases of mangrove planting in the Philippines (Vilamayor et al, 2016; Primavera &
Esteban, 2008). One of the strategies in mangrove rehabilitation is the creation of a

biodiversity corridor (Doydee & Buot, 2014; Sinfuego & Buot, 2014).

Aside from mangrove planting, seawall was constructed as an immediate solution
to the problem In 2016, a 1.5km seawall was constructed in addition to the 50m previously
erected, as a reinforcement in coastal erosion mitigation. However, previous experiences
of some of the locals in the island on improvised hard structures proved that the protection
provided was temporary and later on aggravated coastal erosion. Similar observations were
reported locally in the province of La Union. Groins and seawalls were used to mitigate
coastal retreat and were found to enhance coastal erosion (Berdin et al. 2004; Bayani-Arias
et al, 2012). In other parts of the globe i e. Japan (Kobayashi, Uda, & Noshi, 2015) and
Ghana (Addo, Walkden, & Mills, 2008), the same observations were reported. However,
Tait & Griggs (1990), in their two-year field observations of beach response to seawall in
Monterey Bay in the United States, claimed there was no substantial evidence to the
observations that seawalls can really enhance coastal erosion, as their observations proved
otherwise. However, it was implied in their report that the following should be considered
when building a seawall: beach profile, long-term trend of coastal erosion and shoreline
retreat, and natural processes such as wind-wave interaction and wave-beach interaction.
All of these factors should be considered and it appears that this is not the case n Manamoc

Island, as the seawall was meant for immediate response against hydrometeorological


hazards. It was from this standpoint that this study was proposed and conducted. This paper
sought to enhance coping mechanism to build a resilient island that can withstand
hydrometeorological hazards in the years to come. This was done by determining coping
mechanisms of community residents to hydrometeorological hazards; and enhancing

coping mechanisms against hydrometeorological hazards.

Methods

Describing Manamoc Island as a coastal system and determining the coping
mechanisms of community residents to hydrometeorological hazard

Fifteen key informants which include elders, housewives, youth, seaweed farmer,
People’s organization (PO) officer, local community council member, non-government
(NGO) representative, Municipal Planning Development Office (MPDO) representative,
Disaster Risk Reduction Management Officer (DRRMO), and KALAHI CIDDS (Kapit-
Bisig Laban sa Kahirapan — Comprehensive and Integrated Delivery of Social Services)
personnel were interviewed. Transcripts were analyzed using thematic analysis described
by Braun & Clarke (2006) to generate themes of the diverse narratives of informants. To
describe Manamoc Island as a coastal system, systems thinking approach was employed
using the narratives as well as personal observation. Coping mechanisms of community

residents to hydrometeorological hazards were derived through KII as described above.


Enhancing coping mechanisms of island residents

Assessing the mangrove structure

Using plot method, forty-two (42) 10m X 10m sampling plots were laid-out along
the mangrove stretch of the two major mangrove forest in Manamoc Island: Caseledan
Lagoon and Kanike (Figures 5.1). Plots were distributed according to mangrove zones:
landward, middleward and seaward. Number of trees, species, diameter-at-breast height
(dbh), height, coordinates of each plot and the disturbances observed were noted and
recorded per plot. Field Guide to Philippine Mangrove by Primavera (2009) was used in
identifying the mangroves. Species names were validated by an expert from the University

of the Philippines Los Bafios (UPLB).

Average height and relative basal area per plot were computed to describe the
physiognomy. Shannon’s index (Spellerberg & Fedor, 2003) was used to compute the
index. Importance value (IV) was computed using density, frequency and basal area.

Dominance was computed using Ohsawa’s model (Ohsawa, 1984) as follows:

d= ~ {Zier (i — xX)? + Dieu x?}

where d= the deviation, xi =the actual percent share (in this study, IV values are used) of
the top species (T), ie., in the top dominant in the one-dominant model, or the two in the
two-dominants model and so on; x is the ideal percent share based on the model as
mentioned above; xj is the percent share of the remaining species (U); and N is the total

number of species.


Meanwhile, the total RBA was used in cluster analysis. A dendrogram was
constructed using unweighted pair group method with arithmetic (UPGMA) averaging
Inking algorithm (Jongman, Braak, & Tongeren, 1987) and Bray-Curtis similarity index
at 0.4. The resulting zones were named after the dominant mangrove species. The dominant
mangrove species were those with highest RBA. Following Ohsawa’s model of dominance,
if there were two co-dominant species, the name of the second dommant was combined

with the first dominant species and so on.
Mapping of mangrove corridors and reforestation sites

Using remote sensing technique, mangrove forest and the potential corridors were
mapped. Landsat images dated November 2016 were downloaded from USGS website and
were processed using QGIS 2.18.13. Due to the coarse resolution of the image, Google
earth explorer was also employed to outline the mangrove patches. This was imported in
QGIS as (keyhole markup language) kml file and used asa layer. Using the same software,

mangrove corridors were created.
Results

Manamoc Island systemin the context of coastal retreat and hydrometeorological
hazards

It was revealed in the KII, that in the past, the natural processes and natural hazards
continuously interact with the natural barriers resulting to the coastal landscape of

Manamoc Island (Figure 6.1). Economic activities of Manamoc Island started in the late

sel

qoeoidde Surqump sursjsXs Susn pue
syoeuuoym Aay ot) Woy poyesouad wojgold & se jeanel [eseod YAM W9}sAs & Se pues] SOMIeURY JO WeseIp ageUIOYIS | "9 aNd]

TSCUVZVH /SSA0OUd TVANLIVN

JaLureg yenyea
o1 Ss: ye
ueumy jo joedun
aly) Uo aspay mony,
joypey «
yuatao10yua
tad Os eh
}Aap eos «

TWunIn5-0L0s 8
Qrop F a souueg [eeu
ayeaud) aakoydury e > 0} Sone UeUMY
Surysy /Sureaey = yo ioedun at uo
SPOOMESS a adpayMouy jo yore] «
JIWONOOA a pueg « 2 yuatmasr1oyua
F209 5 UWORNIVIXe Yor 2p pod + > ATE <2
ssvrsvas MOT + pues Sunemsay ‘VSISAHd : ‘VAop [eoIsAN ©
J2A0D TIO MOT « Teaeag vonR}asan TVanLIn-O1los
aaorgueu amddeidry . TeIseoo 1IIO + oS uononpoid yyeg «
paymourery + Sunjueyd ParpeIoy « Suruvays surysty
TVOISOTOIa SAOFsURY + sserseag « z yosay +
Tremeas « SWSINVHIAW asorsuey, + 5 SUTULIEY spaomeag «

‘TWOISAHd ONIGOD TvoIoToId DINONOD



1980’s to early 1990’s which include seaweed farming, providing labor to the resort,
fishing, gleaning, and salt production. These activities negatively affected the natural
barriers and thus slowly degrading them This resulted to the reduced efficiency of the
natural barriers to provide the protection services. Making the matter worst were the
increasing physical development in the island primarily due to the improved finances of
the locals, weak law enforcement, and apparent lack of knowledge on the impact of human
activities to the natural barriers. In spite of it all, inherent to the community was the coping
mechanisms. In response to the impending threat of coastal retreat, the comnmmity initiated
mangrove planting, rprapping, building of seawall, and regulating sand and rock
extraction. Currently, the commumity had their seawall for protection Due to both
anthropogenic and natural factors, mangroves were fragmented, coral cover is very low as
well as the seagrass. Their economic activities have not changed as well as their socio-
cultural status. They did regulate sand and rock extraction but there is no legal basis such
as local ordinance. Natural processes and hazards are perpetual not to mention the threats
of climate change and sea level rise that could amplify the negative impacts of

hydrometeorological hazards.

Coping mechanisms of community residents to hydrometeorological hazards

KIT have revealed four coping mechanisms of the commmity to
hydrometeorological hazards (Table 6.1). The first coping mechanism was mangrove
plantng. As early as 1990’s the ecological importance of mangroves in particular as

greenbelt against the onslaught of monsoons and storms had been recognized. The


community planted mangroves in order to protect the communal cemetery and this was
apparently successful Mangrove planting became annual activity for the community
through the Manamoc National High School. Their students were taught the importance of
mangroves and inculcated this in their young minds through planting. Hence, this practice

has to be sustained through generations.

Table 6.1 Coping mechanisms of the community residents to hydrometeorological hazards
generated from the thematic analysis of the key mformant interview.

SUBTHEMES FOR COPING STATEMENT

MECHANISMS
1. Mangrove planting "The mangroves planted by the high school students
mitigated coastal retreat protected the cemetery from the coastal erosion"

2. Riprapping protected houses "Juan and Neneng built riprap around their
and properties for a moment _ respective houses, for a moment their houses were
protected but eventually nearly washed out after a

typhoon event"
3. Sand and rock extraction "No ordinance issued but we just agreed that there
were regulated shall be a designated area for sand extraction"
4. Seawall will protect us from "If we will not build seawall, we will lose our fresh
coastal retreat and storm water"
surge

Another coping mechanism was riprapping to protect houses and other properties.
Manamoc Island has been experiencing coastal retreat for decades. As a fishing
community, majority built their abode next to the dynamic beach hence they witnessed and
experienced first-hand the negative impacts of coastal retreat as well as
hydrometeorological hazards. In response, some of the households directly affected built

riprap or improvised seawall to protect their houses and other properties against the strong


waves. This was however proven to be temporary as these were all destroyed by just one
typhoon event that hit the island. Due to this, hard structures ie. seawall was seen as the

best protection against the strong waves and storms that may accelerate coastal retreat.

The third coping mechanisms of the community was regulating micro sand mining
and rock extraction through assignment of designated area for sand extraction. Realizing
that one of the factors contributing to coastal retreat was intensive micro sand mining for
the constructions going on in the island whether for private houses or for community
projects such as road concreting, the community decided to regulate the extraction of sands
within the island by assigning designated areas for sand extraction. Extracting of sands in
places other than the designated one is illegal. The same was applied to rock extraction.
Collection of rocks in hillsides was prohibited. However, since these were not ordinances,
no sanctions done for violators and therefore not effective. Sanctions through ordinances

will curtail if not stop the violators.

The last coping mechanism for hydrometeorological hazards was construction of
seawall to mitigate coastal retreat and coastal erosion. In 2016, a 1.5km seawall was built
in the northwestern beach of the island. This is the area facing the built-up commnnity of
the island. The project was funded through the KALAHI-CIDDS, a project of the
Department of Social Welfare and Development (DSWD) intended for poverty alleviation.
However, after Typhoon Haiyan, another phase of the project was implemented under the
same project but with focus on the rehabilitation of the areas affected by the said typhoon.
In the province of Palawan, Manamoc Island was among those badly hit and thus became
arecipient of the project. With the completion of the seawall project, the people feel safer

especially the directly affected. Unfortunately, during the conduct of the study, there were


Portions of the seawall having cracks already. These cracks could lead to collapse of that

portion of the seawall. There is a need to enhance this seawall then.

Enhancing coping mechanisms to hydrometeorological hazards

Both anthropogenic and natural factors have contributed to coastal retreat in
Manamoc Island causing loss of residences, anxiety for the affected and increasing risk for
the residents of Manamoc Island (Figure 6.2). Results have shown that there were six (6)
factors that cause coastal retreat: storm surge, monsoons, typhoons, weak law enforcement,
physical development, and livelihood activities. These factors, when not addressed, may
aggravate coastal retreat causing increase in disaster risk, loss of residences, and anxiety
for the directly affected. Although coastal retreat may sometimes just a consequence of
natural processes of a dynamic coastal environment resulting from coastal erosion, it is still
imperative to mitigate when a number of population was affected. In determining the
appropriate strategy to arrest each contributing factor it is necessary to look into its nature.
Storm surge, typhoons, and monsoons were all physical in nature while the rest were all
anthropogenic in nature. To mitigate the impact of factors physical in nature, natural way
shall also be applied by enhancing the natural barriers through 1) establishment of
mangrove corridor network; and 2) reforestation and planting of other coastal vegetation
such as Baringtonia asiatica Kurz., Ipomoeae pes-caprae (L.) R. Br., Crinum asiaticum
Linn, Scaevola taccada (Gaertn.) Roxb., Pandanus sp., and Acacia farnesiana (L.) Willd.
These beach forest species helped in stabilizing the sand particularly in areas where
mangroves cannot colonize. Furthermore, these species were already present in the area

and some of these species are known to be land stabilizers because of their structures.

Ovl

yoeoidde Sunpmp susjsks Suisn pue syoawoyu Asay a) WOK
Pareisusd pugs] Soweueyy Ul yeanal [eIseOo 0} pamqUUOO aney ye sIO}oy FurApopun ap jo ureFap oeuoqog 79 amidy

2 suooydiy | pooyryaary |
| : | (exym) ywomdozasap |
|

suoosuoyy | qeatsknyg |
oS isa! | cai Bs edhe |
| |
= = | - ie | yuauas10;ua ]
omen | | aduns WOIS | Me] ye2,\4 |

JOpuiod aaorsueyy — 1 t -
TVUNIVN [ INJ9OdOUHINV

a ]
l |

Ivaadlad TVLSVOD

| 4 4 ot
paysaye oy) | ysiu sa1sesip soouapIsor
Joy Ajorxuy UI aseai0U] JO SSOT

EE

ey ——e e004 |
| syaye


1. Establishment of mangrove corridor network in Manamoc Island. Biodiversity
corridors are thin straps of habitat used to connect isolated patches of a landscape
(Tewksbury, et al, 2002). Mangrove forest in Manamoc Island were fragmented into
patches (Figures 6.3 and 6.4). Mapping shows that there were 6 mangrove patches. This
was due to both anthropogenic and natural causes but mostly due to the former because of
the livelihood activities. For mangroves to be efficient buffer against strong winds and
waves, it should be a healthy and have at least 100m width (Lee et al, 2014). To connect
these mangrove patches, there were two types of corridors most appropriate to be
established in identified sites: lmear and stepping stone (Figures 6.3 and 6.4). Patch 1 was
a reforestation site of the Barangay established to protect the cemetery from coastal
erosion. It was mostly Rhizophora mucronata Lam. and Rhizophora stylosa Griff, the
most common planting material in mangrove planting activities. Cluster analysis (Figure
5.4) have shown that Patch 2 belongs to Cluster I (mixed stands of Rhizophora apiculata
Blume. and Rhizophora mucronata Lam), I (Rhizophora mucronata Lam), and II
(Sonneratia alba J. Smith). A portion of Patch 2 was likewise a reforestation site of
Manamoc National High School (MNHS). Patch 3 was similar to Patch 4 which belongs
to Clusters I and IV with Avicennia marina (Forsk.) Vierh. as dominant species. These two
patches were separated by a narrow gap used as a channel for pump boat. Similarly, the
gap between patches 2 and 3 was due to anthropogenic activities like dry dock. This portion
was part of built-up area and was also used as dry dock for pump boats. Patch 5 belonged
to Clusters I to TV (Figure 5.4) however the nearest portion of Patch 5 to the linear corridor

belonged to Clusters I and II. Patches 5 and 6 were separated by big rocks. Mangroves in

Stepping stone
corridor 1

Stepping stone
corridor 2

LS

Legend

0 115 230 460 HR Mangrove
AGES ET [BBB other vegetation

Figure 6.3 Map of Manamoc Island showing the linear and stepping stone
corridors to be established to connect mangrove patches inside the Caseledan
Lagoon. Base map generated from google earth and processed using QGIS. Inset
map shows the landsat image of Manamoc Island.


Linear corridor 2

: %
~~
0 115230 460 690 __—920
ee Meters

245900 246600 247300 248000

Figure 6.4 Map of Manamoc Island showing linear corridor to be established along
the southwest shoreline of the island to connect mangrove patches. The base map
was generated from goog earth and processed using QGIS. (Inset map shows
Manamoc Island landsat image).



between these two patches were sparsely distributed. Dominant species will be used to

connect all the patches accordingly (Figure 5.4).

2. Mangrove reforestation and planting of other coastal vegetation in areas not suitable
for mangroves. The need to rebuild a coastal forest is urgent. The mangrove forest in
Manamoc Island was relatively thin ranging from 10m to 300m in width. There were parts
of the mangroves that were cleared. One was converted into fishpond (Figure 6.5,
reforestation site 3) that did not materialize. Others were cleared for economic activities,
while other mangroves were not simply dispersing in these areas. Reforestation is the best
option in these areas to encourage colonization of mangroves especially in reforestation
site 1 (Figure 6.5). Reforestation site 1 was a wetland or swamp area where some Aegiceras
species and Nypa fruticans (Thunb.) Wurmb. can be found. Aegiceras species were
sparsely distributed while Nypa fruticans (Thunb.) Wurmb. were in clusters. This wetland
was considered critical by the locals as it was believed to be part of the watershed of the
island. During dry months, the wetland never totally dries up. Incidentally, the dug-well
located next to the wetland which was the main source of potable water for the whole island
never totally dries-up even during dry months. A thin strip of sand with vegetation
separated the wetland from the seawater (Figure 6.6). This thin strip of sand was among
the site of coastal retreat based from the results of time-series analysis of sand boundary

change in the northwest section of the island (Figure 4.6) and from the testimonies of the

Spl

(L102 ‘€1 190 :pammboe
arp) wesSoid owes ay) Suisn poyrpout pue qe ySoop woy payesoued dew aseg ‘poysasojay 2q 0} papoou jer sded ayy smoys SajdN9
Poy ‘Wep siskjeue uonejeFon oy) W poyeorpul se sops uOBEISoIOJOI oAOUEW Jo JUA}Xo oI SuLMOYS PUES] SoMEULW Jo dey “s°9 ams

yyse3 ajboocy

9 ous
UO eISOIOJIY

S ous
WOHe|SOIOJOY



Figure 6.6. Map of Manamoc Island showing the thin strip of sand dividing the wetland
and seawater (inset). The base map used was from Google Earth and processed using
QGIs.

locals. The locals feared of losing the main source of potable water if the trend continues
in the future. It was imperative to plant more mangroves in this part to sustain the thin strip
of sand and to accumulate sediments and sand that will protect the wetland. Although there
was a seawall that protected this thin strip of sand, it is temporary. The seawall is only as
good as the quality of the concrete as well as the design of the seawall. Meanwhile,
reforestations Sites 2, 3, and 4 were all gaps inside the mangrove forest that needed to be
closed. Table 6.2 shows the species to be used. Meanwhile, some parts of the island

affected by coastal retreat were not suitable for natural colonization of mangroves, hence

other types of vegetation should be used. The locals had identified some species of plants
and claimed to have contributed in the stability of the coastline (Table 6.3). Acacia
famesiana (L.) Willd., an invasive species was also very common along the sandy coastal
area. These plants can be planted and used to control erosion especially in the identified

areas of coastal retreat.

Table 6.2 Dominant mangrove species of Manamoc Island per cluster.

CLUSTERS DOMINANT SPECIES

Chster I Avicennia marina (Forsk.) Vierh.

Chuster If Bruguiera sexangula (Lour.) Poi.

Chuster III Rhizophora apiculata Blume - Rhizophora mucronata Lam.
Cluster TV Rhizophora mucronata Lam.

Chster V Sonneratia alba J. Smith

Table 6.3. List of some species of plants found in the coastal area of Manamoc Island.

SCIENTIFIC NAME LOCAL NAME HABIT
Acacia farnesiana (L.) Willd. - shrub
Baringtonia asiatica Kurz. biton tree
Crinum asiaticum Linn. gubawa herbaceous
Ipomoea pes-caprae (L.) R. Br. ragay-ray vine
Pandanus sp. pandan herbaceous

Scaevola taccada (Gaertn.) Roxb. susuploton shrub



Discussion

It is but natural for humans to adapt to their environment as part of their survival
instinct especially when facing difficult situation. In the context of resilience and
adaptation, it is coping mechanism. For Small Islands like Manamoc Island which are
prone to hydrometeorological hazards such as typhoons and coastal retreat, their coping
mechanisms include planting mangroves, improvising riprap, implementing local policies,
and constructing seawalls. These coping mechanisms involved modifying their physical
and social environment. However, these were not enough. With the impending threats of
climate change and sea-level rise, small islands such as Manamoc Island are becoming
more prone to disasters due to hydrometeorological hazards. In fact all small islands in the
entire country is vulnerable to hazards (Lasco et al, 2008). It is therefore critical for them
to enhance their physical protection and implement mitigating measures especially that the
current coping mechanisms of the local people as shown in Figure 2 are lacking. Due to
fmancial constraints since cost is also an important factor for consideration therefore that
a low-cost and yet efficient coastal protection measures were recommended. Since coastal
retreat was caused by both anthropogenic and natural factors, approach for the mitigation
should be holistic. Hence the coping mechanisms were composed of several components

addressing both physical, biological, and social dimension of coastal retreat.

The establishment of biodiversity corridors is commonly used in ecosystem
restoration to create corridors to repopulate an area with the native fauna and flora. The

concept is however also used for plants to connect fragmented patches of vegetation.

Doydee and Buot (2014) proposed the establishment of mangrove corridors in Thailand to
connect fragmented mangrove patches caused by both natural and anthropogenic factors.
This was to restore mangrove cover in Thailand to avoid similar devastation after the 2004
tsunami Mangrove vegetation need corridors to facilitate the dispersal of propagules
(Doydee & Buot, 2014). Although in Manamoc, the patches were only few and the gap in
between were relatively short distance, it is still important that these patches be connected
to facilitate increase of mangrove cover. Linear and stepping stone corridors were the
appropriate type to be used since the gap between patches were either too long or short but
linear. Dominant species (Table 6.2) of mangrove will be used to ensure higher rate of

success.

In some patches (Figure 6.3 — 6.4), there were portions with large gap and appeared
to have not been recolonized by mangroves naturally. Reforestation can hasten
recolonization of these gaps by mangroves. Furthermore, reforestation can hasten spread
or colonization of mangroves in terminal ends of some patches therefore increasing
mangrove coverage. Planting of coastal vegetation in areas not suitable for mangroves can
also help stabilize the coastline. The use of local species was based on the presumption that
those species will have high rate of survival aside from the fact that these plants were

identified to aid in stabilizing coastline.

The coping mechanisms addressed in this paper addressed only the physical
dimension of the problem. It is also important to note that the problem of coastal retreat

being both anthropogenic and natural in nature was multi-dimensional and should therefore

be addressed holistically. Each of this component is actually interconnected such that one

approach may never produce good results without addressing the others as well

Conclusion

Coping mechanisms to hydrometeorological hazards are very important for
vulnerable comnumities such as small islands like Manamoc Island. The community of
Manamoc Island has their coping mechanisms however there were flaws in it and thereby
rendering less effective if not effective at all Therefore it should be enhanced. Planning
without scientific basis will not make any sense at all. Moreover, it will endanger lives and
resources will be wasted. Establishing mangrove corridor network may be likened to
simply mangrove planting. However, the strategic location and using the right species to
be planted will ensure increase of mangrove cover. Reforestation and vegetating coastal
area especially beach areas using local beach forest species will increase coastal protection
from hydrometeorological hazards and will ensure stability of the coastline. The approach
is more natural hence aside from it is cheap, there is no negative impact in the long run

compared to hard engineering approach.

Recommendation

This study would like to recommend the adoption of the enhanced coping
mechanisms to hydrometeorological hazards proposed in this study by the policy makers

and local leaders of Manamoc Island as a short term measures. Polishing local ordinances

and empowering local enforcers through sustained IEC in nature education will support the
establishment of mangrove corridor network, reforestation, and planting activities to build
resilient Manamoc Island environment and community residents. The residents should also
however consider transferring permanently in other large islands such as in Palawan Island
given the impending threats of sea level rise and climate change. Moreover, there is a need
to study the details of IEC activities appropriate to Manamoc local government units and
community residents. The people need to understand the ecological role of marine habitats,
sand and rocks, and coastal vegetation in the protection of the coastline as well as the role
of physical processes that shape the coastline. Above all villagers should understand that

all their activities interact either positively or negatively with island habitats and processes.


Literature Cited

ADDO, K. A., WALKDEN, M., & MILLS, J. P. (2008). Detection, measurement and
prediction of shoreline recession in Accra, Ghana. JSPRS Journal of
Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing , 63 (2015)  543:558.
www.elsevier.com/locate/isprsjprs; date accessed: August 22, 2016.

BAYANI-ARIAS, J. K., DORADO, M. A., & DORADO, R. A. (2012). Economic
Vulnerability and Analysis of Adaptation Options to Coastal Erosion in San
Fernando, La Union. JESM, 15(2): 35 — 49.

BRAUN, V., & CLARKE, V. (2006). Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qualitative
Research in Psychology, 77-101.

DOYDEE, P., & BUOT, I. J. (2014). Connecting Fragmented Mangrove Patches Using
Biodiversity of Ranong Coastal Landscape, Thailand. J. Wetlands Biodiversity,
47-15.

JONGMAN., R. H., BRAAK, C. J., & TONGEREN, O. V. (1987). Data analysis in
community and landscape ecology. Netherlands: Centre for Agricultural Publishing
and Documentation (Pudoc), Wageningen.

KOBAYASHI, A., UDA, T., & NOSHI, Y. (2015). Shorelme devastation of Hota coast by
man-made causes. Procedia Engineering , 116 (2015) 171-178.
www.elsevier.com/locate/procedia. Date accessed: August 22, 2016. .

LASCO, R. D., PULHIN, F. B., SANCHEZ, P. A., GARCIA, K., & GERPACIO, R.
(2008). Mainstreaming Climate Change in the Philippines Working Paper nr 62.
Los Banos, Laguna, Philippines: World Agroforestry Centre.

LEE, S. Y., PRIMAVERA, J. H., GUEBAS, F., & RECORD, S. (2014). Ecological Role
and services of tropical mangrove ecosystems: areassessment. Global Ecology and
Biogeography, 23, 726-743, © 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. .

OHSAWA, M. (1984). Differentaiton of vegetation zones and species strategies in the
subalpine region of Mt. Fuji. Vegetation, 15-52.

PRIMAVERA, J. H. (2000). Development and conservation of Philippine mangrove:
institutional ISSUES. ECOLOGICAL ECONOMICS , 35(1):91-106.

PRIMAVERA, J. H. (2009). Field Guide to Philippine Mangroves. llb-ilo City: Philippine
Tropical Forest Conservation Foundation, Inc. (PTFCF) and ZSL-Philippines and
Foundation for Communication Initiatives (FOCI).


SINFUEGO, K. S., & BUOT, I. J. (2014). Mangrove zonation and utilization by the local
people in Ajuy and Pedada Bays, Panay Island, Philippines. Journal of Marine and
Island Cultures , 3:1-8.

SPELLERBERG, I. F., & FEDOR, P. J. (2003). Blackwell Science, Ltd A tribute to Claude
Shannon (1916-2001) and a plea for more rigorous use of species richness, species
diversity, and the 'Shannon-Weiner' Index. Global Ecology & Biogeography, Vol.
12, 177-179.

TAIT, J. F., & GRIGGS, G. B. (1990). Beach response to the presence of a seawall Shore
and Beach, 11-28.

TANAKA, N., SASAKI, Y., MOWJOOD, M. I, JINADASA, K. B., & HOMCHUEN, S.
((2007). ). Coastal vegetation structures and their functions in tsunami protection:
experience of the recent Indian Ocean tsunami . Landscape Ecol Eng , 333-45.

TEWKSBURY, J., LEVEY, D. J., HADDAD, N. M., SARGENT, S., ORROCK, J. L.,
WELDON, A., ... Townsend, P. (2002). Corridors affect plants, animals, and their
interactions in fragmented landscapes. Proceedings for the National Academy of
Science of the United States of America (pp. 12923 - 12926). Washington DC:
Kenneth R. Fullton.

TOLENTINO, P. L., POORTINGA, A., KANAMARU, H., KEESSTRA, S., MAROULIS,
J., DAVID, C.P., & RITSEMA, C. J. (2016). Projected Impact of Climate Change
on Hydrological Regimes in the Philippines. PLoS ONE, 1-14.

VILLAMAYOR, B. M., ROLLON, R, SAMSON, M., ALBANO, G. M., &
PRIMAVERA, J. (2016). Impact of Haiyan on Philippine mangrove: Implications
to the fate of the widespread monospecific Rhizopora plantations against strong
typhoons. Ocean and Coastal Management , 132 (2015) 1 — 14;
www.e;esevier.com/locate.ocecoaman. Date accessed: August 22, 2016.

CHAPTER VII

GENERAL DISCUSSION

Coastal retreat is among the effects of hydrometeorological hazards to Manamoc
Island. This has been observed by the locals for decades and time series analysis of
Manamoc shoreline have shown an average of 38 — 64.5m coastal retreat from a period of
1989 — 2016 (Figure 4.4 — 4.6). Apparently it was caused by a compounding effect from
both physical and anthropogenic factors as revealed in the KII (Table 4.7). These were
typhoon, storm surge, monsoon, weak law enforcement, physical development

(infrastructure), and livelihood activities.

Physical factors such as storms, typhoons, monsoons, and longshore currents are
part of the earth’s natural processes that shape the coast (Winterwerp, Borst, & De Vries,
2005). Typhoons, storm surge, and monsoon may cause coastal erosion however these
three are also responsible in accretion. Offshore sand and sediments maybe dump or fill
onshore adding to the sand budget (Marchand, 2010). This is very critical for Manamoc
Island whose large portion of the sand budget comes from the offshore brought by waves,
storms, and tides since there is no continuous runoff water or rivers in the island. Without
obstructions, erosion and accretion will continue to occur reshaping the coastlne of
Manamoc Island. With the current mind setting of most of the people, not mindful of the
repercussions, the development and livelihood activities will always be present, causing

interruptions and negative impact to the natural processes as well as im the natural barriers

of the island such as the sand and rocks, corals, seagrass, and the mangroves. Human
activities, in particular development and livelihood activities had negative impacts to the
environment. Consequently humans who are dependent on the environment will be greatly
affected especially if the environment can no longer sustain its current condition and can
no longer absorbed the disturbances and therefore cannot provide ecosystem services.
Further aggravating the situation were the lack of policy to arrest the problem and the weak
enforcement of environmental laws similar to the report of Duvat (2009) in small island

developing countries.

It appears that the problems of coastal retreat was not only a simple problem of
human activities interrupting physical processes and destructing the natural barriers but
instead it also go deeper into the social problem such as lack of education or understanding
of our environment, wrong concept of development, and poverty at its best. This was
manifested in the manner how the Manamoc community cope to the hydrometeorological
hazards. Enhancing coping mechanism of Manamoc is therefore imperative. However, it
is also a must to address such complicated problem in a holistic manner addressing each

contributing factor simultaneously. Further, it should be ecological and less expensive.

One of the strategies in mitigating coastal retreat as well as coastal protection is soft
engineering in particular mangrove planting. Plethora of studies have shown that mangrove
help stabilize coastline and is good buffer against strong wind and waves ie. Villamayor
(2016); Doydee & Buot (2014); Cruz et al (2011). Enhancement of green belt for
Manamoc Island is imperative to help stabilize the coastlme of Manamoc and to enhance

its resilience mechanisms against hydrometeorological hazards. The mangroves in

Manamoc was fragmented (Figure 6.3 and 6.4) and therefore reduces the efficiency of
ecological services particularly in buffering strong winds and waves. Literature have
shown that for an efficient protection against storm surge and strong winds, mangroves
should have at least 100m width (Kobayashi, Uda, & Noshi, 2015). There is a need to
reconnect this and to improve the mangrove cover of Manamoc Island and thereby
improving its efficiency. Aside from the cover, the distribution and physiognomy of
mangroves in Manamoc landscape is also crucial in the protection services that the
mangroves will provide. Rhizophora species dominated the mangroves in Manamoc
(Figure 6) which is an advantage since this species complex root system were good at
attenuating waves and trapping sediments (Horstman, etal, 2014). Despite of being a small
island and relatively far from big islands where source of mangroves species are, Manamoc
has relatively diverse mangroves. This is an equally important requirement for resilience
(Gunderson, 2000). Diverse ecosystem tends to be more resilient than less diverse
ecosystem. This distribution was very crucial in the establishment of corridors and for
reforestation since each mangrove species has unique morphological characteristics and

unique requirements.

Enhancing the coping mechanisms of Manamoc should not be limited to mangrove
planting but as well as reforestation of areas where it is not suitable. Furthermore, since
coastal retreat is a complex problem resulting ffom both anthropogenic and natural factors
(Table 4.7), soft engmeering should be complemented with strict implementation of
environmental policies protecting the natural barriers and also education for the locals on

how their activities affect the natural barriers that protect them


As suggested in the systems theory, when addressing the problem of coastal retreat,
Manamoc Island should be treated as a system that is composed of different interdependent
components. In the case of Manamoc Island these components are classified into different
dimensions: natural (physical and biological), social, economic, and cultural (including
political). Each of this component should be carefully considered including how each of
them interact with each and the result of their interactions. The principle of
interconnectivity described how these components are interrelated and affect each other as

manifested in the impact of the activities of the community to the shoreline.


Literature Cited

CRUZ, E., PRIMAVERA, J., & SANTOS, J. C. (2011). Engineering Analysis for a
mangrove planting site - towards a sustainable community-engaged coastal
protection program in the Philippines. Retrieved from www.irbnet.de:
www. irbnet.de/daten/iconda/CIB_DC26751.pdf Date accessed: August 2016

DOYDEE, P., & BUOT, I. J. (2014). Connecting Fragmented Mangrove Patches Using
Biodiversity of Ranong Coastal Landscape, Thailand. J. Wetlands Biodiversity,
4:7-15.

DUVAT, V. (2009). Beach Erosion management in Small Islands Developing States:
Indian Ocean case studies. Coastal Processes. WIT Transactions on Ecology and
the Environment, 126:149-160.

GUNDERSON, L. (2000). Ecological resilience: in theory and application. Annu. Rev.
Ecol. Syst., 31:425-739.

HORSTMAN, E., DOHMEN-JANSSEN, C., NARRA, P., BERG, N. V., SIEMERINK,
M., & HULSCHER, S. (2014). Wave attenuation in mangroves: a quantitative
approach to field observations. Coastal Engineering , 94 (2014) 47-62.
www.elsevier.com/locate/coastaleng,

KOBAYASHI, A., UDA, T., & NOSHI, Y. (2015). Shoreline devastation of Hota coast by
man-made causes. Procedia Engineering , 116 (2015) 171-178.
www.elsevier.com/locate/procedia. Date accessed: August 22, 2016. .

LEE, S. Y., PRIMAVERA, J. H., GUEBAS, F., & RECORD, S. (2014). Ecological Role
and services of tropical mangrove ecosystems: areassessment. Global Ecology and
Biogeography, 23, 726-743, © 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. .

MARCHAND, M. (2010). Concepts and Science for Coastal Erosion Management.
Concise report for policymakers. USA: Deltares, Delft.

SINFUEGO, K. F., & BUOT, I. J. (2008). Floristic Compostion and Analysis of the True
Mangrove Vegetation in the Philippines Islands. Journal of Nature Studies, 7(2):
83-90.

SPALDING, M., RUFFO, S., LACAMBRA, C., MELIANE, I., HALE, L. Z.,
SHEPHARD, C., & BECK, M. (2014). The role of ecosystems in coastal
protection: adapting to climate change and coastal hazards. Ocean and Coastal
Management, 50-57.


TANAKA, N., SASAKI, Y., MOWJOOD, M. I., JINADASA, K. B., & HOMCHUEN, S.
((2007). ). Coastal vegetation structures and their functions in tsunami protection:
experience of the recent Indian Ocean tsunami . Landscape Ecol Eng , 3:33-45.

VILLAMAYOR, B. M., ROLLON, R, SAMSON, M., ALBANO, G. M., &
PRIMAVERA, J. (2016). Impact of Haiyan on Philippine mangrove: Implications
to the fate of the widespread monospecific Rhizopora plantations agamst strong
typhoons. Ocean and Coastal Management , 132 (2015) 1 —- 14;
www.e;esevier.com/locate.ocecoaman. Date accessed: August 22, 2016.

WINTERWERP, J. C., BORST, W. G., & DE VRIES, M. B. (2005). Pilot study on the
erosion and rehabilitation of a mangrove mud coast. Journal of Coastal Research,

21 (2), 223-230. West Palm Beach, Florida, ISSN 0749-0208.

CHAPTER VIII

SUMMARY, CONCLUSION, AND RECOMMENDATION

A study on the coastal environmental dynamics of Manamoc Island in northeastern
Palawan was conducted from October to November 2016. Generally, the study was
conducted to understand the coastal processes that causes coastal retreat and to propose
possible options for mitigation. This was done by: describing the coastal dynamics around
Manamoc Island; evaluating the suitability and possibility of mangroves as mitigating
measure for coastal retreat; and proposing community resiliency measures to enhance the
ability of the island to withstand hydrometeorological hazards. To be able to describe the
coastal dynamics around Manamoc Island, the folowing were done: time series analysis
of Manamoc shoreline from 1989 — 2016 using remote sensing techniques; profiling of
Manamoc Island beach area; determining the effect of longshore transport to sand
dynamics through orange method; analysis of wind pattern; analysis of tide characteristics;
and key informant interview. Time series analysis and KII have revealed that there was
coastal retreat of 38 — 64.5m in the coastline of Manamoc Island. Results further revealed
that this was due to the compounding effect of both physical factors such as monsoons,
storm surge, and typhoons and anthropogenic factors such as weak law enforcement,
physical development, and livelihood activities. The physical factors are generally

categorized as hydrometeorological hazards. As a small island, it is given that Manamoc

was vulnerable to these hazards. Therefore, enhancing the coping mechanisms of Manamoc

Island was imperative.

One of these mechanisms was mangrove reforestation. To determine the suitability
of mangroves to mitigate coastal retreat, vegetation analysis of mangrove forest in
Manamoc Island, land cover analysis using remote sensing technique and KII were done.
Results revealed that there were 11 species of true mangrove found in the Island which was
relatively diverse than other big islands in the province. Among the species found,
Rhizophora mucronata Lam. was the most dominant species. Cluster analysis resulted to
5 clusters: Cluster I — Avicennia marina (Forsk.) Vierh.; Cluster II — Bruguiera sexangula
(Lour.) Poir.; Cluster III - Rhizophora apiculata Blume and Rhizophora mucronata Lam.;
Cluster TV — R. mucronata Lam; and Cluster V - Sonneratia alba J. Smith. The clustering
of the mangrove in Manamoc Island follows the mangrove zonation. Clusters I and II were
landward species. Clusters [I] and IV were middleward species but sometimes overlap with
seaward zone. Cluster V was seaward species. Canonical correspondence analysis have
shown that environmental factors such as soil texture, soil pH, phosphorus and nitrogen
influenced the distribution and clustering of mangrove. Thus, mangrove are suitable to

mitigate coastal retreat as verified in land cover analysis and KII.

Meanwhile, to enhance coping mechanisms to hydrometeorological hazards, the
following were done: determination of coping mechanisms of Manamoc community to
hydrometeorological hazards through KII and systems analysis using KII. Results have
shown that as acoping mechanism to hydrometeorological hazards, Manamoc community

planted mangroves, built riprap and seawall, regulated sand and rock mming. However, all

of these were not sufficient to protect Manamoc. Therefore, the following were
recommended: establish mangrove corridor; reforestation; review and amend policies that

addresses the factors contributing to coastal retreat; and train and deputize enforcers.

In relation to the hydrometeorological hazards, mangrove was an indispensable
defense. Not only that, mangroves are good coastline stabilizers because of their complex
Toot system. This characteristic of mangrove is important for Manamoc to mitigate coastal
retreat. There was a need therefore to increase the mangrove cover in Manamoc and this is
possible through reforestation and establishment of mangrove corridors to connect
mangrove patches. In areas not suitable for mangroves, other beach forest species shall be
planted to improve vegetation cover. To sustain all of these, it should be compleme nted
with strict implementation of environmental policies and education at all levels. The locals
should understand that their activities have impact to the natural barriers that protect and
support their system and positive attitude towards environmental protection should be
inculcate in the minds ofthe younger generation. These will not only protect the mangroves

but as well as the other natural barriers such as coral reefs, seagrasses, sand, and rocks.

Coastal processes such as coastal erosion, accretion, and longshore drift
continuously shaped the shoreline of Manamoc Island as affected by monsoon, tide
characteristics, and storms/typhoons. Shoreline retreated and advanced depending on these
variables. This is the natural processes. However, these were not understood by many and
hence treated coastal retreat and coastal erosion as a problem affecting their lives. These
coastal processes have short term and long term pattern. Further, anthropogenic activities

such as sand and rock extraction, riprapping, deforestation, and others interrupted these

natural processes resulting to coastal retreat. The people should be informed of the natural
processes shaping the coastline as well as be educated on how their activities contributed
and aggravated coastal retreat. This should be considered in barangay planning and
development. The use of mangrove to counter coastal retreat is feasible. However, since
coastal retreat is complex, the enhancement of coping mechanisms is not limited to use of
mangroves. Systems theory taught us holistic approach and therefore for a
hydrometeorological hazard resilient commumity, other components should be addressed
too simultaneously. Finally, it is highly recommended that the locals should consider

relocation in the long term plan.

Talking about the holistic approach, due to the limitations of this study, some
important aspect were not considered and were beyond the scope of this study. The effect
of sea level rise and other geologic process were not considered in this study therefore it is
still possible that the coastal retreat may have been due to sea level rise or other geologic
processes such as land subsidence. It is therefore recommended that studies on the sea level

and also on other geologic processes that could have affect Manamoc Island must be

conducted.

