Community Structure and Physiological Profile of Gut Bacteria Isolated from Brazilian Earthworm (Pontoscolex corethrurus) Found in Mt. Makiling, Philippines

Sarah Jean G. Supnet

UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES DILIMAN

Master of Science in Microbiology

September 2023

ABSTRACT

Earthworms and their gut microflora perform synergistically to efficiently transform
organic wastes into useful metabolites. However, studies on the composition and
function of the earthworm gut microbial community is limited in the Philippines.
Pontoscolex corethrurus (Brazilian earthworm) is an endogeic species belonging to
Family Rhinodrilidae (subclass Oligochaeta) that is commonly found in tropical soils
under undisturbed native vegetation. This study highlights the structural and functional
profiles of bacterial communities found in the gut of P. corethrurus collected from Mt.
Makiling in Los Bafios, Laguna, Philippines. Community-level physiological profile
(CLPP) analysis revealed that at 48h of incubation, all Biolog EcoPlate™ carbon
substrates, except a-ketobutyric acid, were utilized by the gut bacteria, with an
increasing average well color development (AWCD) within the 120h incubation.
Shannon-Weaver Index (H) value of 3.226±0.053 indicates a relatively high functional
metabolic diversity and an even distribution of different functional types.
Proteobacteria (42.23%), Actinobacteria (27.85%), and Firmicutes (11.88%) were the
most abundant bacterial phyla found in the P. corethrurus gut, based on QIIME 2
bioinformatics analysis. The enzymes associated with the highly utilized carbon
substrates in the Biolog EcoPlate™ also corresponded to the PICRUSt2-predicted
functions. Overall, it was found out that the P. corethrurus gut bacterial community is
genetically and physiologically diverse, with high efficiency of substrate degradation.
P. corethrurus gut hosts different bacteria may serve as a potential source of
biocatalysts with agricultural and industrial uses. The study facilitates an understanding
of the relationship between the community structure and their function in the host and surrounding environment in the tropics.

INTRODUCTION

Background

Earthworms (Suborder Crassiclitellata) comprise a diverse group of generally
terrestrial, burrowing annelids with more than 6,000 extant species in 18 families
(Anderson et al., 2017). They are the dominant soil fauna (Sapkota et al., 2020), and
are found in all continents except Antarctica (Lavelle et al., 1993; Brown and
Dominguez, 2010; Decaéns, 2010). They play a major role in terrestrial soil systems
(Aira et al., 2008; Bartlett et al., 2010) by altering microbial communities and soil
dynamics (Lee, 1985; Edwards and Bohlen, 1996). They are also essential in nutrient
cycling and organic matter degradation, and are valuable as soil health and soil quality
indicators (Spurgeon et al., 2003; Edwards, 2004; Vandecasteele et al., 2004).
Earthworms can consume about 2-30 times their body weight per day, which is vital in
the pedogenesis, and to soil profile and fertility (Lee, 1985). Moreover, they positively
influence the activity of other organisms inhabiting soils, making them “ecosystem
engineers” (Lavelle and Spain, 2001; Bartlett et al., 2010; Blouin et al., 2013). The
function of earthworms in the ecosystem is affected by the physicochemical parameters
of their soil environment, such as concentration of electrolytes, soil texture, moisture,
pH, and source of food (Kale and Karmegam, 2010). Majority of earthworm
populations thrive in soil as well as in decaying logs and leaves, mud of streams and
riverbanks, and arboreal and marine littoral habitats (Anderson et al., 2017).

Earthworms are of interest to researchers due to their characteristic food niches,
habitat, and mechanisms of adaptation, which are important in organic waste
management (Kale and Karmegam, 2010). Apart from increasing crop production,

earthworms were shown in studies to produce different bioactive molecules with

various industrial applications such as in human and veterinary medicine,
environmental management strategies, and in nutrition, to name a few (GrdiSaa et al.,
2013). Earthworms efficiently exploit the beneficial soil microbiota, destroy soil
pathogens, and transform organic wastes such as domestic, industrial, and hospital
wastes, into enzymes, growth hormones, antibiotics, vitamins, and protein-rich casts
(Govindarajan and Prabaharan, 2014).

The gut microbiome forms a complex interdependence with the host, and plays
important regulatory roles in host nutrition and metabolism, immune system, and other
physiological functions (Liu et al., 2018). Earthworm gut-associated microflora has
been known to mediate the decomposition of organic matter and other soil chemical
processes such as ingestion and digestion, stimulation of microorganisms, and organic
matter breakdown (Binet et al., 1998; Monroy et al., 2008; Aira et al., 2009). The
ingested particles which are rich in nutrients serve as substrate for and source of
microbial growth (Tiwari et al., 1989). Interestingly, not all bacteria are digested in the
earthworm gut since some are activated during transit, while others are not affected
(Pedersen et al., 1993; Drake et al., 2007). It is generally recognized that the majority
of the earthworm’s intestinal bacteria come from the adjacent soil where it is located
(Karsten and Drake, 2006; Horn et al., 2006), but is not a spontaneous mixture of
microorganisms existing in soil (Egert et al., 2004; Drake and Horn, 2007; Knapp et
al., 2008, 2009; Thakuria et al., 2010). Nonetheless, this tube-like structure provides a
unique anoxic micro-environment that favors anaerobic bacteria due to stable
conditions of moisture and availability of different nutrients. The earthworm gut can
also act as a “biological filter” for the ingested microbial communities that can favor or
select specific groups of microorganisms (Drake and Horn, 2007). Consequently, there

is a significant difference in the bacterial composition found between the earthworm

gut and that of the soil (Sun et al., 2020). Earthworms are also known to have impacts
on soil microbial diversity, as observed in the changes in the earthworm cast that
originates in the gut processes (Aira et al., 2015; Medina-Sauza et al., 2019). The food
source was also found to influence the earthworm gut microbiome, but the core
microbiomes associated with the earthworms remained unchanged (Liu et al., 2018).

The variations in earthworm digestion and assimilation indicate the presence of
ecological group-specific gut microbiota (Lavelle and Spain, 2001). A study by
Thakuria et al. (2010) demonstrated that the anecic earthworms Lumbricus
terrestrisandL. friendi, and the  endogeic _— earthworms Aporrectodea
caliginosa and Ap. longacontain ecological group-specific gut wall-associated
bacterial communities. Specifically, the abundance of these specific gut wall-associated
bacteria, such as Proteobacteria, Firmicutes, and an actinobacterium, was found to be
ecological group dependent. Based on this study, it was found that there is natural
selection in the gut wall-associated bacteria of earthworms, and is influenced by the
ecological group as the strongest determinant, followed by the habitat, and lastly, the
species.

Earthworm research increases over the recent years, however, reports on the
diversity and function of the gut bacteria, their correlation with the earthworm’s
activities, and the specific mechanisms of nutrient transformation and pollutant
detoxification remain insufficient (Sun et al., 2020). In addition, the information on the
abundance, diversity, nature, and specificity of the gut bacterial flora in different
earthworm genera are lacking (Singh et al., 2015). Many earthworm species also lack
information on ingestion rates, assimilation of carbon and nitrogen, food preference,
and more importantly, the composition of gut microflora and their enzymatic potentials

(Brown et al., 2000).

Several surveys and diversity studies of Philippine earthworms began in early
2000s covering mountainous forested areas of Luzon and Mindanao Islands (Aspe and
James, 2014, 2015, 2016, 2017; Hong and James, 2004, 2008a, 2008b, 2009, 2010,
201 1a, 2011b; James, 2004, 2006; James et al., 2004; Hong, 2018; Aspe and Obusan,
2023). Around 200 species of native earthworms including 10 genera are currently
identified in the Philippines due to the recent taxonomic research (Aspe et al., 2021;
Aspe and Obusan, 2023). Earthworms collected from the Philippines were likewise
investigated for responses toward herbicidal ingredients as well as other agricultural
studies (Rasco et al., 2011; John et al., 2015; Magahud et al., 2017). However, the
published data or research on the gut microflora of the earthworms found in the
Philippines is very limited, where the gut microflora of the African Night Crawler or
ANC earthworms was investigated for the activities of its gut-associated bacteria and
fungi (Mapile and Obusan, 2020). With the accompanying problems about solid waste
management in the country such as continued accumulation of solid wastes, weak
implementation of law, improper disposal of wastes, and insufficient number of
landfills, Philippines becomes the “third-largest generator of solid waste per year
among Southeast Asian Countries” (Romero, 2020). As hosts of diverse microbes,
earthworms provide a link between substrate feeder-microbe interactions and nutrient
cycling (Govindarajan and Prabaharan, 2015), a valuable non-renewable source for an
agricultural country. The production of compost using earthworms through
vermicomposting converts organic wastes into “high-quality compost” that generally
comprises the worm’s casts and decayed organic matter (Ismail, 2005; Devi and
Prakash, 2015). This process aids in the transformation of organic wastes into nutrient

fertilizers as soil amendments for plant growth (Papafilippaki et al., 2015; Sanasam and

Talukdar, 2017), which makes a promising and useful solution on solid waste
management.

Pontoscolex corethrurus, the earthworm of interest in this study, was among the
species which were described in the earthworm diversity and population studies in the
Philippines (Hong and James, 2008a; Aspe et al., 2009; Joshi et al., 2020; Aspe et al.,
2021; Jose et al., 2021). Pon. corethrurus or the “Brazilian earthworm” is a peregrine
earthworm commonly found in the tropics which has been successfully introduced
worldwide. It was first described in 1857 by Fritz Miiller in the state of Santa Catarina
Brazil, and is the most prevalent earthworm in that country (Hendrix and Bohlen, 2002).
This endogeic (topsoil dweller) and geosophagus (soil feeder) earthworm can tolerate
a wide range of biotic and abiotic factors in the environment (Lavelle et al., 1987;
Fragoso et al., 1999). Despite being among the most studied tropical earthworm
morphospecies (i.e., there were numerous studies on its impact in the environment,
responses to environmental conditions, earthworm community assessment, biological
features, biofertilization and bioremediation, vermicomposting, etc.), there still remains
a scarcity in terms of studies on the gut microbiome of Pon. corethrurus (Taheri et al.,
2018). Given the importance of earthworms in terrestrial ecosystem processes and the
influence of the gut microbiome, it is therefore significant to consider the profiling of
the structure and composition of the gut microbial communities, and how these
microbes function metabolically in relation to their hosts and the environment.

A type of metabolic profiling of microbes is the community-level physiological
profiling (CLPP) - a culture-dependent low-cost protocol with ease of use that gives
information on the function of microbial communities based on carbon source
utilization using the Biolog EcoPlate™ (Weber and Legge, 2010; Németh et al., 2021).

Although this method is valuable in providing insights into substrate utilization patterns

and metabolic functional potential, it does not inform about the genetic composition of
the microbial community (Németh et al., 2021). Another microbiome profiling
technique is the 16S rRNA gene amplicon sequencing - a rapid and effective marker
for the identification of composition and diversity, most especially in complex
communities (Zhang et al., 2023). Unlike the Biolog EcoPlate™, this sequencing
technique gives the identity of both the culturable and unculturable components of
microbial communities. It is supported by curated taxonomic databases such as the
SILVA 16S rRNA gene references (Quast et al., 2013), and the sequence data generated
is processed or analyzed using bioinformatics pipelines or packages such as the QIIME
2 (Bolyen et al., 2019; Estaki et al., 2020). One limitation of this microbial community
marker-gene sequencing is that it does not provide information about the functional
composition of the microbial communities (Douglas et al., 2020). To address this
concern, PICRUSt2 was developed to predict the functional potential of a bacterial
community based on marker gene sequencing profiles (Douglas et al., 2020). It allows
the prediction of functions for any 16S sequences, has a more expanded database of
reference genomes used for prediction, and has a more stringent inference of pathway

(Douglas et al., 2020).

Objectives of the Study

This study generally aimed to profile the bacterial communities found in the gut
of the earthworm species Pon. Corethrurus, commonly known as Brazilian
earthworm,that were collected from Mt. Makiling, Los Bafios, Laguna, Philippines.
Specifically, the study (1) determined the CLPP of the bacteria; (2) investigated the

structure and diversity of the bacterial community through 16S metagenomic

sequencing targeting the V3-V4 regions; and (3) predicted the functional profiles of

bacteria in relation to the carbon substrate utilization patterns.

Scope and Limitations of the Study

This study reports data of processed earthworms collected from one-time
sampling in three sampling points at the Mt. Makiling Forest Reserve. This forest
reserve is a well-known outdoor laboratory, most especially to foresters, and scientists
in related fields. It is an environment with unique and diverse forest ecosystems which
has become a subject for research through the years, but is largely under-explored in
terms of its earthworm fauna. Only the adult earthworms which survived the voiding of
the gut or starvation process (~20 earthworms per sampling point) proceeded to the
succeeding analyses. Moreover, the three sampling points had corresponding pooled
gut samples each, and were consistently used as three replicates in all procedures and
analyses.

Only those bacteria which were culturable, at least on the substrates present on
EcoPlate™ wells, were assessed for the “actual” physiological profiles, and therefore
does not reflect the entire microbial community found in the gut of Pon. corethrurus.
On the other hand, both culturable and unculturable bacteria identified by 16S
metagenomic sequencing were examined for the “predicted” metabolic functions. Only
some of the highly utilized carbon substrates in the Biolog EcoPlate™ were used as the
basis of the predicted enzymatic functions in PICRUSt2. Lastly, this study was limited
to the most abundant taxa identified in the Pon. corethrurus gut, and the classification

of bacteria was only up to the genus level.

REVIEW OF LITERATURE

Earthworms and their role in soil organic matter dynamics

Earthworms belonging to Phylum Annelida, Class Chaetopoda, and Order
Oligochaeta are the first multicellular eucoelomate invertebrates that flourished in
terrestrial habitats, comprising the main soil macrofauna (Kale and Karmegam, 2010).
The distribution patterns, and species richness and abundance of earthworms manifest
climatic and edaphic factors of the geographic zone (Taheri et al., 2018). Their
stratification systems are one of the factors in soil profile and pedogenesis, and they
improve soil fertility by enhancing soil organic matter assimilation (Govindarajan and
Prabaharan, 2014). They also influence the “no tillage or shallow ploughing” systems
of cropping (Govindarajan and Prabaharan, 2014).

Earthworms are one of the most significant heterotrophic detritus feeders or
eaters in the terrestrial ecosystems based on biological activity and biomass (Laossi et
al., 2010). They influence plant growth mainly by augmenting mineralization of soil
organic matter, producing regulators of plant growth through microbial activity
stimulation, modifying oxygen and water availability in plant roots by soil aggregation
and porosity alteration, controlling parasites and pests, and stimulating symbionts (PizZI
and Novakova, 1993; Canellas et al., 2002; Scheu, 2003; Brown et al., 2004; Han et al.,
2005; Ayyadurai et al., 2007; Naik et al., 2008; Sinha et al., 2010). However, it is still
challenging to identify the corresponding impact of a certain species of earthworm on
a particular species of plant (Blouin et al., 2013; Laossi et al., 2010).

The interaction between microorganisms and earthworms, as well as the
metabolism of available carbon (Dlamini et al., 2001), revolves around the drilosphere
(Ismail, 1995; Kale and Karmegam, 2010). It has been described that microbial activity


is higher in the drilosphere than in the adjacent soil environment (Brown et al., 2000).
Drilosphere is described by Lavelle (1988) as the populations of earthworm including
the total soil volume, and the populations of microbes and invertebrates that are
influenced by the earthworms’ activities. From larger to smaller temporal and spatial
scales, the drilosphere was further described into main constituents, namely: (a)
burrows, galleries, or diapause open and closed soil chambers, (b) middens, (c) surface
and below-ground casts, (d) earthworm surface in contact with soil and the externally
produced earthworm structures, and the (e) internal micro-environment of the
earthworm gut. Each of these elements are known to produce contradicting results on
the dynamics of the soil organic matter and microbial activity based on the temporal
scale (Brown et al., 2000). In general, the drilosphere contributes substrate for growth
and survival of microorganisms (Kale and Karmegam, 2010).

Different earthworm ecological groups, i.e., endogeic, epigeic, and anecic,
create large differences in drilospheres (Brown et al., 2000). Endogeic earthworms
generally forage primarily on soil organic matter and humified materials below the soil
surface, and considerably build vertical and predominantly horizontal burrows in soil
(Thakuria et al., 2010). Epigeic earthworms infrequently ingest soil and mostly
consume plant litter and litter inhabitants, therefore attributing their primary and direct
effects to the litter system. They thrive above the mineral soil, and rarely create burrows
(Thakuria et al., 2010). The anecics consume particulate organic matter with soil
particles and surface litter that usually form permanent middens and deep vertical
burrows in the mineral soil layer. They emerge on the soil surface to forage on partly
decomposed plant litter, manure, and other organic debris (Thakuria et al., 2010). Based
on their ecological category along the latitudinal gradient, endogeic earthworms were

shown to be commonly found in tropical areas, while epigeic and anecic earthworms

were predominant in temperate regions (Lavelle, 1983). Some earthworms show
plasticity in their burrowing behaviors, specifically Lumbricus terrestris, which was
found to dwell anecically under arable niches and thrive epigeically in forest soils, but
the cause of this behavior still needs further research (Bartlett et al., 2010). A recent
study by Bottinelli et al. (2020) re-examined the three ecological classification system
of earthworms that statistically and morphologically redefined the categorization,
resulting in epi-anecic, endo-anecic, epi-endogeic and intermediate classifications.
These can be calculated based on the percentage of anecic, endogeic, and epigeic

characteristics at the community level (Bottinelli et al., 2020).

The digestion of earthworms is described as the fastest among the processes that
occur in the drilosphere, although it might be affected by the ingestion and the effects
of microbial) activity. This in turn influences the dynamics of soi) organic matter based
on the total assimilation rates of species belonging to a community (Brown et al., 2000).
The ingested minerals and organic matter channel through the gut in about 2 to 6 hours
depending on the earthworm species (Hartenstein et al., 1981; Barois et al., 1993;
Brown, 1995). These materials will then be completely broken down physically,
chemically, and biologically (Barois et al., 1993). Endogeics convert substrates
physically in a gradual manner, such as by altering clay properties and water holding
capacities (Brown et al., 2000), while epigeic earthworms or the “litter feeders"
transform ingested materials commonly into black, porous, and mull humus-like casts

(Aranda et al., 1999).


The peregrine earthworm Pontoscolex corethrurus

Out of the 6,000 earthworm species already identified and characterized
(Anderson et al., 2017), approximately 500 species are considered as ‘peregrine’ which
are widely distributed, generally due to human cause (Blakemore, 2012). They are well-
acclimatized to human transport, and can take over disturbed habitats (Hendrix et al.,
2008). Their abundance may be restricted by soil fertility, and their distribution may be
hindered by climate (Ortiz-Gamino et al., 2016).

Pontoscolex corethrurus (Miiller, 1857) belonging to Subclass Oligochaeta and
Family Rhinodrilidae (James, 2012) is a widely dispersed exotic endogeic earthworm
(Brown et al., 2006; Gonzalez et al., 2006; Hendrix et al., 2006). It originated in Santa
Catarina, Brazil, and is the most prevalent earthworm in that country (Hendrix and
Bohlen, 2002). The Guyana shield in South America was thought to be the origin of
Pontoscolex (Righi, 1984). Currently, it has been successfully distributed as a foreign
species in Asia and South Africa (Plisko, 2001; Blakemore, 2006). The introduction of
the rubber plant Hevea brasiliensis (Willd. ex A. Juss.) Mull. Arg.) from Brazil
(Murdiyarso et al., 2002; Nath and Chaudhuri, 2010) or the pine seedling (Pinus sp.)
was presumed to be the possible cause of its distribution (Plisko, 2001). Pon.
corethrurus usually competes with native earthworms and invades interrupted niches
through time (Nath and Chaudhuri, 2010), thereby reducing the population of the native
ones (Gonzalez et al., 2006; Hendrix et al., 2006; Aspe et al., 2009; Marichal et al.,
2010). This typically peregrine earthworm is capable of withstanding various
environmental stresses (Lavelle et al., 1987; Fragoso et al., 1999). A study by Cunha et
al. (2014) discovered that there are two highly divergent genetic lineages of Pon.
corethrurus in Sao Miguel Island, Portuguese archipelago of the Azores, signifying the

presence of cryptic species.

Pon. corethrurus was used as a bioindicator of soil quality and ecological
disturbances (Rémbke and Garcia, 2000; Brown et al., 2006), as well as in
biofertilization for restoration studies (Topoliantz et al., 2002), bioremediation (Duarte
et al., 2012; Liang et al., 2011), and vermicomposting (Molina-Murguia et al., 2009;
Chaudhuri and Bhattacharjee, 2011; Nath and Chaudhuri, 2012; Sabrina et al., 2013),
making it one of the well-researched earthworm morphospecies (Fragoso et al., 1997;
Plisko, 2001). However, there still remains a scarcity in terms of studies on the gut

microbiome of Pon. corethrurus (Taheri et al., 2018).

Earthworm diversity and existing research in the Philippines

Research on earthworms sampled in the Philippines largely focused on groups
and species identification, and diversity studies. In a review by Blakemore (2015),
Ghanaian and Indonesian earthworms were identified in worm farms in Australia and
the Philippines. Anderson et al. (2017) described Moniligastridae, the sister group of
Crassiclitellata, to be found only in Southeast Asia (Gates, 1972), including Mindoro
Island. Pon. corethrurus, Drawida sp., Lenogaster sp., Octochaetona sp., Ramiella sp.,
Ocnerodrilus sp., Lampto mauritii, Perionyx excavatus, several Pheretima species, and
species from Megaloscolecidae were also described by Gates (1972) to have been
distributed or can be found in the Philippines.

Newly described arboreal earthworm species namely Dendropheretima
banahawensis, De. bicolensis, Isarogoscolex abiadai, and I. albayensis were collected
from montane forests of Bicol region (James, 2005). New species of the perichaetine
megascolecid genus Pleionogaster, specifically Pl. albayensis, Pl. bicolensis, Pl.
castilloi, Pl. malinaoensis, Pl. tiwiensis, Pl. ffitchae, Pl. isarogensis, Pl. bulusanensis,

Pl. hongi, Pl. sorsogonensis, Pl. nautsae, Pl. viracensis, Pl. caramoanensis, and Pl.


nillosae were collected from the same region (James, 2006). Two new species of
Pheretima — Ph. abiadai and Ph. nagaensis — from Mt. Isarog, Camarines Sur were also
identified (Hong and James, 2008a). Non-Philippine species formerly designated to
Archipheretima Michaelsen (Clitellata: Megascolecidae) from Luzon and Catanduanes
were revised to Archipheretima gritzae, Ar. middletoni, Ar. ricei, Ar. cofini, and Ar.
pandanophila (James, 2009). New species of pheretimoid earthworms from Ilocos
Norte Province, Luzon Island were described including Pheretima, Pithemera, and
Polypheretima (Hong and James, 201 1a), and new Pheretima species were described
from Mt. Amuyao and Mt. Lamagan, near Barlig, Mountain Province (Hong and James,
201 1b). Two new species of Pithemera — Pi. zambalesensis and Pi. altaresi — from Mt.
Tapulao in Zambales were also reported (Hong, 2018).

Earthworms in the central Philippines collected from 67 sites comprising more
than 30 municipalities were surveyed by Flores (2009). Pheretima, Pleionogaster,
Pithemera, Amynthas, Polypheretima, Metaphire, and Archipheretima belonging to
family Megascolecidae, and the highly invasive exotics Pontoscolex and Eudrilus were
identified. Results showed that Pheretima had the most distribution and diversity,
followed by Pleionogaster. Species composition and richness of earthworms in the
mossy and montane forests of Mt. Hilong-hilong, Diwata Range, Agusan del Norte
were investigated by Mohagan et al. (2013) through digging, and counting methods,
where 26 species were identified and 6 were undetermined.

Earthworms found in different forest types and grasslands in Mt. Malindang,
Misamis Occidental Province in Mindanao Island were comprehensively studied by
Aspe et al. (2009) where 25 earthworm species including Pon. corethrurus, and native
species under Family Megascolecidae were detected. Another study by Aspe and James

(2014, 2015) described the pheretimoid earthworm species in Mt. Malindang where


morphological data were documented. This study showed that the Philippines has the
highest diversity worldwide for Pithemera, which also indicated that many earthworm
species are yet to be discovered due to high endemicity. First reports of the subgenus
Parapheretima and Pheretima in the Philippines were described by Aspe (2016).
Amynthas and Polypheretima were likewise described. Recently, molecular
phylogenetic and biogeographic analysis of Philippine earthworms by Aspe and James
(2018) revealed that there has been a rapid diversification of Pheretima lineages.

Pol. elongata (Perrier 1872), Pon. corethrurus (Muller, 1856), Pi. bicincta
(Perrier, 1875), Am. corcitis (Kinberg, 1867) (Barley and Kleinig, 1964), and the
oligochaete Di. nr. curgensis Michaelsen identified as pests (Barrion and Litsinger,
1997) were described in the earlier reports of the earthworm fauna of the Banaue rice
terraces. In a study by Joshi et al. (1999), earthworms were also identified by farmers
in Ifugao Rice Terraces as one of the most significant pests by perforating the walls of
terraced rice fields. Warming temperatures appeared to have caused the migration of
these giant worms from forests to the rice terraces (Ngidlo, 2013). Pon. corethrurus
also present in forest areas, Pi. bicincta (Perrier), Am. diffringens (Baird), and non-
terrace inhabiting species including Polypheretima, Pheretima, and two Pleinogaster
species were also identified. New species of pheretemoid earthworms from Banaue,
Ifugao including Ph. banauensis, Ph. cabigati species of Pithemera: Pi. duhuani, Pi.
Sragumae, Pi. ifugaoensis, and Polypheretima species — Pol. fruticosa, Pol. perlucidula
and Pol. bannaworensis — were reported by Hong and James (2008b). Nineteen (19)
new species of pheretimoid earthworms collected from Palawan were recently
described by Aspe et al. (2021). Most recently, a pheretemoid species of earthworms
were described from a vermicomposting facility in Los Bafios, Laguna (Aspe and

Obusan, 2023).


Earthworms collected from certain areas in the Philippines were investigated
for responses toward herbicidal ingredients as well as other agricultural studies. The
semi-aquatic freshwater earthworm Sparganophilus which generally thrives in rice
paddies and stream banks was investigated by Magahud et al. (2017) for its growth
response and development towards butachlor, a common herbicidal component used in
regulating weeds in rice fields. A microcosm experiment conducted by John et al.
(2015) aimed to evaluate the influence of Pheretima sp. on the turnover of carbon in
paddy soils from a lowland farm of the International Rice Research Institute (IRRI),
under varying conditions of water saturation and nitrogen fertilization. Results
indicated that high soil organic carbon stabilization through the bioturbation of
Pheretima sp. was restricted within the parameters of soil humidity. Moreover, manual
and chemical weeding using paraquat and glyphosate in a banana plantation were
evaluated in a field experiment where the avoidance response only to normal glyphosate
concentration was significantly observed in Pon. corethrurus (Rasco et al., 2011).

Eudrilus eugeniae, commonly known as ‘African Night Crawler’ or ‘ANC’, is
one of the most extensively studied earthworm species. It was introduced to the
Philippines around the 1980s (Guerrero 2005; Blakemore 2016) as a vermiculture
commodity together with Pe. excavatus (Guerrero, 2009). These two epigeic
earthworm species were found as favorable vermicomposts and vermeals where
biodegradable wastes were used as culture media. Epigeic earthworms are also
ecologically known and widely used in the production of organic manure or
vermicompost, a good soil amendment (Pattnaik and Reddy, 2010; Raphael and
Velmourougane, 2011; Ravindran et al., 2015). Vermicomposts produced by Eu.
eugeniae was shown to significantly yield rice crops locally and internationally (Kale,

1998; Pontillas et al., 2009). Research by Torino et al. (2013) investigated the cellulose-


degrading vermicompost bacteria of Eu. eugeniae. Mineralization, biodegradation, and
antagonistic activities of the gut-associated bacteria and fungi of Eu. eugeniae were

likewise recently investigated (Mapile and Obusan, 2020).

Structural diversity and functional profiling of earthworm gut bacterial

communities

Soil decomposition and other chemical processes (Petersen and Luxton, 1982;
Lee, 1985; Edwards and Bohlen, 1996) are influenced by the earthworm gut-associated
activities such as ingestion, digestion, stimulation of microorganisms, and organic
matter breakdown (Binet et al., 1998; Monroy et al., 2008; Aira et al., 2009). The
earthworm gut exhibits the ideal conditions for microorganisms since several studies
have demonstrated that microbial populations increased in the gut relative to the
undigested soil (Edwards and Lofty, 1977; Wolter and Schei, 1999; Munnoli, 2007).
The ingested particles which are rich in nutrient organic wastes serve as the substrate
for and source of microbial growth (Tiwari et al., 1989). The earthworm gut is a tubular
structure from mouth to anus, which comprises the pharynx, esophagus, intestine, and
digestive glands, that usually contains mucus, organic, and mineral matter
(Govindarajan and Prabaharan, 2014). Remarkably, not all bacteria are digested in the
earthworm gut since some are activated during the transit, while others are not affected
(Pedersen and Hendriksen,1993; Drake and Horn, 2007). According to Brown (1995),
the microbial composition of the soil that has been ingested by the earthworms may be
similar to that of their gut contents. However, the population, biomass, and activity of
the gut microbial communities may be different from that of the unconsumed soil

(Schénholzer et al., 1999). Competition between the endosymbiotic gut and ingested


microbes was considered as the cause of “selection” (Brown and Mitchell, 1981). In
addition, a selective suppression was detected in the midgut while stimulating other soil
microbes (Byzov et al., 2007) which may modify breakdown pathways as well as the
microbes involved (Rudi et al., 2009). The course of microorganisms in the earthworm
gut is significant in soil microbial community structuring and in the breakdown of
organic matter (Lemtiri et al., 2014). The gut transit of microorganisms such as
protozoa, fungi, and resistant bacteria leaves spores which create an inoculum for the
colonization of newly formed earthworm casts (Brown, 1995).

Karsten and Drake (1995) described the first scanning electron microscopy
(SEM) study on earthworm intestinal tract where coccoid bodies from Octolasion
cyaneum hindgut were observed. Cocci, rod-shaped bacteria, and filamentous
microorganisms in L. terrestris L. 1758 and O. cyaneum were likewise described, but
their roles in the earthworm digestion were not inferred. Studies on earthworm gut
microbial community through culture technique (KriSrtuek et al., 1992; Karsten and
Drake, 1995, 1997) and electron microscopy (Jolly et al., 1993) showed higher numbers
of Ap. caliginosa and L. rubellus gut microbes than the surrounding soil (Karsten and
Drake, 1995). Pseudomonas oxalaticus, an oxalate-degrading bacterium, was isolated
from Ei. lucens gut (Contreras, 1980). Several studies found that the gut microbial
community of earthworms are mainly composed of Gram-negative bacteria (Karsten
and Drake, 1997). Moreover, it was found that bacteria tightly associated with the gut
wall were different from the gut content, indicating that only certain bacteria can thrive
in the gut (Singleton et al., 2004). A thorough exploration of the gut microflora of
Pheretima sp. was conducted by Bhat et al. (1960) and Khambata and Bhat (1957)
where Pseudomonas, Coryneform, Nocardia, Streptomyces, and Bacillus were isolated.

Fungi were likewise found in the gut and casts (Dash et al., 1979), with some plant


growth promoting properties (Raghavendra, 2001). A study by Singleton et al. (2003)
also found Pseudomonas, as well as Paenibacillus, Azoarcus, Burkholderia,
Spiroplasm, and Actinobacterium as earthworm gut-associated microbes and were also
found in casts. Pseudomonas alcaligenes and Acidobacterium with hydrocarbon
degradation properties were also identified (Johnsen et al., 2005). Other studies found
that the fungi Alternaria alternata endured the conditions of the midgut, and will
germinate and develop in the casts (Lemtiri et al., 2014). Several studies also reported
that the earthworm gut comprises microbial communities including denitrifiers,
cellobiose utilizers, and symbionts such as Proteo- and Actinobacteria, fungi, and
protozoa (Schénholzer et al., 2002; Ihssen et al., 2003). Populations of Actinobacteria
in L. rubellus were found to be higher in earthworm guts, casts, or burrows (Kristufek,
1993). Aeromonas hydrophila in Ei. foetida (Toyota and Kimura, 2000) and fluorescent
pseudomonads in L. terrestris (Devliegher and Verstraete, 1997) were identified.
Clostridium butyricum, C. beijerinckii, and C. paraputrificum anaerobic bacteria were
also found in the gut of Ei. foetida.

A study on the L. terrestris and Ap. caliginosa earthworm guts through single
strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP) revealed a-proteobacteria, B-
proteobacteria, y-proteobacteria, A-proteobacteria, Bacteroides, Verrucomicrobia,
Planctomycetes, and Firmicutes bacterial groups (Lee and Bartlett, 1976; Bohlen et al.,
1995; Parthasarathi and Ranganathan, 1998; Vivas et al., 2009; Nechitalyo et al., 2010).
These earthworms were also found to harbor an ecological group which were specific
gut wall-associated bacterial communities (Govindarajan and Prabaharan, 2014).
Bacillus insolitus, B. megaterium, B. breris, B. pasteurii, B. sphaericus, B.
thuringiensis, and B. pabuli which were typical of soil bacteria were identified from the

gut of Onychochaeta borincana (Valle Molinares et al., 2007). Pseudomonas,


Klebsiella, Azotobacter, Serratia, Aeromonas, and Enterobacter were also identified
from the earthworm gut (Singleton et al., 2003; Byzov et al., 2007). Likewise,
Aeromonas, Bacillus, Pseudomonas, Flavobacterium, Nocardia, Gordonia, Proteus,
Vibrio, Clostridium, Klebsiella, Enterobacter, Azotobacter, Serratia, and
Mycobacterium were identified in the gut of earthworms (Valle-Molinares et al., 2007;
Singleton et al., 2003; Byzov et al., 2007) which were primarily nitrogen fixers,
phosphate solubilizers, and plant growth promoters (Martinez-Romero, 2001; Loredo-
Osti et al., 2004) with possible mutualistic relationships (Barois and Lavelle, 1986;
Brown et al, 2000; Brito- Vega and Espinosa-Victoria, 2009).

The Biolog EcoPlate™ is used to investigate the rate of carbon utilization of
bacterial communities through the community-level physiological profiling (CLPP), a
characteristic pattern or metabolic fingerprint that varies among different groups of
microorganisms (Baudoin et al., 2001; Gomez et al., 2004; Grayston et al., 2004). The
EcoPlates contain 31 substrates that are commonly found in plant root exudates, hence,
are ecologically more relevant and represent the kinds of substrates that are more
accessible to soil microorganisms (Campbell et al., 1997). The EcoPlate™ substrates
are typically designed for ecological studies of whole microbial communities (Preston-
Mafham et al., 2002), and nine of which were plant root exudate constituents (Campbell
et al., 1997). This technique provides microbial community analysis and
characterization or physiological profiles by inoculating bacterial isolates onto the plate
(Garland, 1997). Apart from the Biolog GN2 plates, the EcoPlate™ is recommended
for examining highly active microorganisms (Choi and Dobbs, 2009; O’Connell and
Garland, 2002). One of the advantages of using the EcoPlate™ is its increased
probability of representing a physiological profile of a microbial community since each

substrate is in triplicate (Classen et al., 2003). The Biolog redox technology that is based


on the reduction of the colorless tetrazolium dye into the violet formazan as an indicator
of sole carbon source utilization was first used to examine the metabolic activity of
heterotrophic microbial communities from different environmental samples such as
water, wheat rhizosphere, and soil (Garland and Mills, 1991). The tertrazolium dye used
in the plate is not metabolized by fungi, thus fungi do not contribute to the CLPP data
obtained from the EcoPlate™ (Preston-Mafham et al., 2002). The reduction in CLPP-
based biodiversity typically suggests contamination resulting in extinction of sensitive
species (Preston-Mafham et al., 2002).

Several studies on characterizing the earthworm vermicasts and vermicomposts
in relation to its microbial communities using Biolog EcoPlate™ have been
conductedThe physicochemical, biochemical, and microbial characteristics of pig
slurry by analyzing fresh casts of Eu. eugeniae through CLPP analysis using Biolog
EcoPlate™ data showed differences in the physiological profile (Aira et al., 2006;
2007; Yakushev and Byzov, 2008). The result indicated that the differences in
vermicomposting stages affected the organic matter degradation which restricted the
growth of microbial communities in casts and pig slurry. The functional diversity on
microbial biomass and microbial community level physiological profiles of the epigeic
worms L, rubellus (Hoffmeister), L. castaneus (Savigny), and Satchellius mammalis
(Savigny), the anecic worms L. friendi Cognetti and Ap. longa (Ude), and the endogeic
worms Ap. caliginosa (Savigny), Octolasion cyaneum (Savigny), Allolobophora
chlorotica (Savigny) and Ap. rosea (Savigny), were also investigated using CLPP
analysis (Sheehan et al., 2008). Ei. andrei was also studied for its microbial community
structure and function in a lignocellulosic enriched plant residue through Biolog
(Gémez-Brandon et al., 2010). Likewise, the effect of lumbricid earthworms on the

functional diversity of microbes in burrows was assessed using Biolog EcoPlate™


(Lipiec et al., 2016). Substrate utilization of soil bacteria exposed to cadmium as well
as earthworm activity (Muniz et al., 2014) and the effect of fumigants on Ei. andrei and
soil microbes (Fouché, 2015) were also investigated using the EcoPlate™ technique.

Denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE) analysis along with the CLPP
using EcoPlate™ were used in investigating the response of microbial communities in
compost without earthworms and vermicompost (Biswarup and Kalyani, 2009), and in
soil bacterial diversity with and without Metaphire posthuma (Doan et al., 2013).
Differences in the genetic structure of microbial communities in vermicompost
(Biswarup and Kalyani, 2009), and compost and non-processed materials (Vivas et al.,
2009) were also demonstrated using DGGE. Quantitative PCR and DGGE analysis
were used to investigate the differences in the microbial structure of Ei. foetida
vermicomposts of lignocellulosic wastes (Castillo et al., 2013). The effect of Pon.
corethrurus on the whole microbial community structure and activity related to CO2
and N20 fluxes from a tropical soil was similarly analyzed using DGGE (Chapuis-
Lardy et al., 2010). Moreover, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon (PAH) degradation by
earthworms in relation to changes in the structure and diversity of the microbial
communities in a PAH-contaminated sediment was examined using EcoPlate™ and
DGGE (Natal-da-Luz et al., 2012).

Several studies on the microbial community structure of earthworm gut also
used DGGE. Specifically, Hong et al. (2011) investigated the intestinal bacterial
community of Ei. foetida through PCR-DGGE where Entomoplasma somnilux and
Bacillus licheniformis were found to be abundant. Aeromonas, Clostridium,
Ferrimonas, and uncultured bacteria were likewise identified. PCR-DGGE analysis of
the gut of L. rubellus found that the microbial composition of both gut and cast is

associated with diet or food ingested (Knapp et al., 2009). It was also found that


Proteobacteria, Bacteroidetes, Firmicutes, and Actinobacteria were predominant.
Bacterial community analysis of M. posthuma gut which were placed in cadmium-
treated soil were also analyzed using PCR-DGGE and found that Stenotrophomonas sp.
D2, Bradyrhizobium japonicum, and Labrys sp. CC-BB4 were abundant (Liang et al.,
2009).

Other techniques that were used to quantify the metabolic profile of microbial
communities include the deep-well microtiter plate technique or the MicroRespmethod
using two methods to detect evolved COz, i.e., colorimetric reaction in absorbent alkali
and radioactive carbon source and scintillation counting (Campbell et al., 2003). The
Degens’ catabolic profiling has the same advantage with MicroResp technique;
however, many soil containers are needed (Degens and Harris, 1997). Garland et al.
(2003) recommended the addition of fluorometric oxygen detection consumption when
analyzing CLPP. Its advantages include lower substrate concentration in detecting
microbial response and shorter incubation time but requires soil suspension inoculation
and use of expensive equipment.

Lastly, next generation sequencing (NGS) provides higher replication for
sampling and analysis of microbial community diversity, composition, and structure,
apart from its reduced cost (Green and Neufield, 2016). Recent studies on the microbial
community of earthworm gut using NGS include the analysis of Ei. foetida gut response
to triclosan (Ma et al., 2017), taxonomic and functional annotation of gut bacterial
communities of Ei. foetida and Pe. excavatus, and the fermentative taxa in gut contents
of the earthworm L. terrestris (Meier et al., 2018). The NGS microbiome profiling
through the 16S rRNA gene amplicon sequencing is a rapid and effective marker for
the identification of composition and diversity, most especially in complex

communities (Zhang et al., 2023). Unlike the Biolog EcoPlate™, this sequencing


technique gives the identity of both the culturable and unculturable components of
microbial communities. It is supported by curated taxonomic databases such as
Greengenes or the SILVA 16S rRNA gene references (Quast et al., 2013). The selection
of primers or the target regions is also a factor in microbiome profiling depending on
the target group of microorganisms. Targeting the V3-V4 region is commonly applied
when the focus is on identifying bacteria (Fadeev et al., 2021). The sequence data
generated is processed or analyzed using bioinformatics pipelines or packages such as
the Mothur or QIIME 2 (Bolyen et al., 2019; Estaki et al., 2020). This microbial
community marker-gene sequencing does not provide information on the functional
composition of the sampled communities (Douglas et al., 2020). Hence, PICRUSt2 was
developed to predict the functional potential of a bacterial community based on marker
gene sequencing profiles (Douglas et al., 2020). It allows the prediction of functions for
any 16S sequences, has a more expanded database of reference genomes used for

prediction, and has a more stringent inference of pathway (Douglas et al., 2020).

The Mount Makiling Forest Reserve

Mount Makiling (or Mount Maquiling) is a dormant stratovolcano located in the
province of Laguna, Philippines with an elevation of 3,580 feet or 1,090 meters above
sea level (masl). According to the ASEAN Centre for Biodiversity (2023), Mt. Makiling
has no record of eruptions and is regarded as inactive, but it manifests volcanic activities
or geothermal characteristics such as the presence of hot springs, mud springs, and
fumaroles. The Philippine Institute of Volcanology and Seismology (PHIL VOLCS)
categorized it as “potentially active”. This mountain is considered as a geothermal
resource via the 426-kilowatt Makiling-Banahaw project plant that supplies 15 percent

of the electric requirement of Luzon (Fernandez, 2006). Mt. Makiling was established


as the first national park of the Philippines on February 23, 1993, by Proclamation No.
552, and was decommissioned as a national park on June 20, 1963, by the Republic Act
No. 3523 when it was reassigned to the University of the Philippines, Los Bafios
(UPLB) for the purpose of forestry education (ASEAN Center for Biodiversity, 2023).
Since 1910, Mt. Makiling remained and continued to be a well-recognized outdoor
research laboratory for the UPLB College of Forestry, as it contributed scientific
knowledge to the majority of the country’s foresters and related professions (ASEAN

Center for Biodiversity, 2015).

Mt. Makiling was recategorized as a forest reserve under the Republic Act No.
6967 (Magcale-Macandog et al., 2022). It was declared as an ASEAN Heritage Park on
September 25, 2013, during the 4"" Informal Ministerial Meeting in Surabaya, Indonesia
(ASEAN Center for Biodiversity, 2015). It extends up to 42.44 square kilometers of
land that crosses Laguna (i.e., Los Bafios, Bay, and Calamba City) and Batangas (i.e.,
Sto. Tomas), and lies within 65 kilometers of Metro Manila (Makiling Center, n.d.).
Apportioned into four subwatersheds — Cambantoc, Molawin-Dampalit, Greater Sipit,
and Tigbi-—the forest reserve is situated at the southern portion of Laguna de Bay which
is linked to the Manila Bay via the Pasig River (Sandoval et al., 2019). The Makiling
Center for Mountain Ecosystems under the current College of Forestry and Natural
Resources of UPLB currently oversees the forest reserve through its mandates of
“generating and strengthening the scientific knowledge for the conservation and
sustainable development of tropical mountain ecosystems in partnership with mountain
communities” (Makiling Center, n.d.). Apart from being an educational and scientific
resource, the reserve also functions as a recreational park and tourist spot, as it is the
closest mountain to Metro Manila with attractive features such as summit, boiling mud,

botanic gardens, and unique flora and fauna (ASEAN Center for Biodiversity, 2015).


Mt. Makiling has the highest temperature during April to July, and lowest
temperature during December to February, with an annual mean temperature of 25.9°
to 29.3°C (Magcale-Macandog et al., 2022). It is in the dry season from January to
April, and wet season from May to December (Caldecott, 1993). The soil in the forest
reserve is predominantly loam-clay which is an outcome of volcanic tuff and ash, with
some white-clay soil in Puting Lupa at the southwestern slopes opposite of Sto. Tomas
(Pancho, 1973; 1983). Moreover, pH across different landscape positions ranged from
4.64 to 6.24 (Timbas et al., 2016). Being an environment with unique and diverse forest
ecosystems, the reserve has been a subject for research through the years. Some of the
more recent Mt. Makiling studies include plant and/or tree distribution and diversity
analysis (Castillo et al., 2015, 2018, and 2021; Magcale-Macandog et al., 2022), canopy
(Agudilla et al., 2018; Zarate et al., 2018; Gonzalez et al., 2020), groundwater
(Sandoval et al., 2019) and watershed (Soriano et al., 2019), mosses (Alcala et al., 2020
and 2022), and macrofungal diversity studies (Nacua et al., 2018). Despite the
numerous research conducted, Mt. Makiling is largely under-explored with regards to
its earthworm fauna. In 2005, some earthworms collected from Mt. Makiling were
described by James, followed by a study of Hong and James in 2008 where new species
of Pheretima earthworms collected from the same area were described. Earthworms
were also mentioned in some studies conducted in Mt. Makiling, such as earthworms
causing porosities in soil (Comia et al., 1993; Onodera, 1994), but no further

characterization or identification was performed.


METHODOLOGY

Sample collection

The permit to conduct sampling activity in Mt. Makiling Forest Reserve was
obtained from the Makiling Center for Mountain Ecosystems prior to the sample
collection. At least thirty (30) adult clitellated Pon. corethrurus earthworms were
collected in October 2019 through digging holes in forest soils with 0.5 m x 0.5 mx 0.3
m (depth) within the organic soil horizon (Aspe et al., 2009) in Mt. Makiling, Los
Bafios, Laguna at three sampling points of about 50 m apart, at an elevation of ~460
masl (Timbas et al., 2016). Freshly collected worms were placed in open containers
with their corresponding environmental soil sample. During transit, the containers with
worm samples were kept at 20°-23°C and were semi-covered with black plastic bag to
allow aeration and to maintain dark conditions. The samples were transported to the
Microbial Ecology of Terrestrial and Aquatic Systems (METAS) Laboratory of the
Institute of Biology, College of Science, University of the Philippines Diliman, and
were further sorted manually. Samples were then placed in plastic containers with pores
and were maintained in a stock moist soil under total darkness at room temperature until
processing. The identity of the collected earthworms was verified by Dr. Nonillon M.
Aspe, a biologist and an expert on the taxonomy, systematics, and diversity of

Philippine earthworms.

Earthworm starvation, and gut extraction and preparation

Four previous sample collections were done in Mt. Makiling, i.e., early March
2018, late July 2018, early February 2019, and mid-August 2019. Earthworms collected

during these periods were utilized for the optimization of starvation conditions such as


the number of days of starvation, dark incubation conditions, maintenance of moisture
content, replacement of sterile filter papers, and appropriate starvation containers.

Using the samples obtained in October 2019 as previously described,
earthworms were removed from soil culture, washed with tap water to remove the soil
particles, and were placed in sterile dark containers with sterile moistened filter paper
for about 24-72 h prior to dissection to allow voiding of the gut contents (Caselli et al.,
2006). Sterile distilled water was added as needed to maintain moist conditions. Only
the earthworms that remained alive after the starvation process proceeded to the
dissection and extraction of gut contents.

Each specimen was washed with 70% ethanol followed by two washes of sterile
distilled water for surface sterilization (Parle, 1963; Fujii et al., 2012). Prior to
dissection, earthworms were pinned down horizontally on a sterilized dissecting pan
with the dorsal part facing downward. The ventral part was cut open longitudinally
along the earthworm using sterilized dissecting tools (Julius et al., 2014). Whole
intestines, including the foregut, midgut, and hindgut of around 20 earthworms per
sampling point that survived the starvation process, were removed by dissection (Fujii
et al., 2012). All the extracted complete gut samples were pooled per sampling point,
subsequently suspended in nine mL of sterile 0.9% NaCl solution, manually macerated
and mixed thoroughly, and further homogenized for 5-10 minutes using a vortex mixer
(Toyota and Kimura, 2000; Han et al., 2009; Albasha et al., 2014). Each of the sampling
points represents one replicate of pooled gut sample, thus three sampling points indicate
the three replicates in the succeeding experiments.

Methods on the proper disposal of earthworm carcasses after dissection were
adapted from the waste management protocols of the Institute of Biology — Biosafety

Committee. Specifically, earthworm carcasses were soaked in either 70% ethanol or


10% bleach for about two hours. Common decontamination procedure using pressure
steam was alternatively done. Decontaminated earthworm carcasses were placed in

secured plastic bags and disposed of properly.

Community-level physiological profiling (CLPP) analysis

Biolog EcoPlate™ (96-well) containing 31 different carbon sources and a
control well in triplicates, was used to determine the potential metabolic diversity or
physiological data of microbial communities found in the earthworm gut, based on the
methods of Frac et al. (2012) with modifications. Stefanowicz (2006) recommended
that soil samples be initially mixed with an appropriate solution prior to inoculation into
the EcoPlate™. In this study, the earthworm gut contents that resemble soil particles
were mixed with a modified Ringer’s solution as part of the basic protocols for CLPP
analysis when using sediment and compost samples (Insam and Goberna, 2004). One
mL of the previously prepared earthworm gut homogenate was added with 9 mL of
modified Ringer’s solution composed of 7.2 g/L NaCl, 0.37 g/L KCI, and 0.17 g/L
CaCl2 (Insam and Goberna, 2004), and were mixed thoroughly. The dilution of a soil
sample that will result in approximately 10° colony forming units (CFU) ina 100 pL of
sample was determined as 10° and was used for the CLPP assay (Konopka et al., 1998).
A volume of 130 pL of the diluted sample was inoculated into each well of the Biolog
EcoPlate™. The inoculated plates were covered with aluminum foil and were placed
inside a sterile plastic container with moist paper towels to maintain moisture and
incubated at 25°C (Preston-Mafham et al., 2002). The rate of the carbon utilization of
the earthworm gut bacteria was indicated by the reduction of the tetrazolium, a redox
indicator dye, that changes from colorless to purple (Lehman et al., 1995; Insam, 1997;
Islam et al., 2010).


Nano plate reader

Absorbance readings were recorded using the SPECTROstar
(BMG LABTECH, Germany) at 590 nm wavelength every 24 hours for five days. The
Biolog EcoPlate™ is commonly measured at ODsoonm because the peak absorbance of
the tetrazolium dye indicator could be measured at this wavelength (Garland, 1997;
Muniz et al., 2014; Garau et al., 2007). Since the 96 wells of the Biolog EcoPlate™
contain 31 carbon sources and blank/control wells in triplicates, all OD readings were
done thrice per time point (Németh et al., 2021). Prior to the data processing, the
measured OD readings were initially corrected by subtracting the OD readings of the
control wells that contain the modified Ringer’s solution diluent from the OD readings
of the substrate-containing wells, to remove the background effect of the diluent on the
OD values (Németh et al., 2021).

The microbial response in each well that will express the average well color

development (AWCD) was determined as follows (Gomez et al., 2004):

AWCD = ODj/ 31

where OD; is the optical density value from each well and was corrected by subtracting
the blank well values (without a carbon source and inoculated with the diluent only)
from each plate’s wells with carbon source (Garland and Mills, 1991; Weber et al.,
2007).

Richness (R) value was calculated as the number of oxidized carbon substrates,
and the Shannon—Weaver index value (H) (i.e., the richness and evenness of response)
(Barnes et al., 1998) was calculated using an OD of 0.25 as threshold for positive

response (Garland, 1997). The Shannon—Weaver index was calculated as follows:


H = —Ypi(Inpi)

where p, is the ratio of the activity on each substrate (OD,) to the sum of activities on
all substrates LOD,. Plate readings at the 48"" hour of incubation was used to evaluate
AWCD, R, and H values (Frac et al., 2012), since it was the shortest incubation time
that showed the evident change in OD readings within the incubation period, while the
OD readings obtained from the 120-hour incubation were used in other data assessment
because these showed the optimal OD readings (Gryta et al., 2014; Nagy et al., 2013;
Frac et al. 2012). A heatmap of the average intensity of carbon substrate utilization in
all replicates were generated through RStudio (version 2023.06.0+421) using a
hierarchical clustering method analysis via the ComplexHeatmap package based on the
method of Obusan et al. (2023). Values gathered at time point zero were not included
in the analysis.

The substrate average well color development (SAWCD) was calculated

following the formula used in the study of Chou et al. (2017) and Németh et al. (2021):

SAWCD = Zi, OD:
N
where N is the number of the substrates in a particular class, and ODj is the ODso0nm
blank-corrected values within the substrate class. The substrate groupings were based
on the study of Sala et al. (2010) where the substrates were classified according to their
biochemical characteristics. SAWCD values were used to generate a heatmap through
RStudio (version 2023.06.0+421) using a hierarchical clustering method analysis via
the ComplexHeatmap package, based on the method of Obusan et al. (2023). Values

gathered at time point zero were not included in the analysis.


Genomic DNA extraction for NGS

Whole genomic DNA was extracted using the DNeasy PowerSoil Kit (Qiagen,
Benelux BV) with some modifications. In brief, pooled extracted gut samples from each
of the three sampling points that were previously suspended in nine mL of 0.9% NaCI
solution were each processed using three soil DNA extraction kit preparations (total of
nine kit preparations). The three kit preparations per sampling point were combined
separately in the final elution step to concentrate the extracted DNA, resulting in three
replicates. The same pool of gut samples and replicates were used in Biolog EcoPlate™
assay.

The absorbance of the extracted DNA was measured using the NanoDrop
2000C spectrophotometer (Thermo Scientific, Wilmington, DE) at 260 nm wavelength
to assess the relative quantity of the DNA extracted, and at absorbance ratio of A260280
to determine its concentration and purity (Thakuria et al., 2009). Pure DNA should
produce A2eongo ratio of around 1.8 (Sambrook et al., 1989) where a lower ratio
indicates protein and polysaccharide contamination, while DNA with A260230 ratio
below 1.8 is considered to contain significant number of contaminants such as phenol,
chaotropic salts, and other aromatic compounds (Thakuria et al., 2009).

The three genomic DNA samples (treated as replicates) were sent to Macrogen,
Inc. (Seoul, South Korea) for metagenomic amplicon sequencing. Each of the replicates
were separately sequenced. The V3-V4 region of the 16S ribosomal RNA gene of the
samples were amplified using MOPC-purified primers. After passing the quality
control, the samples proceeded to the construction of the sequencing library by
preparing random fragmentation of the DNA using the Herculase II Fusion DNA
Polymerase Nextera XT Index Kit V2 library kit under the sequencing facility’s library
protocol, followed by 5’ and 3” adapter ligation. Adapter-ligated fragments are then


PCR amplified and gel purified. The samples were then sequenced using the Illumina

MiSeq platform using 300 bp paired-end setting, producing 100,000 reads per sample.

NGS metagenomic data analysis and processing

Sequence data analysis was performed for each of the replicates using the
Quantitative Insight into Microbial Ecology 2 (QIIME 2) version 2022.11, a next-
generation microbiome bioinformatics platform with focus on data and analysis
transparency (Bolyen et al., 2019) via the Ubuntu 22.04.1 LS Windows Subsystem
Linux (WSL) within the Anaconda3 version 23.1.0 environment. Metadata and
manifest files of the samples were prepared, the raw data sequences were imported into
a paired-end demultiplexed QIIME zipped artifact (.qza), and the output sequences
were trimmed to remove the adapter and unwanted sequences. Sequence quality
control, including quality filtering, chimera checking, and paired-end joining, was
performed using DADA2, an expanded open-source R package that improves the
Divisive Amplicon Denoising Algorithm (DADA) —a previously released model-based
approach for correcting amplicon errors without creating OTUs — by employing a new
quality-aware model of Illumina amplicon errors (Callahan et al., 2016). The resulting
data was visualized after this quality filtering method by constructing feature table and
feature summaries. A phylogenetic tree was generated using the mafft program to
initially perform a multiple sequence alignment, filter the alignment to remove
positions that are highly variable, and generate a phylogenetic tree from the masked
alignment using the FastTree program. mafft is a multiple sequence alignment
program for unix-like operating systems like Linux. This software provides several

multiple alignment methods such as L-INS-i (accurate; for alignment of <~200


sequences) and FFT-NS-2 (fast; for alignment of <~30,000 sequences). FastTree is a
software that builds a quick phylogenetic tree from the aligned sequences that infers
approximate-maximum-likelihood. The diversity of the samples was analyzed using the
core metrics phylogenetic method which rarefies the Feature Table [Frequency] QIIME
2 artifact to a user-specified depth and computes several alpha diversity metrics,
specifically the Shannon’s Diversity Index and Observed Features which are a
quantitative and a qualitative measure of community richness, respectively, and the
Faith’s Phylogenetic Diversity which is a qualitative measure of community richness
that incorporates phylogenetic relationships between the features. Alpha rarefaction
was plotted by computing alpha diversity metrics at multiple sampling depths. In
evaluating the microbial ecological diversity using the metagenomics data, the alpha
diversity identifies the richness or the observed number of unique sequence variants,
and evenness or the read count distribution in the observed sequence variants within a
sample (Willis, 2019). Rarefaction is a normalization tool in metagenomics that
involves subsampling the same number of reads for each sample to equalize the total

number of counts in all samples (Calle, 2019).

Taxonomic analysis of the samples was done by primarily assigning taxonomy
to the sequences in the Feature Data [Sequence] QIIME 2 artifact using a pre-trained
SILVA 138.1 NR99 16S rRNA classifier where the sequences have been trimmed to
only include 300 bases from the region of the 16S that was sequenced in this study (V3-
V4 region, bound by the 341F/805R primer pair, non-redundant at 99% identity) (Quast
et al., 2012; Yilmaz, et al., 2013). Balvodiiité and Huson (2017) compared the
microbiome analysis results of different databases and found that RDP and SILVA only
go down to the genus level. A similar study by Soverini and Castagnetti (2022) found

several sequences with unmatched or ambiguous taxonomy contained in publicly


available databases (including SILVA or Greengenes) that limits the possibility of
resolution at a lower taxonomic level. In other words, SILVA taxonomies do not
contain the rank of species and therefore was only limited to up to genus level of
annotation, as reflected in this study. The taxonomic composition of the samples was
visualized using the QIIME 2 taxa barplot (Bolyen et al., 2019) and Krona pie chart

visualization tool (Ondov et al., 2011) as a QIIME 2 plug-in (up to family level).

Functional prediction using the 16S rRNA data through PICRUSt2

The prediction of functional abundances based on the 16S rRNA marker gene
sequences was performed using the PICRUSt2 software, an improved version of the
Phylogenetic Investigation of Communities by Reconstruction of Unobserved States
(PICRUSt) (Douglas et al., 2020). The input files used in the standard PICRUSt2
pipeline were the FASTA of the amplicon sequence variants (ASVs) or the
representative sequences of the samples obtained from DADA2, and a BIOM table of
the abundance of each ASV across each sample. Enzyme commission or classification
(EC) numbers and KEGG orthology (KO) metagenomes were predicted, as well as
MetaCyc metabolic pathway database abundances and coverages based on the
predicted EC number abundances. The nearest-sequenced taxon index (NSTI) was
calculated for each input ASV, and any ASVs with NSTI > 2 were excluded from the
output by default. Stratified output was set and calculated to increase the run-time. The
phylogenetic placement of reads used the evolutionary placement algorithm included
in RAXML, or PPLACER (EPA-NG) (Barbera, et al., 2019) as the default option, and the
SATé-Enabled Phylogenetic Placement (SEPP) as an alternative placement option to

improve the accuracy and/or speed of phylogenetic placement techniques (Mirarab et


al., 2012). The Minimal set of Pathways (MinPath) parsimony approach (Ye and Doak,
2009) was used for the pathway inference. Descriptions were added to the table of gene

family or pathway abundances as a quick description of each functional category.


RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Community-level physiological profiling (CLPP) of the Pon. corethrurus gut

bacterial communities

The CLPP analysis of the Pon. corethrurus gut bacterial communities are
summarized in Table 1. The AWCD indicates the general potential metabolic activity
of a microbial community or the total bioactivity of the Biolog EcoPlate™ (Kenarova
et al., 2014). The AWCD of 0.907+0.126 showed a high absorbance which indicated
that the gut bacteria that were present in the Biolog EcoPlate™ were capable of
oxidation and that the AWCD values may be used as a marker of microbial activity
(Gryta et al., 2014). The high richness (R) value of 28+3.215 was another indication
that demonstrated a high number of oxidized carbon substrates (Gryta et al., 2014). The
Shannon-Wiener Index (H) illustrates the physiological diversity of bacterial
communities (Kenarova et al., 2014) and the H index values typically range from 1.5
to 3.5 (Clarke and Warwick, 2001), i.e., where higher H values signify metabolically
active microbial communities that can degrade more substrates, indicates the
physiological diversity of the bacterial community (Muniz et al., 2014). A high H value
of 3.226+0.053 of the Pon. corethrurus earthworm gut bacterial communities indicated
that they could utilize more substrates with high efficiency (Muniz et al., 2014). A
microbial community that has high diversity implies that it is not dominated by a single
species and that the abundance is not concentrated into only one species (Kiernan,

2019).


Table 1. AWCD*, R**, and H*** values obtained at the 48-hour of incubation of each
replicate of the Pon. corethrurus gut sample

Replicate AWCD* R” HH”

A 1.052 30 3.259

B 0.841 24 3.165

Cc 0.826 29 3.254
Average 0.907 +0.126 2843.215 3.226+0.053

“AWCD — Average Well Color Development
**R — Richness Value
***H — Shannon-Weaver Index Value

The activity of the Pon. corethrurus gut bacteria throughout the incubation
period is demonstrated in Figure 1. The AWCD values across replicates A, B, and C
are shown in Figure 1A, while the averaged AWCD values of the replicates with the
coefficient of determination or R? are shown in Figure 1B. The gut samples were
serially diluted thrice prior to inoculation in each of the substrate-containing wells in
the Biolog EcoPlate™, and UV-Vis spectrophotometry was used to measure the
absorbances at ODsoonm of the time-dependent microbial activity. Thus, it is important
to validate if the data conforms with the Beer-Lambert law that states that there is a
direct proportionality of the increase in concentration to the increase in absorbance
(Swinehart, 1962). With regard to the proportion of variance, the original formula of
the coefficient of determination or R? evaluates how much the dependent variable is
affected by the independent variables (Wright, 1921). Since time points 0 to 72 hours
had the highest value of R? or closest to 1, the data within this duration conformed with
the Beer-Lambert law. This related the increase in concentration to the increase in time,
which could then be used to compare absorbance readings across samples. Time points
beyond 72 hours showed deviation from linearity or lower R? value which indicates

possible factors such as real deviation (e.g., oversaturation), spectral deviation due to


the quality of the monochromator, and chemical deviation from formed by-products
resulting to shifts in pH conditions (Mamouei et al., 2021). Nonetheless, all absorbance
readings from all the time points in this study were used to investigate the overall carbon
substrate utilization of the Pon. corethrurus gut bacteria. In addition, all AWCD values
showed increasing microbial community activity from time point 0 to 120 hours in all

the replicates.

The presence of the M. posthuma earthworms in vermicompost-treated soil
were shown to increase bacterial activity and diversity with higher AWCD, Shannon,
and richness indices at 72 hours of incubation, which may suggest the degradation of
organic matter due to the activation of microorganisms (Doan et al., 2013). Another
study found that the presence of the earthworm Ap. caliginosa Savigny, 1826) and
amendment of cadmium altered the CLPP of soil bacteria. Specifically, cadmium
induced tolerance in soil bacteria while the earthworm allowed the survival of a higher
number of bacteria under cadmium (Muniz et al., 2014). CLPP analysis was also used
to examine the functional diversity of microorganisms in Eu. eugeniae earthworm casts
and pig slurry where the microflora of casts metabolized more carbon substrates than
the microflora in pig slurry, as evidenced by significantly higher richness and diversity
values (Aira et al., 2005). Further, the transit of the pig slurry in the gut of Ew. eugeniae
resulted in the reduction of nitrogen and carbon in the casts. These findings support the
common perception that labile carbon compounds are vital components of earthworm
nutrition, at least in the case of endogeic earthworms, and consequently, the availability
of carbon may restrict the growth of earthworms (Seastedt et al., 1988; Scheu and
Schaefer, 1998; Tiunov and Scheu, 2004). Microorganisms may likewise constitute an
important part of the diet of earthworms, which can feed on them selectively (Moody

et al., 1995; Edwards, 2004; Aira et al., 2007; Zirbes et al., 2012). A greater enzymatic


activity also indicates beneficial earthworm-microorganism interaction, and can be
attributed to fragmentation and moistening of organic substrates and microbial
development that occurs in the earthworm gut (Lipiec et al., 2016). Overall, the gut
transit was shown to increase the number of substrates used by the microflora, and the
assessment of their metabolic potentials will define the extent of organic matter

degradation and stabilization (Aira et al., 2005).

A

i

i

TE!

Figure 1A. Average well color development (AWCD) or the microbial response from timepoint
0 to 120 hours. Letters A, B, and C denote the replicates per timepoint; “outliers” indicate

substrates that are underutilized.

a nn ni aw °

a =
@"5q0) (OMY

4 4
a“ o


io]

2.5 5
2 ——@——~ 0-120 hours
als + ee : oh Linear (0-120 hours)
o R?=0,9951 1 Linear (0-96 hours)
A 14 - t Linear (0-72 hours)
9g +
eS
< T
05 | I
0; 1 r r r Tr
0 24 48 72 96 120

Incubation (hours)

Figure 1B. Average well color development (AWCD) or the microbial response from
timepoint 0 to 120 hours of the averaged replicates showing the coefficient of

determination or R?. Error bars indicate standard deviation.

At 48 to 120 hours, all the carbon substrates were positively utilized by the Pon.
corethrurus gut bacteria except for the a-ketobutyric acid. This substrate was also
poorly utilized until the end of the incubation period, along with the 2-hydroxy benzoic
acid (Figure 3). Meanwhile, the carbon sources that had higher ODssonm values among
the other positively utilized substrates at 48-hour of incubation were glycogen and
Tween 40 (polymers); B-methyl-D-glucoside, N-acetyl-d-glucosamine, and D-mannitol

(carbohydrates); and D-malic acid (carboxylic acid) (Figure 2).


Incubation (hours)
Class Specific substrates 24 48 72 96 120
D-Galactonic acid-y-lactone
D-Cellobiose
a-D-Lactose
B-Methyl-D-glucoside
D-Xylose

i-Erythritol

D-Mannitol
N-Acetyl-D-glucosamine
Glucose-1-phosphate
D,L-a-Glycerol phosphate
Tween 40

Glycogen

Pyruvic acid methyl ester
D-Glucosaminic acid
D-Galacturonic acid
y-Hydroxybutyric acid
\taconic acid
a-Ketobutyric acid
D-Malic acid

2-Hydroxy Benzoic acid
xy Benzoic acid
L-Arginine
L-Asparagine
L-Phenylalanine
L-Serine

L-Threonine
Glycyl-L-glutamic acid
Phenylethylamine
Putrescine

a
s
=
®
.
s
°

Utilization pattern

Amino acids

Figure 2. Heatmap diagram of the average intensity of carbon substrate utilization of
the Pon. corethrurus gut bacteria in Biolog EcoPlate™ from 24 to 120-hour incubation.
Legend indicates the blank-corrected OD590nm values as the intensity of utilization
patterns. Legend indicates the blank-corrected ODsoonm values as the intensity of
utilization patterns. The carbon substrates are grouped according to the study of Sala et

al. (2010).

The metabolic profile of the Pon. corethrurus gut microbial communities is
demonstrated in Figures 3 and 4. In terms of the intensity of specific carbon substrate
utilization based on time point, T120 and T96 clustered together showing low and very

high carbon substrate utilization (Figure 3). Likewise, T72 and T48 clustered together,

with similar utilization patterns as the first cluster, while T24 relatively had the least
clustering with any of the timepoints due to its lowest utilization pattern. Overall, these
indicate that the ODsoonm values had an increasing trend of carbon substrate utilization
through time. In terms of substrate class, the most utilized after the incubation period
were polymers and carbohydrates, followed by the amino acids, and carboxylic and
acetic acids. The amines and phenolic compounds were the least utilized among the
substrate classes (Figure 4). The capacity of the bacterial community to utilize carbon
sources in the EcoPlate™ was shown to increase with the addition of earthworm casts
(Zhou et al., 2019). In addition, the presence of Ei. andrei earthworms on grape marc
(grape pomace) were shown to increase the utilization of some amino acids and
polymers and a corresponding higher substrate diversity value, which indicated the key
role of earthworms in the decomposition of fresh plant residues through the interaction
with microbial communities (Gdmez-Brandon et al., 2010). In terms of the roles of
microorganisms in the composting process, carbohydrates and carboxylic acids can be
utilized rapidly at early stage (Albrecht et al., 2010), while the amino acids that are
produced during composting serve as energy and carbon sources for the metabolism of
bacteria (Lopez-Gonzalez et al., 2015). The similar substrate utilization pattern
observed in the Pon. corethrurus gut bacteria may also be related to their putative
capacities or roles in the composting process. A study by Liepic et al., (2016)
demonstrated the same higher utilization of polymers and other carbon sources by the
microbial communities in the burrow system and Lumbricid cast aggregates of a loess
soil under a pear orchard. The greater utilization of amino acids was indirectly
correlated to an increase in protease activity, while the greater utilization of glycogen
and D-xylose was significantly correlated to the enhanced B-glucosidase enzymatic

activity (Lipiec et al., 2016). These results can be related with microbial succession that


occurs in the decomposition of organic matter in soil (Nannipieri et al., 2003; Insam
and Goberna, 2004), and that the casts produced by earthworms enhance and conserve

the quality of soil (Lipiec et al., 2016).

Glycogen

5 B-Methy|-D-glucoside
ey Tween 40
: D-Malic acid
in| Tween 80
L-Asparagine
D-Cellobiose
i a ¥-Hydroxybutyric acid Utilization Pattern
D-Xylose 28
D-Mannitol 5
D-Galacturonic acid rr
LSerine *
Glucose-1-phosphate ne
L-Arginine
4-Hydroxy benzoic acid o
a-D-Lactose Class
Pyruvic acid methyl ester Amines
Putrescine Amino acids
D,L-a-Glycerol phosphate Carbohydrates
Glycyt-L-gluatamic acid carboxy ese
Phovianiiarine Phenolic compounds
Polymers
L-Threonine
laconic acid
D-Galactonic acid-y-lactone
L-Phenyialanine
\-Erythritol
-Cyclodextrin
D-Glucosaminic acid

‘a-Ketobutyric acid
2-Hydroxy benzoic acid

fy

T72
T48
T2.


Figure 3. Heatmap diagram of the average intensity of carbon substrate utilization of
the Pon. corethrurus gut bacterial communities at 24-120 hours of incubation of each
of the substrates. Each time point shows the blank-corrected ODs90nm absorbance values
of the averaged A, B, and C replicates. Legend indicates the blank-corrected ODsoonm
values as the intensity of utilization patterns. The carbon substrates are classified

according to the study of Sala et al. (2010).


Polymers

| Cerbohydrates: Utilization Pattern
Amino acids 8;

Carboxylic and acetic acids

os

Amines “)

Phenolic compounds

T96
T24

Figure 4. Mean substrate average well color development (SAWCD) of the Pon.
corethrurus gut bacterial communities at 24-120 hours of incubation of each of the
substrate classes. Each time point shows the SAWCD of the averaged A, B, and C
replicates. Legend indicates the blank-corrected ODsoonm values as the intensity of
utilization patterns. The carbon substrates are classified according to the study of Sala

et al. (2010).

Polymer degradation by the earthworm gut bacteria

Among the positively utilized substrates by the Pon. corethrurus gut microbial
community, glycogen was the most utilized. Glycogen was found to be highly utilized
by the earthworm Dendrobaena octaedra as a mechanism to combat stress due to the
presence of aluminum and nickel metals as contaminants or pollutants (Holmstrup et
al., 2011). Detoxification processes involve the use of readily available carbon sources
for energy such as glycogen and protein (Uwizeyimana et al., 2017). In relation to this,
the gut microbiota of earthworms was found to be involved in the metabolism and
removal of organic pollutants in farmland soil (Pass et al., 2015; Zhu et al., 2018). These
findings were further supported by the study of Chang et al. (2021) where the effect of

fomesafen herbicide on the gut microbial composition and physiology of Ph. guillelmi


were investigated. The gut, cast, and soil samples were demonstrated to be of use in
improving the quality of soil, and by relieving the effects of soil pollutants in
earthworms by examining the effects of a pollutant or a source of stress (Chouaia et al.,
2019). Exposure of Ei. foetida to biodegradable polymers poly-L-lactide and
polycaprolactone were also found to increase their body weight and reproduction
(Holzinger et al., 2023). Another polymer that was positively utilized by the P.
corethrurus gut microbial community was Tween 80 (polysorbate 80, polyoxyethylene
sorbitan monooleate), a non-ionic surfactant commonly used in the food industry,
cosmetics, and pharmaceuticals as an emulsifying agent. A study by Chassaing et al.
(2015) on germ-free mice fed with drinking water supplemented with 1% Tween 80
were not affected by inflammation and accumulation of body fat as observed in non-
germ-free mice. It was then correlated that the gut microbiota may play a role in these
observed results (Nielsen et al., 2016). Tween 40, a palmitic acid ester, was also
positively utilized by the Pon. corethrurus gut microbial communities. A study by
Gryta et al. (2014) found that Tween 40, along with 4-hydroxybenzoic acid, were the
only utilized substrates by the microbial communities of an activated sewage sludge
with heavy metals, which likewise suggest a stress alleviation mechanism due to heavy
metal contamination (Keranova and Boteva, 2015). The least utilized polymer was the
a-cyclodextrin, a cyclic oligosaccharide with D-glucose units linked by a-1,4-
glucosidic bonds obtained from the enzymatic degradation of starch. An amphiphilic
macromolecule with multiple hydroxyl groups is a characteristic of cyclodextrin-based
polymers (Liu et al., 2021). Cyclodextrins have a beneficial effect on the remediation
of organic pollutants in soil via forming inclusion complexes which in turn enhance the
aqueous solubility and consequently, the bioremediation of hydrophobic contaminants

(Morillo et al., 2020).


Carbohydrate utilization

Based on the clustering of substrates in terms of specific carbon utilization in
Figure 3, the most utilized carbohydrates were B-methyl-D-glucoside and N-acetyl
glucosamine, followed by D-cellobiose and D-xylose. a-D-lactose and glucose-!-
phosphate were also moderately utilized, while D-mannitol, pyruvic acid methyl ester,
D,L-a-glycerol phosphate, and i-erythritol had the lowest utilization rate.

B-methyl-D-glucoside is a monosaccharide and another product of glucose
and methanol reaction (Helferich and Schafer, 1926). A study by Weng et al., (2022)
demonstrated that the high utilization of B-methyl-D-glucoside by soil microorganisms
in Calamagrostis angustifolia (reed grass or small weed) wetland is dependent on the
nitrogen concentrations.

Another carbon substrate that was positively and highly utilized was the N-
acetyl glucosamine, a main component of the peptidoglycan layer. This is an amino
sugar that is important in the synthesis of cell surface structures in bacteria and is also
significant in supplying energy and carbon in the glycolytic pathway (Boulanger et al.,
2010). An interesting function of the N-acetyl glucosamine is cell signaling (Konopka,
2012). Cell-to-cell communications of microorganisms is important in maintaining the
ecological processes and social interactions in the environment, including chemical
signaling and nutrient cross-feeding (Morris et al., 2013; Asfahl et al., 2017). The
interactions among bacteria ascertain the overall activity of a bacteria in a particular
niche which in turn influences the ecosystem functions at a global scale (Jansson and
Hofmockel, 2018).

More common types of carbohydrates, specifically the D-cellobiose, D-xylose,
and a-D-lactose were utilized by the earthworm gut bacteria in this study. This pattern
of utilization may be attributable to sugars, being the most readily available organic


compound, and the most significant carbon sources for microorganisms in soil. The
major processes of sugar dissimilation by soil microorganisms were uptake, utilization,
and recycling that were thought to sustain the activities of microorganisms in the
detritusphere and in the rhizosphere (Gunina and Kuzyakov, 2015). It was found that
the casts and mucus of earthworms are rich in polysaccharides which can also be
derived from soil fauna (Zhang et al., 2009; Pan et al., 2010).

Glucose-|-phosphate as a source of carbon can be utilized via the presence of
glucose-1-phosphatase which is important in the regulation of phosphate metabolism

in soil microorganisms. A novel type of this enzyme with high phytase activity was

reported in a soil bacterium Pantoea sp. from forest soil samples (Suleimanova et al.,
2015). Earthworms and phosphate-solubilizing bacteria promote organic carbon
sequestration as a soil remediation process to enhance organic matter degradation and

hasten the carbon cycle (Wang et al., 2022).

Utilization of amino acids

L-asparagine was the most utilized amino acid by Pon. corethrurus gut
microorganisms, followed by the moderate utilization of L-serine and L-arginine. The
amino acids with the lowest utilization rates were glycyl-L-glutamic acid, L threonine,
and L-phenylalanine. The utilization of L-asparagine can be attributed to the production
of L-asparaginase by microorganisms. A study by Fatima et al. (2019) revealed that soil
isolates of Pseudomonas aeruginosa demonstrate anticancer activity on HeLa cells.
Another study reported an L-asparagine monohydrate-dependent extracellular
polymeric substances (EPS) or biofilm-producing B. licheniformis from the gut of M.

posthuma earthworm (Biswas et al., 2020). The EPS of this gut bacterial isolate were


also found to stimulate metal sorption and bioflocculation that suggest its potential in
heavy metal bioremediation.

Serine deaminases catalyze the degradation of serine to pyruvate and ammonia
(Chen et al., 2012). B. subtilis utilizes serine as a significant precursor in biosynthesis
reactions (Klewing et al., 2020). L-serine, along with L-glutamic acid, L-glutamine, L,
alanine, L-methionine, and L-threonine, comprise an abundant portion in soil solution
(Broughton et al., 2015). These L-isomeric amino acids are considered to be the main
sources of nitrogen in plants as well as in soil microorganisms by an exclusive sel f-
cycling of D-enantiomers in bacteria with peptidoglycan, and also prevents nutrient
competition by fungi and plants (Lam et al., 2009).

L-arginine is among the most important nutrients in bacteria as it serves both as
a carbon and nitrogen source that maintains their growth. The availability of L-arginine
in oxygen-limiting environments enables the bacteria to survive since it functions in
ATP production (Scribani Rossi et al., 2022), which may suggest the possible survival
of bacteria in oxygen-limiting conditions such as the earthworm gut. Moreover, L-
arginine was related to virulence (Schreiber et al., 2006) and antibiotic resistance of
bacteria (Peng et al., 2017), as well as the formation of biofilms (O’toole and Kolter,

1998).

Carboxylic and acetic acid as carbon source of earthworm gut bacteria

The most utilized carboxylic acids by the gut bacteria of Pon. corethrurus were
D-malic and y-hydroxybutyric acids, followed by D-galacturonic acid as low to
moderately utilized. Itaconic acid and D-galactonic acid-y-lactone were utilized poorly,
while D-glucosaminic acid had the lowest utilization, and a-ketobutyric acid as the only
non-utilized carboxylic acid.


Malic acid is one of the major organic acid root secretions, and is a preferred
carbon source second to glucose by certain microorganisms such as B. subtilis and
Azospirillum brasilense (Bashan and de-Bashan, 2002; Meyer et al., 2011). A study by
Rudrappa et al. (2008) provided a biochemical data proving that L-malic acid, the
tricarboxylic acid cycle (TCA) intermediate, exuded from Arabidopsis roots
particularly communicates with and recruits the beneficial rhizobacterium B. subtilis
FB17. Moreover, these root secretions were found to be instigated by a foliar pathogen
of tomato, and encourage the formation of biofilms in Arabidopsis roots at increased
malic acid levels. A similar study by Rekha et al., (2018) found that the plant-growth
promoting B. subtilis RR4 obtained from the rice rhizosphere encourages the
biosynthesis of malic acid in rice roots.

y-hydroxybutyric acid, along with a-butyric acid, a-cyclodextrin, 2-
hydroxybenzoic acid, glutamyl-L-glutamic acid, and threonine were found to be
important carbon sources for Ei. foetida under cadmium stress, suggesting the role of
microbial communities as tools in demonstrating the mechanisms of detoxification in
their hosts (Ning et al., 2019).

The effects of sole carbon utilization and the soil microbial activity in various
conditions and parameters (i.e., rate of nitrogen fertilizer, salt concentration, and
different amounts of saline water irrigation) were correlated to the utilization of D-
galacturonic acid, D-galactonic acid-y-lactone, D-glucosaminic acid together with
substrates from other classes such as L-asparagine, L-arginine, and L-threonine amino

acids, and the Tween 80 polymer (Cheng et al., 2017).


Metagenomic sequencing data analysis and composition of the gut bacteria of Pon.

corethrurus

Earthworms are known to accommodate a wide array of microorganisms most
especially in their gastrointestinal tracts (Knapp et al., 2008, 2009; Mathipi et al., 2020).
The interaction between the earthworm and its gut microbiota enables the
decomposition of organic substances, cycling of nutrients, and other important
biogeochemical processes that occur in the soil environment (Thakuria et al., 2010;
Byzov et al., 2015; Aira et al., 2022). Some studies demonstrate that the bacterial
composition of the earthworm gut differed with the earthworm species, ecological
lifestyle, and the conditions of their surrounding environment (Sun et al., 2020). Here,
the Pon. corethrurus gut bacterial diversity was demonstrated initially by measuring
the alpha diversity indices and by analyzing the alpha rarefaction using the QIIME 2
platform.

The major bacterial phyla found in the Pon. corethrurus earthworm gut based
on the averaged relative frequency of the replicate samples were Proteobacteria
(42.23%), Actinobacteriota (27.85%), and Firmicutes (11.88%), while minor bacterial
phyla found were Verrucomicrobiota (4.18%), Chloroflexi (3.87%), Planctomycetota
(3.04%), Myxococcota (2.67%), and some unclassified bacteria and others (4.29%)
(Figure 5). Notably, there are differences in the relative frequency of the phylum found
in each of the replicates. Nonetheless, the presence and the hierarchy of the most
abundant phylum per replicate are similar. A study by Sapkota et al. (2020) found that
the dominant gut community assemblages of three earthworm genera, namely,
Aporrectodea, Allolobophora and Lumbricus were found to be Proteobacteria,

Acidobacteria, Actinobacteria, Firmicutes, and Verrucomicrobia. Previous studies and


reviews have also reported that the major bacteria that were found in the earthworm gut
were Proteobacteria, Acidobacteria, Actinobacteria, and Firmicutes (Drake and Horn,
2007; Liu et al., 2018; Ma et al., 2017; Medina-Sauza et al., 2019). These results were
similar to that of the bacterial phyla found in the Pon. corethrurus gut. Actinobacteria
and Proteobacteria were regarded as the key players in the decomposition of organic
materials, particularly at curing stages (Jurado et al., 2014), while Firmicutes,
Actinobacteria, Proteobacteria were found to be the dominant phyla in composting
(Guo et al., 2021; Zhao et al., 2023). Several members of the Phylum Proteobacteria
rapidly grow in the presence of amino acids and other organic carbon sources in the
earthworm gut, and hence was presumed to be the cause of its dominance (Medina-
Sauza et al., 2019). As previously shown, there were carbon sources such as amino
acids which were positively utilized in the EcoPlate, which may indicate a similar
explanation about the dominance of Phylum Proteobacteria in the gut of Pon.

corethrurus.


1) «Bacteria Bacteria:p Proteobacteria
4__Bacteria;k_Bacteria:p_Actinobacteriota
_Firmicutes

Verrucomicrobiota
(_Bacteriaip_Chloroflexi
._Bacteria:p_Planctomycetota
\_Bacteriaip_Myxococeota
\__Bacteria;p_Patescibacteria
(__Bacteria:p_Cyanobacteria
_Bacteria;p _Acidobacteriota
_Bacteria:p_Bdellovibrionota
._Bacteriaip_Desulfobacterota
|_Bacteria;k_Bacteria;p_Bacteroidota
[EB 6 Bacteria:k Bacteria; _Methylomirabiiota
BBB 6 Bacteria:k Bacteriaip _Nitrospirota
[BB 1 Bacteria:x Bacteria: Dependent
1) 6 _Bacteria;k_Bacteria:p_Sva04es
__Bacteria;k_Bacteria;p_NB1¥)
1) 6_Bacter
/ d_Archaeak_Archaeaip_Halobacterota
[BB o_Archaeak Archaea:p_Crenarchaeota
._Bacteria;p_MBNT15

._ Bacteriap_Gemmatimonadota

_Archaea;p_Euryarchaeota

1) 4. Bacteria:k_Bacteria:p_Armatimonadota
d_Bacteria;k_Bacteria:p_Entotheoneliaeota

\_Bacteria;p_Sumerlaeota
/ d_Bacteria;k_Bacteriaip_WS4
Bacteria;p__Fibrobacterota
[By 6 _2acteria:x Bacteria:p_spirochaetota
ts ‘_Archaea;p_Aenigmarchaeota
«_Bacteriaip_Deterrisomatota
._Bacteria;p_SAR324_clade(Marine_group_8)
eS ._ Bacteriap_RCP2-54
1) 4_Bacteria:k Bacteria _0TB120
d__Bacteriazk_Bacteria:p_Nitrospinota

(_ Bacteria;p_Elusimicrobiota

__Archaea;p_ Thermoplasmatota

Sample

Figure 5. Gut composition of the Pon. corethrurus earthworm at the phylum level
(fevel 3) using the QIIME 2 visualization too! (Bolyen et al., 2019). Percentages

indicate the relative frequency.


The major classes under Phylum Proteobacteria found in the Pon. corethrurus
gut consisted of a-proteobacteria (39.78%), and y-proteobacteria (2.45%), while the
Phylum Actinobacteriota comprised mainly of Actinobacteria (17.56%),
Thermoleophilia (6.52%), and Acidimicrobiia (3.15). The major classes found in
Phylum Firmicutes were Bacilli (6.51%) and Clostridia (4.97%). The most abundant
order found in the earthworm gut were Rhizobiales (32.59%), an a-proteobacteria,
followed by Micrococcales (8.63%), an actinobacteria. Other major orders include
Rhodobacterales (5.82%), an a-proteobacteria, followed by Clostridiales (3.88%), and
Paenibacillales (3.30%), a Bacilli, The most dominant subfamily was
Xanthobacteraceae (13.97%) under order Rhizobiales, followed by subfamily
Rhizobiaceae (8.59%), Microbacteriaceae (7.16%) under order Micrococcales,
Rhodobacteraceae (5.82) under order Rhodobacterales, and Beijerinckiacea (4.40%)
under order Rhizobiales. The most abundant genera described were Agromyces
(4.94%), Amaricoccus (4.64%), Paenibacillus (2.78%), Mesorhizobium (2.67%), and
Clostridium (2.55%). All percentages are based on the average relative abundances of
each taxa. Each of the replicate’s bacterial composition, specifically the major classes,

orders, and families, are presented in Figures 6-15.


Phylum Proteobacteria, Class a-proteobacteria

A

°

91% of
\

p__Proteobacteria

% 37% of
k__Bacteria

37% of
all

0_Defluviicoccales 1% |
0__Sphingomonadales 0.6% |)
0_Acetobacterales 0.5% [il
o_Rickettsiales 0.3% [/)
o_uncultured 0.2% |)
o_Azospirillales 0.09%
0_Elsterales 0.07% [i
0__Caulobacterales 0.07% [i
o_Tistrellales 0.04% [il
0__Dongiales 0.04% [i]
0__Paracaedibacterales 0.02% {il}
0%

o__Reyranellales 0% fi

96% of
p__Proteobactena

«Baier
41% SI

'Iphaproteobactt
Proteobacter, 0_Defluviicoccales 0.7%
0__Sphingomonadales 0.2% ©)
0__Acetobacterales 0.1% ji
o__uncultured 0.1%
0_Azospirillales 0.1%
0_Elsterales 0.08% Si
o__Caulobacterales 0.2% [i
0__Tistrellales 0.08% ji)
0_Dongiales 0.02% fil}
o__Paracaedibacterales 0.2% [i
— 0.06% fi
0__Reyranellales 0.04% {i


fo of
p__Proteobecterta

44% of
k_Bacterta

44% Sf

0__Defluviicoccales 0% {i
0__Sphingomonadales 0.1%
o__Acetobacterales 0.1% i)
o_Rickettsiales 0
o__uncultured 0.3%
o__Azospirillales 0.07%
o_Elsterales 0.04% 1
Mera, o__Caulobacterales
Q
oe 0__Tistrellales 0.4%
&

0_Dongiales 0%
o__Paracaedibacterales 0
— 0.02% [it
o__Reyranellales 0% Mi

Figure 6. Bacterial composition of the Pon. corethrurus gut (replicates A, B, and C)
showing the orders of Class a-proteobacteria under Phylum Proteobacteria. Percentages
of each taxon denote relative abundance. Small pie charts indicate the fraction of Class
a-proteobacteria for the specified taxon. The taxa were visualized using the Krona

visualization tool (Ondov et al., 2011).


Phylum Proteobacteria, Class a-proteobacteria, Order Rhizobiales

87% of
¢__Alphaproteobacteria

A

80% of
p_Proteobacteria

32% of
k_Bacteria
32% of

all

{__Rhizobiales_Incertae Sedis 0.7%
{_tabraceae 0.1% |

°Seceq, __Pleomorphomonadaceae 0.1% ea

{_Kaistiaceae 0.07% [ill
{_uncuitured 0.07% [ii

{_Rhodomicrobiaceae 0.02% {ill

— 002% [i
{__Amb-16S-1323 0% &

89% of
‘¢_Alphaproteobacteria

86% of
P_Proteobacteria

37% of
k_Bacteria

37% of
all

{_Ahizobiales_Incertae_Sedis 0.1% |
{_Labraceae 0.1% |)
{__Pleomorphomonadaceae ov fill
{_Kaistiaceae 1% {iil}

 vncutured ox

{_Rnodomicrobiaceae 0.07% [ll

— o1%

{_Amb-168-1323 0.02% [I


Cc 70% of
¢__Alphaproteobacteria

67% of
p__Proteobacteria
31% of
k_Bacteria

31% of
all

1_Xanthobaci
1_Rhizobiales_Incertae_Sedis 0.3%

{_Labraceae 0.03%

|

iH
\

Figure 7. Bacterial composition of the Pon. corethrurus gut (replicates A, B, and C)
showing the families under Order Rhizobiales of Class a-proteobacteria under Phylum
Proteobacteria. Percentages of each taxon denote relative abundance. Small pie charts
indicate the fraction of Order Rhizobiales for the specified taxon. The taxa were

visualized using the Krona visualization tool (Ondov et al., 2011).


Phylum Proteobacteria, Class y-proteobacteria

A p__Proteobatiera

0s_Methylococcales 1%
0s_Coxiellales 1% |
0s_CC024 0.9% |)
os_PLTAI3 0.2% [i

— 02% fi

os_Diplorcktsiales 0% fl
0s_Steroldobacterales 0% [lj

os_uncutues om [lf

p_Proteobacteria |_Gammaproteobacteria_Incertae_Secis 0.5% fill
©8_Methylococcales 0% {iif
0s__Coxieliales 1% |
os_ccp24 ov fi
os_PLTAIS 0% J
_*~—
0_Diplorickettsiales 1% [iil
0s__Steroidobacterales 0% [lj
os_uncuttured 0.5% [il
os_EC3 0.5% {iil}


Cc eased

2% of
k_Bacteria

2% of
all

0s_Gammaproteobacteria_Incertae Sedis 0% il
0s__Methylococeales 0%
os_Coxiellales 0.5%
0s_CCD24 0%
os_PLTAI3 0% |

_ 0.5% BE

%

4 0s_Diplorickettsiales 1% [lll
\
%

os_uncuitured 1% [ill

Figure 8. Bacterial composition of the Pon. corethrurus gut (replicates A, B, and C)
showing the orders of Class y-proteobacteria under Phylum Proteobacteria. Percentages
of each taxon denote relative abundance. Small pie charts indicate the fraction of Class
y-proteobacteria for the specified taxon. The taxa were visualized using the Krona

visualization tool (Ondov et al., 2011).


Phylum Proteobacteria, Class y-proteobacteria, Order Burkholderiales

31%
¢_Gammaproteobacierta
3% of
p__Proteobacteria

1% of
k_Bacterla

1% of

{_Oxalobacteraceae 3% |
f_Alcaligenaceae 0.7% &
{_Neisseriaceae 0.7% {i

{__Methylophilaceae 0.7% oo]

{_Sutterellaceae 0% &
{_Burkholderiaceae 0% &
{__Rhodocyclaceae 0% Ez

65% of,
¢_Gammaproteobacteria

2% of

1% of
k_Bacteria

1% of
all

Gammaproteobactg

tsc-res oa% [iy
{_Oralobacteraceae 0.8% |
{_Atcaligenaccas 0% fl
{Nelsseriaceae 0.0% [iI
_
a
{_Rhodocyclaceae 0% i |

{__Methylophilaceae

{_Suttorellaceae


Cc 3

56% of
¢_Gammaproteobacteria

g
g 2% of
p__Proteobacteria
<i} 0.9% of
i k_Bacteria
0.9% of
all

{_Nitrosomonadaceae 0.9% ||

{_SC-184 0

1_Alealigenaceae 0.9%

Figure 9. Bacterial composition of the Pon. corethrurus gut (replicates A, B, and C)
showing the families under Order Burkholderiales of Class y-proteobacteria under
Phylum Proteobacteria. Percentages of each taxon denote relative abundance. Small pie
charts indicate the fraction of Order Burkholderiales for the specified taxon. The taxa

were visualized using the Krona visualization tool (Ondov et al., 2011).


Phylum Actinobacteriota, Class Actinobacteria

A f p_Actinobaciorola

13% of
k_Bacteria
13% of

all

Microcock
o_Mier en

o_Pemts 2% {ill

‘0_Kineosporiales 0.5% &
©__Streptosporangiales 0.5% {ill
o_FFCH16263 0.2% {iil

0_Actinobacteria 0.06% B

70% of
p__Actinobacteniota

18% of
k_Bacteria

18% of
all

Actinobacter

0_Streptomycetales 2% &
o_Frankiales 2% |
o_Pemis 0.5% {ill
‘0__Streptosporangiales 0.2% BE

0__FFCH16263 0% | |
©__Actinobacteria 0% s&s
— 0.04% [i


Cc i sap reesei

23% of
k_Bacteria

23% of
all

Mi
ec) Actinobacteria

| Actinobacteriota)

s -
Me, 0_PeM15 0.5%

ey o_Kneospoaes 1% fl

Wo
is o__Srepiosporangiaes 05% fl
i 5 o_FFCH16263 0.1% [il

o_Actinobacteria 0.03% {ill

|

Figure 10. Bacterial composition of the Pon. corethrurus gut (replicates A, B, and C)
showing the orders of Class Actinobacteria under Phylum Actinobacteriota.
Percentages of each taxon denote relative abundance. Small pie charts indicate the
fraction of Class Actinobacteriota for the specified taxon. The taxa were visualized

using the Krona visualization tool (Ondov et al., 2011).


Phylum Actinobacteriota, Class Actinobacteria, Order Micrococcales

50%
o_Actinobanierts
25% of
p__Actinobacteriota

6%
k_Basiere

%.

st

f__Promicromonosporaceae 2% &
{_Cellulomonadaceae 0.5%
{_Dermacoccaceae 0.4% [il]

f__Demequinaceae 0.3% |

47% of
¢_Actinobacteria
33% of
p__Actinobacteriota

of
k_Baciera

9% of
all

s__Micrococcal

Actinobacteri

{_Promicromonosporaceae 0.5% |
{_Dermacoceaceae 0% ll
{_Demequinaceas 0.6% [ill

{Micrococcales 0.09% ie


51% of
c__Actinobacteria
36% of
p__Actinobacteriota
12% of

k_Bacteria

12% of
all

;__Micrococcal

Actinobacteri

{_Dermacoccaceae 0% |

{Micrococcales 0.07% [il

_ i

Figure 11. Bacterial composition of the Pon. corethrurus gut (replicates A, B, and C)
showing the families under Order Micrococcales of Class Actinobacteria. Percentages
of each taxon denote relative abundance. Small pie charts indicate the fraction of Order
Micrococcales for the specified taxon. The taxa were visualized using the Krona

visualization tool (Ondov et al., 2011).


Phylum Actinobacteriota, Class Thermoleophilia

A

p_Actinobacienota
9% of

k_Bacterla

ar

©.

o_uncutured 2% {fill

B p_Actinobad rot
k_Baberl
5% af


p_Actinobacteroee
k_ Batter

5% a

Figure 12. Bacterial composition of the Pon. corethrurus gut (replicates A, B, and C)
showing the orders under Class Thermoleophilia under Phylum Actinobacteriota.
Percentages of each taxon denote relative abundance. Small pie charts indicate the
fraction of Class Thermoleophilia for the specified taxon. The taxa were visualized

using the Krona visualization tool (Ondov et al., 2011).


Phylum Actinobacteriota, Class Acidimicrobiia

12% of
p__Actinobacteriota

adh
mg

ctinobacter

_~

uncultured 0.8% |)

p__Actinobacterof
k_Baetiel
2% 3

Actinobacte

os__uncultured 0%

os__Actinomarinales 0% |


p_Actinobacterof
k_Batieel
4% Fi

Na
C2625,

oa

os__uncultured 0%

os__Actinomarinales 1% P|

Figure 13. Bacterial composition of the Pon. corethrurus gut (replicates A, B, and C)
showing the orders of Class Acidimicrobiia under Phylum Actinobacteriota.
Percentages of each taxon denote relative abundance. Small pie charts indicate the
fraction of Class Acidimicrobiia for the specified taxon. The taxa were visualized using

the Krona visualization tool (Ondov et al., 2011).


Phylum Firmicutes, Class Clostridia

54% of
p_Firmicutes

7% of

T% ot
all

c_Clostridia
p__Firmicutes

©_Clostridia 0.7% |
o_uncutured 0.2% {fill

©__Chistenseneliales 0.1%

p__Firmicul ia

k_BatGre
3% of

Peptostreptococcales-Tissierellales

0__Clostridia 2% ce
O__uncultured 0.8% B
©_Christenseneliales 0% fil

o_Clostrdia UCG-014 0.9% [ll


. 48% of
p__Firmicutes
1% of
k_Bactera

5% of
all

c__Clostridia

p_ Firmicutes,

o_Clostridia 2%

o__Christensenellales 0% &
o__Clostridia_UCG-014 0% =

Figure 14. Bacterial composition of the Pon. corethrurus gut (replicates A, B, and C)
showing the orders under Class Clostridia of Phylum Firmicutes. Percentages of each
taxon denote relative abundance. Small pie charts indicate the fraction of Class
Clostridia for the specified taxon. The taxa were visualized using the Krona

visualization tool (Ondov et al., 2011).


Phylum Firmicutes, Class Bacilli

A 42% of

p_Firmicutes

5% of
k_Bacteria

5% of
all

¢_Bacilli
p_Firmicutes

o_Lactobacitales 0.6% {fll}

0_Slaphylococcales 0.3% |

p_Fintiottes
k_Bacter
10% of
c__Bacilli
Firmicutes os_Alicyclobacillales 0.3%

os__Lactobacillales 0% ge
os__Staphylococcales 0.3% &
— 0.08% |
os__Erysipelotrichales 0.08% Be
os__Entomoplasmatales 0.2% a

os_Thermoactinomycetales 0.2% [ll]
os__Mycoplasmatales 0% [ij


Cc 45% of

p__Firmicutes
4% of
k_Baciera
4% of
al
c__Bacilli
irmicutes os__Alicyclobacillales 0% 8

os_Lactobaciliales 0% fi
os__Staphylococcales 1%
0%

os__Erysipelotrichales 0.4% fa

os__Entomoplasmatales 0% eal

% ;
6,
,
%, .
%, os__Thermoactinomycetales 0.4% &

os__Mycoplasmatales 0.4% &

Figure 15. Bacterial composition of the Pon. corethrurus gut (replicates A, B, and C)
showing the orders of Class Bacilli under Phylum Firmicutes. Percentages of each taxon
denote relative abundance. Small pie charts indicate the fraction of Class Clostridia for
the specified taxon. The taxa were visualized using the Krona visualization tool (Ondov

etal., 2011).

Agromyces

Agromyces were found to be the most abundant genera in the gut of Pon.
corethrurus earthworm comprising 4.9%. Agromyces is an actinobacteria that is Gram-
positive, non-spore forming, and non-motile. This can be filamentous or non-

filamentous, and can live in an environment from aerobic to microaerophilic conditions


(Hamada et al., 2014). This genus was first proposed by Gledhill and Casida in 1969
that was later amended by Zkurskaya et al. in 1992. Several species of this
actinobacteria are commonly found in soil, and were found to have a crucial interaction
with plants such as in root nodule formation in legumes (Zahkia et al., 2006), and asa
plant-beneficial bacteria (Trifonova et al., 2009). A study by De Maria et al. (2011)
found that the inoculation of rhizosphere microorganisms including Agromyces sp. in
Salix caprea (goat willow plant) was found to increase the phytoextraction of cadmium
and zinc, a way by which plants can eliminate contaminants from the environment (e.g.,
contamination of soils with heavy metals) and centralize them in above-ground plant
tissue such as shoots. Moreover, this phytoextraction was found to augment the
phytoavailibity and nutrient uptake of potassium in plants. Agromyces is also among
the most abundant genus found in the gut of Pol. elongata, but relatively low in Pe.
excavatus and Eu. eugeniae (Thakur et al., 2021). These three latter earthworms were
found to have abundant aerobic and anaerobic bacteria. Moreover, phenotypic analysis
of the functional metabolism of the gut bacteria in these earthworms showed high
abundance of ammonia oxidizers, followed by sulfate and nitrate reducers, and
dehalogenators which suggest their contribution in degradation and bioremediation

activities.

Amaricoccus

The second most abundant genus found in the gut of Pon. corethrurus is
Amaricoccus initially proposed by Maszenan et al. (1997), a Gram-negative, non-
motile, and non-spore forming, capsule-producing bacteria that appear in spherical
tetrad cells. There were five Amaricoccus species described, four of which were all

isolated from activated sludge biomass samples of wastewater treatment plants


(WWTPs), and one species was isolated from mangrove sediment (Mo et al., 2020).
Those Amaricoccus species isolated in WWTPs were found to utilize the following
carbon sources in the BIOLOG GN and GP systems: D-ribose, D-xylose, L-arabinose,
D-fructose, D-galactose, a-D-glucose, M-inositol, D-mannitol, D-mannose, D-sorbitol,
D-trehalose, dextrin, sucrose, maltose, cellobiose, xylitol, a- and B-hydroxybutyric
acid, a-ketobutyric acid, succinic acid, L-glutamic acid, D-lactic acid methyl ester, L-
lactic acid, D- and L-malic acid, methyl succinate, methyl pyruvate, pyruvic acid, A-
acetyl-L-glutamic acid, adenosine, D- and L-alanine, L-asparagine, and L-serine, to
name a few (Maszenan et al., 1997). Amaricoccus was also found in the gut of Eisenia
andrei and was described as part of the core gut and cast bacterial community of this
earthworm which was fed with cow, horse, and pig manures prior to the structural

profiling (Aira et al., 2015).

Paenibacillus

Paenibacillus are characterized as Gram-positive, motile, and facultative
anaerobic or strictly aerobic rod-shaped bacteria which were also found in the gut of
Pon. corethrurus. This genus was originally included with the Bacillus but were later
regrouped (Patowary and Deka, 2020). In terms of plant growth and development,
Paenibacillus are known to play a role in nitrogen fixation, phosphate and potassium
solubilization, and production of siderophores under iron-limiting conditions that
increases the uptake of iron in microorganisms (Saha et al., 2016). They are also found
to produce plant-growth promoting hormones such as cytokinin and indole acetic acid.
Moreover, Paenibacillus act as biocontrol agents by promoting pathogen resistance and
host defense mechanisms to several types of plants such as legumes, cucumber, and

pepper, and by inhibiting the growth of Pectobacterium carotovorum that causes


disease in potato. Overall, the biocontrol capabilities of this genus enhances crop yield.
Several studies have also reported the xenobiotic, hydrocarbon, polyaromatic
hydrocarbon (PAH), and heavy metal bioremediation potentials of Paenibacillus. The
gut of the Eisenia and Ap. calignosa was found to be inhabited by Paenibacillus (Horn
et al., 2005), and also were described to degrade aromatic compounds under oxygen-

limiting environments (Medina-Sauza, 2019).

Mesorhizobium

Mesorhizobium, under order Rhizobiales, are Gram-negative nitrogen-fixing
symbionts in legume root nodules (Delgado et al., 2007). These soil bacteria live in
close association with roots and they have established a role in agriculture. Specifically,
the capability of Mesorhizobium to produce plant growth promoting hormones such as
gibberellins, auxins, and cytokinins, and to augment the availability of important
nutrients through nitrogen fixation and phosphate solubilization, are some of their
benefits on plants (Dubey et al., 2016). In addition, Mesorhizobium exhibits antagonism
toward plant pathogens and induction of resistance as plant growth protection, the
application of which is considered a sustainable alternative due to the reduction of
pesticide use (Horrigan et al., 2002; Fulekar et al., 2014). Other potential applications
of Mesorhizobium include bioremediation of contaminated soils via
phytoaccumulation, and biomass and biofuel production due to the degradation of
agricultural wastes (Syed and Tollamadugu, 2019). In this study, Mesorhizobium sp.
was one of the bacteria found in the Pon. corethrurus gut. Similarly, the bacterial genus
was also detected through shotgun sequencing to examine the effect of Pon. corethrurus
on the rhizosphere microbial community (Braga et al., 2016). Moreover, a uronate

isomerase gene which was correlated with the biological fixation of nitrogen in non-


leguminous plants was found in the genera of Mesorhizobium. The Ap. trapezoides
lumbricid earthworm was also found to harbor this specific rhizobium in its nephridia

(De Menezes et al., 2018).

Clostridium

The earthworm gut is an oxygen-limited environment that is suitable for the
growth of anaerobic heterotrophic bacteria that are ingested and are capable of
fermentation (Drake and Horn, 2007). Several fermentative bacteria that can reduce
nitrate or nitrite include Clostridium spp. which were found in the Pon. corethrurus gut,
as well as in Ei. foetida (Toyota and Kimura, 2000; Koubova et al., 2015; Khyade,
2018; Medina-Sauza et al., 2019). Clostridium are spore-forming Gram-positive
obligate anaerobes that can transform glucose to ethanol, lactate, acetate, and butyrate,
to name a few (Rainey et al., 2009). Psychrotolerant Clostridium species might also be
associated with the organic matter degradation that occurs in the earthworm gut due to
the production of exoenzymes such as xylanase and cellulase (Akila and Chandra,
2003). Overall, Clostridium species are among the active taxa that are found in the gut
of earthworms that utilize saccharides from the gut mucus and plants during earthworm

ingestion and passage (Wiist et al., 2011).


Functional prediction of the microbial community found in Pon. corethrurus gut

Predictive analysis was performed using PICRUSt2 functions, and the KOs and
ECs related to the degradation of the highly utilized carbon substrates in the Biolog
EcoPlate™ (Table 2). The predicted genes coding for the enzymes and the related
biochemical degradation pathways that are involved in the metabolism of the selected
carbon substrates were examined to gain information about the functional capabilities

of the microorganisms that are involved in the main carbon source utilizations.

The glycogen phosphorylase (EC:2.4.1.1) with 0.090% relative abundance was
predicted and identified as involved in the degradation of glycogen in bacteria (Cifuente
et al., 2019), with GLYCOCAT-PWY related to the glycogen degradation I in bacteria
as the predicted pathway. Glycogen phosphorylase was found to be involved in the
mitigation of stress and formation of biofilm in Azospirillum brasiliense SP7 (Lerner et
al., 2009), a plant-growth promoting bacterium that enhances mineral uptake in plants

by nitrogen fixation and root development (Dobbelaere et al., 2002).

The predicted enzyme for the degradation of B-methy]-D-glucoside is B-
glucosidase (EC:3.2.1.21), with 0.21% relative abundance, a class of enzyme that
hydrolyzes non-reducing and terminal §-1,4-glycosidic bonds of different
glycoconjugates such as glucosides and oligosaccharides, and is known to facilitate
symbiotic as well as pathogenic interactions in the hosts, and also used by a few
microorganisms in the degradation of organic matter found in soil, thus nurture soil
quality (Sengupta et al., 2023). Moreover, the B-glucosidase enzymes found in
cellulolytic microorganisms were found to be associated with the induction of cellulase

and hydrolysis of cellulose (Bisaria and Mishra, 1989; Tomme et L., 1995). In relation


to the efficient utilization of cellulose, these enzymes likewise catalyze the hydrolysis

of the glycosidic bonds of cellobiose that produce glucose units (Chen et al., 2021).

N-Acetyl-D-glucosamine, one of the highly utilized carbohydrates by the Pon.
corethrurus gut bacteria, is an excellent source of energy and nitrogen for the growth
of microorganisms. These types of sources are also used by microorganisms to carry
out nutrient cycling in the environment. (Meadow et al., 1987; Riemann and Azam,
2002). The uptake of this carbohydrate in bacteria were shown to be via the N-Acetyl-
D-glucosamine (NAG) -specific phosphoenolpyruvate: carbohydrate
phosphotransferase system (PTS) wherein the phosphorylated NAG during membrane
transit can either be deaminated into ammonia, acetate, and fructo-6-P (Bassler et al.,
1991), or may enter the cell wall peptidoglycan biosynthesis (Belas et al., 1996). B-N-
acetylglucosaminidase (EC:3.2.1.96) with 0.0005% relative abundance, is among the
predicted enzymes to be related to the utilization of NAG in bacteria, with
GLCMANNANAUT-PWY (super pathway of N-acetylglucosamine, N-
acetylmannosamine and N-acetylneuraminate degradation) as a related pathway. This
enzyme was reported to play a role in cell wall recycling in bacteria (Jacobs et al.,
1994). Chitinase (EC:3.2.1.14) with 0.027% relative abundance, is another predicted
enzyme for the degradation of N-Acetyl-D-glucosamine with PWY-6906 (chitin
derivatives degradation) as a related pathway. Chitin, the second most abundant
polysaccharide in nature next to cellulose, is a polymer made of N-acetyl-D-
glucosamine with various industrial and biomedical applications (Satitsri and
Muanprasat, 2020) that are degraded by chitinases into low molecular weight
chitooligomers (Hamid et al., 2013). B-N-acetylglucosaminidase can likewise degrade

chitin oligosaccharides into N-acetylglucosamine monomers (Yang et al., 2019). Some


soil microorganisms were screened and determined to produce chitinases (Chern et al.,

2004).

Table 2. Metagenomics-based functional prediction of some of the main enzymes and
pathways related to the degradation of the highly utilized substrates in the Biolog

EcoPlate™
Substrate KO predicted EC predicted Pathway predicted
Glycogen K00688 (PYG, glgP; EC:2.4.1.1) GLYCOCAT-PWY;
(Polymer) Glycogen phosphorylase) Glycogen phosphorylase — Glycogen degradation I
(bacterial)
B-Methyl-D- _K05349 (bglX; B- EC:3.2.1.21] 5
glucoside Glucosidase) -glucosidase
(Carbohydrat
e)
N-Acetyl-D-  K01183 (Chitinase) EC:3.2.1.14] PWY-6906;
glucosamine Chitinase Chitin derivatives
(Carbohydrat degradation
e)
K01227 (Mannosyl- 1,96] GLCMANNANAUT-
glycoprotein endo-B-N- -glycoprotein Pwy;
acetylglucosaminidase) endo-B-N- Superpathway of
acetylglucosaminidase N-acetylglucosamine,
N-acetylmannosamine and
N-acetylneuraminate
degradation
L-Asparagine K01424 (ansA, ansB; (EC:3.5.1.1] -
(Amino acid) _ L-Asparaginase) Asparaginase
D-Xylose KO01805 (xylA; [EC:5.3.1.5] PWY-6901;
(Carbohydrat Xylose isomerase) Xylose isomerase Superpathway of glucose
e) and xylose degradation
D- K15531 (rexA; [EC:3.2.1.15] GALACTUROCAT-PWY;,

Galacturonic

Oligosaccharide reducing-

Polygalacturonase

D-Galacturonate

acid end xylanase) degradation I
(Carboxylic
acid)
L-Arginine K01476 (rocF, arg; (EC:3.5.3.1] ORNARGDEG-PWY;
(Amino acid) Arginase) Arginase Superpathway of L-
arginine and L-ornithine
degradation
AST-PWY;
L-Arginine degradation II
(AST pathway)
a-D-Lactose K12111 (ebgA; [EC:3.2.1.23] LACTOSECAT-PWY;
(Carbohydrat Evolved B-Galactosidase B-galactosidase Lactose and galactose
e) subunit a) degradation I


Asparaginase (EC:3.5.1.1), with 0.026% relative abundance, is the predicted
enzyme for the degradation of L-asparagine. Microorganisms isolated from soil,
including Bacillus (Thenmozhi et al., 2011; Sanghvi et al., 2016) and Streptomyces
species (Narayana et al., 2008; Dhanam Jayam and Kannan, 2014), were found to
produce L-asparaginases. There are also rhizobial-type L-asparaginases which were
described from Rhizobium etli that can utilize L-asparagine as a sole carbon and
nitrogen source (Moreno-Enriquez et al., 2012). Moreover, L-asparaginase was
reported to be produced by the B. licheniformis bacteria isolated from the gut of M.
posthuma earthworm (Biswas et al., 2019). These enzymes have a wide array of
applications such as anticancer drugs and are used in formulations for therapeutic use,

drug resistance, and in the food industry (Qeshmi et al., 2018).

Xylose isomerase (EC:5.3.1.5), or glucose isomerase, with 0.042% relative
abundance, is the predicted enzyme for the degradation of D-xylose with a predicted
PWY-6901 (super pathway of glucose and xylose degradation), among the many other
pathways. Bacteria usually utilize the isomerase pathway to transform xylose to
xylulose, which is further metabolized into ethanol, and eventually leads to its use in
the pentose phosphate pathway (Jagtap and Rao, 2018). Xylose isomerase is an
important enzyme related to the degradation of hemicellulose, a heteropolymeric chain
composed of D-xylose (Zhao et al., 2020). Streptomyces species in the earthworm gut
were presumed to be involved in the metabolism of hemicellulose and xylose from the

ingested residual crops (Killham and Prosser, 2007).

One of the enzymes that degrade D-galacturonic acid is the enzyme
polygalacturonase (EC:3.2.1.15) with 0.0006% relative abundance and its predicted
pathway GALACTUROCAT-PWY (D-galacturonate degradation 1).
Polygalacturonases, together with the pectin lyase, pectate lyase, and pectin esterase,


are a type of pectinase enzymes that break the glycosidic bonds of galacturonic acid
residues in pectic substances, the structural polysaccharides of plant cells (Liu and
Kokare, 2023). The enzymatic production of polygalacturonases, which was predicted
in this study as one of the functions of Pon. corethrurus gut bacteria, may assist the
digestion of plant matter ingested by earthworms. Moreover, a soil-isolated B.
sphaericus was observed with high poygalaturonase activity (Jayani et al., 2010).
Polygalacturonases are the most abundant among all pectinolytic enzymes, and
microbial pectinolytic enzymes have a wide array of uses such as in processing of
textile and plant fiber, extraction of coffee and tea, remediation of industrial

wastewater, and others (Jayani et al., 2005).

Arginase (EC:3.5.3.1) with 0.061% relative abundance, is related to the
degradation of L-arginine with two predicted pathways, ORNARGDEG-PWY (super
pathway of L-arginine and L-ornithine degradation) and AST-PWY (L-arginine
degradation II). Arginase enzyme has a significant role in L-ornithine production,
pathogenicity and stress resistance, and nitrogen metabolism and translocation in
bacteria (Hernandez et al., 2021). Streptomyces sp. isolated from soil was found to
produce L-arginase with antineoplastic or anticancer activity (Gumashta et al., 2021).
Arginase and protease activities were detected in the posterior midgut and hindgut of

feeding earthworms (Tripathi et al., 2007).

Lastly, B-galactosidase (EC:3.2.1.23), or commonly called lactase, with 0.099%
relative abundance, is involved in the degradation of D-lactose, with LACTOSECAT-
PWY (lactose and galactose degradation I) as the related pathway. B-galactosidase is a
cellulose multienzyme that is important in cellulose hydrolysis and is produced by some
strains of lactic acid bacteria (Kolev et al., 2022). This enzyme splits or hydrolyzes the
disaccharide lactose which yields galactose and glucose that eventually enter the


glycolysis (Pivarnik and Senecal, 1995). B-galactosidase enzymes are used in the food
industry such as in the production of lactose-free products for lactose-intolerant people
and as an additive to prevent crystallization in frozen desserts (Champluvier et al.,
2018). In terms of waste disposal and management, these enzymes are used to treat
whey that are produced at the commercial level by transforming it to ethanol and sweet
syrup that have further applications in the breadmaking industry (Zhou and Chen,
2001). The high and stable enzyme activity and productivity, as well as the efficiency
in fermentation are some of the advantages of B-galactosidase enzymes from bacterial

origins (Saqib et al., 2017).

The PICRUSt2 data is dependent on the genomic data of the Pon. corethrurus
gut bacteria, and therefore provide information regarding the functional potential of a
microbial community. Moreover, the metabolic fingerprint or the CLPP data generated
using the Biolog EcoPlate™ were matched with the function based on metagenome

prediction.


CONCLUSIONS

The metabolic fingerprint demonstrated by the CLPP data obtained from the
Biolog EcoPlate™ indicates high physiological and microbial diversity of the Pon.
corethrurus gut bacteria. In terms of the degradation and gut passage of organic matter
and other substances, this information may serve as a baseline data on the metabolic
functionality of the active microbes that are responsible in different ecological and
biogeochemical processes occurring in the soil environment and in the earthworm gut.
However, analyzing the CLPP data alone does not provide the exact underlying
mechanism on how the carbon substrates were utilized, as well as the structural
composition of the actual substrate utilizers. Likewise, the potentially produced
metabolic by-products in the wells, along with the biological interactions that may have
occurred among the bacterial communities, were not elucidated. Hence, the molecular
identification of microbes in each of the positive wells can reveal which specific
microorganisms were responsible for the carbon substrate utilizations.

Metagenomics analysis of the 16S rRNA sequence revealed a diverse bacterial
structure and composition of the endogeic Pon. corethrurus gut, which is dominated by
the Proteobacteria, Actinobacteria, and Firmicutes, also found to be the most dominant
bacterial gut communities in epigeic earthworms. This finding may indicate that the
Pon. corethrurus gut is a favorable environment for these taxa, and that these
microorganisms may link the earthworm’s gut processes to its environment. The role
of metagenomic sequencing and bioinformatics analysis is imperative in determining
the structure and diversity of the gut microflora. Further, the identified major genera,
specifically Agromyces, Paenibacillus, and Mesorhizobium, were plant-beneficial

microorganisms with useful purposes in the agricultural setting, which indicates that


the Pon. corethrurus can be harnessed for its beneficial microbes. Other advantageous
bacteria may be present, however, this study only focused on the most abundant taxa.
The earthworm gut microflora can likewise be examined by evaluating the effects of
certain nutrient or fertilizer amendments, pesticides, and others. These will give insights
on which gut bacterial groups can thrive in these types of conditions, and consequently
will have implications on their possible contribution to their hosts. The metabolic and
structural diversity profiles of the Pon. corethrurus gut bacteria under stress (e.g.,
presence of heavy metals, and other sources of pollutants or contaminants in terrestrial
environments) may be investigated and compared to the baseline data gathered from
the Mt. Makiling-collected earthworms.

The predicted enzymatic functions of the Pon. corethrurus gut bacteria,
specifically those which are related to the highly utilized carbon substrates, provide a
association between the actual metabolic profile to the predicted functions. This data
further give understanding about the importance of a certain substrate to the growth and
metabolism of bacteria, with presumptive relation to: a) some plant and soil-associated
processes; b) possible role of a particular enzyme to the earthworm as the host; and c)
the potential industrial and/or biomedical applications of the produced enzymes. The
earthworm gut bacteria can be utilized both in culture-dependent and culture-
independent methods when bioprospecting for enzymes that are industrially important
(e.g., enzymes that can degrade plastics and other environmental pollutants).
Specifically, culture methods can be used to assess the production of certain enzymes
qualitatively and quantitatively, while culture-independent methods can be used to
mine the metagenomic data for all the metabolic functions that may be present.
Metagenome-based functional predictions can be further explored in terms of the most

abundant biochemical pathways present, which may suggest specific underlying


biochemical processes that occur during the degradation or utilization of a certain
substrate. It is also crucial in interpreting the implicit mechanisms that may be
associated to the processes that occur in soil, including cycling of nutrients, and
bioremediation and detoxification of harmful substances in terrestrial environments.
Overall, the gut of Pon. corethrurus earthworm hosts a diverse microbial
community with a rich metabolic or functional profile. The identification of the
bacterial groups that harbor the predicted enzymes and biochemical pathways, and the
taxonomic annotation using other databases that are curated up to the species level may
be performed, for a more targeted correlation of the genetic and structural diversity to

the metabolic functional profile.

REFERENCES

Agudilla, M.A. R., Alegre, A. C., Israel, K. P. R., Nicmic, J. C., Reyes, J. N. 1, &
Soriano, M. S. (2018). Canopy dynamics of typhoon-disturbed mahogany stand in
Mount Makiling Forest Reserve, Asean Heritage Park [Philippines]. In 14. FORESPI
International Conference on Biodiversity in a Changing Landscape and Climate,,
College, Laguna (Philippines), 8-9 Nov 2018. FORESPI.

Aira, M., Monroy, F., & Dominguez, J. (2006). Changes in microbial biomass and
microbial activity of pig slurry after the transit through the gut of the earthworm
Eudrilus eugeniae (Kinberg, 1867). Biology and fertility of soils, 42(4), 371-376.

Aira, M., Monroy, F., & Dominguez, J. (2007). Eisenia fetida (Oligochaeta:
Lumbricidae) modifies the structure and physiological capabilities of microbial
communities improving carbon mineralization during vermicomposting of pig
manure. Microbial Ecology, 54(4), 662-671.

Aira, M., Sampedro, L., Monroy, F., & Dominguez, J. (2008). Detritivorous
earthworms directly modify the structure, thus altering the functioning of a
microdecomposer food web. Soil Biology and Biochemistry, 40(10), 2511-2516.

Aira, M., Monroy, F., & Dominguez, J. (2009). Changes in bacterial numbers and
microbial activity of pig slurry during gut transit of epigeic and anecic
earthworms. Journal of hazardous materials, 162(2-3), 1404-1407.

Aira, M., Bybee, S., Perez-Losada, M., & Dominguez, J. (2015). Feeding on
microbiomes: effects of detritivory on the taxonomic and phylogenetic bacterial
composition of animal manures. FEMS Microbiology Ecology, 91(11), fiv117.

Aira, M., Pérez-Losada, M., Crandall, K. A., & Dominguez, J. (2022). Composition,
Structure and Diversity of Soil Bacterial Communities before, during and after Transit
through the Gut of the Earthworm Aporrectodea caliginosa. Microorganisms, 10(5),
1025.

Akila, G., & Chandra, T. S. (2003). A novel cold-tolerant Clostridium strain PXYL1
isolated from a psychrophilic cattle manure digester that secretes thermolabile xylanase
and cellulase. FEMS microbiology letters, 219(1), 63-67.

Albasha, M. O., Gupta, P., & Ramteke, P. W. (2014). Isolation of microflora in
earthworms guts from different substrates. American Journal of Agriculture and
Forestry, 2(4), 206-208.

Albrecht, R., Périssol, C., Ruaudel, F., Le Petit, J., & Terrom, G. (2010). Functional
changes in culturable microbial communities during a co-composting process: carbon
source utilization and co-metabolism. Waste Management, 30(5), 764-770.

Alcala, A. A., Castillo, M. L., Malabrigo Jr, P. L., Logatoc, E. L., Pasion, B. O., &

Alcala, R. S. (2020). Mosses from the Greater Sipit Subwatershed, Mt. Makiling Forest
Reserve, the Philippines. Journal on New Biological Reports, 9(2), 262-268.


Alcala, A. A., Alcala, R. S., & Logatoc, E. L. (2022). Mosses from the Molawin-
Dampalit Subwatershed, Mt. Makiling Forest Reserve, the Philippines.

Anderson, F. E., Williams, B. W., Horn, K. M., Erséus, C., Halanych, K. M., Santos,
S.R., & James, S. W. (2017). Phylogenomic analyses of Crassiclitellata support major
northern and southern hemisphere clades and a Pangaean origin for earthworms. BMC
evolutionary biology, 17(1), 123.

Aranda, E., Barois, I., Arellano, P., Irisson, S., Salazar, T., Rodriguez, J., & Patron, J.
C. (1999). Vermicomposting in the. Earthworm Management in Tropical
Agroecosystems, 253.

ASEAN Centre for Biodiversity. (2015). Mount Makiling Forest Reserve. ASEAN
HERITAGE PARKS. https://www.aseanbiodiversity.org/heritage_park/mount-
makiling-forest-reserve/

ASEAN Centre for Biodiversity. (2023). Mount Makiling Forest Reserve. ASEAN
Clearing House Mechanism. _ https://asean.chm-cbd.net/protected-areas/mount-
makiling-forest-
reserve#:~:text=Mount%20Makiling%20is%20a%20state,national%20park%200f%2
Othe%20Philippines.

Asfahl, K. L., & Schuster, M. (2017). Social interactions in bacterial cell-cell
signaling. FEMS Microbiology Reviews, 41(1), 92-107.

Aspe, N. M., Nujieza, O. M., & Torres, M. A. (2009). Diversity and distribution of
earthworms in Mt. Malindang, Philippines. Journal of Nature Studies, 8, 59-67.

Aspe, N. M., & James, S. W. (2014). New species of Pheretima (Oligochaeta:
Megascolecidae) from the Mt. Malindang Range, Mindanao _ Island,
Philippines. Zootaxa, 3881(5), 401-439.

Aspe, N. M., & James, S. W. (2015). New Polypheretima and Pithemera (Oligochaeta:
Megascolecidae) species from the Mt. Malindang Range, Mindanao Island,
Philippines. Journal of natural history, 49(37-38), 2233-2256.

Aspe, N. M., & James, S. W. (2016). New species of Pheretima, Amynthas,
Polypheretima, and Pithemera (Clitellata: Megascolecidae) from Mindanao and
associated islands, Philippines. Zoological Studies, 55(8), 2016-55.

Aspe, N. M., & James, S. W. (2017). Pheretimoid earthworms (Clitellata:
Megascolecidae) from Mt. Apo, Mindanao Island, Philippines with description of eight
new species. Raffles Bulletin of Zoology, 65.

Aspe, N. M., & James, S. W. (2018). Molecular phylogeny and biogeographic
distribution of pheretimoid earthworms (clitellata: Megascolecidae) of the Philippine
archipelago. European Journal of Soil Biology, 85, 89-97.

Aspe, N. M., Manasan, R. E., Manlavi, A. B., Patiluna, M. L. E., Sebido, M. A. B.,
Obusan, M. C. M., ... & James, S. W. (2021). The earthworm fauna of Palawan,


Philippines with description of nineteen new pheretimoid species (Clitellata:
Megascolecidae). Journal of Natural History, 55(11-12), 733-797.

Aspe, N. M., & Obusan, M. C. M. (2023). Pheretimoid earthworms (Clitellata:
Megascolecidae) cultivated in a vermifacility in Los Bafios, Laguna, Philippines, with
description of a new species. Zootaxa, 5255(1), 101-112.

Ayyadurai, N., Naik, P. R., & Sakthivel, N. (2007). Functional characterization of
antagonistic fluorescent pseudomonads associated with rhizospheric soil of rice (Oryza
sativa L.). Journal of microbiology and biotechnology, 17(6), 919-927.

Balvo¢itite, M., & Huson, D. H. (2017). SILVA, RDP, Greengenes, NCBI and OTT—
how do these taxonomies compare?. BMC genomics, 18(2), 1-8.

Barbera, P., Kozlov, A. M., Czech, L., Morel, B., Darriba, D., Flouri, T., & Stamatakis,
A. (2019). EPA-ng: massively parallel evolutionary placement of genetic
sequences. Systematic biology, 68(2), 365-369.

Barley, K. P., & Kleinig, C. R. (1964). The occupation of newly irrigated lands by
earthworms.

Barnes, B. V., Zak, D. R., Denton, S. R., & Spurr, S. H. (1998). Forest Ecology. John
Wiley & Sons. Inc., New York.

Barois, I., & Lavelle, P. (1986). Changes in respiration rate and some physicochemical
properties of a tropical soil during transit through Pontoscolex corethrurus
(Glossoscolecidae, Oligochaeta). Soil Biology and Biochemistry, 18(5), 539-541.

Barois, |., Villemin, G., Lavelle, P., & Toutain, F. (1993). Transformation of the soil
structure through Pontoscolex corethrurus (Oligochaeta) intestinal tract. In Soil
Structure/Soil Biota Interrelationships (pp. 57-66).

Barrion, A. T., & Litsinger, J. A. (1997). Dichogaster nr. curgensis Michaelsen
(Annelida: Octochaetidae): an earthworm pest of terraced rice in the Philippine
Cordilleras. Crop Protection, 16(1), 89-93.

Bartlett, M. D., Briones, M. J., Neilson, R., Schmidt, O., Spurgeon, D., & Creamer, R.
E. (2010). A critical review of current methods in earthworm ecology: from individuals
to populations. European Journal of Soil Biology, 46(2), 67-73.

Bashan, Y., & De-Bashan, L. E. (2002). Protection of tomato seedlings against infection
by Pseudomonas syringae pv. tomato by using the plant growth-promoting bacterium
Azospirillum brasilense. Applied and environmental microbiology, 68(6), 2637-2643.

Bassler, B. L., Yu, C., Lee, Y. C., & Roseman, S. (1991). Chitin utilization by marine

bacteria. Degradation and catabolism of chitin oligosaccharides by Vibrio
furnissii. Journal of Biological Chemistry, 266(36), 24276-24286.


Baudoin, E., Benizri, E., & Guckert, A. (2001). Metabolic fingerprint of microbial

communities from distinct maize rhizosphere compartments. European Journal of Soil
Biology, 37(2), 85-93.

Belas, R. O. B. E.R. T., Simon, M. E. L. V. I. N., & Silverman, M. I. C.H. A. E. L.
(1986). Regulation of lateral flagella gene transcription in Vibrio
parahaemolyticus. Journal of Bacteriology, 167(1), 210-218.

Bhat, J. V., Khambata, S. R., Maya, G. B., Sastry, C. A., lyer, R. V., & Iyer, V. (1960).
Effect of earthworms on the microflora of the soil. Indian Journal of Agricultural
Science, 30(2), 106-114.

Binet, F., Fayolle, L., Pussard, M., Crawford, J. J., Traina, S. J., & Tuovinen, O. H.
(1998). Significance of earthworms in stimulating soil microbial activity. Biology and
fertility of soils, 27(1), 79-84.

Biolog EcoPlate™. 2023. BIOLOG Microbial Community Analysis. Biolog, Inc.,
Hayward, CA.

Bisaria, V. S., Mishra, S., & Eveleigh, D. E. (1989). Regulatory aspects of cellulase
biosynthesis and secretion. Critical reviews in biotechnology, 9(2), 61-103.

Biswarup, S., & Kalyani, M. (2009). Functional and genetic profiling tools: insight to
the black box of vermicomposting process. Dynamic Soil, Dynamic Plant, 3(Special
Issue 2), 53-60.

Biswas, J. K., Banerjee, A., Majumder, S., Bolan, N., Seshadri, B., & Dash, M. C.
(2019). New extracellular polymeric substance producing enteric bacterium from
earthworm, Metaphire posthuma: modulation through culture conditions.
In Proceedings of the Zoological Society (Vol. 72, pp. 160-170). Springer India.

Biswas, J. K., Banerjee, A., Sarkar, B., Sarkar, D., Sarkar, S. K., Rai, M., & Vithanage,
M. (2020). Exploration of an extracellular polymeric substance from earthworm gut
bacterium (Bacillus licheniformis) for bioflocculation and heavy metal removal
potential. Applied Sciences, 10(1), 349.

Blakemore, R. J. (2006). Cosmopolitan Earthworms-An Eco-Taxonomic Guide to the
Peregrine Species of the World. VermEcology.

Blakemore, R.J. (2012). In: Cosmopolitan Earthworms, 5" ed. Yokohama.
Blakemore, R. J. (2015). Eco-taxonomic profile of an iconic vermicomposter — the
‘African Nightcrawler’ earthworm, Eudrilus eugeniae (Kinberg, 1867). African
Invertebrates, 56(3), 527-548.

Blakemore, R.J. (2016). Eco-taxonomic profile of an iconic vermicomposter— the

‘African nightcrawler’ earthworm, Eudrilus eugeniae (Kinberg, 1867). African
Invertebrates, 56 (3), 527-548.


Blouin, M., Hodson, M. E., Delgado, E. A., Baker, G., Brussaard, L., Butt, K. R., ... &
Cluzeau, D. (2013). A review of earthworm impact on soil function and ecosystem
services. European Journal of Soil Science, 64(2), 161-182.

Bohlen, P. J., & Edwards, C. A. (1995). Earthworm effects on N dynamics and soil
respiration in microcosms receiving organic and inorganic nutrients. Soil Biology and
Biochemistry, 27(3), 341-348.

Bolyen, E., Rideout, J. R., Dillon, M. R., Bokulich, N. A., Abnet, C. C., Al-Ghalith, G.
A., ... & Caporaso, J. G. (2019). Reproducible, interactive, scalable and extensible
microbiome data science using QUIME 2. Nature biotechnology, 37(8), 852-857.

Boulanger, A., Déjean, G., Lautier, M., Glories, M., Zischek, C., Arlat, M., & Lauber,
E. (2010). Identification and regulation of the N-acetylglucosamine utilization pathway
of the plant pathogenic bacterium Xanthomonas campestris pv. campestris. Journal of
bacteriology, 192(6), 1487-1497.

Bottinelli, N., Hedde, M., Jouquet, P., & Capowiez, Y. (2020). An explicit definition
of earthworm ecological categories—Marcel Bouché’s triangle
revisited. Geoderma, 372, 114361.

Braga, L. P., Yoshiura, C. A., Borges, C. D., Horn, M. A., Brown, G. G., Drake, H. L.,
& Tsai, S. M. (2016). Disentangling the influence of earthworms in sugarcane
thizosphere. Scientific Reports, 6(1), 38923.

Brito-Vega, H., & Espinosa-Victoria, D. (2009). Bacterial diversity in the digestive
tract of earthworms (Oligochaeta). Journal of Biological Sciences, 9(3), 192-199.

Broughton, R. C. I., Newsham, K. K., Hill, P. W., Stott, A., & Jones, D. L. (2015).
Differential acquisition of amino acid and peptide enantiomers within the soil microbial
community and its implications for carbon and nitrogen cycling in soil. Soil Biology
and Biochemistry, 88, 83-89.

Brown, B. A., & Mitchell, M. J. (1981). Role of the earthworm, Eisenia foetida, in
affecting survival of Salmonella enteritidis ser Typhimurium. Pedobiologia, 21(6),
434-438.

Brown, G. G. (1995). How do earthworms affect microfloral and faunal community
diversity?. Plant and soil, 170(1), 209-231.

Brown, G. G., Barois, I., & Lavelle, P. (2000). Regulation of soil organic matter
dynamics and microbial activity in the drilosphere and the role of interactions with other
edaphic functional domains. European journal of soil biology, 36(3-4), 177-198.

Brown, G. G., Edwards, C. A., & Brussaard, L. (2004). How earthworms affect plant
growth: burrowing into the mechanisms. Earthworm ecology, 2, 13-49.

Brown, G. G., James, S. W., Pasini, A., Nunes, D. H., Benito, N. P., Martins, P. T., &

Sautter, K. D. (2006). Exotic, peregrine, and invasive earthworms in Brazil: diversity,
distribution, and effects on soils and plants. Caribbean Journal of Science, 42(3), 339.


Brown, G. G., & Dominguez, J. (2010). Uso das minhocas como bioindicadoras
ambientais: principios e praticas-o 3° Encontro Latino Americano de Ecologia e
Taxonomia de Oligoquetas (ELAETAO3). Acta zoolégica mexicana, 26(SPE2), 1-18.

Bynum, N. (2015). What is Biodiversity.

Byzov, B. A., Khomyakov, N. V., Kharin, S. A., & Kurakov, A. V. (2007). Fate of soil
bacteria and fungi in the gut of earthworms. European Journal of Soil Biology, 43,
$149-S156.

Byzov, B. A., Tikhonov, V. V., Nechitailo, T. Y., Demin, V. V., & Zvyagintsev, D. G.
(2015). Taxonomic composition and physiological and biochemical properties of
bacteria in the digestive tracts of earthworms. Eurasian Soil Science, 48(3), 268.

Caldecott, J. O. (1993). Opportunities for biodiversity management in the Makiling
Forest Reserve, Philippines. ERMP.

Callahan, B. J., McMurdie, P. J., Rosen, M. J., Han, A. W., Johnson, A. J. A., &
Holmes, S. P. (2016). DADA2: High-resolution sample inference from Illumina
amplicon data. Nature methods, 13(7), 581-583.

Calle, M. L. (2019). Statistical analysis of metagenomics data. Genomics &
informatics, 17(1).

Campbell, C. D., Grayston, S. J., & Hirst, D. J. (1997). Use of rhizosphere carbon
sources in sole carbon source tests to discriminate soil microbial communities. Journal
of Microbiological Methods, 30(1), 33-41.

Campbell, C. D., Chapman, S. J., Cameron, C. M., Davidson, M. S., & Potts, J. M.
(2003). A rapid microtiter plate method to measure carbon dioxide evolved from carbon
substrate amendments so as to determine the physiological profiles of soil microbial
communities by using whole soil. Applied and environmental microbiology, 69(6),
3593-3599.

Canellas, L. P., Olivares, F. L., Okorokova-Faganha, A. L., & Faganha, A. R. (2002).
Humic acids isolated from earthworm compost enhance root elongation, lateral root
emergence, and plasma membrane H+-ATPase activity in maize roots. Plant
physiology, 130(4), 1951-1957.

Caselli, F., Gastaldi, L., Gambi, N., & Fabbri, E. (2006). In vitro characterization of
cholinesterases in the earthworm Eisenia andrei. Comparative Biochemistry and
Physiology Part C: Toxicology and Pharmacology, 143(4), 416-421.

Castillo, J. M., Romero, E., & Nogales, R. (2013). Dynamics of microbial communities
related to biochemical parameters during vermicomposting and maturation of
agroindustrial lignocellulose wastes. Bioresource technology, 146, 345-354.

Castillo, L. A., Lapitan, P. G., Balatibat, J. B., Castillo, M. L., & Bantayan, N. C.
(2015). Spatial Distribution of Kalantas (Toona calantas Merr. & Rolfe) in the


Molawin-Dampalit Watershed, Mount Makiling Forest Reserve,
Philippines. Ecosystems and Development Journal, 5(3).

Castillo, M. L., Castillo, L. A., Canceran, M. S., Gonzalvo, K. J. P., Barua, L. D.,
Alegre, A. C., ... & Bantayan, N. C. (2018). Distribution, diversity and spatial analysis
of tree species in a long-term ecological research plot in Molawin-Dampalit Watershed,
Mount Makiling Forest Reserve. Asian Journal of Biodiversity, 9(1).

Castillo, L. A., Bantayan, N. C., Canceran, M. S., Barua, L. D., Alegre, A. C., Gonzalvo,
K. J. P., ... & Castillo, M. L. (2021). Tree Composition, Diversity, and Stand Structure
of Mid-montane Forest in Sipit Watershed, Mount Makiling Forest Reserve ASEAN
Heritage Park, Philippines. Philippine Journal of Science, 150.

Champluvier, B., Kamp, B., & Rouxhet, P. G. (1988). Immobilization of B-
galactosidase retained in yeast: adhesion of the cells on a support. Applied microbiology
and biotechnology, 27, 464-469.

Chapuis-Lardy, L., Brauman, A., Bernard, L., Pablo, A. L., Toucet, J., Mano, M. J., ...
& Blanchart, E. (2010). Effect of the endogeic earthworm Pontoscolex corethrurus on
the microbial structure and activity related to CO2 and N20 fluxes from a tropical soil
(Madagascar). Applied Soil Ecology, 45(3), 201-208.

Chaudhuri, P. S., & Bhattacharjee, S. (2011). Reproductive biology of eight tropical
earthworm species of rubber plantations in Tripura, India. Tropical Ecology, 52(1), 49-
60.

Chen, S., Xu, X. L., & Grant, G. A. (2012). Allosteric activation and contrasting
properties of L-serine dehydratase types | and 2. Biochemistry, 51(26), 5320-5328.

Chen, L. J., Feng, Q., Wei, Y. P., Li, C. S., Zhao, Y., Li, H. Y., & Zhang, B. G. (2017).
Effects of saline water irrigation and fertilization regimes on soil microbial metabolic
activity. Journal of Soils and Sediments, 17, 376-383.

Chen, A., Wang, D., Ji, R., Li, J., Gu, S., Tang, R., & Ji, C. (2021). Structural and
catalytic characterization of TsBGL, a f-Glucosidase from Thermofilum sp.
ex4484_79. Frontiers in Microbiology, 12, 723678.

Chern, L. L., Stackebrandt, E., Lee, S. F., Lee, F. L., Chen, J. K., & Fu, H. M. (2004).
Chitinibacter tainanensis gen. nov., sp. nov., a chitin-degrading aerobe from soil in
Taiwan. International journal of systematic and evolutionary microbiology, 54(4),
1387-1391.

Choi, K. H., & Dobbs, F. C. (1999). Comparison of two kinds of Biolog microplates
(GN and ECO) in their ability to distinguish among aquatic microbial
communities. Journal of Microbiological Methods, 36(3), 203-213.

Chou, Y. M., Shen, F. T., Chiang, S. C., & Chang, C. M. (2017). Functional diversity

and dominant populations of bacteria in banana plantation soils as influenced by long-
term organic and conventional farming. Applied Soil Ecology, 110, 21-33.


Chouaia, B., Goda, N., Mazza, G., Alali, S., Florian, F., Gionechetti, F., ... & Montagna,
M. (2019). Developmental stages and gut microenvironments influence gut microbiota
dynamics in the invasive beetle Popillia japonica Newman (Coleoptera:
Scarabaeidae). Environmental microbiology, 21(11), 4343-4359.

Clarke, K. R., & Warwick, R. M. (2001). Change in marine communities. 4n approach
to statistical analysis and interpretation, 2, 1-68.

Classen, A. T., Boyle, S. I., Haskins, K. E., Overby, S. T., & Hart, S. C. (2003).
Community-level physiological profiles of bacteria and fungi: plate type and incubation
temperature influences on contrasting soils. FEMS Microbiology Ecology, 44(3), 319-
328.

Comia, R. A., Paningbatan, E. P., & Hakansson, I. (1994). Erosion and crop yield
response to soil conditions under alley cropping systems in the Philippines. Soil and
Tillage research, 31(2-3), 249-261.

Contreras, E. (1980). Studies on the Intestinal Actinomycete Flora of Eisenia lucens
(Annelida, Oligochaeta). Pedobiologia, 20(6), 411-416.

Csuzdi, C. (2012). Earthworm species, a searchable database. Opuscula Zoologica
Budapest, 43(1), 97-99.

Cunha, L., Montiel, R., Novo, M., Orozco-terWengel, P., Rodrigues, A., Morgan, A.
J., & Kille, P. (2014). Living on a volcano’s edge: genetic isolation of an extremophile
terrestrial metazoan. Heredity, 112(2), 132.

Dash, M. C., Mishra, P. C., & Behera, N. (1979). Fungal feeding by a tropical
earthworm [India]. Tropical Ecology (India).

De Maria, S., Rivelli, A. R., Kuffner, M., Sessitsch, A., Wenzel, W. W., Gorfer, M., ...
& Puschenreiter, M. (2011). Interactions between accumulation of trace elements and
macronutrients in Salix caprea after inoculation with rhizosphere
microorganisms. Chemosphere, 84(9), 1256-1261.

De Menezes, A. B., Prendergast-Miller, M. T., Macdonald, L. M., Toscas, P., Baker,
G., Farrell, M., ... & Thrall, P. H. (2018). Earthworm-induced shifts in microbial
diversity in soils with rare versus established invasive earthworm populations. FEMS
microbiology ecology, 94(5), fiy051.

Decaéns, T. (2010). Macroecological patterns in soil communities. Global Ecology and
Biogeography, 19(3), 287-302.

Degens, B. P., & Harris, J. A. (1997). Development of a physiological approach to
measuring the catabolic diversity of soil microbial communities. Soil Biology and
Biochemistry, 299-10), 1309-1320.

Delgado, M. J., Casella, S., & Bedmar, E. J. (2007). Denitrification in rhizobia-legume
symbiosis. In Biology of the nitrogen cycle (pp. 83-91). Elsevier.


Devi, J, & Prakash, M. (2015). Microbial population dynamics during
vermicomposting of three different substrates amended with cowdung. Int J Curr
Microbiol Appl Sci, 4(2), 1086-1092.

Devliegher, W., & Verstraete, W. (1997). Microorganisms and soil physico-chemical
conditions in the drilosphere of Lumbricus terrestris. Soil Biology and
Biochemistry, 29(1 1-12), 1721-1729.

Dhanam Jayam, G. & Kannan, S. (2014). Isolation, characterization and screening of
L-asparaginase producing actinomycetes (Streptomyces) from the soil samples of Gulf
of Mannar region. International Journal of Science and. Research, 3 (5) (2014), 343-
346.

Dlamini, T. C., Haynes, R. J., & Van Antwerpen, R. (2001). Exotic earthworm species
dominant in soils on sugarcane estates in the Eshowe area of the north coast of
KwaZulu-Natal. Sugar Technology, 75, 217-221.

Doan, T. T., Jusselme, D. M., Lata, J. C., Van Nguyen, B., & Jouquet, P. (2013). The
earthworm species Metaphire posthuma modulates the effect of organic amendments
(compost vs. vermicompost from buffalo manure) on soil microbial properties. A
laboratory experiment. European Journal of Soil Biology, 59, 15-21.

Dobbelaere, S., Croonenborghs, A., Thys, A., Ptacek, D., Okon, Y., & Vanderleyden,
J. (2002). Effect of inoculation with wild type Azospirillum brasilense and A. irakense
strains on development and nitrogen uptake of spring wheat and grain maize. Biology
and Fertility of Soils, 36, 284-297.

Douglas, G. M., Maffei, V. J., Zaneveld, J. R., Yurgel, S. N., Brown, J. R., Taylor, C.
M., ... & Langille, M. G. (2020). PICRUSt2 for prediction of metagenome
functions. Nature biotechnology, 38(6), 685-688.

Drake, H. L., & Horn, M. A. (2006). Earthworms as a transient heaven for terrestrial
denitrifying microbes: a review. Engineering in Life Sciences, 6(3), 261-265.

Drake, H. L., & Horn, M. A. (2007). As the worm turns: the earthworm gut as a transient
habitat for soil microbial biomes. Annual Review of Microbiology, 61, 169-189.

Duarte, A. P., Brown, G. G., & Pauletti, V. (2012). Changes in the forms of lead and
manganese in soils by passage through the gut of the tropical endogeic earthworm
(Pontoscolex corethrurus). European journal of soil biology, 53, 32-39.

Dubey, R. K., Tripathi, V., Dubey, P. K., Singh, H. B., & Abhilash, P. C. (2016).
Exploring rhizospheric interactions for agricultural sustainability: the need of
integrative research on multi-trophic interactions. Journal of Cleaner Production, 115,
362-365.

Edwards, C. A. (2004). The importance of earthworms as key representatives of the soil
fauna. Earthworm ecology, 2, 3-11.


Edwards, C. A., & Bohlen, P. J. (1996). Biology and ecology of earthworms (Vol. 3).
Springer Science & Business Media. .

Edwards, C. A., & Lofty, J. R. (1977). Biology of Earthworms, Chapman and Hall.
London, UK.

Egert, M., Marhan, S., Wagner, B., Scheu, S., & Friedrich, M. W. (2004). Molecular
profiling of [6S rRNA genes reveals diet-related differences of microbial communities
in soil, gut, and casts of Lumbricus terrestris L. (Oligochaeta: Lumbricidae). FEMS
Microbiology Ecology, 48(2), 187-197.

Estaki, M., Jiang, L., Bokulich, N. A., McDonald, D., Gonzalez, A., Kosciolek, T., ...
& Knight, R. (2020). QIIME 2 enables comprehensive end-to-end analysis of diverse
microbiome data and comparative studies with publicly available data. Current
protocols in bioinformatics, 70(1), €100.

Fadeev, E., Cardozo-Mino, M. G., Rapp, J. Z., Bienhold, C., Salter, I., Salman-
Carvalho, V., ... & Boetius, A. (2021). Comparison of two 16S rRNA primers (V3—-V4
and V4—V5) for studies of arctic microbial communities. Frontiers in microbiology, 12,
637526.

Fatima, N., Khan, M. M., & Khan, I. A. (2019). L-asparaginase produced from soil
isolates of Pseudomonas aeruginosa shows potent anti-cancer activity on HeLa
cells. Saudi Journal of Biological Sciences, 26(6), 1146-1153.

Fernandez, R. (2006, August 10). Makiling’s a volcano, but inactive — Phivolcs.
PhilStar GLOBAL.
https://www. philstar.com/nation/2006/08/1 0/35 1857/makiling | 46s-volcano-inactive-
151-phivoles

Flores, D. G. (2009). Earthworm distribution in selected islands of the Visayan (Central
Philippine) Archipelago. Philippine Journal of Systematic Biology, 1(1), 27-32.

Fouché, T. C. (2015). The effect of fumigants on earthworms (Eisenia andrei) and soil
microbial communities (Doctoral dissertation).

Frac, M., Oszust, K., & Lipiec, J. (2012). Community level physiological profiles
(CLPP), characterization and microbial activity of soil amended with dairy sewage
sludge. Sensors, 12(3), 3253-3268.

Fragoso, C., Brown, G.G., Patron, J.C., Blanchart, E., Lavelle, P., Pashanasi, B.,
Senapati, B., & Kumar, T. (1997). Agricultural intensification, soil biodiversity and
agroecosystem function in the tropics: the role of decomposer biota. Applied Soil
Ecology 6, 17-35.

Fragoso, C., Kanyonyo, J., Moreno, A., Senapati, B. K., Blanchart, E., & Rodriguez,

C. (1999). A survey of tropical earthworms: taxonomy, biogeography and
environmental plasticity. Earthworm management in tropical agroecosystems, |-26.


Fujii, K., Ikeda, K., & Yoshida, S. (2012). Isolation and characterization of aerobic
microorganisms with cellulolytic activity in the gut of endogeic earthworms. Jnt
Microbiol, 15(3), 121-30.

Fulekar, M. H., Pathak, B., & Kale, R. K. (2014). Nanotechnology: perspective for
environmental sustainability. Environment and sustainable development, 87-114.

Garau, G., Castaldi, P., Santona, L., Deiana, P., & Melis, P. (2007). Influence of red
mud, zeolite and lime on heavy metal immobilization, culturable het erotrophic
microbial populations and enzyme activities in a contaminated soil. Geoderma, 142(1-
2), 47-57.

Garland, J. L. (1997). Analysis and interpretation of community-level physiological
profiles in microbial ecology. FEMS microbiology ecology, 24(4), 289-300.

Garland, J. L., & Mills, A. L. (1991). Classification and characterization of
heterotrophic microbial communities on the basis of patterns of community-level sole-
carbon-source utilization. Applied and environmental microbiology, 57(8), 2351-2359.

Garland, J. L., Roberts, M. S., Levine, L. H., & Mills, A. L. (2003). Community-level
physiological profiling performed with an oxygen-sensitive fluorophore in a microtiter
plate. Applied and environmental microbiology, 69(5), 2994-2998.

Gates, G. E. (1972). Burmese earthworms. An introduction to the systematics and
biology of Megadrile oligochaetes with special reference to Southeast Asia. Burmese
earthworms. An introduction to the systematics and biology of Megadrile oligochaetes
with special reference to Southeast Asia, 62(7).

Gledhill, W. E., & Casida Jr, L. E. (1969). Predominant catalase-negative soil bacteria.
Ill. Agromyces, gen. n., microorganisms intermediary to Actinomyces and
Nocardia. Applied Microbiology, 18(3), 340-349.

Gomez, E., Garland, J., & Conti, M. (2004). Reproducibility in the response of soil
bacterial community-level physiological profiles from a land use intensification
gradient. Applied Soil Ecology, 26(1), 21-30.

Goémez-Brandon, M., Lazcano, C., Lores, M., & Dominguez, J. (2010). Detritivorous
earthworms modify microbial community structure and accelerate plant residue
decomposition. Applied Soil Ecology, 44(3), 237-244.

Gonzalez, G., Huang, C. Y., Zou, X., & Rodriguez, C. (2006). Earthworm invasions in
the tropics. Biological Invasions Belowground: Earthworms as Invasive Species, 47-
56.

Gonzalez, J. C. T., de Guia, A. P. O., Dimalibot, J. C., Pantua, K. V., Gustilo, W. O.,
& Bantayan, N. C. (2020). Understorey to canopy vertebrate fauna of a lowland
evergreen forest in Mt. Makiling Forest Reserve, Philippines. Biodiversity Data
Journal, 8.


Govindarajan, B., & Prabaharan, V. (2014). Gut Micro-Floral of Earthworms: A
Review. American Journal of Biological and Pharmaceutical Research, 1(3), 125-130.

Govindarajan, B., & Prabaharan, V. (2015). Gut bacterial load analysis of earthworms
(Eudrilus eugeniae)-a controlled laboratory study. Eur J Environ Ecol, 2(2), 1-6.

Grayston, S. J., Campbell, C. D., Bardgett, R. D., Mawdsley, J. L., Clegg, C. D., Ritz,
K,, ... & Millard, P. (2004). Assessing shifts in microbial community structure across a
range of grasslands of differing management intensity using CLPP, PLFA and
community DNA techniques. Applied Soil Ecology, 25(1), 63-84.

Grdigaa, M., GrSicb, K., & Grdi8ac, M. D. (2013). Earthworms-role in soil fertility to
the use in medicine and as a food. Invertebrate Survival Journal, 10(1).

Green, S. J., & Neufeld, J. D. (2016). Introduction to Microbial Community Analysis
of Environmental Samples with Next-Generation Sequencing. Manual of
environmental microbiology, 2-4.

Gryta, A.. Frac, M., & Oszust, K. (2014). The application of the Biolog EcoPlate
approach in ecotoxicological evaluation of dairy sewage sludge. Applied biochemistry
and biotechnology, 174, 1434-1443.

Guerrero, R.D.III. (2005). Vermicomposting gets high marks in the tropics
(Philippines). BioCycle, 46 (8), 60.

https://www. biocycle.net/vermicomposting-gets-high-marks-in-the-tropics-
philippines/

Gumashta, R., Jain, R., Pandey, A., Tiwari, P., & Jain, A. (2021). Applicability of
Native L-Arginase produced by Streptomyces plicatus KAR73 as Antineoplastic
Agent. Journal of Scientific & Industrial Research, 80(10), 841-849.

Gunina, A., & Kuzyakov, Y. (2015). Sugars in soil and sweets for microorganisms:
review of origin, content, composition and fate. Soil Biology and Biochemistry, 90, 87-
100.

Guo, Y. X., Chen, Q. J., Qin, Y., Yang, Y. R., Yang, Q. Z., Wang, Y. X., ... & Zhang,
G. Q. (2021). Succession of the microbial communities and function prediction during
short-term peach sawdust-based composting. Bioresource Technology, 332, 125079.

Hamada, M., Shibata, C., Tamura, T., & Suzuki, K. I. (2014). Agromyces marinus sp.
nov., a novel actinobacterium isolated from sea sediment. The Journal of
Antibiotics, 67(10), 703-706.

Hamid, R., Khan, M. A., Ahmad, M., Ahmad, M. M., Abdin, M. Z., Musarrat, J., &
Javed, S. (2013). Chitinases: an update. Journal of pharmacy & bioallied
sciences, 5(1), 21.

Han, J., Sun, L., Dong, X., Cai, Z., Sun, X., Yang, H., ... & Song, W. (2005).
Characterization of a novel plant growth-promoting bacteria strain Delftia


tsuruhatensis HR4 both as a diazotroph and a potential biocontrol agent against various
plant pathogens. Systematic and applied microbiology, 28(1), 66-76.

Han, M. K., Lee, J. S., Oh, H. W., Park, D. S., Shin, D. H., Bae, K. S., ... & Park, H. Y.
(2009). Isolation and characterization of a cellulase-free endo-B-1, 4-xylanase produced
by an invertebrate-symbiotic bacterium, Cellulosimicrobium sp. HY-13. Process
Biochemistry, 44(9), 1055-1059.

Hartenstein, F., Hartenstein, E., & Hartenstein, R. (1981). Gut load and transit time in
the earthworm Eisenia foetida.

Helferich, B., & Schafer, W. (1926). a-Methyl d-Glucoside. Org. Synth, 6, 64.

Hendrix, P. F., & Bohlen, P. J. (2002). Exotic earthworm invasions in North America:
ecological and policy implications: expanding global commerce may be increasing the
likelihood of exotic earthworm invasions, which could have negative implications for
soil processes, other animal and plant species, and importation of certain
pathogens. Bioscience, 52(9), 801-811.

Hendrix, P. F., Baker, G. H., Callaham, M. A., Damoff, G. A., Fragoso, C., Gonzalez,
G., ... & Zou, X. (2006). Invasion of exotic earthworms into ecosystems inhabited by
native earthworms. Biological invasions belowground: earthworms as invasive
species, 87-100.

Hendrix, P. F., Callaham Jr, M. A., Drake, J. M., Huang, C. Y., James, S. W., Snyder,
B. A., & Zhang, W. (2008). Pandora's box contained bait: the global problem of
introduced earthworms. Annual review of ecology, evolution, and systematics, 39, 593-
613.

Hernandez, V. M., Arteaga, A., & Dunn, M. F. (2021). Diversity, properties and
functions of bacterial arginases. FEMS Microbiology Reviews, 45(6), fuab034.

Holmstrup, M., Sorensen, J. G., Overgaard, J., Bayley, M., Bindesbal, A. M., Slotsbo,
S., ... & Asmund, G. (2011). Body metal concentrations and glycogen reserves in
earthworms (Dendrobaena octaedra) from contaminated and uncontaminated forest
soil. Environmental pollution, 159(1), 190-197.

Holzinger, A., Hink, L., Sehl, E., Ruippel, N., Lehndorff, E., Weig, A. R., ... & Feldhaar,
H. (2023). Biodegradable polymers boost reproduction in the earthworm Eisenia
fetida. Science of the Total Environment, 164670.

Hong, Y., & James, S. W. (2004). New species of Amynthas Kinberg, 1867 from the
Philippines (Oligochaeta: Megascolecidae). Revue Suisse de Zoologie, 111(4), 729-
742.

Hong, Y., & James, S. W. (2008a). Two new earthworms of the genus Pheretima

(Oligochaeta: Megascolecidae) from Mt. Isarog, Luzon Island, Philippines. Journal of
Natural History, 42(23-24), 1565-1571.


Hong, Y., & James, S. W. (2008b). Nine new species of earthworms (Oligochaeta:
Megascolecidae) of the Banaue rice terraces, Philippines. Revue Suisse de
Zoologie, 115(2), 341-354.

Hong, Y., & James, S. W. (2009). New earthworms of the Pheretima urceolata species
group (Oligochaeta: Megascolecidae) from southern Luzon,
Philippines. Zootaxa, 2059(1), 33-45.

Hong, Y., & James, S. W. (2010). Six new earthworms of the genus Pheretima
(Oligochaeta: Megascolecidae) from Balbalan-Balbalasang, Kalinga Province, the
Philippines. Zoological Studies, 49(4), 523-533.

Hong, Y., & James, S. W. (201 1a). NEW SPECIES OF PHERETIMA, PITHEMERA,
AND  POLYPHERETIMA (CLITELLATA: MEGASCOLECIDAE) FROM
KALBARYO, LUZON ISLAND, PHILIPPINES. Raffles Bulletin of Zoology, 5%(1).

Hong, Y., & James, S. W. (2011b). New earthworm species of the genus Pheretima
(Clitellata: Megascolecidae) from Mountain Province, Philippines. Journal of Natural
History, 45(29-30), 1769-1788.

Hong, S. W., Lee, J. S., & Chung, K. S. (2011). Effect of enzyme producing
microorganisms on the biomass of epigeic earthworms (Eisenia fetida) in
vermicompost. Bioresource Technology, 102(10), 6344-6347.

Hong, Y. (2018). Two new earthworm species of genus Pithemera Sims and Easton,
1972  (Clitellata: Megascolecidae) from Mt. Tapulao, Luzon _ Island,
Philippines. Journal of Asia-Pacific Biodiversity, 1 1(2), 199-202.

Horn, M. A., Ihssen, J., Matthies, C., Schramm, A., Acker, G., & Drake, H. L. (2005).
Dechloromonas denitrificans sp. nov., Flavobacterium denitrificans sp. nov.,
Paenibacillus anaericanus sp. nov. and Paenibacillus terrae strain MH72, N20-
producing bacteria isolated from the gut of the earthworm Aporrectodea
caliginosa. International journal of systematic and evolutionary microbiology, 55(3),
1255-1265.

Horn, M. A., Drake, H. L., & Schramm, A. (2006). Nitrous oxide reductase genes
(nosZ) of denitrifying microbial populations in soil and the earthworm gut are
phylogenetically similar. Applied and environmental microbiology, 72(2), 1019-1026.

Horrigan, L., Lawrence, R. S., & Walker, P. (2002). How sustainable agriculture can
address the environmental and human health harms of _ industrial
agriculture. Environmental health perspectives, 110(5), 445-456.

Ihssen, J., Horn, M. A., Matthies, C., Goiner, A., Schramm, A., & Drake, H. L. (2003).
N20-producing microorganisms in the gut of the earthworm Aporrectodea caliginosa
are indicative of ingested soil bacteria. Applied and Environmental
Microbiology, 69(3), 1655-1661.


Insam, H. (1997). A new set of substrates proposed for community characterization in
environmental samples. Microbial communities: functional versus structural
approaches, 259-260.

Insam, H., & Goberna, M. (2004). Use of BiologRe for the Community Level
Physiological Profiling (CLPP) of environmental samples.

{slam, M. R., Singh Chauhan, P., Kim, Y., Kim, M., & Sa, T. (2011). Community level
functional diversity and enzyme activities in paddy soils under different long-term
fertilizer management practices. Biology and Fertility of Soils, 47, 599-604.

Ismail, S. A. (1995). Earthworms in soil fertility management. In: Thampan PK, editor.
Organic Agriculture, 77-100.

Ismail S.A. (2005). The earthworm book. Other India Press, Mapusa, 101.

Jacobs, C., Huang, L. J., Bartowsky, E., Normark, S., & Park, J. (1994). Bacterial cell
wall recycling provides cytosolic muropeptides as effectors for beta-lactamase
induction. The EMBO journal, 13(19), 4684-4694.

Jagtap, S. S., & Rao, C. V. (2018). Microbial conversion of xylose into useful
bioproducts. Applied microbiology and biotechnology, 102, 9015-9036.

James, S. W. (2004). New species of Amynthas, Pheretima and Pleionogaster
(Clitellata: Megascolecidae) of the Mt. Kitanglad Range, Mindanao Island,
Philippines. The Raffles Bulletin of Zoology, 52(2), 289-313.

James, S. W. (2005). New genera and species of pheretimoid earthworms (Clitellata:
Megascolecidae) from southern Luzon, Philippines. Systematics and Biodiversity, 2(3),
271-279.

James, S. W. (2006). The earthworm genus Pleionogaster (Clitellata: Megascolecidae)
in southern Luzon, Philippines. Organisms Diversity and Evolution, 6(3), 167-170.

James, S. W. (2009). Revision of the earthworm genus Archipheretima Michaelsen
(Clitellata: Megascolecidae), with descriptions of new species from Luzon and
Catanduanes Islands, Philippines. Organisms Diversity and Evolution, 9(3), 244-e1.

James, S. W. (2012). Re-erection of Rhinodrilidae Benham, 1890, a senior synonym of
Pontoscolecidae James, 2012 (Annelida: Clitellata). Zootaxa, 3540(1), 67-68.

James, S. W., Hong, Y., & Kim, T. H. (2004). New earthworms of Pheretima and
Pithemera (Oligochaeta: Megascolecidae) from Mt. Arayat, Luzon Island,
Philippines. Revue suisse de Zoologie, 111(1), 3-10.

Jansson, J. K., & Hofmockel, K. S. (2018). The soil microbiome—from metagenomics
to metaphenomics. Current opinion in microbiology, 43, 162-168.

Jayani, R. S., Saxena, S., & Gupta, R. (2005). Microbial pectinolytic enzymes: a
review. Process Biochemistry, 40(9), 2931-2944.


Jayani, R. S., Shukla, S. K., & Gupta, R. (2010). Screening of bacterial strains for
polygalacturonase activity: its production by Bacillus sphaericus (MTCC
7542). Enzyme research, 2010.

John, K., Jauker, F., Marxsen, J., Zaitsev, A. S., & Wolters, V. (2015). Earthworm
bioturbation stabilizes carbon in non-flooded paddy soil at the risk of increasing
methane emissions under wet soil conditions. Soil Biology and Biochemistry, 91, 127-
132.

Johnsen, A. R., Wick, L. Y., & Harms, H. (2005). Principles of microbial PAH-
degradation in soil. Environmental pollution, 133(1), 71-84.

Jolly, J. M., Lappin-Scott, H. M., Anderson, J. M., & Clegg, C. D. (1993). Scanning
electron microscopy of the gut microflora of two earthworms: Lumbricus terrestris and
Octolasion cyaneum. Microbial Ecology, 26, 235-245.

Jose, R. P., Aspe, N. M., Aureo, W. A., Parba, R. Y., Capunhag, C. D., & Narido, C. I.
(2021). Earthworm diversity and populations in different habitats of Rajah Sikatuna
Protected Landscape, Bohol, Philippines. Philippine Journal of Systematic Biology,
15(1), 1-11.

Joshi, R. C., Matchoc, O. R. O., Cabigat, J. C., & James, S. W. (1999). Survey of
earthworms in the Ifugao rice terraces, Philippines. Journal of Environmental Science
and Management (Philippines).

Joshi, R.C., Aspe, N.M., & Cope, A.E. (2020). Field Guide: Earthworms in Heirloom
Rice Fields of the Philippine Cordillera and Their Integrated Management. Los Bajfios,
(Philippines) International Rice Research Institute.

Julius A, B., Adewunmi B, I., Kehinde O, A., & Adijat O, A. (2014). Microbial
diversity and digestive enzyme activities in the gut of earthworms found in sawmill
industries in Abeokuta, Nigeria. Revista de Biologia Tropical, 62(3), 1241-1249.

Jurado, M., Lopez, M. J., Suarez-Estrella, F., Vargas-Garcia, M. C., Lopez-Gonzalez,
J. A., & Moreno, J. (2014). Exploiting composting biodiversity: study of the persistent
and biotechnologically relevant microorganisms from _lignocellulose-based
composting. Bioresource technology, 162, 283-293.

Kale, R. D. (1998). Earthworms: nature's gift for utilization of organic wastes.

Kale, R. D., & Karmegam, N. (2010). The role of earthworms in tropics with emphasis
on Indian ecosystems. Applied and Environmental Soil Science, 2010.

Karsten, G. R., & Drake, H. L. (1995). Comparative assessment of the aerobic and
anaerobic microfloras of earthworm guts and forest soils. Applied and environmental
microbiology, 61(3), 1039-1044.

Karsten, G. R., & Drake, H. L. (1997). Denitrifying bacteria in the earthworm

gastrointestinal tract and in vivo emission of nitrous oxide (N (inf2) O) by
earthworms. Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 63(5), 1878-1882.


Kenarova, A., Radeva, G., Traykov, I., & Boteva, S. (2014). Community level
physiological profiles of bacterial communities inhabiting uranium mining impacted
sites. Ecotoxicology and Environmental Safety, 100, 226-232.

Kenarova, A., & Boteva, S. (2015). Functional diversity of microorganisms in heavy

metal-polluted soils. Heavy Metal Contamination of Soils: Monitoring and
Remediation, 245-257.

Khambata, S. R., & Bhat, J. V. (1957). A contribution to the study of the intestinal
microflora of Indian earthworms. Archives of Microbiology, 28(1), 69-80.

Khyade, V. B. (2018). Bacterial diversity in the alimentary canal of earthworms. J
Bacteriol Mycol Open Access, 6(3), 183-185.

Kiernan, D. (2019). Introduction, Simpson’s Index and Shannon-Weiner Index. Nat.
Resour. Biometrics. SUNY Coll. Environ. Sci. For.

Killham, K., & Prosser, J. (2007). The prokaryotes In: Paul E, ed. Soil Microbiology,
Ecology and Biochemistry. Ft. Collins.

Klewing, A., Koo, B. M., Kriiger, L., Poehlein, A., Reu8, D., Daniel, R., ... & Stiilke,
J. (2020). Resistance to serine in Bacillus subtilis: identification of the serine transporter
YbeC and of a metabolic network that links serine and threonine
metabolism. Environmental Microbiology, 22(9), 3937-3949.

Knapp BA, Seeber J, Podmirseg SM, Meyer E, & Insam H. (2008). Application of
denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis for analysing the gut microflora of Lumbricus
rubellus Hoffmeister under different feeding conditions. Bull Entomol Res, 98: 271-
279.

Knapp, B. A., Podmirseg, S. M., Seeber, J., Meyer, E., & Insam, H. (2009). Diet-related
composition of the gut microbiota of Lumbricus rubellus as revealed by a molecular
fingerprinting technique and cloning. Soil Biology and Biochemistry, 41(11), 2299-
2307.

Kolev, P., Rocha-Mendoza, D., Ruiz-Ramirez, S., Ortega-Anaya, J., Jiménez-Flores,
R., & Garcia-Cano, I. (2022). Screening and characterization of B-galactosidase activity
in factic acid bacteria for the valorization of acid whey. JDS communications, 3({), [-
6.

Koner, S., Chen, J. S., Hsu, B. M., Tan, C. W., Fan, C. W., Chen, T. H., ... & Nagarajan,
V. (2021). Assessment of carbon substrate catabolism pattern and functional metabolic
pathway for microbiota of limestone caves. Microorganisms, 9(8), 1789.

Konopka, A., Oliver, L., & Turco, Jr, R. F. (1998). The use of carbon substrate
utilization patterns in environmental and ecological microbiology. Microbial
Ecology, 35, 103-115.

Konopka, J.  B. (2012). | N-acetylglucosamine functions in cell
signaling. Scientifica, 2012.


Koubova, A., Chrofakova, A., Pizl, V., Sanchez-Monedero, M. A., & Elhottova, D.
(2015). The effects of earthworms Eisenia spp. on microbial community are habitat
dependent. European Journal of Soil Biology, 68, 42-55.

Krigrtiek, V., Ravasz, K., & Pizl, V. (1992). Changes in densities of bacteria and
microfungi during gut transit in Lumbricus rubellus and Aporrectodea caliginosa
(Oligochaeta: Lumbricidae). Soil Biology and Biochemistry, 24(12), 1499-1500.

Kristufek, V., Ravasz, K., & Pizl, V. (1993). Actinomycete communities in earthworm
guts and surrounding soil. Pedobiologia (Jena), 37(6), 379-384.

Lam, H., Oh, D. C., Cava, F., Takacs, C. N., Clardy, J., de Pedro, M. A., & Waldor, M.
K. (2009). D-amino acids govern stationary phase cell wall remodeling in
bacteria. Science, 325(5947), 1552-1555.

Laossi, K. R., Noguera, D. C., & Barot, S. (2010). Earthworm-mediated maternal
effects on seed germination and seedling growth in three annual plants. Soil Biology
and Biochemistry, 42(2), 319-323.

Lavelle, P. (1983). The structure of earthworm communities. In Earthworm ecology:
from Darwin to vermiculture (pp. 449-466). Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands.

Lavelle, P. (1988). Earthworm activities and the soil system. Biology and fertility of
soils, 6(3), 237-251.

Lavelle, P., Blanchart, E., Martin, A., Martin, S., & Spain, A. (1993). A hierarchical
model for decomposition in terrestrial ecosystems: application to soils of the humid
tropics. Biotropica, 130-150.

Lavelle, P., Barois, I., Cruz, I., Fragoso, C., Hernandez, A., Pineda, A., & Rangel, P.
(1987). Adaptive strategies of Pontoscolex corethrurus (Glossoscolecidae,
Oligochaeta), a peregrine geophagous earthworm of the humid tropics. Biology and
Fertility of Soils, 5, 188-194.

Lavelle, P., & Spain, A. V. (2001). Soil ecology.,(Kluwer Academic Publishers:
Dordrecht, The Netherlands).

Lee, K. E. (1985). Earthworms: their ecology and relationships with soils and land use.
Academic Press Inc.

Lee, Y. S., & Bartlett, R. J. (1976). Stimulation of plant growth by humic
substances. Soil Science Society of America Journal, 40(6), 876-879.

Lehman, R. M., Colwell, F. S., Ringelberg, D. B., & White, D. C. (1995). Combined
microbial community-level analyses for quality assurance of terrestrial subsurface
cores. Journal of Microbiological Methods, 22(3), 263-281.

Lemtiri, A., Colinet, G., Alabi, T., Cluzeau, D., Zirbes, L., Haubruge, E., & Francis, F.

(2014). Impacts of earthworms on soil components and dynamics. A
review. Biotechnologie, Agronomie, Société et Environnement, 18.


Lerner, A., Castro-Sowinski, S., Lerner, H., Okon, Y., & Burdman, S. (2009). Glycogen
phosphorylase is involved in stress endurance and biofilm formation in Azospirillum
brasilense Sp7. FEMS microbiology letters, 300(1), 75-82.

Liang, S. H., Chen, S. C., Chen, C. Y., Kao, C. M., Yang, J. I., Shieh, B. S., ... & Chen,
C. C. (2011). Cadmium-induced earthworm metallothionein-2 is associated with metal
accumulation and counteracts oxidative stress. Pedobiologia, 54(5-6), 333-340.

Lipiec, J., Frac, M., Brzeziriska, M., Turski, M., & Oszust, K. (2016). Linking microbial
enzymatic activities and functional diversity of soil around earthworm burrows and
casts. Frontiers in Microbiology, 7, 1361.

Liu, D., Lian, B., Wu, C., & Guo, P. (2018). A comparative study of gut microbiota
profiles of earthworms fed in three different substrates. Symbiosis, 74, 21-29.

Liu, Z., Ye, L., Xi, J.. Wang, J., & Feng, Z. G. (2021). Cyclodextrin polymers:
Structure, synthesis, and use as drug carriers. Progress in Polymer Science, 118,
101408.

Lopez-Gonzalez, J. A., Suarez-Estrella, F., Vargas-Garcia, M. C., Lopez, M. J., Jurado,
M. M., & Moreno, J. (2015). Dynamics of bacterial microbiota during lignocellulosic
waste composting: studies upon its structure, functionality and biodiversity.
Bioresource technology, 175, 406-416.

Loredo-Osti, C., Lopez-Reyes, L., & Espinosa-Victoria, D. (2004). Plant growth
promoting bacteria associated with grasses: A review. Terra Latinoamericana, 22(2),
225-239.

Ma, L., Xie, Y., Han, Z., Giesy, J. P., & Zhang, X. (2017). Responses of earthworms
and microbial communities in their guts to Triclosan. Chemosphere, 168, 1194-1202.

Magahud, J. C., Dalumpines, S. L. P., Aspe, N. M., & Cabusora, C. C. (2017).
Responses of Paddy Earthworm, Sparganophilus sp., to Butachlor Herbicide. JAMURE
International Journal of Ecology and Conservation, 21(1), 1-1.

Magcale-Macandog, D. B., Paller, V. G. V., Torreta, N. K., Lambio, I. A. F., Hadsall,
A. S., Buot, I. J., ... & Laruya, J. M. (2022). Plant Diversity of Mount Makiling Forest
Reserve: Implications to Management and Conservation. In Plant Genetic Resources,
Inventory, Collection and Conservation (pp. 97-119). Singapore: Springer Nature
Singapore.

Makiling Center. (n.d.). Mount Makiling Forest Reserve, An ASEAN Heritage Park.
Makiling Center for Mountain Ecosystems. https://makiling.center/

Mamouei, M., Budidha, K., Baishya, N., Qassem, M., & Kyriacou, P. A. (2021). An

empirical investigation of deviations from the Beer—Lambert law in optical estimation
of lactate. Scientific Reports, 11(1), 13734.


Mapile, M. R. F., & Obusan, M. C. M. (2020). Mineralization, Biodegradation, and
Antagonistic Activities of Gut-associated Bacteria and Fungi of African Nightcrawler,
Eudrilus eugeniae (Kinberg, 1867). Science Diliman, 32(1).

Marichal R., Martinez A.F., Praxedes C., Ruiz D., Carvajal A.F., Oszwald J., Hurtado
M. Del. P., Brown G.G., Grimaldi M., Desjardins T., Sarrazin M., Decaens T.,
Velasquez E. & Lavelle P. (2010). Invasion of Pontoscolex corethrurus
(Glossoscolecidae, Oligochaeta) in landscapes of the Amazonian deforestation arc.
Applied Soil Ecology, 46: 443-449.

Martinez-Romero, E. (2001). Rhizobia populations in Mexico. Acta Zoologica
Mexicana, 1, 29-38.

Maszenan, A. M., Seviour, R. J., Patel, B. K. C., Rees, G. N., & McDougall, B. M.
(1997). Amaricoccus gen. nov., a gram-negative coccus occurring in regular packages
or tetrads, isolated from activated sludge biomass, and descriptions of Amaricoccus
veronensis sp. nov., Amaricoccus tamworthensis sp. nov., Amaricoccus macauensis sp.
nov., and Amaricoccus kaplicensis sp. nov. International Journal of Systematic and
Evolutionary Microbiology, 47(3), 727-734.

Meadow, N. D., Revuelta, R., Chen, V. N., Colwell, R. R., & Roseman, S. (1987).
Phosphoenolpyruvate: glycose phosphotransferase system in species of Vibrio, a
widely distributed marine bacterial genus. Journal of bacteriology, 169(11), 4893-
4900.

Medina-Sauza, R. M., Alvarez-Jiménez, M., Delhal, A., Reverchon, F., Blouin, M.,
Guerrero-Analco, J. A., ... & Barois, I. (2019). Earthworms building up soil microbiota,
a review. Frontiers in Environmental Science, 7, 81.

Meier, A. B., Hunger, S., & Drake, H. L. (2018). Differential engagement of
fermentative taxa in gut contents of the earthworm Lumbricus terrestris. Applied and
Environmental Microbiology, 84(5), e€01851-17.

Meyer, F. M., Jules, M., Mehne, F. M., Le Coq, D., Landmann, J. J., Gérke, B., ... &
Stiilke, J. (2011). Malate-mediated carbon catabolite repression in Bacillus subtilis
involves the HPrK/CcpA pathway. Journal of bacteriology, 193(24), 6939-6949.

Mirarab, S., Nguyen, N., & Warnow, T. (2012). SEPP: SATé-enabled phylogenetic
placement. In Biocomputing 2012 (pp. 247-258).

Mo, K. L., Huang, H. Q., Wu, Q. J., & Hu, Y. H. (2020). Amaricoccus solimangrovi
sp. nov., isolated from mangrove soil. International Journal of Systematic and
Evolutionary Microbiology, 70(10), 5389-5393.

Mohagan, A. B., Murro, M. A. L., & Ibafiez, J. (2013). Diversity and Local Status of
Earthworms in the Mossy and Montane Forests of Mt. Hilong-hilong Range, Agusan
del Norte, Philippines. JAMURE International Journal of Ecology and Conservation, 6,
26.


Molina-Murguia, J. F. F., Garcia-Calderén, N. E., & Martin, G. A. (2009). Cocoa
industrial debris composting in soil and earthworm breeding. Compost science &
utilization, 17(3), 197-204.

Monroy, F., Aira, M., & Dominguez, J. (2008). Changes in density of nematodes,
protozoa and total coliforms after transit through the gut of four epigeic earthworms
(Oligochaeta). Applied Soil Ecology, 39(2), 127-132.

Moody, S. A., Briones, M. J. I., Piearce, T. G., & Dighton, J. (1995). Selective
consumption of decomposing wheat straw by earthworms. Soil Biology and
Biochemistry, 27(9), 1209-1213.

Morris, B. E., Henneberger, R., Huber, H., & Moissl-Eichinger, C. (2013). Microbial
syntrophy: interaction for the common good. FEMS microbiology reviews, 37(3), 384-
406.

Muniz, S., Lacarta, J., Pata, M. P., Jimenez, J. J., & Navarro, E. (2014). Analysis of the
diversity of substrate utilisation of soil bacteria exposed to Cd and earthworm activity
using generalised additive models. PLoS One, 9(1), e85057.

Munnoli, P. M. (2007). Management of Industrial Organic Solid Waste through Vermi-
Culture Biotechnology with Special Reference to Microorganisms (Doctoral
dissertation, Goa University).

Murdiyarso, D., Van Noordwijk, M., Wasrin, U. R., Tomich, T. P., & Gillison, A. N.
(2002). Environmental benefits and sustainable land-use options in the Jambi transect,
Sumatra. Journal of Vegetation Science, 13(3), 429-438.

Nacua, A. E., PACIS, H. Y. M., Manalo, J. R., Soriano, C. J. M., Tosoc, N. R. N.,
Padirogao, R., ... & Deocaris, C. C. (2018). Macrofungal diversity in Mt. Makiling
Forest Reserve, Laguna, Philippines: with floristic update on roadside samples in
Makiling Botanic Gardens (MBG). Biodiversitas Journal of Biological
Diversity, 19(4), 1579-1585.

Nagy, Z. M., Gruiz, K., Molnar, M., & Fenyvesi, E. (2013). Comparative evaluation of
microbial and chemical methods for assessing 4-chlorophenol biodegradation in
soil. Periodica Polytechnica Chemical Engineering, 57(1-2), 25-35.

Naik, P. R., Raman, G., Narayanan, K. B., & Sakthivel, N. (2008). Assessment of
genetic and functional diversity of phosphate solubilizing fluorescent pseudomonads
isolated from rhizospheric soil. BMC microbiology, 8(1), 230.

Nannipieri, P., Ascher, J., Ceccherini, M., Landi, L., Pietramellara, G., & Renella, G.
(2003). Microbial diversity and soil functions. European journal of soil science, 54(4),
655-670.

Narayana, K. J. P., Kumar, K. G., & Vijayalakshmi, M. (2008). L-asparaginase

production by Streptomyces albidoflavus. Indian Journal of Microbiology, 48, 331-
336.


Natal-da-Luz, T., Lee, I., Verweij, R. A., Morais, P. V., Van Velzen, M. J., Sousa, J.
P., & Van Gestel, C. A. (2012). Influence of earthworm activity on microbial
communities related with the degradation of persistent pollutants. Environmental
toxicology and chemistry, 31(4), 794-803.

Nath, S., & Chaudhuri, P. S. (2010). Human-induced biological invasions in rubber
(Hevea brasiliensis) plantations of Tripura (India)—Pontoscolex corethrurus as a case
study. Asian Journal of Experimental Biological Science, 1(2), 360-369.

Nath, S., & Chaudhuri, P. S, (2012). Effect of rubber leaf litter diet on growth and
reproduction of five tropical species of earthworms under laboratory
conditions. Journal of Applied Bioscience, 38, 151-155.

Nechitaylo, T. Y., Yakimov, M. M., Godinho, M., Timmis, K. N., Belogolova, E.,
Byzov, B. A., ... & Golyshin, P. N. (2010). Effect of the earthworms Lumbricus
terrestris and Aporrectodea caliginosa on bacterial diversity in soil. Microbial
ecology, 59(3), 574-587.

Nemeth, I., Molnar, S., Vaszita, E., & Molnar, M. (2021). The biolog ecoplate™
technique for assessing the effect of metal oxide nanoparticles on freshwater microbial
communities. Nanomaterials, 11(7), 1777.

Ngidlo, R. T. (2013). Assessment of Climate Change Impacts, Vulnerabilities and
Adaptation Strategies in the Traditional Rice Terraces of the Cordillera Region,
Northern Philippines. Asian Journal of Science and Technology, 4(11), 180-186.

Nielsen, C. K., Kjems, J., Mygind, T., Snabe, T., & Meyer, R. L. (2016). Effects of
Tween 80 on growth and biofilm formation in laboratory media. Frontiers in
microbiology, 7, 1878.

Ning, Y., Zhou, H., & Zhou, D. (2019). Study on the microbial community in
earthworm and soil under cadmium stress based on contour line
analysis. Environmental Science and Pollution Research, 26, 20989-21000.

O'Connell, S. P., & Garland, J. L. (2002). Dissimilar response of microbial communities
in Biolog GN and GN2 plates. Soil Biology and Biochemistry, 34(3), 413-416.

O'Toole, G. A., & Kolter, R. (1998). Initiation of biofilm formation in Pseudomonas
fluorescens WCS365 proceeds via multiple, convergent signalling pathways: a genetic
analysis. Molecular microbiology, 28(3), 449-461.

Obusan, M. C. M., Castro, A. E., Villanueva, R. M. D., Isagan, M. D. E., Caras, J. A.
A., & Simbahan, J. F. (2023). Physico-Chemical Quality and Physiological Profiles of
Microbial Communities in Freshwater Systems of Mega Manila,
Philippines. Dara, 8(6), 103.

Onodera, H. (1994). Effect of Degradation of Forest Land on Erosion and Infiltration

Capacity of Soil. In Proc. of JIRCAS Int. Symp. on Rehabilitation of Degraded Forest
Lands in the Tropics: Technical Approaach. Tsukuba, Japan.


Ortiz-Gamino, D., Pérez-Rodriguez, P., & Ortiz-Ceballos, A. I. (2016). Invasion of the
tropical earthworm Pontoscolex corethrurus (Rhinodrilidae, Oligochaeta) in temperate
grasslands. PeerJ, 4, e2572.

Pan, X., Song, W., & Zhang, D. (2010). Earthworms (Eisenia foetida, Savigny) mucus
as complexing ligand for imidacloprid. Biology and Fertility of Soils, 46, 845-850.

Pancho, J. V. (1973). Mt. Makiling as a station for biological research. Philipp
Agric, 57, 21-33.

Pancho, J.V. (1983). Vascular Flora of Mount Makiling and vicinity Luzon:
Philippines, part 1 Kalikasan, Philippine journal of biology. Kalikasan Press, Manila.

Papafilippaki, A., Paranychianakis, N., & Nikolaidis, N. P. (2015). Effects of soil type
and municipal solid waste compost as soil amendment on Cichorium spinosum (spiny
chicory) growth. Scientia Horticulturae, 195, 195-205.

Parle, J. N. (1963). Microorganisms in the intestines of
earthworms. Microbiology, 31(1), 1-11.

Parthasarathi, K., & Ranganathan, L. S. (1998). Pressmud Vermicast are ‘Hot Spots' of
Fungi and Bacteria. Ecology Environment and Conservation, 4, 81-86.

Pass, D. A., Morgan, A. J., Read, D. S., Field, D., Weightman, A. J., & Kille, P. (2015).
The effect of anthropogenic arsenic contamination on the earthworm
microbiome. Environmental microbiology, 17(6), 1884-1896.

Patowary, R., & Deka, H. (2020). Paenibacillus. In Beneficial Microbes in Agro-
Ecology (pp. 339-361). Academic Press.

Pattnaik, S., & Reddy, M. V. (2010). Nutrient status of vermicompost of urban green
waste processed by three earthworm species—Eisenia fetida, Eudrilus eugeniae, and
Perionyx excavatus. Applied and Environmental Soil Science, 2010.

Pedersen, J. C., & Hendriksen, N. B. (1993). Effect of passage through the intestinal
tract of detritivore earthworms (Lumbricus spp.) on the number of selected Gram-
negative and total bacteria. Biology and Fertility of Soils, 16(3), 227-232.

Peng, J., Cao, J., Ng, F. M., & Hill, J. (2017). Pseudomonas aeruginosa develops
Ciprofloxacin resistance from low to high level with distinctive proteome
changes. Journal of proteomics, 152, 75-87.

Petersen, H., & Luxton, M. (1982). A comparative analysis of soi) fauna populations
and their role in decomposition processes. Oikos, 288-388.

Pivarnik, L. F., Senecal, A. G., & Rand, A. G. (1995). Hydrolytic and transgalactosylic

activities of commercial B-galactosidase (lactase) in food processing. Advances in food
and nutrition research, 38, 1-102.


Pizl, V., & Novakova, A. (2003). Interactions between microfungi and Eisenia andrei
(Oligochaeta) during cattle manure vermicomposting: The 7th international symposium
on earthworm ecology: Cardiff: Wales: 2002. Pedobiologia, 47(5-6), 895-899,

Plisko, J. D. (2001). Notes on the occurrence of the introduced earthworm Pontoscolex
corethrurus (Miiller, 1857) in South Africa (Oligochaeta: Glossoscolecidae). African
Invertebrates, 42(1), 323-334.

Pontillas, L., Lugo, E., Malate, R., & Lanioso, A. (2009). Efficacy evaluation of
vermicompost and inorganic fertilizer applied in lowland rice. Threshold, 4, 66-75.

Preston-Mafham, J., Boddy, L., & Randerson, P. F. (2002). Analysis of microbial
community functional diversity using sole-carbon-source utilisation profiles—a
critique. FEMS Microbiology Ecology, 42(1), 1-14.

Qeshmi, F. [., Homaei, A., Fernandes, P., & Javadpour, S. (2018). Marine microbial L-
asparaginase: Biochemistry, molecular approaches and applications in tumor therapy
and in food industry. Microbiological Research, 208, 99-112.

Quast, C., Pruesse, E., Yilmaz, P., Gerken, J., Schweer, T., Yarza, P., ... & Gléckner,
F. O. (2012). The SILVA ribosomal RNA gene database project: improved data
processing and web-based tools. Nucleic acids research, 41(D1), D590-D596.

Raghavendra Rao, B. (2001). Assessment of Microbiological and Biochemical Quality
of Urban Compost and Its Impact on Soil Health (Doctoral dissertation, University of
Agricultural Sciences, Bangalore).

Rainey, F. A. (2009). Genus I. Clostridium prazmowski 1880, 23. Bergey's manual of
systematic bacteriology, 3, 738-828.

Raphael, K., & Velmourougane, K. (20I1). Chemical and microbiological changes
during vermicomposting of coffee pulp using exotic (Eudrilus eugeniae) and native
earthworm (Perionyx ceylanesis) species. Biodegradation, 22(3), 497-507.

Rasco Jr, E. T., Oguis, G. K. R., Fusilero, M. A. T., Taya, H. M. M. C., Lacsamana, M.
G., & Ragas, R. E. B. (2011). Long-term effects of weed management on earthworm
abundance in a banana plantation in Davao City, Southern Mindanao
Philippines. Banwa (Philippines).

Ravindran, B., Contreras-Ramos, S. M., & Sekaran, G. (2015). Changes in earthworm
gut associated enzymes and microbial diversity on the treatment of fermented tannery
waste using epigeic earthworm Eudrilus eugeniae. Ecological Engineering, 74, 394-
401.

Rekha, K., Baskar, B., Srinath, S., & Usha, B. (2018). Plant-growth-promoting

rhizobacteria Bacillus subtilis RR4 isolated from rice rhizosphere induces malic acid
biosynthesis in rice roots. Canadian journal of microbiology, 64(1), 20-27.


Riemann, L. & Azam, F. (2002). Widespread N-acetyl-D-glucosamine uptake among
pelagic marine bacteria and its ecological implications. Applied and environmental
microbiology, 68(11), 5554-5562.

Righi, ; G. (1984). Pontoscolex (Oligochaeta, Glossoscolecidae), a new
evaluation. Studies on Neotropical Fauna and Environment, 19(3), 159-177.

Rémbke, J., & Garcia, M. (2002). Assessment of ecotoxicological effects of pesticides
on the soil fauna and soil processes under tropical conditions. In: GERMAN-
BRAZILIAN WORKSHOP ON NEOTROPICAL ECOSYSTEMS.
ACHIEVEMENTS AND PROSPECTS OF COOPERATIVE RESEARCH, 2000,
Hamburg. Proceedings... Hamburg: SHIFT: MADAM: WAVES, 2002. p. 543-548..

Romero, P. (2020). Phl Facing Garbage Crisis; 16.6 Million Metric Tons Of Waste This
Year Can Fill 99 Philippine Arenas. One News PH.

Rudi, K., Gdegard, K., Lokken, T. T., & Wilson, R. (2009). A feeding induced switch
from a variable to a homogenous state of the earthworm gut microbiota within a host
population. PloS one, 4(10), e7528.

Rudrappa, T., Czymmek, K. J., Paré, P. W., & Bais, H. P. (2008). Root-secreted malic
acid recruits beneficial soil bacteria. Plant physiology, 148(3), 1547-1556.

Sabrina, D. T., Hanafi, M. M., Gandahi, A. W., Muda Mohamed, M. T., & Abdul Aziz,
N. A. (2013). Effect of mixed organic-inorganic fertilizer on growth and phosphorus
uptake of setaria grass (‘Setaria splendida'). Australian Journal of Crop Science, 7(1),
75.

Saha, M., Sarkar, S., Sarkar, B., Sharma, B. K., Bhattacharjee, S., & Tribedi, P. (2016).
Microbial siderophores and their potential applications: a review. Environmental
Science and Pollution Research, 23, 3984-3999.

Sala, M. M., Arrieta, J. M., Boras, J. A., Duarte, C. M., & Vaqué, D. (2010). The impact
of ice melting on bacterioplankton in the Arctic Ocean. Polar biology, 33, 1683-1694.

Sambrook, J., Fritsch, E. F., & Maniatis, T. (1989). Molecular cloning: a laboratory
manual (No. Ed. 2). Cold spring harbor laboratory press.

Sanasam, S. D., & Talukdar, N. C. (2017). Quality compost production from
municipality biowaste in mix with rice straw, cow dung, and earthworm Eisenia
fetida. Compost Science & Utilization, 25(3), 141-151.

Sandoval, J. A., & Tiburan Jr, C. L. (2019). Identification of potential artificial
groundwater recharge sites in Mount Makiling Forest Reserve, Philippines using GIS
and Analytical Hierarchy Process. Applied geography, 105, 73-85.

Sanghvi, G., Bhimani, K., Vaishnav, D., Oza, T., Dave, G., Kunjadia, P., & Sheth, N.

(2016). Mitigation of acrylamide by L-asparaginase from Bacillus subtilis KDPS1 and
analysis of degradation products by HPLC and HPTLC. SpringerPlus, 5, 1-11.


Sapkota, R., Santos, S., Farias, P., Krogh, P. H., & Winding, A. (2020). Insights into
the earthworm gut multi-kingdom microbial communities. Science of the Total
Environment, 727, 138301.

Saqib, S., Akram, A., Halim, S. A., & Tassaduq, R. (2017). Sources of B-galactosidase
and its applications in food industry. 3 Biotech, 7, 1-7.

Satitsri, S., & Muanprasat, C. (2020). Chitin and chitosan derivatives as biomaterial
resources for biological and biomedical applications. Molecules, 25(24), 5961.

Scheu, S. (2003). Effects of earthworms on plant growth: patterns and perspectives: the
7" international symposium on earthworm ecology: Cardiff Wales:
2002. Pedobiologia, 47(5-6), 846-856.

Scheu, S., & Schaefer, M. (1998). Bottom-up control of the soil macrofauna community
in a beechwood on limestone: manipulation of food resources. Ecology, 79(5), 1573-
1585.

Schénholzer, F., Hahn, D., & Zeyer, J. (1999). Origins and fate of fungi and bacteria in
the gut of Lumbricus terrestris L. studied by image analysis. FEMS Microbiology
Ecology, 28(3), 235-248.

Schénholzer, F., Hahn, D., Zarda, B., & Zeyer, J. (2002). Automated image analysis
and in situ hybridization as tools to study bacterial populations in food resources, gut
and cast of Lumbricus terrestris L. Journal of Microbiological Methods, 48(1), 53-68.

Schreiber, K., Boes, N., Eschbach, M., Jaensch, L., Wehland, J., Bjarnsholt, T., ... &
Schobert, M. (2006). Anaerobic survival of Pseudomonas aeruginosa by pyruvate
fermentation requires an Usp-type stress protein. Journal of bacteriology, 188(2), 659-
668.

Scribani Rossi, C., Barrientos-Moreno, L., Paone, A., Cutruzzola, F., Paiardini, A.,
Espinosa-Urgel, M., & Rinaldo, S. (2022). Nutrient sensing and biofilm modulation:
the example of L-arginine in Pseudomonas. International Journal of Molecular
Sciences, 23(8), 4386.

Seastedt, T. R., James, S. W., & Todd, T. C. (1988). Interactions among soil
invertebrates, microbes and plant growth in the tallgrass prairie. Agriculture,
ecosystems & environment, 24(1-3), 219-228.

Sengupta, S., Datta, M., & Datta, S. (2023). B-Glucosidase: Structure, function and
industrial applications. In Glycoside Hydrolases (pp. 97-120). Academic Press.

Sheehan, C., Kirwan, L., Connolly, J., & Bolger, T. (2008). The effects of earthworm
functional diversity on microbial biomass and the microbial community level
physiological profile of soils. European journal of soil biology, 44(1), 65-70.

Singh, A., Singh, D. P., Tiwari, R., Kumar, K., Singh, R. V., Singh, S., ... & Nain, L.

(2015). Taxonomic and functional annotation of gut bacterial communities of Eisenia
foetida and Perionyx excavatus. Microbiological Research, 175, 48-56.


Singleton, D. R., Hendrix, P. F., Coleman, D. C., & Whitman, W. B. (2003).
Identification of uncultured bacteria tightly associated with the intestine of the
earthworm Lumbricus rubellus (Lumbricidae; Oligochaeta). Soil Biology and
Biochemistry, 35(12), 1547-1555.

Singleton, D. R., Hendrix, P. F., Coleman, D. C., & Whitman, W. B. (2004). Erratum:
Identification of uncultured bacteria tightly associated with the intestine of the
earthworm Lumbricus rubellus (Lumbricidae; Oligochaeta) (Soil Biology and
Biochemistry 35: 12 (1547-1555. Soil Biology and Biochemistry, 36(5).

Sinha, R. K., Agarwal, S., Chauhan, K., & Valani, D. (2010). The wonders of
earthworms and its vermicompost in farm production: Charles Darwin’s ‘friends of
farmers’, with potential to replace destructive chemical fertilizers from
agriculture. Agricultural sciences, 1(2), 76-94.

Soriano, M., Hilvano, N., Garcia, R., Hao, A. J., Alegre, A., & Tiburan, Jr, C. (2019).
Land use/land cover change detection and urban sprawl analysis in the Mount Makiling
Forest Reserve watersheds and buffer zone, Philippines. Environments, 6(2), 9.

Soverini, M., & Castagnetti, A. (2022). Importance of database curation in taxonomic
assignation of 16S data. Access Microbiology, 000545-v1.

Spurgeon, D. J., Weeks, J. M., & Van Gestel, C. A. (2003). A summary of eleven years
progress in earthworm ecotoxicology: The 7th international symposium on earthworm
ecology: Cardiff: Wales: 2002. Pedobiologia, 47(5-6), 588-606.

Stefanowicz, A. (2006). The Biolog plates technique as a tool in ecological studies of
microbial communities. Polish Journal of Environmental Studies, 15(5).

Suleimanova, A. D., Beinhauer, A., Valeeva, L. R., Chastukhina, I. B., Balaban, N. P.,
Shakirov, E. V., ... & Sharipova, M. R. (2015). Novel glucose-1-phosphatase with high
phytase activity and unusual metal ion activation from soil bacterium Pantoea sp. strain
3.5. 1. Applied and environmental microbiology, 81(19), 6790-6799.

Sun, M., Chao, H., Zheng, X., Deng, S., Ye, M., & Hu, F. (2020). Ecological role of
earthworm intestinal bacteria in terrestrial environments: a review. Science of the Total
Environment, 740, 140008.

Swinehart, D. F. (1962). The beer-lambert law. Journal of chemical education, 39(7),
333.

Syed, S., & Tollamadugu, N. P. (2019). Role of plant growth-promoting
microorganisms as a tool for environmental sustainability. In Recent developments in
applied microbiology and biochemistry (pp. 209-222). Academic Press.

Taheri, S., Pelosi, C., & Dupont, L. (2018). Harmful or useful? A case study of the

exotic peregrine earthworm morphospecies Pontoscolex corethrurus. Soil Biology and
Biochemistry, 116, 277-289.


Thakur, S. S., Lone, A. R., Tiwari, N., Jain, S. K., & Yadav, S. (2021). Metagenomic
Exploration of Bacterial Community Structure of Earthworms? Gut. Journal of Pure &
Applied Microbiology, 15(3).

Thakuria, D., Schmidt, O., Liliensiek, A. K., Egan, D., & Doohan, F. M. (2009). Field
preservation and DNA extraction methods for intestinal microbial diversity analysis in
earthworms. Journal of Microbiological Methods, 76(3), 226-233.

Thakuria, D., Schmidt, O., Finan, D., Egan, D., & Doohan, F. M. (2010). Gut wall
bacteria of earthworms: a natural selection process. The ISME journal, 4(3), 357.

Thenmozhi, C., Sankar, R., Karuppiah, V., & Sampathkumar, P. (201 1). L-asparaginase
production by mangrove derived Bacillus cereus MABS: optimization by response
surface methodology. Asian Pacific journal of tropical medicine, 4(6), 486-491.

TIMBAS, N. L. T., BADAYOS, R. B., SANCHEZ, P. B., & CRUZ, P. C. S. (2016).
Variability of soil properties along selected transects in Mt. Makiling Forest Reserve,
Philippines. [AMURE, 60.

Tiunov, A. V., & Scheu, S. (2004). Carbon availability controls the growth of
detritivores (Lumbricidae) and their effect on nitrogen mineralization. Oecologia, 138,
83-90.

Tiwari, S. C., Tiwari, B. K., & Mishra, R. R. (1989). Microbial populations, enzyme
activities and nitrogen-phosphorus-potassium enrichment in earthworm casts and in the
surrounding soil of a pineapple plantation. Biology and Fertility of Soils, 8(2), 178-182.

Tomme, P., Warren, R. A. J., & Gilkes, N. R. (1995). Cellulose hydrolysis by bacteria
and fungi. Advances in microbial physiology, 37, 1-81.

Topoliantz, S., Ponge, J. F., Arrouays, D., Ballof, S., & Lavelle, P. (2002). Effect of
organic manure and the endogeic earthworm Pontoscolex corethrurus (Oligochaeta:
Glossoscolecidae) on soil fertility and bean production. Biology and fertility of
soils, 36, 313-319.

Torino, C. M., Lerios, T. E., & Bretana, B. L. P. (2013). Isolation and characterization
of cellulose-degrading bacteria of African night crawler (Eudrilus eugeniae
Kinberg). USM R&D Journal, 29, 49-54.

Toyota, K., & Kimura, M. (2000). Microbial community indigenous to the earthworm
Eisenia foetida. Biology and fertility of soils, 31, 187-190.

Trifonova, R., Postma, J., & Van Elsas, J. D. (2009). Interactions of plant-beneficial
bacteria with the ascomycete Coniochaeta ligniaria. Journal of applied
microbiology, 106(6), 1859-1866.

Tripathi, G., Kachhwaha, N., Dabi, I., & Singh, J. (2007). Earthworms as
bioengineers. Frontiers in Ecology Research. Nova Science Publisher, 187-270.


Uwizeyimana, H., Wang, M., Chen, W., & Khan, K. (2017). The eco-toxic effects of
pesticide and heavy metal mixtures towards earthworms in soil. Environmental
toxicology and pharmacology, 55, 20-29.

Valle-Molinares, R., Borges, S., & Rios-Velazquez, C. (2007). Characterization of
possible symbionts in Onychochaeta borincana (Annelida:
Glossoscolecidae). European Journal of Soil Biology, 43, $14-S18.

Vandecasteele, B., Samyn, J., Quataert, P., Muys, B., & Tack, F. M. (2004). Earthworm
biomass as additional information for risk assessment of heavy metal biomagnification:
a case study for dredged sediment-derived soils and polluted floodplain
soils. Environmental Pollution, 129(3), 363-375.

Vivas, A., Moreno, B., Garcia-Rodriguez, S., & Benitez, E. (2009). Assessing the
impact of composting and vermicomposting on bacterial community size and structure,
and microbial functional diversity of an  olive-mill waste. Bioresource
technology, 100(3), 1319-1326.

Wang, Z., An, Y., Chen, H., Zhang, J., Zhang, H., Zhu, G., ... & Zhang, Y. (2022).
Effects of earthworms and phosphate-solubilizing bacteria on carbon sequestration in
soils amended with manure and slurry: a 4-year field study. Agronomy, 12(9), 2064.

Weber, K. P., Grove, J. A., Gehder, M., Anderson, W. A., & Legge, R. L. (2007). Data
transformations in the analysis of community-level substrate utilization data from
microplates. Journal of microbiological methods, 69(3), 461-469.

Weber, K. P., & Legge, R. L. (2010). Community-level physiological profiling.
Bioremediation: methods and protocols, 263-281.

Weng, X., Sui, X., Liu, Y., Yang, L., & Zhang, R. (2022). Effect of nitrogen addition
on the carbon metabolism of soil microorganisms in a Calamagrostis angustifolia
wetland of the Sanjiang Plain, northeastern China. Annals of Microbiology, 72(1), 18.

Willis, A. D. (2019). Rarefaction, alpha diversity, and statistics. Frontiers in
microbiology, 10, 2407.

Wolter, C., & Scheu, S. (1999). Changes in bacterial numbers and hyphal lengths during
the gut passage through Lumbricus terrestris (Lumbricidae,
Oligochaeta). Pedobiologia, 43(6), 891-900.
Wright, S. (1921). Correlation and causation.

Wiist, P. K., Horn, M. A., & Drake, H. L. (2011). Clostridiaceae and Enterobacteriaceae
as active fermenters in earthworm gut content. The ISME journal, 5(1), 92-106.

Yakushev, A. V., and Byzov, B. A. (2008). Microbiological characterization of
vermicomposts by the method of multisubstrate testing. Eurasian Soil Science, 41(11),
1221-1227.


Yang, W. J., Xu, K. K. Yan, X., & Li, C. (2019). Knockdown of B-N-
acetylglucosaminidase 2 impairs molting and wing development in Lasioderma
serricorne (Fabricius). Insects, 10(11), 396.

Ye, Y., & Doak, T. G. (2009). A parsimony approach to biological pathway
reconstruction/inference for genomes and metagenomes. PLoS computational
biology, 5(8), €1000465.

Yilmaz, P., Parfrey, L. W., Yarza, P., Gerken, J., Pruesse, E., Quast, C., ... & Gléckner,
F. O. (2014). The SILVA and “all-species living tree project (LTP)” taxonomic
frameworks. Nucleic acids research, 42(D1), D643-D648.

Zakhia, F., Jeder, H., Willems, A., Gillis, M., Dreyfus, B., & De Lajudie, P. (2006).
Diverse bacteria associated with root nodules of spontaneous legumes in Tunisia and
first report for nifH-like gene within the genera Microbacterium and
Starkeya. Microbial ecology, 51, 375-393.

Zarate, J. T., Eslit, R. O. S., Amoranto, M. B. C., de Lumban, M. L., Camarinta, K. J.
B., Pajarillo, J. M. T., ... & Maloles, J. S. (2018, October). Exploring the Microbial
Diversity of Mt. Makiling Forest Reserve Forest Canopy: Experiences and Implications
for Biotechnological Initiatives. In The SEA+ Conference on Biodiversity and
Biotechnology 2018.

Zgurskaya, H. I., Evtushenko, L. I., Akimov, V. N., Voyevoda, H. V., Dobrovolskaya,
T. G., Lysak, L. V., & Kalakoutskii, L. V. (1992). Emended description of the genus
Agromyces and description of Agromyces cerinus subsp. cerinus sp. nov., subsp. nov.,
Agromyces cerinus subsp. nitratus sp. nov., subsp. nov., Agromyces fucosus subsp.
fucosus sp. nov., subsp. nov., and Agromyces fucosus subsp. hippuratus sp. nov., subsp.
nov. International Journal of Systematic and Evolutionary Microbiology, 42(4), 635-
641.

Zhang, S., Hu, F., Li, H., & Li, X. (2009). Influence of earthworm mucus and amino
acids on tomato seedling growth and cadmium accumulation. Environmental
Pollution, 157(10), 2737-2742.

Zhang, W., Fan, X., Shi, H., Li, J., Zhang, M., Zhao, J., & Su, X. (2023).
Comprehensive Assessment of 16S rRNA Gene Amplicon Sequencing for Microbiome
Profiling across Multiple Habitats. Microbiology Spectrum, e00563-23.

Zhao, Z., Xian, M., Liu, M., & Zhao, G. (2020). Biochemical routes for uptake and
conversion of xylose by microorganisms. Biotechnology for biofuels, 13, 1-12.

Zhao, X., Juan, L., Hongxia, Y., Zongxian, C., & Lingui, X. (2023). Dynamics of
Bacterial Diversity and Functions with Physicochemical Properties in Different Phases
of Pig Manure Composting. Biology 12(9).

Zhou, G., Qiu, X., Chen, L., Zhang, C., Ma, D., & Zhang, J. (2019). Succession of
organics metabolic function of bacterial community in response to addition of
earthworm casts and zeolite in maize straw composting. Bioresource technology, 280,
229-238.


Zhou, Q. Z., & Chen, X. D. (2001). Effects of temperature and pH on the catalytic
activity of the immobilized B-galactosidase from Kluyveromyces lactis. Biochemical
Engineering Journal, 91), 33-40.

Zhu, D., Chen, Q. L., An, X. L., Yang, X. R., Christie, P., Ke, X., ... & Zhu, Y. G.
(2018). Exposure of soil collembolans to microplastics perturbs their gut microbiota
and alters their isotopic composition. Soil Biology and Biochemistry, 116, 302-310.

Zirbes, L., Thonart, P., & Haubruge, E. (2012). Microsale interactions between

earthworms and microorganisms, a review. Biotechnologie, Agronomie, Société et
Environnement, 16(1).
