STARBOOKS Online Content Distribution and Sharing

ALFON B. NARQUITA

UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES LOS BAÑOS

MASTER IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY

April 2013

Abstract
This proposal helped develop an online system for the stand-alone kiosks to address the
challenges in content distribution and monitoring, and in preparation for establishing a
community of stakeholders. The online version serves not only as an online kiosk for registered stakeholders, but most importantly it would serve as a venue for resource sharing and sourcing. Areas of implementation focused on the uploading and downloading features of the
online version, the security of updates in transit, simplification of report generation and submissions, and the platform for communication among stakeholders. PHP was used in developing the front-end and the back-end, together with MYSQL for
database. Various open sourced software were also integrated to achieve system requirements
like Gpgraph for reporting, Flex Paper for viewing full text files, Sparkweb for online chat, and SWFTools for auto convertion of uploaded PDF materials.

The Problem Domain
DOST’s information arm Science and Technology Information Institute (STII), has
recently launched the STARBOOKS program. The program aims to have a wider public use of
the S&T materials housed and collected in the STII library by providing stand alone terminals
dubbed as “STARBOOKS Kiosks”. Installation of these kiosks basically extends the STII library
to privileged recipients, most especially those from remote areas where resources are scarcely

available.

The STARBOOKS kiosk consists of a standard computer set containing digitized
materials from the STII library packaged in a specially designed frame. It requires no

subscription, no internet connection.

As to date, there are over 130 sites installed all over the country since its launch last July

2011. And still, more are lined-up for requests.

According to its Library Section, The STII library has in its collection around 150,000
materials in science and technology composed of books, journals, serial publications, reference
materials, annual reports, thesis and dissertations, technical and project reports, directories, and
even non-print materials in video and audio format acquired in local and international sources
including full text articles from subscriptions. Some of which are public domain, and most are

still covered by proprietary laws.

Selected by a core group composing of librarians and information officers, STII is giving
away these collections for free. Materials covered by proprietary laws are cleared from their
respective owners. These proprietary materials are distributed under terms that they can only be

shared with non-profit and non-distributing stakeholders. Stakeholders are prohibited from


copying, transferring and distributing these materials by any means without prior notice and

approval from STII.

And in implying such restrictions, all STARBOOKS servers are locked in a designed
frame, accessible only to a designated administrator, Full texts viewable from the kiosk terminals
are also converted to SWF format in a per page basis. This is in an effort to load the materials

fast, and create a complex structure to discourage, if not prevent downloading from the kiosks.

With all these conditions in proprietary content, we arrive at our most important security

concern, the distribution of updates.

Because STARBOOKS servers and kiosks are not connected to the internet, updates have
to be sent via CDs/DVDs through couriers. These CDs contains the compressed SWFs and
instructions on how to manually upload them in the stand-alone server. An implementation of
password protected ZIP and RAR files has been considered. But based on tests, ZIP and RAR
passwords can be easily removed by password cracking softwares readily available through
“googling”. Moreover so, we send the administrators the passwords via email, assuming these

passwords are for their eyes only.

The risks of attaining full text copies are high in mailing CDs. It risks potential
distribution and profiteering from certain individuals, risking breach of terms with proprietary

owners and risking possible fine and law suits.

Also, equally pressing is keeping track of these updates whether they have reached their
designated stakeholders, and the technical support that follows. Library and Technical Support
staffs are assigned in tracking these updates and assist them in manually updating their kiosk via
call or SMS, and that incurs communication cost. Email was a cheaper alternative, but that


consumes time as some stakeholders have limited access to internet, and would only be able to

reply at some time.

In short, the problem was how to send the updates securely with less cost and efficient

ISTARBOOKS
Dipolog
STAREOOKS
Davao,

SiAREOOKS
leyte

STARBOOKS

Zamboanga

Downloading and updating needs to be as seamless as a single click with less human

monitoring?

STi staff

=o = G

Monitoring

Figure 1. Flow of the manual system for update distribution and monitoring.

intervention as possible. Most administrators assigned to manage STARBOOKS are not systems
and software experts. They are normally teachers with intermediate computer backgrounds (these

are the best staff they could assigned to manage the server and kiosks).

With over 130 installed sites, we can clearly see the need to manage update distribution
and monitoring. We can also see the potential for outsourcing content from these sites. By the
end of 2013, the number of installed sites are expected to increase at least by fifty percent (50%).
The STARBOOKS project has already laid out the foundation for a possible research-based
community. And only by providing these stakeholders, up-to-date content, and efficient service
would keep them interested in patronizing and adopting STARBOOKS.

STARBOOKS

om

ISTARBOOKS)
Stakeholder

ISTARHOOKS)
Stakeholder

STARBOOKS STARBOOKS!
Online Stakeholder
Version:

STARBOOKS)
Stakeholder

ISTARBOOKS)

ISTAREOOKS! Stakeholder

Stakefolden
ISTAREOOKS)

Stilsholder

Figure 2. Proposed STARBOOKS Community model. The online version will facilitate content sharing. A
‘messaging system can also be served for collaboration among stakeholders.

Review of Existing Alternatives
As for the problem of update distribution, we are sending the CDs via couriers. Prior to the
installation of STARBOOKS, the stakeholders accomplish a copy of a memorandum of
understanding (MOU). This MOU serves both as a contract and a futile attempt for discouraging
illegal copies, distribution, and modification of the software and the content of the whole

package. (Please see Appendix A for MOU sample template.)

In the case of monitoring, aside from the SMS and calls, we have also tried group mailing.
This may have been a good alternative if we are cutting the cost in distributing updates. But
confirmation takes a while. It also requires that we assign one staff for follow-ups. In the current
number of stakeholders, two staffs are assigned. These staff could have been more productive if
utilized for content build-up or digitization instead.

It is clear that these solutions are not efficient, and a new system or way of doing things

should be changed.

Approach taken in this project

Theoretical Framework.

Digital Rights Management (DRM).

Previously, Digital Rights Management (DRM) focused on security and encryption as a
means of solving the issue of unauthorized copying, that is, lock the content and limit its
distribution to only those who pay. This was the first-generation of DRM, and it represented
a substantial narrowing of the real and broader capabilities of DRM. The second-generation
of DRM covers the description, identification, trading, protection, monitoring and tracking of
all forms of rights usages over both tangible and intangible assets including management of
rights holders relationships. Additionally, it is important to note that DRM is the “digital
management of rights" and not the "management of digital rights". That is, DRM

manages all rights, not only the rights applicable to permissions over digital content.

Because of STARBOOKS? nature dealing with copyrighted digital content. The model
used for this proposal is closely or partly related to the implementation of DRM. As seen in
Figure 2, we intend to serve the content to only those who have rightful access. And these

contents can only be updated to the kiosk assigned to the downloading account.

Software Requirement Specifications

a. SCOPE OF THE SYSTEM
This system will address the challenges in STARBOOKS content/update
distribution, data security in transit, content sharing and sourcing, simplifying report

generation and submissions and building of stakeholders’ community.
b. OVERALL DESCRIPTION
A. Product functions
The STARBOOKS Online aims to develop the following:

1, Online Content Distribution
The system will provide two means of downloading updates: through the

Notifications Section and through the Search Page.

Through the Notifications Section, updates will be listed and grouped by
month as they are uploaded by content partners. The source of the material
will also be displayed to give stakeholders some sense of accountability and

ownership.

Through the Search Page, the user will type keywords of desired material
and may download content by viewing one of the results. This feature enables

the stakeholder to create customized content for their offline STARBOOKS.

2. Data Security and Encryption

This script will add security to the downloaded content wherein the
materials will be encrypted and repacked as a zip file. The first part of the
filename represents the type of files this particular zip file holds. The
Institution Code represents the account used to download this update. The
Additional authentication will be used to compare this file with the configured
code within the Offline STARBOOKS. This determines if this material will be
uploaded to the Offline Kiosk or not. The Holdings ID represents a unique ID

used to identify this material in the database.

3. Content Sharing

The system will provide an uploading facility that will enable stakeholders
to share their materials with other stakeholders. This may include local school
papers, compiled investigatory projects, academic researches, videos, and
others. Uploading of materials include the creation of metadata using standard
fields (Dublin Core). The uploaded materials shall be categorized into Books,
Thesis, and Serials. To be make the uploaded materials available for others to
download, fulltext shall have to be attached to the created metadata. The
system will automatically convert PDF files into SWF files. It is converted to
SWF format to be used with the Flex Paper application embedded for the

fulltext viewing.

4, Reports Submission and Monitoring.

The STARBOOKS Offline has been modified to log all users’
activities automatically. The Site Administrator will just have to click a button
to generate a transmittal file of these logs and repacked into a zip file. The
STARBOOKS Online will then provide venue for Site Administrators to send

or upload the transmittal file.

5. Stakeholders’ Community
The system will utilize a free open-sourced web chat engine called
SPARKWEB. This is an enhancement for the OPENFIRE project running on
web-based messenger clients through XMPPs. An OPENFIRE server shall be
configured and setup in a publicly accessible server. Stakeholders can either
connect through the web-based facility or use an XMPP client. Either way,
this will connect them to the central chat server wherein they can interact and

collaborate with their fellow stakeholders.

B. User characteristics
This section identifies all the intended users of this system as well as the
expected skills that may be required from them. The information in this section
will help identify possible training and support to be given to the users upon

deployment of this system.

The system will provide the following access levels:


. Super User
The Super User shall be the overall technical and web

administrator of STARBOOKS Online. He/She shall be responsible to:

|. Administer/Monitor the different users by giving them different levels of

interaction to the system.

. Administer STARBOOKS databases and servers.

. STI Administrator

STII Administrator will be the overall project manager. Moreover,

this user will be required to perform the following:

a. Facilitate standard and advanced report generation.
b. Perform QA and integrity check with the uploaded contents.
c. Administer the monitoring of report submissions of stakeholders and

provide STII management with relative data analysis.

. Site Administrator

The site administrators are the staff assigned to manage the offline
STARBOOKS kiosk. The administrators must have enough knowledge
about the system. For the online version, their privileges include. They
will also have access to the online STARBOOKS messenger for technical

support and collaboration works.


Site administrator functions:

a. Responsible for maintaining the integrity and timely submission of
reports to STII.
b. Perform online downloading of updates, uploading content, report
generation and submission.
c. Access online STARBOOKS messenger for technical support
requests and collaboration works.
4. Cluster Administrator
The cluster administrator, also called as the Regional
‘Administrator, is a support to the STI Administrator. Moreover, this user

will likely be required to perform the following:

a. Manage stakeholders located in their respective regions.
b. Administer the monitoring of report submissions of stakeholders
within their cluster and provide Regional office with relative data

analysis.

C. General constraints
The factors that may somehow affect or constrain the development of this
system are identified as follows:
1, User Constraints
It is expected that some Site Administrators will have limited computer

skills which may not conform to user requirements of this system. However,


proper training and support will be given to them upon the deployment of the
system to be able to familiarize themselves with the functions of the system.
2. System Performance
Since STARBOOKS Online is internet connection dependent, it is
expected that the data center will experience some degree of lag and downtime
when several sites will be downloading and uploading their files at the same
time. Performance is also affected by the quality of connection site administrators

will use.

D. Assumptions and dependencies
The STARBOOKS Online System shall be web-based and will be browser

independent.

It will ensure that the design specifications set for this project conform to

the needs of its users.

c. SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS

A. Interface requirements

1, User interfaces

a. The system shall require entering of valid username and password from

the user to access the different components/modules of the system.

B

b. The system shall allow the Super Users to limit the access rights of the

administrators to the system.
c. The system shall provide Sections for downloading of content updates.

d. The system shall allow Site Administrators to upload their contents to

STARBOOKS Online.

e. The system shall allow Site and Cluster Administrators to upload their

transmittal to STARBOOKS Online.

f. The system shall provide venue for stakeholders’ community and

collaboration activities.

g. The system shall allow the Administrators to view statistical reports of

their respective sites/cluster.

h. The system shall provide links to different components/modules of the

system for the identified/assigned users,

2. Hardware interfaces

a. Data center and application servers should run on high speed processor.
b. The servers should have at least Dual Core processor or higher with at
least 268 of RAM.

c. It must have at least 1 7B hard disk space to handle large amount of

data.


d. The system will best run on the client-side workstation with at least 256 MB of RAM

and at least Pentium-class processor.

3. Software interfaces
1. The application server and STARBOOKS data center shall be required to
run on Apache 1.3.26 server under Linux or Window based operating

system.

2. Software that will be used for the system shall be PHP, and MySQL 5.

3. Communication interfaces

1. The network connecting computers from STARBOOKS stakeholders
to application server should be provided with at least 1.0 Mbps for

downloading.

8. Functional requirements
This section defines the data and process requirements for the system.

1. Information storage and retrieval
There will be available forms to allow the user to manage the information
to be entered and retrieved from the data center. Furthermore, list boxes will

be made available to speed up data entry and ensure data accuracy. Moreover,


functional buttons will be made available to enable the users generate and

submit transmittal files, and viewing of reports.

2. Process description

This section discusses the required process that shall be performed by the

system. The system shall enable the users to access and perform the following

system components/modules: Online Content Distribution, Data Security and

Encyrption, Content Sharing, Simplified Reports Submission and Monitoring

and Stakeholders’ Community modules.

Table: Use Case 1: Downloading Updates

Use Case Online Content Distribution: Downloading updates
Name:
Actor: Site Administrator, Cluster Administrator
Description: The Site administrator and Cluster Administrator downloading the
update from the Online STARBOOKS.
‘Normal a. Site Administrator logs in to the system, using the account
with site administrator access level.
Course: b. Site administrator click on the Notifications button.
c. Select update from the list.
d. Download and save the file to an auxiliary device.
Alternate @. Site administrator logs in to the system, using the account
with site administrator access level.
Course: b. Site administrator clicks in the Download/Browse button.
c. Type keyword in the search box.
d. View desired result.
e. Click on the download link to download the material.
f. Save file to auxiliary device.



Pre-
Condition:

The administrator should have logged in successfully.

Post-
Condition:

An update file is downloaded.

Table2: Use Case 2: Material Upload

Use Case | Online Content Distribution: Material Upload
Name:
Actor: ‘Site Administrator, Cluster Administrator, STI Administrator
Description: _ | The Site Administrator, Cluster Administrator, STII Administrator
uploading the material to the Online STARBOOKS.
‘Normal a. Logs in to the Online STARBOOKS
b. Click on the Create Material button.
Course: c. Fill-up the metadata form.
d. Click on the Upload Full text button.
e. Select the metadata record.
£._Upload the pdf file associated with the metadata.
Alternate
Course:
Pre- The administrator should have logged in successfully.
Condition:
Post- ‘A new file is uploaded and marked as new update ready for
Condition: downloading by other stakeholders.
Table3: Use Case 3: Using the Update
Use Case Data Security: Using the Update
Name:
Actor: Site Administrator, Cluster Administrator, STII Administrator



Description:

The Site Administrator, Cluster Administrator, STII Administrator
uploading the material to the Online STARBOOKS.

Normal a. Logs in to the Online STARBOOKS:
b. Click on the Notification button.
Course: c. Select update from the list.
d. Download and save the file to an auxiliary device.
e. Go to the Offline Kiosk
f. Login to the Admin Interface of the Offline STARBOOKS.
g. Click on the upload button.
h,_ Select the update downloaded from the Online Kiosk.
Alternate
Course:
Pre- The administrator should have logged in successfully.
Condition:
Post- Offline STARBOOKS has been updated
Condition:

Table4: Use Case 4: Report Submission

Use Case Report Submission
Name:
Actor: Site Administrator, Cluster Administrator
Description: The Site Administrator, Cluster Administrator submitting the report
to the Online STARBOOKS.
Normal a. Logs in to the Admin Interface on Offline STARBOOKS
b. Click on the Generate Transmittal button.
Course: c. Download and save the file to an auxiliary device.
d. Logs in to the Online STARBOOKS.
e. Click on the Submit Report Button.
f._ Select the downloaded report file from the Offline Kiosk.
Alternate
Course:

Pre-Condition:

The administrator should have logged in successfully.



Stakeholder has submitted a report.

Table5: Use Case 5: Online Community

Use Case Online Community

Name:

Actor: Site Administrator, Cluster Administrator, STI Administrator, Librarian
and IT technical support staff from STII.

Description: The Site Administrator, Cluster Administrator submitting the report to
the Online STARBOOKS.

Normal a. Logs in to Onine STARBOOKS

'b. Click on the Online Chat button.

Course: ©. Login to the Online Chat Room.

Alternate

Course:

Pre- The administrator should have logged in successfully.

Condition:

Post- Stakeholder can interact with other online stakeholder.

Condition:



3. Data construct specification

acco TwiPrvinee Taitegion
a oar +] inegion nevonvame
imiserteve intety ae

ted dtmaddes 14

‘intCategory a +
a thiMultimedia. teiCluser
AY emait ‘tbiRecord tbIMultimedi usta
ICSF ‘SubTitle ‘teType
varUserName ‘VolumeNo
InsCode ‘Author jas ~
a
a Publication
3 Hs
a
os 1

Figure 3 .Data Requirement

Figure 3 shows fourteen classes or tables to be made available for
STARBOOKS Online. Table Account will contain information about the
registered user accounts. Table Institution will store stakeholders’ institutional
profile. Table Record will contain all information about a record; this includes the
title, material type, Author, etc. Table Multimedia, however, will indicate how
many multimedia/fulltext is attached to each records; this table has fields such as
FileName, FileLocation, FileType, etc. Logs, CSF, Log Book and Keywords


tables will have the user logs to be used on reporting and monitoring. Table
Transmit will hold the generation of transmittal file logs. Cluster, Institution type,
Region, Province and City Tables shall serve as lookup tables for some fields in

the table Institution.

Performance requirements

The application server should have enough capacity to handle all the files coming

from stakeholders.

Design constraints

The Web UI shall be made to be user-friendly.

Software system attributes
Below are the non-functional requirements for all components of STARBOOKS

Online System which are categorized as follows.
i Reliability
The system shall ensure that site/cluster monitoring shall be

managed by the legitimate administrators alone.

The system shall come up with accurate reports regarding the

Downloading/uploading of updates.
8. Availability

Although the STARBOOKS Online may be needing time for

maintenance and upgrading, the system needs to be functional at least six


days a week and will be available 24 hours a day. This will give enough
time for the administrators to download/upload updates with a maximum

possible time.
©. Security

The system shall provide different access levels for its users to

ensure that only authorized personnel will be allowed to

The system shall be managed by the administrators who will

monitor the security levels of the system.

The system shall be providing username and passwords to its

users to control access rights in the system.

Downloadable updates should be ecrypted and packed in a zip file.

Portability

The system should run in all device capable of running a web browser.

The system shall be browser independent. It shoud run in any

browser supporting Flash.

E. Usability
The system shall enable the site/cluster administrators to manage

their sites effectively.


The system shall present online help and provide proper

documentations, such as user’s manual

The system shall conduct proper training to its users upon the

deployment of the system.


Methodologies
A. Content Distribution
The target of putting up an online distribution scheme is to minimize if not totally
eliminate operation cost. Available updates both produced by STII or the stakeholder are to be

hosted in a web location available through access levels.

owas (2)
| >; >

OnlineVersion) Q

Download

| E>
Dovnload 2

Figure 4. Updates are provided online as downloads

The online version focuses primarily on the backend part of the system. Because content
have yet been weeded of proprietary materials. For the meantime, STII management has
approved the deployment of the backend and frontend to offline site administrators only.

The site is available via access levels. They are the following:

Super User. The overall technical and web administrator of STARBOOKS Online.
Privileges includes everything that is in the system including administration of user levels,
databases and servers.

STII Administrator. The overall project manager. Privileges includes standard and
advanced report generation and content uploading. This account will be used only to monitor

report submissions and provide STII management with relative data analysis.

Site Administrator. The site administrators are the staff assigned to manage the offline
STARBOOKS kiosk. They are responsible for maintaining the integrity ang timely submission
of reports to STII. For the online version, their privileges includes downloading updates,
uploading content, report generation and submission. They will also have access to the online
STARBOOKS messenger for technical support and collaboration works.

Cluster Administrator. The cluster administrator is a support to the STII Administrator.
They will manage stakeholders located in their respective regions. Also called the Regional
‘Administrators. They have the same privileges as the STII administrator, only that their report
generations are limited only to that of their cluster.

Users. These are the average users and researchers. They have no administrative
functions. All they do is access the system to browse and go through its contents. As for this
implementation, each Site Administrator is also provided with a User level account. This is in
place to allow them to cater the STARBOOKS online kiosk to their local users.

Download privileges will be available only for Cluster and Site administrators. They will

be responsible for updating their offline STARBOOKS.


Figure 5. Screenshot: STARBOOKS Online Login Screen.

Wilcome to 0ST Soence Dg! Libra!

]
Re ee |

Figure 6. Screenshot: Online User interface for the Site Administrator.

Downloads are available in two ways. One is through the Notifications Section.


ea
ery

ase fie LF |
‘Admin teens i = oa feo faraaeneee

a = my

Figure 7. Screenshot: STARBOOKS Online, Notification Section.

Here, updates are listed as they are uploaded by content partners. The materials are listed
and grouped by month. Figure 7 shows the list of updates available within three months. The
source of the material is displayed to give stakeholders some sense of accountability and
ownership. Materials uploaded will be subjected to studies and verification by STII if itis freely

shareable or if it is covered by proprietary laws.


Figure 8. Screenshot: STARBOOKS Online, Search page.

The other way for downloading updates is through the Search Page. Here you can type

keywords for your desired material.

Figure 9, Screenshot: STARBOOKS Online, Results page.

By viewing one of the results, Site Administrators and Cluster Administrators will have


an option for download. This feature enables the stakeholder to create customized content for

their offline STARBOOKS.

rapasagngrasugng ano Tse foes

Figure 10. Screenshot: STARBOOKS Online, Video view page. A download link is available for Site and
Cluster Administrators only.

In sync with the online update downloading, we have also updated the back-end for the
Offline STARBOOKS. A feature to upload updates with one button click has been added. We
use to call the stakeholders one by one to help them with the instruction and deployment of the
new updates. PDF files contained in the DVDs are manually copied to the Offline
STARBOOKS'’ system folders by the Site Administrators and the SQL files are manually loaded
through PHPMYADMIN interface to update the database. This is both risky and tedious. Risky,
because not all Site Administrators are computer savvy and technically knowledgeable with
systems and databases. Tedious, since most non computer savvy administrators cannot follow
with the instructions. In cases like these, we employ the help of the DOST regional offices.

Technical staffs are sent from the DOST regional offices to assist problematic sites.


SECURITY AND ENCRYPTION

Concerns over sending the updates via DVDs have been raised by management. Not only
is it costly but it also poses risk of theft. Some materials are still classified as proprietary and are
shared through STARBOOKS only in the condition that it will not be used for profit. These

materials can get duped or compromised during transit.

As a measure, the Online STARBOOKS eliminates the use of DVDs for distribution.
Updates are now freely available at the Online STARBOOKS. To add security to the

downloaded content, the materials are encrypted and repacked as a zip file.

Additional
Authentication

S 6dHf_11-03_qp6mm5g_qp6mm5umng.zip
Ud a


Holdings 1D

File Type

Institution
Code

Figure 12, File name composition of downloaded ZIP file,

The first part of the filename represents the type of files this particular zip file holds. The
Institution Code represents the account used to download this update. The Additional
authentication is used to compare this file with the configured code within the Offline
STARBOOKS. This determines if this material will be uploaded to the Offline Kiosk or not. The

Holdings ID represents a unique ID used to identify this material in the database.


(HOO B28

=a

fultent
Matera

sau fie

Figure 13. Composition of the downloaded ZIP file.

The zip file composes of the actual fulltext materials, in the case of digitized reading
materials. And will consist of a flash movie in the case of video materials. An additional SQL
file is also inserted in the package to provide reference for updating the database in the Offline
STARBOOKS. The SQL file, along with filename is grabbled using combinations of text ordinal
values and secret key ordinal values encrypted with base64 encryption. It is a pity that the ZIP
library in PHP does not support password protected zip files. That could have improved the
protection of the material. This may not be the most sophisticated encryption available, but still,

it provides additional layer of protection.

The Offline STARBOOKS? backend has been modified as well to interpret such
encryption. Authentication takes place after decrypting the information in the zip file, And based
on this authentication, the Offline STARBOOKS will decide whether this file is legitimate or

not. In case that the material is not intended for this machine, the STARBOOKS Offline will not


extract and unscramble the payload.

Download STARBOOKS
mmm 2 ia ee Dipsiee
STARBOOKS
PEVER)
pana pra STAREOOKS
Teyte’
x STARBOOKS
Zamboanga

Figure 14. Downloadable updates will only work on stakeholder's kiosk

STARBOOKS

OnlineVersion}

A concern has been raised regarding this security setup. Since the STARBOOKS Offline
is written in PHP, it is possible to crack and decipher the encryption by viewing the source code.
In a client-server setup this can be secured using access restrictions. But in STARBOOKS
Offline kiosks where the server and client is the same machine, this is not acceptable. We may
require stakeholders to provide and use servers in all installation. Nonetheless, plans for
developing a compiled version of STARBOOKS Offline has been greatly considered. Using a
compiler to develop the new interface will deviate the project from the advocacy of using open-

source softwares and will translate cost in software licenses.

Figure 15. Encryption in the STARBOOKS Online, and decryption in the STARBOOKS Offline.


CONTENT SHARING

For content sharing we included in our STARBOOKS Online an uploading facility. The
uploading facility will enable stakeholders to share their materials with other stakeholders. This
may include local school papers, compiled investigatory projects, academic researches, videos,

and others.

Figure 16. Encryption Page for creating new material (metadata)

Included in the uploading page is the creation of metadata. These are standard fields
(Dublin Core) for creating metadata. It can be categorized into Books, Thesis, and Serials.
Creating the metadata is the first step in sharing content. These fields are used for data mining

and possible computation of relevance.


es

ame a]

Figure 17, Attachment of fultext or video to the metadata

Creating the metadata will append the record in the database. But it is yet to be available
for others to download or to be included in the search results. You have to attach a full text
material or a video to your created metadata. PDF files uploaded this way are automatically
converted by the Online STARBOOKS into SWF files. It is converted to SWF format to be used
with the Flex Paper application embedded for the fulltext viewing. SWF are preferred because its
faster than the standard PDF in terms of loading. The average PDF will first load the entire PDF
file into memory before rendering it to your browser. Whilst the SWF format displays the current
page right away while the rest of the file are loading. For a 100 page material, it is practical and

faster to load it as FLASH rather than PDF.

The uploading facility will allow for sustainability in terms of content. Each stakeholder
will now become a content partner as well as a marketing arm for material promotions and

dissemination.


REPORT AND MONITORING
The team together with some senior staff carefully analyzed the existing processes for the
report submission. It turns out that one process in the user registration greatly affects the

administrators’ productivity.

In STARBOOKS Offline version 1.0°s process, before a normal researcher can use the
STARBOOKS kiosk, they will need to fill up a registration form. This registration form includes
basic information only, which can be used to gauge our STARBOOKS users and therefore can
be used as a basis for targeting new contents. All users are required to fill this form which piles
up to the administrators. The submitted forms are to be encoded periodically to the
STARBOOKS Offline backend. This would give the STARBOOKS Offline baseline data for
generating reports which should be printed by the administrator at the end of the month. These
printed reports are to be sent to STII for data analysis. The added encoding work discourages the

administrator to come up with a productive report.

In the midst of November to December 2012, we have rolled out STARBOOKS Offline
version 2.0 which answered this problem. In this version, user will have to pass a one-time
registration only. This will allow them to create an account to the system. In their succeeding use
to the STAROOKS Offline, they will only need to login. With this system, forms will no longer
be submitted to the administrator, and the administrator will no longer pile them up in stacks.
Reports are also no longer required to be printed for submission. The STARBOOKS Offline has
been modified to log all activities automatically. The report is now repacked into a zip file we
call, transmittal file. Administrators now need only to send or upload the transmittal file to the

STARBOOKS Online.


1@

Stakeholder

Online

Figure 18. Submission of transmittal file (reports) to the STARBOOKS Online.

The Zip file consists of the files containing SQL commands that will update the online

database with the stakeholder’s data.

Piwamay ea en =]

Figure 19. Content of the generated transmittal fie.

STAKEHOLDER'S COMMUNITY
The upload and download feature of the STARBOOKS Online already supports the

proposed content sharing among stakeholders. To further enhance and solidify this community, a


communication media is established.

Fs or or
eM ey atten sn Bint
STARBOOKS 2, |

Figure 20. STARBOOKS Online Messenger.

For communication, we utilized the free open-sourced web chat engine called
SPARKWEB. This is an enhancement for the OPENFIRE project running on web-based
messenger clients through XMPPs. An OPENFIRE server has to be configured and setup in a
publicly accessible server. Stakeholders can either connect through the web-based facility or use
an XMPP client. Either way, this will connect them to our central chat server wherein they can
interact and collaborate with their fellow stakeholders. Online technical support will be available
through this online messenger as well as Library Staff support for content inquiries and requests.

With this system, collaborative projects with stakeholders among clusters are now possible.


Content Distribution

RESULTS

Through update downloads, we eliminated the cost incurred during update distribution.

The following table shows the expense per quarter during update distribution:

Table 6. Computation for the update distribution using couriers.

Courrier Rate ‘Communication | DVD per pe Number of | TOTAL
(small parcel) (Cell Cards) Sites in 2012
PHP 70.00 PHP 100.00 PHP 100.00 Spes@PHP | 114 PHP 30,780.00

20.00 each

The table above is computed with the 114 sites established as of December 2012. The

Php70 for courier is a standard 1-2kg package from LBC. Cell cards are also allocated for

technical support, monitoring, and tracking of updates. We pack the updates in five DVDs giving

us a total of 20Gb worth of updates.

expenses will relatively rise.

Clearly, with the increasing number of Stakeholders,

With the updated backend in the Offline STARBOOKS, it is now capable of updating

itself with only a click of a button. Human intervention in updating are now limited to the

selection of materials only. Database and system files are automatically extracted, processed, and

updated by the Offline STARBOOKS backend.


Stakeholder

and uploads it the Offline STARBOOKS kiosk.

Figure 21. Site Administrator downloads the update as a zip file from the Online STARBOOKS,

Table 7. Comparison of tasks and elapsed time to update the Offline Kiosk..

Size of Preparation of Elapsed | Elapsed | Technical support
Update updates time for | time for rendered to
updates to | updating the | stakeholder. (Data
reach | kiosk using | are based from
stakeholder the technical support
packaged rendered to
update Zamboanga
regional office ona
test update)
With 20go — S| Select Tto2days | 1 to 2 days.| © Call
DVDs DVDs materials to Transfer of Region IX,
include in 20gb from that
update. DVD a updates
© Create Kiosk will be
MYSQL file sent.
for use in averages 10) Assist
updating the 30min — Ihr kiosk
kiosks depending admin in
database. on CPU and copying the
* Group and memory full texts.
a in speed. . ey
ios!
DVD. Database admin in
* Send DVD update updating
via courier. averages to the
lomin = - database
30min through
depending PHPMAdm
on size of in or SQL
command



SQ file through
generated DOS
for this prompt.
cea Iferrors are
batch encountere
. 4, assist
admin in
debugging.
With Smb = + Loginto | 5-30 30sec Confirm
Online 50mb per system. | minutes} 2min per with
Downloads | material © Check | per material, Region IX
Notification | download. | depending ithe)
s for : performed
(Tested on size.
updates. ; an update.
© Download | With Globe
the update. | and
SMART
broadband)
Download
time
depends on
size and
user
bandwidth

REPORT AND MONITORING

Since STARBOOKS Offline’s debut in 2011, only few stakeholders have submitted their

reports. Turning the STARBOOKS Offline version 1.0 a monitoring nightmare. STARBOOKS

Online has greatly improved report submission and monitoring



yan arm] an

Figure 22. Submitted report by cluster.

This pilot test shows that stakeholders with a green check has submitted their report for
that corresponding month. The red crosses means that there were no reports submitted for that
month. This report significantly shows the active sites. And the clusters that greatly adheres and
patronize project. The report has become a basis for an upcoming project to gather all

stakeholder into a convention-like program these coming months.

a1

e= =

Figure 23. Sample Statistical reports

The statistical reports can now serve its purpose. We now have data for analysis and
content targeting. Keywords here that shows zero (0) results are now prioritized by STII’s
content development team. Subscriptions have been named and deals have been forged with
Encyclopedia Britannica for the inclusion of their software in all STARBOOKS Offline kiosks.

These are all made possible from the statistics gathered from these reports.


[GG sees tor eran

oe nn 7 tg te gpd sent
2012 Top 2 eo Rel Keron

Figure 24 Sample Statistical reports. Table showing keywords with zero results.

SECURITY AND ENCRYPTION

The effect of having the updates encrypted has yet been measured quantitatively. We
currently have no baseline number for measuring frequency of attacks in the offline kiosks.
From all the STARBOOKS installations since 2011, there has only been one reported incident of
breach of the MOU. One school from Leyte, configured the offline kiosk with a public IP
address and linked it to their School website. This automatically called for an administrative
response, since we do not allow hosting of the materials from any online means. The school was
given a warning, and they immediately complied.

In their part, they were only trying to propagate the use of STARBOOKS material to an

even bigger audience. This actually initiated the idea that STARBOOKS should be pushed


online. This project actually helped the design process in gearing the STARBOOKS project

towards becoming an online resource center.


CONCLUSIONS

With STARBOOKS Online, update distribution has been easier to manage. Distribution
expense has been trimmed down to a minimum, and report monitoring and submission has been
more convenient and active. Through update and resource downloading, Kiosks can now be
customized according to stakeholder’s requirements. Content can now be sustained through
collaborative resource sharing. The development of the STARBOOKS Online compliments the
exhaustive rollout of the Offline version. Providing room and avenue where all materials and
efforts can be organized in a single venue and create a sustainable content sharing environment.

The STARBOOKS project greatly fulfills STII’s mandate in the area of disseminating
S&T related information. It has been considered by the DOST as one of its “Ramdam ni Juan”
projects because of its appeal to help promote government livelihood programs in the rural areas.

It can still grow and has many more rooms for improvement to better serve our stakeholders.


REFERENCES
Php.net — www.php.net, for all PHP syntax and programming references.

W3schools — www.w3schools.com, for PHP and CSS how tos and ZIP library

functions.
Stackoverflow.com — www.stackoverflow.com, for sample programming scripts.
Koha - www.koha.org, for digital library concepts.

Flexpaper — flexpaper.devaldi.com, code.google.com/p/flexpaper, for pdf viewer

solutions.
Dublincore — dublincore.org, for library metadata standards.

http://www.media.utah.edu/MODwiki for Digital Rights Management concepts
