Patterns in the Distribution and Abundance of Post-Outbreak Population of the Coconut Leaf Beetle, Brontispa longissima (Gestro) (Coleoptera: Chrysomelidae) in Albay, Philippines

GENEAN L. GALICIA

UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES LOS BAÑOS

Doctor of Philosophy in Entomology

JUNE 2019

ABSTRACT

The study was conducted to characterize the changes in the population of the
coconut leaf beetle over time and space, and to relate these changes to the infestation
pattern of palms, age of palms, development and reproduction of the pest, and the growth
and development of the coconut leaf. Field monitoring of the CLB population in old
stands of coconut (more than 7 years old) and young stands of coconut (3-5 years old)
was done from February 2017 to July 2018 in Albay Philippines where an outbreak of the
pest occurred in 2009. Laboratory and greenhouse studies on the rate of development
and reproduction of the pest and of the coconut leaf were also done in order to explain the patterns observed in the field. The spatial distribution of the CLB population as well as the infested palms were
aggregated throughout the monitoring period based on the Index of dispersion and
Lloyd’s mean crowding. Clumped distribution pattern is related to the percent infested
palms, density and age of coconut palms. Development time and reproduction of CLB is
inferred to be synchronous with the emergence of every shoot of coconut leaf which has an average of more or less 23 days before another shoot emerged. This observation complemented the laboratory and field biology studies where CLB was able to complete
its development from egg to adult in 32.00 ± 0.33 and 34.33 ± 0.41 days and pre-
oviposition period of 20.10 ± 0.70 days. On the basis of these findings, the infestation of
CLB was shown not to spread even if there was an increase in the population hence, decisions on pest control should not be based on monitoring of infested palms alone.

Keywords: reproduction, development, age structure, index of dispersion, age of palm

CHAPTER I

INTRODUCTION

The coconut leaf beetle, Brontispa longissima is a serious problem of
coconut palms in the Philippines in 2005 because of its dramatic increase in the
population. According to PCA in 2009, it was first sighted among coconut trees
along Airport Road NAIA and Roxas Boulevard in Pasay City. The infestation
had spread in different areas throughout the country from Southern Luzon to
Mindanao. A total of 281 Municipalities and 46 provinces in 13 regions were
confirmed infested by the coconut leaf beetle in 2009. The pest ravages coconuts
and other palms in the CALABARZON area especially in Cavite, Batangas and
Laguna. Lately, it has been found sporadically in Quezon, Camarines Sur, Albay
and Northern Samar. In the latter provinces, the coconut leaf beetle may have
been brought in by landscape contractors who are unaware or unfamiliar of the
pest. Data shows that from August 2007 to March 2011, it has already affected

more than 3 million coconut trees.

It is unclear if CLB was introduced to the Philippines in 2005 because the
pest was listed in Gabriel’s inventory of pests in the Philippines (1997) as cited by
Johnston (1965). However, most of the reports claimed that it was introduced in

the Philippines. The question of its introduction could not be verified so far.

Takano et al., (2011) reported that there are two monophyletic groups of
CLB ,one distributed over a limited area (Australia, Papua New Guinea, Samoa
and Sumba Island) referred to as the Pacific clade and the other dispersed over a
wide area of Asia and the Pacific Region (referred to as the Asian clade). Recent
invasions and outbreaks have been reported only in areas where the Asian clade
have been found. The Asian clade has a significantly longer lifespan and
produces more eggs than the Pacific clade suggesting that the former has
advantageous life history traits with the potential to become serious pests.
However, Takano’s claim only suggest the place of origin or distribution

pathways of B. longissima.

Three morphological forms of adult CLB had been documented in
different countries. The color morph occurring in Thailand is the same morph
present in the Philippines except in Palawan where the color morph found in
Malaysia is also present (Navasero et al., 2008). The genus Brontispa are mainly
found in Southeast Asia and the Western and Norther Pacific. A number of
species have been described, although several revisions of the genus have seen a
considerable reduction in the number of species. The latest major revision of the
subfamily Hispinae to which the genus Brontispa belongs was in 1957. Since
then, no further studies on the taxonomy of the genus Brontispa have been
implemented. The sudden and rapid spread of the pest into Southeast Asia and its
considerable intra specific variation in color patterns within the species B.

longissima has caused confusion among plant protection specialists in the region,

and now urgently warrants a revision of the genus Brontispa ( Liebregts et

al.,2004 ).

The incursion of CLB in the Philippines in 2005 from Pasay to other areas
was assumed to be brought about by trading or elicit entry of imported ornamental
plants. It may have been present two years earlier based on the presence of trees
with almost all fronds damaged. In 2006, it was reported to be present only in the
Southern Luzon Provinces, Bulacan and Camarines Sur. Three years later it has
reached 34 other provinces representing all the major islands. Its infestation was

not confined only in the Philippines. (Navasero et al., 2008).

The distribution and infestation of CLB all over the country was compiled
by CABI (1989). This pest was first recorded in Indonesia (1885) and American
Samoa (1974) and continued to spread over the continent into Australia (1979),
China (1988), Maldives (1999), Vietnam (1999), Thailand (2000), Cambodia

(2001), Lao PDR (2001), Myanmar (2004) and Philippines (2005).

The coconut leaf beetle caused serious economic damage in Southeast
Asia. The invasion of coconut beetle in Cambodia resulted to 1.95 million trees
or 16% were killed by this pest. Losses estimated at US$17.8 million to the
country industry in Vietnam in 2002. In 2004, it is reported that the total areas hit
by the coconut beetle in Thailand were 7229 hectares (FAO, 2004). In the

Philippines, PCA (2009) documented 2,317,768 coconuts attacked and damaged

by the pest of which 48% are bearing, another 48% non-bearing and the rest are

seedlings (4%).

Although the coconut leaf beetle infestation in the Philippines has not
gone to an alarming level for the past five years, the pest remains to be a threat to
the coconut industry. It is therefore imperative to develop a pest control strategy

against the pest coupled with a reliable pest monitoring system.

Objective of the Study

The study was conducted to understand the pattern of infestation of the
coconut leaf beetle (CLB) in relation to the development and reproduction of the
pest and the development of coconut .

Specifically, it aimed;

1. To determine the spatial distribution of damaged palms across season as
affected by the age of coconut,

2. To relate the infestation pattern of palms to the density and age structure of
the coconut leaf beetle population,

3. To determine the rate of development and reproduction of the coconut leaf

beetle and the leaf development of coconut.

CHAPTER II

REVIEW OF RELATED LITERATURE

Taxonomy of the Coconut Leaf Beetle (Brontispa longissima Gestro)

The taxonomy of the coconut leaf beetle is unclear. Takano et al., (2011) suggest
there are two cryptic species in the current species concept of B. longissima based on

mitochondrial DNA analysis and laboratory crosses.

Some workers have used different names which are synonyms with B.longissima .
Different color morphs of CLB have been described which varies geographically from
reddish-brown to black. Color forms of CLB were described as separate species or
subspecies but currently they are all treated as one species. In Indonesia, many local
varieties have been described from time to time such as var. /ongissima with brown
elytra, originally described in Wolan (Maluku Province), and in Java; var.frogatti Sharp
with almost black elytra, from New Britain and the Solomon islands;var.selebensis
Gestro with a spindle-shaped, black marking on the suture of the elytra, originating from
south and north Sulawesi ,also from near Bogor and Java. Numerous forms, intermediate
between the last two varieties were considered to occur in Sulawesi, Maluku and Papua
Provinces. Fertile offspring from /ongissima and selebensis crosses could be produced in

the laboratory (Kalshoven, 1981). Generally, the color of the adults varies

geographically from reddish -brown in Java to almost black in the Solomon Islands, New

Guinea and Papua Province (Indonesia) (Rethinam, 2007).

The genus Brontispa Sharp (Coleoptera: Chrysomelidae: Cassidinae) contains 22
described species. Seventeen species of which reported feeding on various palms
(Staines, 2011). Species are difficult to separate and the genus is in need of revision.
Among them, Brontispa longissima (Gestro) is the most studied species (Takano et al.,

2012).

Coconut hispine beetle is also known as coconut beetle, coconut leaf hispid, New
Hebrides coconut hispid, dorsalis palm leaf beetle,brontispe du cocotier,tweekleurige
klapperbladkever and Kokosnussblattkafer. Similarly, ever since its first description by
Gestro in 1885 as Brontispa longissima some workers have used different names such as
B. froggatti Sharp, B. castanea Lea, B. reicherti Uhmann, B. simmondsi Maulik and
Oxycephala longipennis Gestro which are all synonyms of B. longissima (Gestro).
However, B. limbata (Waterhouse et al., 1987 ) from Mauritius is considered valid

species.

Species belonging to the genus Brontispa are mainly found in Southeast Asia and
the western and northern Pacific. A number of species have been described, although
several revisions of the genus have seen a considerable reduction in the number of
species. The latest major revision of the subfamily Hispinae, to which the genus
Brontispa belongs, was in 1957. Since then, no further studies on the taxonomy of the

genus Brontispa have been implemented. The sudden and rapid spread of the pest into

Southeast Asia, and the fact that there is considerable intra specific variation in color
patterns within the species B. longissima has caused confusion among plant protection
specialists in the region. This scenario, urgently warrants a revision of the genus

Brontispa (Liebregts et al., 2004).
Geographic Distribution of the Coconut Leaf Beetle

The geographic distribution of the coconut leaf beetle was compiled by CABI in
1989. Its distribution was enumerated in table form per area with corresponding year of

origin and spread (Table 1).

Coconut hispine beetle, B.longissima was originally described from the Aru
Islands (Maluku Province). It is native to Indonesia (Aru Islands, Maluku Province and
possibly to Papua Province formerly known as Irian Jaya) and also to Papua New Guinea,
including the Bismarck Archipelago, where it seldom causes serious problems Its arrival
in Tahiti has facilitated its further spread in Polynesia. In recent times, it has invaded
coconut palms in Republic of Nauru, Cambodia, Laos, Vietnam, Thailand, Myanmar and
Hainan Island (China). B. longissima has reached Ari Atol in Maldives from where it can
easily spread to Sri Lanka and Southern parts of India, if not contained. It is now

distributed in Asia, Australia and Pacific Islands (Rethinam, 2007).

Table 1. Geographic distribution of Brontispa longissima. Modified and updated from
the CABI (1989) distribution map no. 227.

PLACE REMARKS

China 1988 Shenzhen area of Guangdong
Province, spread to Hongkong in 1988,
also in Hainan Island

Indonesia 1885 (Aru Islands, Maluku Province and
Papua Province formerly known as Irian
Jaya), believed to be the original home
along with Bismarck Archipelago
(Papua New Guinea)

1912 Salazar Islands of Sulawesi and in
entire Sulawesi, Bali, Java, and Sumatra

Malaysia Year not known

Maldives 1999 Ari Atol

Myanmar 2004

Cambodia 2001

Laos 2001

Singapore Recent introduction, year not told

Taiwan 1975 Pingtung, spread north and east to
Hualein and Haitung

Thailand 2000 serious damage in Prachuap
Khirikan Province (recent introduction)

Vietnam 1999

American Samoa 1974

Australia 1979 Darwin (Northern Territory)

moved eastwards to Queensland Cairns
and Cook town and as far south as

Innisfail
French Polynesia 1981
New Caledonia 1942

New Hebrides 1961

Table 1. Continued ...

North Mariana Islands 1999 Saipan and Rota

Papua New Guinea First reported from Bismarck
Archipelago, believed to be the original
home along with adjacent Indonesia
(Aru Islands, Maluku Province and
Papua Province formerly known as Irian

Jaya)
Republic of Nauru 2001
Samoa 1980
Solomon Islands 1929
Tahiti 1961
Vanuatu 1937
Wallis and Futuna 1987

Coconut Leaf Beetle Infestation in the Philippines

The coconut leaf beetle is believed to be endemic in the Philippines since it was
listed in Gabriel’s book (1997) and Johnston (1965). Aside from this pest four native
species of hispine were also listed namely; Brontispa depressa, Hispodonta sp.,
Octodonta (Uhmania) angulosa, Octodonta (Uhmania) banguiensis and Octodonta

(Uhmania) surigaona.

Brontispa infestation was first sighted among coconut trees along Airport Road,
NAIA and Roxas Boulevard in Pasay City in April 2005. Since then, infestation has been
reported in nearby provinces. In 2007, 40,000 coconut trees in Samar were hit by the leaf
beetle. In that same year, it also attacked more than 2,000 trees in Pangasinan. In 2009,
PCA documented 2,317,768 coconuts attacked and damaged by the pest of which 48%

are bearing, another 48% non-bearing and the rest are seedlings (4%). From 2010 to


2011, the coconut leaf beetle attacked coconut farms in Maasin City, Southern Leyte. In
2012, the coconut leaf beetle threatened coconut farms in Central Mindanao or the
Socesksargen Region, as they already infested at least 12 towns in the region’s four
provinces. PCA data shows that from August 2007 to March 2011, Brontispa has already

affected more than three million coconut trees (PCA, 2014).

Coconut Leaf Beetle Infestation in Southeast Asia and Pacific

Brontispa longissima is native to Indonesia (Aru Islands, Maluku Province and
possibly Papua Province, formerly Irian Jaya) and to Papua New Guinea, including the
Bismarck Archipelago, where it seldom causes serious problems. It is now distributed in
Asia, Australia and Pacific Islands attacking not only coconut palm but also several other
palm species. It has reached Ari Atol in Maldives from where it could easily spread to
Sri Lanka and southern parts of India, if not contained. In Australia it has been recorded
in 27 native and exotic palms. Lack of strict quarantine on the movement of palms
(particularly ornamentals) is considered as a major factor in the spread of B. longissima.
The spread of B. longissima and other coconut pests in Oceania is mainly attributed to

human activities (Dharmaraju, 1984). The following countries were invaded by CBL;

Cambodia. Brontispa longissima invaded Cambodia around 2001. Of the total 12.3
million coconut trees, 1.95 million trees or 16% were killed by B. longissima, while 7.2

million trees or 58% were attacked.


China. The coconut leaf beetle was found in Hainan, Guangdong and Taiwan provinces,
but the worse affected areas are in Hainan province. In Hainan province, 11 species of

host palm trees were recorded.

Lao PDR. CLB was first reported in 2001. A survey showed that six villages in two
provinces are faced with damaged from CLB. These included Namithon village in the
Pakkading district of Bolikamxay province and the villages of Novilay, Vangboaangtai,

Vangboangnua, Fouang and Nabo in the Sepon district of Savannaket province.

Thailand. Damaged caused by Brontispa was first recorded in Naranthiwas province,
the border area near Malaysia in 2000. Heavy infestation was first reported in February
2004 in southem provinces including Surat Thani (Samui island and Pa-ngan Island) and
Prachuap Khiri Kan. It is reported that the total areas hit by the coconut leaf beetle

outbreaks amounted to 7229 hectares.

Vietnam. The coconut leaf beetle was first detected in the Melkong Delta region in
1999. Despite extensive use of chemical insecticides to control this pest, the beetle
spread and incurred losses estimated at US$ 17.8 million to the coconut industry by 2002.

(FAO, 2004).

Life History Studies of the Coconut Leaf Beetle

Adult females lay their 1.4 mm long and 0.5 mm wide brown flat eggs in the still-
folded leaflets of both young and mature coconut palms. The eggs are surrounded by

debris and excrement, and laid longitudinally in rows of an excavated area of leaf tissue.


They hatch in a minimum and maximum period of 3 - 4 and 4 - 7 days respectively. The
whole cycle from egg to adult occupies about five to seven weeks in Java and Sulawesi
(Kalshoven, 1981; Lever, 1969), but can extend to nine weeks in other (presumably
cooler) places. The adult beetle (7.5 to 10 mm long and 1.5 to 2 mm wide) matures two
weeks after emergence from the pupa. It lives for two to three months, The female on
average lays 120 eggs during several weeks (Kalshoven, 1981), which produce 40 larvae.
The beetles are nocturnal and fly well. They always live in the still-folded leaflets and

move outside only to infest the nearby palms or for mating (Rethinam, 2007).

Hosang et al., (2004) reported that the total life cycle of B. longissima from egg to
adult emergence was 5-7 weeks or 5-9 weeks. Adult females lay singly or in groups of
two to four on the still folded leaflets of both young and mature coconut palms (Rethinam
and Singh, 2005). The eggs hatch after an incubation period of about 5 days (Yueguan
and Yankun, 2004) or 3-7 days (Sankaran, 2006). The newly -hatched larva begins to
feed between and inside unopened leaflets (Yueguan and Yankun, 2004). Larval
development from first instar to fifth instar takes approximately five weeks in the rearing
laboratory at a temperature range of 25-30 °C and 60-90 % humidity. The pupal period is
about five days (Kalshoven, 1981) . Female beetles feed for two to three weeks before
producing viable eggs. Kawazu et al., (2012) found that female beetles would copulate
immediately after emergence, males did not copulate until three weeks after emergence.

Most copulation occurred in the early morning or afternoon.


The beetles feed in the unopened new leaf spear. Adults, pupae and larvae are
most commonly found in this part of the palm. As the new leaf opens, the damage can be
seen as brown patches. Fronds with old damage may appear “scorched” due to a

combination of beetle damage and wind damage (Chinn, 2000).

Life Cycle and Behavior of the Coconut Leaf Beetle

Takano et al., (2012) studied the development of B. longissima in the laboratory
using Satakentia liukiuensis. They found that larvae completed their development
between 20-30°C; larvae reared at 31°C failed to pupate. Development was completed at
the effective cumulative temperature of 891.2 degree-days. With an estimated lower
developmental threshold of 13.3°C.

Similar study was conducted by Thu Giang (2009) using leaves of Typha
angustifolia Lesser. The adult biology and developmental time of egg coconut hispine
beetle were studied in the laboratory at 25°C, 60-70 % relative humidity and 12 L: 12 D
photoperiod. The duration of mating of B. longissima averaged 9.0 1.3 min. The pre-
oviposition of adult was 22.5 +1.4 days. Female laid on average 24.5 +4.4 eggs, adult
longevity was over 2 months. Egg deposition of B. longissima is higher during the night
time compared to the day time. Larvae in general have 4 instars. Temperature had a
significant effect on developmental time of larvae, the higher the temperature, the shorter
its duration of development. High humidity (> 95%) is suitable for survival rate and

development of B. longissima eggs.


Ecological Studies

Host Range of the Coconut Leaf Beetle

The coconut leaf beetle attacks not only coconut palm but also several other
palms (Table 2) and several forms of cycads. Some of these palms include betel palm
(Areca catechu), sago palm (Metroxylon sagu), Mexican fan palm (Washingtonia
robusta), fox tail palm (Wodyetia bifurcate), Alexandra palm (Archontophoenix
alexandrae), dwarf date palm (Phoenix roebelenii), nipa palm (Nypa fruitican), royal
palm (Roystonea regia), oil palm (Elaeis guineensis) nicobar palm (Bentinckia
nicobarica), Carpentaria palm (Carpentaria acuminate), fish tail palm (Caryota mitis),
ivory nut palm (Phytelephas sp.). In Australia, there were 27 native and exotic palms

(Rethinam, 2007) recorded to be hosts of CLB.

Table 2. Host range of the coconut leaf beetle.


SPECIES HOSTS REFERENCE
Brontispa Latania sp. Lever, 1937
longissima Oreodoxa regia H.B.K.

Elaeis guinennsis Jaqc.
Thrinax parviflora Swartz

Kentia sp.

Cocos nucifera L.

Archontophoenix alexandrae (F.

Mull.) H.Wende & Drude
Caryota sp.

Metroxylon sagu Rottb.
Bentnickiopsis sp.

Balaka sp.

Calamus sp.

Roystonea regia H.B.K
Washingtonia filifera Wendl.
W. robusta H.Wendl.
Hyophorbe lagenicaulis (L.H.
Bailey) H.E. Moore
Livistona chinensis R.Br.
Areca traiandra Roxb.

Natural Enemies of the Coconut Leaf Beetle

Lepesme, 1947

Howard and Abad, 2001

At the height of the widespread infestation in Southeast Asia and Pacific of this

pest, various control strategies unique or common to the countries affected were utilized

such as the use of endemic natural enemies and chemical control. Some reports indicated

that a number of natural enemies keeps the coconut leaf beetle in check. These natural

enemies include Asecodes hispinarum and Metarhizium anisopliae in China, Tetrastichus

brontispae, Metarhizium anisopliae var.

anisopliae and Beauveria bassiana in


Indonesia, 4. hispinarum in Cambodia, and Chelisoches morio, Metarhizium anisopliae

var. anisopliae, Beauveria bassiana and Tetrastichus brontispae in the Philippines (Table

3).

Table 3. Natural enemies of the coconut leaf beetle.

SPECIES
(ORDER:FAMILY)

PLACE OF
REPORTING

REMARKS AND
REFERENCE

Egg parasitoids
Hispidophila (Haeckeliana)
brontispae Ferriere
(Hymenoptera:
Trichogrammatidae)

Ooencyrtus podontiae Gahan
(Hymenoptera: Encyrtidae)

Trichogrammatoidea nana
Zehntner (Hymenoptera:
Trichogrammatidae)

Larval/pupal parasitoids

Tetrastichus brontispae
Ferriere (Hymenoptera
:Eulophidae)

Java, Indonesia

Java ,Indonesia

Java, Indonesia

Java/Indonesia

Described in 1931,one wasp
develops per Brontispa egg,
parasitized 15% eggs in the field
(Kalshoven,1981)

Parasitized 10% eggs
(Kalshoven, 1981).In 1984,
Brontispa eggs parasitized by
Ooencyrtus were introduced from
Bogor. Introduced to several
countries for evaluation, recorded
in Malaysia

Described in 1896, successful egg
parasitoid of Brontispa as well as
of several other coconut pests.
Native to
Java(Indonesia),introduced to
Fiji, Papua New Guinea and
Solomon Islands

Found in 60-90% of the pupae
and 10% of the larvae
(Kalshoven, 1981). Considered
most effective species ,widely
introduced in the Pacific Islands

for the control of Brontispa

Table 3. Continued ...

Asecodes hispinarum
Boucek (Hymenoptera:
Eulophidae)

Chrysonotomyia sp.
(Hymenoptera:
Eulophidae)

Entomopathogenic fungi
Metarhizium anisopliae
(Metchnikoff) Sorokin
(Moniliales: Moniliaceae)

Beauveria bassiana
(Balsamo) Vuillemin
(Moniliales: Moniliaceae)

Predator

Chelisoches morio
Fabricius (Dermaptera:
Chelisochidae)

Source: Rethinam, 2007

Samoa

Samoa

Samoa

Java /Indonesia

Dispersal Behavior of Hispine Beetles

Larval parasitoid of B.
longissima collected from
Samoa and released in
Nauru, Thailand, Vietnam
and Maldives

Parasitoid was the most
important cause of larval
mortality, parasitizing 75%
of the 4th instar larvae
collected from Samoa

Widely distributed soil
inhabiting
entomopathogenic fungus.
Isolated from B.
longissima

Common fungi, spraying
of coconut trees with 5x10*
conidia/ml effective
against adults and larvae

Important predator of
Brontispa, available in
most of its distribution
zones


Most hispines species seem to be restricted to understory to mid-canopy level

plants. Work on hispines has shown many species to be monophagous or narrowly


oligophagous. These species are found mostly in relation to their host plants. Other
hispines are broadly oligophagous or polyphagous and can be found in many habitats

(Staines, 2011).

The foraging of adult chrysomelids is influenced mostly by altitude, strength of
affinity with the host, attractiveness to flowers and denseness of foliage, and less by the
availability of young foliage and the abundance of ants or spiders. Adults closely
associated with particular hosts clustered on these in a predictable way but faunal
similarities among tree species had little to do with tree phylogenetic considerations

(Basset et al., 1996)

A very specialized group, the Hispinae feed on Monocotyledonae. There are
many cases of allotropy known among the Chrysomelidae, but very often there is below
some kind of hidden botanical relationships or the choice is due to lack of suitable host
plant or due to the succulence of the cultivated plants. Most of the Chrysomelidae feed
on leaves, roots or dead stems or bark. They generally eat the epidermis in the open air
but larvae also can feed on the collar of the root. Larvae of Hispinae and some Alticinae
and Galerucinae are miners (roots, leaves) or gallicolous (Sagrinae). Many larvae of
Chrysomelidae stay at the inferior side of the leaves (Cassidinae, Galerucinae), but that
can be linked with microclimate or with the difference between both epidermis of the
density of stomata. It has been proved that color vision exists in Chrysomelid beetles
(Chrysolina, Angelastica) and they are able to distinguish green tints from one another, as
well as yellow and orange from blue -violet and green. Food selection is also olfactive,

gustative and mechanical (Jolivet et al., 1981).


Flight ability is not uniformly distributed among the Chrysomelidae. Some
groups are good flyers (Donaciinae, Criocerinae, Alticinae, Galerucinae, etc.), some bad
(Cassidinae) or non-flyers, such as most of the Chrysolina and the genera with reduced or
absent wings (Timarcha). Flight is generally done during the heat of the day, under the
sun, or even in the shade in the tropical forest. Sometimes, flight is migratory
(Leptinotarsa, Paropsis, Diabrotica) and linked with physiological changes and external

stimuli. Generally, flight is diurnal but can be nocturnal (Jolivet et al., 1981).

Measures of Insect Population Density

Estimating population densities of pest arthropods is the most important part of
basic research in agricultural ecosystems and one of the main components in pest
management programs; many other properties are derived from the density measure. A
reliable sampling program to estimate density should include a proper sampling time,
sampling unit and sampling size in which the determination of special distribution is
crucial. Knowledge of the spatial distribution of insects is important in understanding the
biology and ecology of a species and the basis for the development of sampling protocols

(Moradi-Vajargah, 2011).

Insect population can be measured in several ways. The methods for estimating
population densities in arthropods constitute the cornerstone of basic research in
agricultural ecosystems and are the principal tool for implementation of pest management

programs. A reliable sampling program includes an identification of the appropriate


sampling time, sampling unit, a determination of the spatial distribution of sampling units

as well as sample size (Sedaratian, 2010).

Statistical procedures are usually based on parametric techniques commonly used
to summarize information and to perform meaningful inferences about a phenomenon of
interest. The traditional statistical tools classify insect population distribution in an
aggregate, uniform or random manner, based on mean values, variances and frequency
distributions (ratio variance/media, Taylor’s potential law, k parameter etc.) (Duarte et

al., 2015)

Measures of Spatial Distribution Pattern

The spatial distribution pattern of insects can be determined by five commonly
used methods; index of dispersion, Taylor’s power law, Iwao’s patchiness regression,
Morisita’s coefficient of dispersion and Lloyd’s mean crowding (Moradi-Vajargah,
2011). However, in this study only Index of dispersion and Lloyd’s mean crowding were

used.

Index of dispersion

Dispersion of a population can be classified through a calculation of the variance
to mean ratio; namely: s2/m=1 random, < 1 regular and > 1 aggregated. Departure from
a random distribution can be tested by calculating the index of dispersion (ID), where n
denotes the number of samples: ID = (n-1) s2/m ID is approximately distributed as x2

with n-1 degrees of freedom. Values of ID which fall outside a confidence interval


bounded with n-1 degrees of freedom and selected probability levels of 0.95 and 0.05, for

instance, would indicate a significant departure from a random distribution.

Lloyd’s Mean crowding (x*)

Lloyd’s mean crowding (x*) was proposed by Lloyd to indicate the possible
effect of mutual interference or competition among individuals. Theoretically, mean
crowding is the mean number of other individuals per individual in the same quadrate:

x*=m+s2/m-1.

As an index, mean crowding is highly dependent upon both the degree of
clumping and population density. To remove the effect of changes in density, Lloyd
introduced the index of patchiness, expressed as the ratio of mean crowding to the mean.
As with the variance-to-mean ratio, the index of patchiness is dependent upon quadrate

size x*/m=1 random, <1 regular and >1 aggregated (Lloyd, 1967).

CHAPTER III

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Study Area

The study was conducted in Guinobatan, Albay from February 2017 to July 2018
in the following places: Purok 4 and Purok 7 in Barangay Muladbucad Grande, Purok 7
in Barangay Mauraro and Purok 4 in Barangay Lower Binogsacan (Figure 1). These
study sites were selected based on the basis of history of CLB infestation. Three of the
six sites were coconut farms with palms that were 7 years old and up (Al, A2, A3) and
hereby referred to in this manuscript as “bearing age” while the other three sites were
farms of young coconut that were composed of 3-5 years old palms (B1, B2, B3) and

hereby referred to as “non-bearing age”.

The study sites are all located at the foot of Mayon Volcano and considered as an
upland agroecosystem with a mix of sloping and flat terrain. Coconut is the primary crop
grown. Along with coconut palms, other fruit trees like mango, pili, cacao, banana and
papaya were also present as well as forest trees. The undergrowth of these trees was

utilized as grazing area for cattle and carabaos.


Figure 1. Map of the relative position of the sampling sites in Guinobatan,
Albay.

Pattern of Distribution

Within each of the study site described above, an area consisting of one hectare of
coconut was designated as monitoring site. All coconut palms within the one-hectare
monitoring site were mapped (Appendix Figure 2). Mapping was done by dividing the
lot into 100 grid cells of 10 m x 10 m area. Each cell was delineated with plastic straw
for easy identification of coconuts within the cell. The relative position of each palm on
each grid cell was marked. After mapping, each palm was visually examined for CLB
damage and recorded. Monitoring of the CLB infestation was initially planned to be
done only once in the wet season (February 2017) and once in the dry season (May 2017)

but it was extended to cover more than a year (July 2018).


The spatial distribution of the palms was determined using two indices: Lloyd’s
Mean Crowding and Index of Crowding. The average number of palms per hectare as

well as the level of infestation in each of the sampling site were also analyzed.

Population Age Structure and Density

In order to characterize the population of the coconut leaf beetle (CLB) in the
study sites, destructive sampling of palms inside the designated 1-hectare monitoring area
were done. The sampling was synchronized with the damage monitoring of palms in

February 2017, May 2017 and July 2018.

A sample of 10 -15 coconut palms per study site was taken at random. The
number of coconut leaf beetle from the samples was counted and classified according to
the life stage. The adults were collected and distinguished into male and female to
determine the sex ratios. Female adults were dissected to determine its reproductive

stage using the rating system in Table 4.

Table 4. Rating system used to designate reproductive stage of the female coconut leaf
beetle (Brontispa longissima Gestro) (Adapted from Cardenas et al., 2000).

REPRODUCTIVE STAGE DESCRIPTION
Virgin females Ovarioles not differentiated
Gravid females Ovarioles with mature ova but without
corpora lutea
Spent females Regressed ovarioles without mature ova

with corpora lutea


Life History of the Coconut Leaf Beetle

The life history of the coconut leaf beetle was studied under laboratory and field
conditions in the Crop Science Department, BUCAF, Guinobatan, Albay and in the

Insect Ecology Laboratory, IWEP, UP Los Bajios, College, Laguna.

Laboratory Life History. The growth and rate of development of CLB was
studied using F1 laboratory population that were originally field collected from various
places in Guinobatan, Albay. Rearing methodology followed that of the protocol

developed by Liebregts et al., (2006) (Appendix Figure 3).

Data were obtained from individually reared insects. Fifty eggs of one cohort
were taken and observed until hatching. As soon as the eggs hatched, larvae were reared
individually in test tubes measuring 25x200 mm provided with excised young coconut
leaf. Replacement of food was done every two days. Daily observations of the insects for

mortality and molting was done. Temperature was recorded daily.

The following data were gathered for the development time in terms of number of
days; egg stage (incubation period), larval stage, total larval period, pupal period, pre-
oviposition period and number of days from egg to adult stage. In terms of reproductive
potential, fecundity was recorded also such as the number of eggs per female in its life
time.

Field Biology. To study the field biology of coconut leaf beetle, twenty coconut
seedlings were inoculated separately with 1* instar larva. There were two newly-emerged

1* instar larva introduced per plant initially, but only one larva was maintained per plant


as soon as the larva has settled to feed. Observations were done daily until adult stage
emerged from a total of 20 larvae. The data gathered were the same as the laboratory
studies. Ambient air temperature in the green house was recorded daily from 8 am and

Spm.

Development of the Coconut Leaf

To study the development of the coconut leaf, 10 coconut seedlings were planted
in the field with a spacing of three meters each. Observation was done daily to determine
the growth, appearance and increase in height of the first true leaf and the succeeding
leaves. The stages were designated arbitrarily and described accordingly as significant

changes were observed in the growth.

Another set of 10 seedlings were planted in polyethylene bags and observed under

greenhouse condition. The same data as earlier described in this section were gathered.

CHAPTER IV

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Spatial Distribution of Infested Palms

The palms infested with the coconut leaf beetle (CLB) in a farm showed a
clumped distribution pattern based on either Index of Clumping or Lloyd’s Mean
Crowding (Table 5). The values of both indices were consistently higher in palms of
non-bearing age (3-5 years old) than those of the bearing age (greater than 7 years old)

across sampling time.

In the first sampling, this result indicate that clumping was observed in both age
groups of palms but the damage in non-bearing palms are more clumped than in bearing
palms. This variation was influenced by the percentage of infestation. It is expected that
index of clumping would increase as more palms are infested given the same area of
sampling. The higher infestation in the non-bearing age seemed to indicate that CLB has
a preference to young palms. It is also possible that the damage to young palms was more

apparent because they succumb to the infestation faster than palms of bearing age.

From the first to the second sampling, there was no difference in the pattern of
infestation of palms in the study sites. There was neither an increase nor decrease in the

number of infested palms as well as their distribution. Considering the high infestation


level and the length of time between the two sampling events, there was no indication
that the CLB have moved to the neighboring palms to feed or oviposit. Unlike other
insects, the CLB did not disperse readily from one plant to another. In the second
sampling, there was no change in the pattern of infestation of palms in the sample farms.
Unlike other insects, the CLB did not disperse readily from one plant to another.
Considering the high infestation level and the length of time between the two sampling
events, there was no indication that the CLB have moved to the neighboring palms to

feed or oviposit.

In the third sampling, the infestation pattern showed a clumped distribution just
like the first two sampling time. Both indices were higher in non-bearing palms than in
bearing palms. The infestation level in the sample farms significantly decreased after a

year and a few palms were felled due to CLB damage.

The index of clumping determines that CLB movement is very low within a
hectare and its feeding behavior is concentrated per frond as a manifestation of the
percent infestation and clumped distribution of damaged palms especially in non-bearing
age. According to Strauss (1988) in chrysomelids, mating, oviposition and adult and
larval feeding all take place on the same plant. It indicates that both adult and larvae feed

on the same resource, indicating a large influence on patterns of host use.

These behavior correlates with the percentage infestation and density of CLB in
non-bearing age. The increased dispersion in non-bearing palms is thought to result from

the higher rate of attack of CLB which indicate a higher infestation. It is also an indicator


of an outbreak in the area with 100 percent infestation in non-bearing palms. Chew et al.,
(1991), observed that infestation rise when hosts are predictable. Predictable and
apparent hosts accumulate greater herbivore loads. Thus, herbivore loads are also related
to host apparency.

Table 5. Spatial distribution of palms infested with the coconut leaf beetle (Brontispa
longissima Gestro) per hectare (Guinobatan, Albay).

SAMPLING | AGE OF DENSITY OF | INFESTED a
TIME PALMS PALMS PALMS CPST SEDI uC)
(No./ha) (Yo/ha)
Index of Lloyd’s mean
clumping crowding
Bearing 151.0 68.6 63.7 78.7
February
2017 Non- 132.0 89.4 96.0 164.0
bearing
Bearing 151.0 68.6 63.7 78.7
May 2017 | Non- 132.0 89.4 96.0 164.0
bearing
Bearing 148.7 12.9 43 6.7
July 2018 | Non- 125.7 62.0 11.3 14.7
bearing
es ee ee ee ce

The level of infestation per palm varied with the age of coconut palms. It is
expected that percent infested palms would increase given the same area of sampling and
higher number of palms per hectare. The same percent infested palms in non bearing age
in two sampling time indicate that CLB has a preference to young palms (Table 6 ). Non-
bearing age had the higher infested fronds in three sampling time than the bearing age.

The intensity of damage was influenced by the mean population of CLB in non-bearing


age. This indicates that CLB has a preference to young palms. The population of CLB in
non-bearing age was higher throughout the sampling period. This indicate that percent-
infested palms is related to the density and age structure of CLB in the field. Most of the
CLB populations are in adult and larval stage in those fronds with highest number of
infestations. These stages were considered as the destructive stage since they are feeding
continuously on the palms and brought too much damage in the fronds. Adult and larva
CLB were observed feeding on the same resource. This indicates that CLB has a
behavior of maximizing the resources available within an area. Its feeding behavior was
influenced also by the heterogeneity of the environment such as microclimate especially
relative humidity and preferred part of the plant. Individuals are attracted to a particular
structures (closed fronds) or stimuli and microclimatic conditions inside the frond
(humid). In this case, CLB tends to aggregate inside the closed fronds as a manifestation
of their preference to humid conditions. Other studies show that aggregation is brought
about by coconut leaf volatiles. Both sexes are attracted to a mixture of B-myrcene, (-)-
limonene and E-2-hexen-]-ol (1:6:1), which are key components of coconut palm leaf
volatiles. A blend of B-myrcene and (-)-limonene (0.7:1-1:0.7) in low amounts (100 ng)
elicits aggregation and oviposition in females. Chemical analyses of food-deprived,
gravid female B. longissima show high concentrations of B-myrcene and (-)-limonene
in their accessory glands, suggesting that female beetles sequester both compounds and
release them during oviposition (Fang , 2011). Thus, level of infestation of CLB per palm
can be explained by the feeding behavior, slow dispersion, higher density, age structure

of CLB and age of palms in the area.


Table 6. Level of infestation of the coconut leaf beetle (Brontispa longissima Gestro) per
palm in the various sampling sites as affected by age of palms (Guinobatan,

Albay).
SAMPLING | AGE |DENSITY OF | INFESTED CLB
TIME OF PALMS PALMS | INFESTATION/PALM
PALMS | (No-/ha) (%ofha) Number of | Number of
infested fronds CLB
Bearing 151.0 68.6 25 59.8
February 2017 | Non 132.0 89.4 44 623
bearing
Bearing 151.0 68.6 29 575
May 2017 | Non 132.0 89.4 3.0 164.9
bearing
Bearing 148.7 129 0.6 10.1
Buty 2018 Non 125.7 62.0 15 19.8
bearing

Population Density and Age Structure of the Coconut Leaf Beetle

The density of CLB in six sampling sites varied with the age of coconut palms

and sampling period (Table 7 and Figure 2). Highest density was observed on second

sampling in non-bearing age. However, its population decline on the third sampling. It

implies that CLB preferred non-bearing age of coconut palms and drier period for their

development and multiplication .


Table 7. Mean density of the coconut leaf beetle (Brontispa longissima Gestro) in the

various sampling sites as affected by age of palms (Guinobatan, Albay).

SAMPLING AGE OF CLB STAGES
TIME PALMS (Number/Palm)
Egg Larva Pupa Adult = Total
Bearing 11.9 27.9 11 9.0 59.8
Feb 2017
iat Non-bearing 88 196 138 201 623
Bearing 23.4 18.8 3.1 12.3 57.5
May 2017
Non-bearing 45.8 60.1 9.8 49.3 164.9
Bearing 2.9 44 0.4 2.3 10.1
July 2018
Non-bearing S22) 6.4 2.7 5.5 19.8

a
S
a
a
cS)
&
<
Zz

Figure 2.

Bearing Non bearing

Bearing Non bearing

Feb.2017

May-17

Sampling period

Begg Mlarva

Bearing Non bearing

Jul-18

pupa Sadult

. Population of the the coconut leaf beetle ( Brontispa longissima Gestro ) in

the study sites.


The age structure of CLB varied with the age of coconut and sampling period
(Figure 3). Both bearing and non-bearing age has more immature stages than the adult
stage from the first sampling until last sampling period. The highest population was in
the larval stage. Its population was concentrated in the non-bearing age. This indicates

that CLB has a preference for non-bearing age of palms.

100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%

Mean The Coconut Leaf Beetle (Brontispa longissima
Gestro) popluation per coconut palm

0%
Bearing Bearing Non Bearing Non
age = age bearing age bearing
age age age
Feb-17 May-17 Jul-18

Sampling period

WEge Blarva @Pupa w Adult

Figure 3. Age structure of the coconut leaf beetle (Brontispa longissima Gestro) in
bearing and non-bearing age of coconut palms.

The reproductive stage of adult female CLB was derived from the samples of
adults collected in the field (Table 8). Its distribution varies from the sampling period

and age of coconut palms. Both ages of coconut palms comprise mostly of virgin


females from February and May 2017 and gravid females in July 2018. Spent females

were also observed in two sampling period regardless of age of coconut palms.

The percent infested palms can be explained by density,age structure and
reproductive stage of adult female. To explain field infestation, the rate of reproduction
of CLB for three months was doubled. Its reproductive stage of adults was mostly on
virgin and gravid females. Results indicate that, the percent infestation in the field will
start in three months’ time. This can be explained further by the density and reproductive
stage from the samples taken in three sampling period. The result of laboratory
experiment, could support the claim that CLB infestation would start in three months’
time. CLB with the presence of spent female is a good indicator that they did not
dispersed well in the area. This also indicate that new infestation was observed on the
first sampling period and CLB population started to established. Two month old infested
on the second sampling and three month old infested on the third sampling as explained
by the rate of development, reproductive stage and age structure in the field. This
explains why pattern of infestation was observed in each sampling area. It says that,
infestation levels are related to numerical stability of hosts as well as the population

density of insects.


Table 8. Mean reproductive stage of adult female coconut leaf beetle (Brontispa

longissima Gestro) in the various sampling sites (Guinobatan, Albay).

SAMPLING AGE OF REPRODUCTIVE STAGE OF CLB | TOTAL
TIME PALM Virgin Gravid Spent
female female female
Bearing 4.0 0.4 0.5 49
February 2017
Non-bearing 8.8 28 1.8 13.4
Bearing i 47 1.6 0.5 68
May 2017
Non-bearing 19.5 5.5 0.1 25.1
Bearing 2.7 47 0.0 74
July 2018
Non-bearing 9.7 17.3 0.0 27.0
Total 49.4 32.3 2.9 84.6

Rate of Development and Reproduction of the Coconut Leaf Beetle

The development time of CLB reared under field condition was shorter than those

reared under laboratory condition (Table 9). Male CLB had shorter duration of life cycle

than the female. There were 5 larval instars instead of 4 and 6 as reported by Froggatt

and O’Connor (1941) .The total duration of larval stage was 23.73+0.33 days and

23.73+0.38 days in females and 23.00+0.38 days and 22.86+0.14 days in males both in

the laboratory and field condition. The total developmental period, days from egg to

adult, was 34.33+0.41 days and 28.37+0.29 days in females and males in the laboratory

and 32.00 +0.33 days in females and 26.71+0.36 days in males in field condition. Both

sexes reared in laboratory and field condition had relatively equal duration of larval

stages and total developmental period from egg to adult.


The data obtained from this study is relatively shorter than those reported by other
investigators (O’Connor, 1940; Froggatt and O’Connor, 1941; Kalshoven, 1981,
Waterhouse and Norris 1987; FAO, 2006). The variation in the developmental period
could be attributed to the differences in temperature, relative humidity, host plants and
other environmental conditions existing in the different study areas. The number of
larval instars differed from that reported by Froggart and O’Connor (1941) which was 4.
As previously reported, the stages may vary from 5 to 6 at different places (O’Connor,

1940).

In order to test if there was a significant difference in the development rate
between the coconut leaf beetle reared from the field and laboratory, a Mann Whitney
Wilcoxon test was used. This test is a non-parametric test which was the best option for
small number of samples. P-value is less than 0.05, which indicates that there was a
significant difference in the development rate between samples from the field and

laboratory.


Table 9. Development time of the coconut leaf beetle (Brontispa longissima Gestro)
reared under laboratory and field condition (duration in days) (Mean+ SEM).

STAGES LABORATORY (n=50) FIELD (n=20)
Female Male Female Male

Egg 4.73+ 0.13 4.83+0.16 3.25+0.16  3.86+0.34
Larva

1* instar 4.53+ 0.10 4.91+0.10 3.88+ 0.13 3.86+0.14

2" instar 5.83+ 0.20 5.20+0.17 4.1340.13  4.43+0.20

3" instar 5.034 0.10 4.80+0.11 5.00£0.19  4.57+0.20

4" instar 6.45+ 0.12 6.46+0.14 5.00 0.19 4.86+0.14

5 instar 4.75+ 0.41 6.91+0.05 5.00+0.19  5.14+0.14
Pupa 5.884 0.19 5.26+0.18 5.7540.16  5.43+0.30
Total Larval period | 23.73+ 0.33 23.54+0.29 23.00+0.38 22.86+0.14
Days from egg to 34.33+ 0.41 28.37+0.29 32.00+0.33 26.71+0.36
adult

P-value <0.05 (P value is less than 5 which indicates significant difference in the development time)

The adult parameters of CLB reared in the laboratory was different from those
reared in the field except for the sex ratio (Table 10). The sex ratio did not deviate from
the expected 1:1 sex ratio and this conforms to the study of Acevedo et al., (2014).
Female longevity was longer under laboratory condition as compared with those reared in
the field. Female longevity was 228.38+9.50 days and 119.625+5.19 days in the
laboratory and field condition. Male longevity was 185.20+15.21 days and 174.57+14.68

days both in the laboratory and field condition. Pre-oviposition period was 20.10+0.70


days in the laboratory and the female laid 87.93+3.26 eggs per female during several

weeks. However, no comparison was made since adult CLB reared in the field died.

Similar studies showed that female lays an average of 120 eggs during several
weeks and lives for 220 days (PCA-RDEB, 2012). In this study, female CLB life span
was almost 8 months and laid 87 eggs per female. It was also observed in the laboratory
under extreme circumstances, that single female CLB could laid 126 eggs and adult

longevity for female was 302 days and male was 355 days .

Table 10. Adult parameters of the coconut leaf beetle (Brontispa longissima Gestro)
reared under laboratory and field condition (Mean+ SEM).

PARAMETERS LABORATORY FIELD
Sex ratio 1:1 1:1
Female Longevity (days) 228.38+9.50 119.625+5.19
Male Longevity (days) 185.20+15.21 174.57£14.68
Fecundity(eggs/female) 87.93+3.26 0.00
Pre-oviposition (days) 20.10+0.70 0.00

The density of CLB for three months exposure in the field varied from sampling
period (Figure 4). From a single pair of CLB introduced per palm, the rate of
development was doubled. The study shows that a single pair of CLB could produce
more adults for three months’ time on single coconut palms and could survive throughout

its generation.


Coconut Leaf Beetle (Brontispa
longissima Gestro)

Mean population per pair of the

100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
Egg

Larva Pupa adult
Sampling period

@1 month #2months ®3 months

Figure 4. Mean population of the coconut leaf beetle (Brontispa longissima Gestro)
after three- month caged experiment under field condition.
The reproductive stage of CLB was counted after a month and thereafter (Figure
5) . CLB undergoing pre-oviposition or virgin female was higher in the second month of
observation and relatively equal in proportion after three months of introduction in the
gravid female. However, the mean physiological age was observed to be more on the

virgin female.


100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%

0%

Reproductive stage of the Coconut Leaf Beetle
(Brontispa longissima Gestro)

1month 2 months 3 months
Sampling period

Virgin female = Gravid female Spent female

Figure 5. Reproductive stage of adult female coconut leaf beetle (Brontispa
longissima Gestro) derived from three-month caged experiment under
field conditions.

Development of the Coconut Leaf

The developmental stages of coconut leaf was observed for three months’ time
under field and green house conditions (Table 11). The developmental stages were
described based on the duration (days) of its emergence. The stages include the
following pinnae emergence (0-5 days), first shoot emergence (17 DAEP- Days after
emergence of pinnae), second shoot emergence (52 DAEP), third shoot emergence (75
DAEP) and fourth shoot emergence (93 DAEP) (Appendix Figure 1). The emergence of

every shoot of the coconut leaf was observed with an average of more or less one month


(23 days) before another shoot emerge. The emergence of shoot of the coconut leaf is

inferred to be synchronous with the development of CLB based on the study in the

laboratory and field condition.

Table 11. Development of the coconut leaf (duration in days) in Guinobatan, Albay.

STAGE DAEP (Days after DURATION (days)
emergence of pinnae)

Pinnae emergence - 0-5
Pinnae elongation 15 10
1* shoot emergence 17 2
2" shoot emergence 52 12
3" shoot emergence 75 rel
93 7

4" shoot emergence



GENERAL DISCUSSION

Infestation Pattern and Development and Reproduction of CLB

The biology of CLB in the laboratory and field also explains the clumped pattern
of infested palms per hectare. Aggregated distribution of infested palms is probably due
to the iteroparous egg laying behavior of the adults. CLB lay eggs singly throughout its
lifetime and the development of their offspring takes place where the eggs laid. It was
observed that, when eggs hatch, the emerging larvae stayed and fed on the same fronds as
they developed until the frond was fully opened. Adult dispersal was very low since they
are weak fliers and often do not move far over the course of their lifespan . Female CLB

inferred to stay on the same frond until the leaflets were fully utilized.

This behavior correlates with the percent infestation in the non-bearing age of
coconut palms where 100% infestation was observed. This indicates that an outbreak
was observed. Likewise, higher infestation is also related to the density of CLB per
hectare . The increase in dispersion in non-bearing palms is thought to result from the

higher rate of attack on palms .

Development of CLB and the Coconut Leaf

The damage per palm can be explained by determining the rate of reproduction of
CLB for three months and its physiological age. To explain field infestation, the rate of
reproduction of CLB for one month until three months was doubled. The physiological

age of adults was mostly on virgin females and gravid females. Results indicate that the


percentage infestation in the field will start in three months’ time when the CLB started
its infestation as reflected in the rate of reproduction and physiological age both in the

laboratory and the field.

The local dispersion of CLB adult is very low since the coconut palms could produce
suitable frond every 23 days as reflected in the development of the coconut leaf. This
will serve as their source of new infestation . The behavior of CLB is to mate
immediately with the male CLB. Such indicates that probably the male CLB will transfer
to another coconut palms and look for female CLB to be mated. Therefore, female CLB
will stay on the coconut palms until it was totally consumed before they will transfer to

another suitable palms to laid eggs.

The development time of CLB females ranged from 32.00+0.33 and 34.33+0.41
days for both field and laboratory and pre-oviposition period of 20.10+0.70 days. Such
results indicates that female CLB are ready to lay eggs after 55.54 days. In the field, only
female CLB was observed to transfer and attacked first the coconut palms in the area
after 55 Days after planting and was observed to lay eggs immediately. This conforms
with the result of development time of CLB in the laboratory. However, observation was

not done comprehensively in terms of CLB egg laying behavior in the field.

The rate of reproduction of CLB after three months in the screen house was
inferred to be related to the development of the coconut leaf. More CLB adult was

produced on a single host after three months of observation. This indicates that, one pair


of CLB could produce more individuals and complete their development on a single host

and ready to transfer on another host after three months’ time.

It was inferred from the study that one coconut palm can support several
generations of CLB. CLB adults were weak fliers so they tend to stay on a single host
until it was totally consumed and fully opened before they transferred to another host to
lay eggs. However, it was observed in the study that one pair of CLB and its generations
could only survived on a single host for three months since coconut palms could not
support its further development. Therefore, CLB tends to transfer on another host for
their survival. The behavior of female CLB is to mate immediately with the male. Such
indicates that probably the male CLB will the first one to transfer to another coconut
palm and look for female CLB to be mated. While the female CLB will stay on the
coconut palms until it was totally consumed before they will transfer to another suitable
palms to lay eggs. This indicates that CLB development synchronized with the
emergence of suitable host in a coconut palms as their source of new infestation. These
observations can be supported by the studies conducted on the rate of development ,

reproduction of CLB and its relationship with the development of coconut leaf.

However, its relationship to the development of coconut leaf have not done
comprehensively since development of the coconut leaf was done for only short period of

time.


Infestation Pattern and Development of the Coconut Leaf

Larval population was more clumped as indicated by the highest value in the
index of clumping . Aggregated way of life of CLB especially in the larval stage are
formed and maintained for a number of reasons and by a number of mechanisms.
Simply, it is the result of uneven distribution of resources and attracted by stimuli from
conspecifics which serve as a reliable indicator of an ephemeral or cryptic resources .
The volatile compounds released by a plant under attack by insect herbivores often
change in composition both quantitively and qualitatively compared to the volatiles
released by an undamaged plant . This aggregation behavior can be explained also by the
feeding behavior and reproductive biology of CLB which is influenced by the
heterogeneity of the environment such as microclimate especially relative humidity and
preferred part of the plant. In the case of CLB, aggregations may arise passively because
individuals are attracted to a particular structures (closed fronds) or stimuli and
microclimatic conditions inside the frond (humid). This observation is supported by
studies of Copp in 1983 that ladybird beetles clump as temperatures fall from 35°C to

15°C in dark or diffuse light, and they dispersed at temperatures above 35°C.

A number of hypotheses have been proposed to answer why do beetles aggregate?
One possible explanation is that animals aggregate for the purposes of mating and that the
probability of mating increases in larger groups. A second possible explanation for

aggregation behavior is that survivorship is greater in larger groups. The increased


survivorship is greater in larger groups and result from an increase in feeding efficiency

or from lower rates of predation or parasitism (Bach,C.1990).

The infestation pattern was indicated by the number of infested fronds. The mean
number of infested frond correlates with the density and age structure of CLB. This
indicates that the higher the number of CLB per palm, the higher the number of fronds
damage (Table 9). Specific pattern was observed on the age structure of CLB throughout
the sampling period and on the age of coconut palms. Larval stage was higher in

population in February 2017 and reached its peak in May 2017 and declined in July 2018.

Non-bearing age of palms indicates a higher mean number of infested fronds
coupled with the higher density of CLB . Most of the CLB populations are in adult and
larval stage in those fronds with highest number of infestations. Results showed that the
feeding behavior , developmental rate, physiological age and adult dispersal could

explain its infestation pattern .

The CLB adult had a low dispersal or movement, this can be supported by the
physiological stage of adults in the field. Most of the adults in the area from February
2017 and May 2017 are virgin females and the presence of spent females. The spent
females are indicator that CLB adult did not dispersed well in the area. They tend to stay
on the same coconut palms throughout their life span. The number of infested fronds
correlates with the density, age structure, physiological age and probably the
development of the coconut leaf. This indicates that, the higher the number of CLB per

palm, the higher the number of fronds damaged which in turn could result to outbreak


scenario. It also indicates that probably the development of CLB synchronized with the
development of the coconut leaf that is why CLB did not dispersed well because of the
new resource available in the area. This explains why infestation pattern was observed to

be clumped.

CHAPTER V

SUMMARY, CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATION

Spatial distribution of damaged palms, infestation pattern, density, age structure
and rate of development and reproduction were studied to understand the pattern of
infestation of CLB in relation to the development and reproduction of the pest and
development of the coconut. These information’s were gathered to generate basic
knowledge as a basis in designing a proper monitoring and sampling scheme for CLB.
These studies showed that those parameters were closely linked to the season, age of

coconut and to the development of the coconut leaf.

Both Index of dispersion and Lloyd’s mean crowding methods indicate an
aggregated distribution pattern of infested palms in a farm across season as affected by
the age of coconut. This variation was influenced by the percentage of infestation
considering the same area of sampling sites. Clumped distribution of infested palms is an

indicator of an outbreak in the area with 100% infestation in non-bearing palms.

Infested palms varied with the age of coconut and non-bearing age had the highest
infestations than the bearing age. This correlates with the higher density of CLB in non-

bearing age as well as the presence of more adults and larval stage in the area.


The clumped distribution of CLB and infestation pattern that could lead to an
outbreak scenario can be explained by the feeding behavior, reproductive biology, egg

laying, dispersal and movement of CLB as well as its density.

The developmental stages of the coconut leaf for three months includes pinnae
emergence, 1° shoot emergence, 2™ shoot emergence, 3rd shoot emergence and 4" shoot
emergence. Analysis on the developmental period of CLB and rate of development
indicates that the development of every shoot of coconut seedlings was inferred to be
synchronous with the development of CLB. The emergence of shoot of coconut leaf was
observed with an average of more or less one month (23 days) before another shoot
emerge. This explains why CLB did not dispersed well in the area because of the
presence of suitable host as their source of new infestation. This observation
complemented the laboratory and field biology studies where CLB was able to complete
its development from egg to adult in 32.00 + 0.33 and 34.33+0.41 days and pre-

oviposition period of 20.10 + 0.70 days.

The spatial distribution of damaged palms, infestation pattem of palms,
population density, age structure, and rate of development and reproduction of CLB on
coconut palms as well as the development of coconut leaf are important basic
information for the development of sampling plans, which are among the key elements in
pest management strategies. Development of sampling protocols require knowledge of

the spatial distribution of insects in understanding the biology and ecology of a species .


On the basis of these findings, CLB infestation did not spread even if there was
an increase in the population. Therefore monitoring of infested palms alone is not

enough to come up with pest control strategy .

Additional studies should investigate the relationship of development of coconut
leaf/palms for a longer period of time. Infestation monitoring should be done every six
months or one year to determine its spatial distribution in an area. Further studies should
be conducted on long dispersal of CLB as well as its population dynamics on bearing and
non-bearing palms. Likewise, behavior on mating and migration pattern of CLB adult is

also recommended.

LITERATURE CITED

ACEVEDO, A.M.T., M.A.J. TORRES, M.M.E. MANTING, E. SABADO, A.R.C.
ALFILER and G. DEMAYO. 2014. Sex ratios of Brontispa longissima
(Gestro) infesting coconuts in selected provinces in the Philippines. Annals
of Biological Research, 5(2),111-116.

BACH,C.E. 1990. Plant successional stage and insect herbivory flea beetles on sand
dune willow. Ecology, 7 (2),598-609.

BASSET, Y.V.E.S. and G.A. SAMUELSON. 1996. Ecological characteristics of an
arboreal community of Chrysomelidae in Papua New Guinea. Chrysomelidae
biology, 2,243-262.

CABI. 1989. Distribution maps of pests.Nos.9, 65, 170, 227, 504, 505, 506, 507,
508. CAB International Institute of Entomology, 56 Queen’s Gate, London,
SW7 SJR, UK.

CARDENAS, A.M. and J.M. HIDALGO. 2000. Seasonal activity and reproductive
biology of the ground beetle Carabus dufouri. (Coleoptera : Carabidae)
European Journal of Entomology, 97 (3), 329-338.

CHEW, F.S. and S. P. COURTNEY. 1991. Plant apparency and evolutionary
escape from insect herbivory. The American Naturalist, 138 (3),729-750.

CHINN, D. and H. BROWN. 2001. Biological control of palm leaf beetle,
Brontispa longissima (Gestro) (Coleoptera:Chrysomelidae) with the wasp
parasitoid, Tetrastichus brontispae (Ferriere) (Hymenoptera: Eulophidae) in
Darwin. Technical Bulletin Department of Primary Industry and Fisheries,
Norther territory of Australia, 288, 61-65.

COPP, N. H. 1983. Temperature-dependent behaviours and cluster formation by
aggregating ladybird beetles. Animal behaviour, 31(2), 424-430.

DHARMARAJU, E. 1984. Transport and the spread of crop pests in Tropical
Polynesia. Commerce and the spread of pests and disease vectors, 257-272.

DUARTE, F., M.V. CALVO, A. BORGES and I.B. SCATONI. 2015. Geostatistics
applied to the study of the spatial distribution of insects and its use in


integrated pest management. Revista. Agronomica del Noroeste Argentino,
35(2):9-20.

FANG, Y., J. SUN and Z. ZHANG. 2011. Response of Brontispa longissima to
coconut palm (Cocos nucifera) leaf volatiles. Physiological Entomology, 36
(4), 321-326.

FAO. 2004. Report of the expert consultation on coconut beetle outbreak in APPPC
member countries.pp.26-27.

FROGGATT, J.L. and B.A. O'CONNOR. 1941. Insects associated with the coconut
palm. Part II. New Guinea Agricultural Gazette, 7(2).

GABRIEL, B.P. 1997. Insects and mites injurious to Philippine crop plants. [np].

GIANG, H. T. T. and S. NAKAMURA. 2009. The study on biological characteristics
of Brontispa longissima (Gestro) (Coleoptera: Chrysomelidae). Journal of
Science Development, 7(2), 159-164.

HISPINE PEST OF PALMS FACT SHEET: A resource for pests and diseases of
cultivated palms. 2016. Id tools. org.

HOSANG, M.L.A., J.C. ALOUW and H. NOVARIANTO. 2004. Biological control
of Brontispa longissima (Gestro) in Indonesia. Report of the expert consultation
on coconut beetle outbreak in APPC member countries, 26-27.

ICHIKI, R.T., D.T. DUNG, S.I. TAKANO and S. NAKAMURA. 2009. Artificial
diets for rearing the coconut hispine beetle Brontispa longissima and its
parasitoid Asecodes hispinarum. Journal of Applied Entomology, 133(7), 539-
545.

JOLIVET, P. , E.  PETITPIERRE and T.H.HSIAO.(Eds.).2012. Biology of
Chrysomelidae (Vo.42).Springer Science and Business Media.

KALSHOVEN, L.G.E. 1981. Pests of crops in Indonesia. Revised and translated into
english by P. A. van der Lann. Jakarta and P. T. Ichtiar Baru-Van Houve.
pp.701.

KAWAZU, K., W. SUGENO, A. MOCHIZUKI, S.I. TAKANO, M. MURATA, R.T.
ICHIKI and S. NAKAMURA. 2012. Age in relation to copulation, egg
development and multiple mating behavior in the coconut palm pest Brontispa
longissima (Coleoptera: Chrysomelidae). Annals of the Entomological Society
of America, 105(5), 746-750.


KAWAZJU, K., W. SUGENO, A. MOCHIZUKI, S. NAKAMURA. 2017. Polyandry
increases reproductive performance but does not decrease survival in female
Brontispa longissima, Bulletin of Entomological Research, 107(2),165-173.

LI, J., D.R. SEAL, G.L. LEIBEE, and O.E. LIBURD. 2012. Seasonal abundance and
spatial distribution of the leafminer, Liriomyza trifolii (Diptera: Agromyzidae)
and its parasitoid, Opius dissitus (Hymenoptera: Braconidae) on bean in
Southern Florida. Florida Entomologist, 95 (1),128-136.

LIEBREGTS, W. and K. CHAPMAN. 2004. Impact and control of the coconut
hispine beetle, Brontispa longissima (Gestro) (Coleoptera: Chrysomelidae).

LLOYD, M. 1967. Mean crowding. J. Anim. Ecol.36:1-30. Bureau of Animal
Population, Department of Zoological Field Studies. Oxford University,
England.

LUMENTUT, N., S. KARINDAH, L. SULISTYOWATI, and R.D. PUSPITARINI.
2013. The demographic of Brontispa longissima variety of celebensis (Gestro)
(Coleoptera: Chrysomelidae) on mapanget tall coconut and brown dwarf
coconut. IOSRJAVS), 6(2),33-37.

LEVER, R. J. 1969. Pests of the coconut palm (No. 18). Food & Agriculture Org.

MORADI-VAJARGAH, M., A. GOLIZADEH, H. RAFIEE-DASTJERDI, M.P.
ZALUCKI, M. HASSANPOUR, and B. NASERI. 2011. Population density
and spatial distribution pattern of Hypera postica (Coleoptera: Curculionidae) in
Ardabil, Iran. Notulae Botanicae Horti Agrobotanici Cluj-Napoca, 39 (2),42-48.

NAKAMURA, S., K. KONISHI and K. TAKASU. 2006. Invasion of the coconut
hispine beetle, Brontispa longissimi; current situation and control measures in
Southeast Asia. In proceedings of international workshop on development of
database (APASD) for biological invasion (Vol. 3, pp. 1-9). Taichung, Taiwan:
Taiwan Agricultural Chemicals and Toxic Substance Research Institute.

NAVASERO, M.V., N.T. SAAVEDRA and M.B. ZIPAGAN. 2008. The coconut leaf
beetle, Brontispa longissima (Gestro) (Chrysomelidae, Colepotera), a serious
threat to the Philippine coconut industry. In proceedings of the 39 PMCP
Anniversary and Annual Scientific Conference, Asturias Hotel, Puerto Princesa
City, Palawan.

O'CONNOR, B. A. 1940. Notes on the coco-nut leaf hispa, Brontispa froggatti Sharp,
and its parasites. New Guinea Agricultural Gazette, 6(2).


PHILIPPINE COCONUT AUTHORITY-ALBAY. 2014. Highlights of
accomplishments.

PHILIPPINE COCONUT AUTHORITY-RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT AND
EXTENSION BRANCH. Technology series No.3 (March 2012). A monthly
techno-info release of PCA-RDEB.

RETHINAM, P., S._ P. SINGH, S. APPANAH, H.C. SIM, and K.V. SANKARAN.
2007.Current status of the coconut beetle outbreaks in the Asia-Pacific region.
Developing an Asia-Pacific strategy for forest invasive species: the coconut
beetle problem:bridging agriculture and forestry. Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific, 1-
23.

SANKARAN, K.V. 2006. The coconut leaf beetle, Brontispa longissima. Newsletter
of the Asia -Pacific forest invasive species network, 1(6),3-4.

SEDARATIAN, A.A., Y. FATHIPOUR, A.A. TALEBI, and S. FARAHANI. 2010.
Population density and spatial distribution pattem of Thrips tabaci
(Thysanoptera: Thripidae) on different soybean varieties.
J.Agr.Sci.Tech,(12),275-288.

STAINES, C.L. 2011. Hispines (Chrysomelidae, Cassidinae) of La Selva Biological
Station, Costa Rica. Zookeys, (157),45.

STRAUSS, S.Y. and A.R. ZANGERL. 2002. Plant-insect interactions in terrestrial
ecosystems. Plant-animal interactions: an evolutionary approach, 77-106.

TAKANO, S.I, A. MOCHIZUKI, K. KONISHI, K. TAKASU, J.C. ALOUW, D.S.
PANDIN and S. NAKAMURA. 2011. Two cryptic species in Brontispa
longissima (Coleoptera: Chrysomelidae): evidence from mitochondrial DNA
analysis and crosses between the two nominal species. Annals of the
Entomological Society of America, 104(2),121-131.

TAKANO, S. 1. K. TAKASU, T. FUSHIMI, R.T. ICHIKI and S. NAKAMURA.
2012. Life history traits and damage potential of an invasive pest Brontispa
longissima (Coleoptera: Chrysomelidae) on Satakentia _ liukiuensis.
Entomological Science, 15(2),238-245.

TAKANO, S. I, A. MOCHIZUKI, K. TAKASU, K. KONISHI, J.C. ALOUW, D.S.
PANDIN and S. NAKAMURA. 2013. Rapid discrimination of two cryptic
species within Brontispa longissima (Gestro) (Coleoptera: Chrysomelidae) by
PCR-RFLP.Journal of Pest Science, 86 (2),151-155.


WATERHOUSE, D.F. and K.R. NORRIS. 1987. Biological control: Pacific prospects.

YAMASHITA, A. and K. TAKASU. 2010. Suitability of potential host plants in Japan
for immature development of the coconut hispine beetle, Brontispa longissima
(Gestro) (Coleoptera: Chrysomelidae). Japan Agricultural Research Quarterly:
JARQ, 44(2), 143-149.

YAMASHITA, A., A. WINOTAI, S. NAKAMURA and K. TAKASU. 2009. Food
plants suitable for mass rearing of the coconut hispine beetle Brontispa
longissima. Korean Journal of Agricultural Science, 36(1), 57-61.

YUEGUAN, F. and X. YANKUN. 2004. Occurrence and control of coconut leaf
beetle in China. Report of the Expert Consultation on Coconut beetle outbreak
in APPC member Countries,26-27.

ZIPAGAN, M. 2014. Personal communication.
