Effects of Root Pruning on the Root Growth Potential (RGP) of Three Philippine Native Tree Species

DENNIS CADAVEZ RAMO

UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES LOS BAÑOS

Doctor of Philosophy in Entomology

JUNE 2018

ABSTRACT

This study was designed to investigate a possible explanation of the flight and
aggregation behavior of the rice black bug (RBB), Scotinophara coarctata by linking
these behaviors to the reproduction of the bug and rice phenology. Greenhouse and field
studies were conducted to determine if oviposition of RBB is confined to certain
phenological stage of rice and if this oviposition preference is reflected in the population
dynamics of rice black bug over two cropping seasons. Behavioral experiments showed
that RBB discriminated against the seedling stage as oviposition site. The significantly
higher number of eggmasses laid on the booting and soft dough stages of rice, as well as
the number of visits and the length of time RBB stayed on these stages compared to other
stages indicate a preference to these phenological stage. It was evident from the age
structure, population dynamics and monitoring of the reproductive status of RBB over
two croppings that individuals arriving in the rice field were mostly immature and
unmated, and that only one reproductive cycle was completed in a cropping season.
Based on the patterns observed in the field and greenhouse experimentation, reproductive
cycles and oviposition behavior of RBB are apparently influenced by the phenology of
rice. Because of this specific requirement in oviposition, a wide scale absence of
appropriate growth stage of rice and other possible host plants in an area for an extended
period of time could be a driving factor that leads to flight to seek favorable habitat
involving a large number of individuals. It is recommended that a landscape scale of
analysis should be done to further test the above hypothesis. A mark-recapture technique
needs to be conducted to fully document movement and flight of RBB.

Keywords: Flight, oviposit ion preference,population dynamics, reproduction, rice black
bug, rice phenology

CHAPTER 1

INTRODUCTION

The rice black bug (RBB), Scotinophara coarctata (Fabricious), is a serious rice
pest in the Philippines owing to its unpredictable bouts of attack. It is native to Southeast
Asia and South Asia regions (NIAES, 2007) and reported as rice pest in Malaysia.
Myanmar, India, Indonesia, Sri Lanka, Thailand, Vietnam, Bangladesh, Pakistan and
South China. The first infestation in the Philippines was recorded in Bono-bono,
Bataraza, Palawan in 1979 (Batay-an et al., 2007). Rice black bug (RBB) has already
encroached major rice producing regions of all the three island groups of Mindanao,
Visayas and Luzon.

Itis reported that RBB could be observed at any stage of the rice plant ((Barion et
al., 2007). During the tillering stage, their feeding results in damage to the central shoots,
causing “deadheart" which leads to stunting and reduction of tillers. Feeding during the
reproductive stage affects panicle development and exertions and panicles have empty

grains known as “whiteheads.” Both RBB adults and nymphs cause damage to the plant
by feeding at the base of the plant and sucking the plant sap from the stem. Heavy
infestation may result in stunting and total drying of the rice plants, a condition known as
“bug burn.”

RBB infestation causes significant economic loss to rice farmers that could result

to complete yield reduction (Estoy et al., 2007). Based on the reports of the Bureau of

Plant Industry from 2004 and 2006, a total of 3,197.73 ha were damaged and a total of
12,815 ha were affected just in Regions 9 and 12 (Cuaterno, 2006). The pest continues to
threaten other rice producing regions in the country.

A number of studies have been conducted to develop control tactics to manage
RBB in the country. In the early 1980s, the International Rice Research Institute (IRRI)
conducted researches integrating chemical and biological methods along with the plant
host resistance (Adalla and Alzona, 2007). Heinrichs et al. (1987) recommended growing.
of resistant cultivars, monitoring of fields and application of insecticides when the
economic injury level is reached. Two promising rice lines tolerant to the bug were
reported after screening conducted in Palawan (Domingo and Heinrichs, 1986). The use
of the fungus, Metarhizium, an entomopathogen was found to be a reliable
countermeasure as it can kill RBB two to seven days after application (Estoy et al., 2007).

Despite these management strategies developed, there had been continuous
occurrence of RBB “outbreaks” in several places in the country. Swarming of RBB adults
in street lights during full moon does not only bring havoc to rice farmers but it also
result to public concern, alarm and annoyance.

Adult RBBs are alleged to be migratory or undergo mass flight. Sheppard (1985)
and Ito et al. (1993) reported that the developing adults are destined to fly coinciding with
the occurrence of the full moon where thousands of adults dominated by males are
attracted to lights. The catch size fluctuated synchronously with the lunar phase of which
large catches occurred around the full moon period and higher catches in certain months

within a year. The migratory or dispersal behavior is not well understood. It is still

unclear whether the mass flight is related to host finding or mate finding. Ito et al. (1993)
postulated that the flight behavior could be related to host finding because of the
seasonality in the trap catch and stages of rice growth.

Litsinger (2007) analyzed from his review of the various studies on the life
history of RBB that the dispersal behavior of RBB by flight occurred to seek aestivation
sites, to return to rice fields from aestivation sites, to seek another rice crop after harvest.
or males seeking mates.

In this context, rice is required or critical in the reproduction and development of
RBB. Ina landscape scale, the presence of appropriate stage of rice to the RBB is a
stochastic event. Rice is usually planted in two cropping seasons per year where irrigation
is available. A two-month fallow period is observed because it takes a month to prepare
the rice paddy for planting. Depending on the scale of analysis, rice could be viewed as
synchronously or asynchronously planted. The flight behavior of RBB could have
evolved as an adaptation to this fragmented availability of suitable host. It is probable
that the oviposition of RBB in rice is time-limited. The reproduction of RBB is
constrained by the time needed to find suitable host for egg laying.

This observation and inference constitutes the biological question that serves as
the core problem. Is the oviposition of the RBB restricted to a certain phenology of rice?
What is the reproductive status of the bug in the ricefield? What are the preferred rice
stages for egg laying? Does the newly eclose RBB lay eggs in the same field? What is the

reproductive status of adults at later stage of rice?

Insects are the most diverse group of living organisms and exhibit great diversity
on their modes of reproduction, yet the reproductive patterns of insects have seldom been
studied in terms of life history theory in general (Fritz et al., 1982; Tsuda, 1982: O’woma
et al, 2016). Insect reproduction is a highly organized process with time-spaced
dimension shaped by the selection pressures present in the environment where the insect
population evolved. It is internally controlled by a hormonal system closely linked to
environmental cues so that insects would likely produce and deposit eggs only when
ecological conditions are favorable for the survival of its progeny (Medina, 2002).

The recent approaches on population dynamics of herbivorous insects have been
less explored on the role of the adult stage especially the ovipositing female in population
life tables. It is necessary to investigate if and how females can adjust the number of eggs
laid to the quantity and quality of resources available for the survival and development of
their future offspring.

In sexually reproducing insect species, a female’s reproductive strategy includes
resource allocation, mating and oviposition patterns (Boggs, 1986). An understanding of
these components and the factors which influence them is central to developing more
complete picture of a species’ life history strategy (Stearns, 1976; Sibly and Calow,
1986). Boggs (1986) elucidated that variation in any of these elements may change the
fitness value, and hence the evolutionary outcome, of a female's reproductive strategy.
One important factor influencing the reproductive pattern is the amount and quality of
resources collected and allocated by the female, since nutrient investment in eggs

constitute major expenditure of energy (Braby and Jones, 1995).

In this study, the effect of host plant phenology on the reproductive pattern of
RBB is explored. A series of field investigation on the age structure, density, sex ratio
and reproductive status of the RBB was done. Ovipositional preference of the bug to
various stages of rice was conducted under greenhouse condition. This study would be
able to provide biological information relative to the bug reproduction strategies in
relation to the phenology of rice and its implication to its flight and aggregation behavior.

This study examined the reproductive cycle and behavior of RBB in relation to
the rice phenology. Specifically, the study aimed to:

1. determine phenological stage of rice most preferred by the RBB for

oviposition;

2. determine the population dynamics in terms of density, age structure and sex

ratio of RBB during and between cropping period; and

3. monitor the variation in the reproductive status of the field population of

female RBB as affected by rice phenology.

The approach taken in understanding the effect of availability and suitability of
host plant (i.e. rice) in the reproductive pattem in the field that may result to mass flight
is by understanding the species specific adaptation of the RBB as they respond to their
varying environment. Hence, studies on host plant stage preference for oviposition and
reproductive maturity status of RBB was investigated.

The study was conducted in Monkayo, Compostela Valley, Philippines from

August 2016 to December 2017.

CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK

Most flight of insects is in prereproductive, occurring at a particular time in adult
life (Johnson, 1963). Most, if not all, flights are generally recognized as migratory or
dispersal by their simultenous, undistractedness and duration at the breeding sites and
usually begin either immediately after the teneral period, as with aphids or relatively
early in adult life, the females nearly always have undeveloped or only partially
developed ovaries (Johnson, 1963). Neurophysiological processes cause the characteristic
of prolonged and undistracted flight, but ecological factors determine when it occurs.

Adult activity of many insect species are highly constrained by environmental
conditions and host plant phenology (Doak et.al., 2006). The timing of oviposition and
selection of the phenological stage of the host plant can have significant consequences for
development and success of offspring (Amaldo et al, 2014). The synchronization of
herbivores with their host plant phenology determines quality and quantity of food
resources and affects the preference-performance linkage and abundance of herbivores
(Yukawa, 2000).

Flight of RBB is regarded as an adaptation to unfavorable condition as dictated by
the environment (i.¢ conditions of food resource). The proposed scenarios if and when
this is most likely to happen is shown in Figure no. 1. The flight of reproductively
immature RBB commence towards the end of cropping season (i.¢ harvesting time).
RBBs fly in an area with favorable food resources which eventually settle and reproduce.

If these conditions are prolonged then heavy infestations are expected. RBBs execute

further flight if and when the conditions are unfavorable. RBBs aggregate in mass
depending on the build-up of population and the scale of the rice area infested. The
seasonality of flights depend solely in the availability of appropriate growth stages. In
this study, the investigation focused on the influence of rice phenology on the
reproductive cycles and behavior of RBB and implications to its flight and aggregation

behavior.

DEATH
conditions

‘ prolong

New area

Noffood disperse by /
a | Further
Cannot Fly CanFly flight sae
|_., Aggregation , MASS |
(Localized) J

aut Aut ||

rt Reproductively  Reproductively

| Mature | Immature

—- Coverageofthis
— Studies tobe
investigated

Figure I, Conceptual framework of the relationship of rice phenology in reproductive
cycles ,flight and aggregation behavior of rice black bug.

CHAPTER 2

REVIEW OF LITERATURE

Taxonomy and Biology of the Rice Black Bug

Several studies on the life history have been reported and the following
information taken all from Barrion et al, 1982; PhilRice, 1995 and Cuatemno. 2006. The
tice black bug (RBB), Scotinophara coarctata (Fabricius), is a rice sap feeding insect
that belongs to Order Hemiptera and Family Pentatomidae. Its scientific name The pest
undergoes incomplete metamorphosis which means from egg, it will become nymph. The
female deposits its egg on the lower part of the leaves or on the basal part of the plant
near the water surface. It lays about 200 eggs during its lifetime compared to 680 eggs as
was observed by other authors in other countries. They are laid in mass of 40-60 eggs.
Oviposition takes place after 12-17 days from mating. The female RBB protects its eggs
until they hatch by covering them with its body. The eggs are greenish when newly-laid
and tum pink when mature and will hatch in 3-4 days).

The RBB nymph molts 4-5 times and passes 5 nymphal instars which are
completed in 25-30 days. Its nymph is colored light brown with a yellowish-green
abdomen and some black spots. It was observed that the nymph development is longer
during dry season. Like the adults, they remain at the bases of the rice plants during

daytime and feed at night.

lu

The RBB adult is brownish black with few distinctly yellowish spots on the
thorax that bear spines below the anterior angles. It is oval-shaped and about 8-9 mm
long. They are very well-adapted to variable conditions and may stay alive for seven
months. The adults may survive throughout the period and between seasons by resting
hidden and inactive in soil cracks, grassy areas or in any area where relative humid
atmosphere seems to provide a good shelter. The adult gives off an offensive odor when
disturbed (Batay-an et al., 2007).

Adults are attracted to street lights and full moon when they congregate and fly in
search of a new area for invasion. Large numbers of the pest are carried by strong winds
to other areas or vegetation’s. Both nymph and adult feed during daytime and mainly at
the base of the rice stem but they may feed on panicles during evening, early morning or
an overcast day (Shepard et al., 1986; Ito and Min, 1993; Cuaterno, 2006).

During daytime, the adults are lethargic and avoid sunlight. A behavioral
characteristic of RBB is their ability to stay underwater when undisturbed though more

than two-hour submersion will cause them death.

History of RBB Infestation in the Philippines

The Philippines is one of the countries in Southeast Asia that is severely hit by the
rice black bug (RBB). The ffirst infestation occurred in Palawan in 1979 which was
followed by a major outbreak in 1982 covering 4,500 ha of rice fields. In 1992, RBB was

observed in Mindanao Island specifically Zamboanga City damaging about 2,070 ha.


Three years later (1995), the pest invaded the whole of Region 9 including the
Autonomous Region of Muslim Mindanao (ARMM). In 1996, the pest was observed in
Region 12 and an outbreak followed a year later. At present, the pest is already a part of
the ecology of the whole Mindanao Island. The pest was spotted in the Visayas in late
1998 particularly in Negros Occidental. It then spread to Siquijor island then to Bohol.
The pest is now the center of attention in Iloilo Island with some reports that it is already

spotted in the southernmost part of Luzon (Cuaterno. 2006).

Habitat, Behavior and Host Range of S. coarctata

Adults and nymphs of RBB aggregate at the base of rice plants just above the
water level in the daytime. They move up the plant at night or during an overcast day (Ito
et al., 1993; PhilRice, 1995). RBBs are known to exhibit a remarkable attractiveness to
light sources during the nights of full moon at certain times of the year (Van Vreden and
Abdul Latif, 1986). A large number of adults are often attracted to street lights and their
offensive odor makes them a nuisance to man. Although some weeds and other cultivated
crops have been listed as alternate host plants of RBB, rice is the most important host
(Van Vreden and Abdul Latif, 1986). Some commonly occurring alternate hosts of RBB

are com, gabi, grasses, sedges, and broadleaves (PhilRice, 1995).


Nature of Damage

The RBB is a small (6.2-9 mm long), cryptic, and highly invasive pest species
attacking all growth stages of the rice plant.The nymphs and adults suck the plants sap
through the stems and nodes near the water surface. This mode of activity causes the
plant to lose water, discolor or result to death in the upper leaves and failure of young leaf
to open. Plants will have stunted growth and the tillering of the plant is disturbed and
reduced. When this happens during tillering stage, the damage is referred to as “dead
heart” occurred while if the pest attacks during booting stage, the resulting damage is
empty panicle similar to whiteheads caused by stem borer. RBB feeds also during
milking stage affecting the rice grains. Severe infestations during this stage will result to
acondition called bug burn and will lead to death (Barion et al., 2007)

Dry season damage by RBB is more severe than wet season. It usually occurs
after heading stage when irrigation water is reduced during the maturation period. It is
said that RBB nymph takes longer time to mature during dry season thus causing more

damage to rice (Cuaterno, 2006).

Development Host

Litsinger (2007) gave an account that a development host is a plant that can

sustain the growth of the insect from eclosion to adulthood and can provide adequate

nutrition for reproduction. In insects that undergo complete metamorphosis such as


Lepidoptera, the larval stage may have different food needs than the adult. A more
complete diet may be obtained from feeding on different plant hosts and. in studies using
artificial diets, it has been found out that the individuals of some species of grasshoppers
and butterflies select food from different diet mixtures that ensure the greatest nutritional
fitness (Bernays and Graham, 1988 as cited by Litsinger, 2007). Most studies that
determine plant host fitness are performed under no-choice conditions where the insect is
forced to feed on only one host. He added that Scotinophora black bugs, being more
mobile may prefer a mixed diet of rice and rice field grasses rather than one plant species.
However, this has not been determined

Moreover, Litsinger (2007) cited only one study where fitness of plant hosts was
determined by greenhouse-rearing trials and that was on a lesser known black bug, S.
Jatiuscula (Breddin). The pest was able to survive in a greenhouse for 117 days in rice.
The female laid about 72 eggs and its egg hatchability was 93% in rice.

Host plant quality is a key determinant of the fecundity of herbivorous insects.
Components of host plant quality (such as carbon, nitrogen, and defensive metabolites)
directly affect potential and achieved herbivore fecundity. The responses of insect
herbivores to changes in host plant quality vary within and between feeding guilds. Host
plant quality also affects insect reproductive strategies: egg size and quality, the
allocation of resources to eggs, and the choice of oviposition sites may all be influenced
by plant quality, as may egg or embryo resorption on poor-quality hosts (Awmack and

Leather, 2002).

1s

Host Plant Selection in Phytophagous Insects

There is a long held and widely accepted view that insects use a sequence of
behavioral responses in host selection. The sequence of steps in host selection includes
habitat location, host location, host acceptance, and host use. Insects use a number of
sensory cues in host selection including visual, olfactory. gustatory, and tactile stimuli as
well as humidity and light intensity (Bernays and Chapman, 1994). These cues stimulate
receptors, generating sensory input and finally behavioral responses. A large number of
sensory receptors of different modalities receive stimulation at each step in the host
selection process. This information must be processed and integrated by the central
nervous system, interpreted as a positive or negative signal and a decision made as to
whether to make a certain behavioral response (Heard, 1999).

Powell et al. (2006) highlighted that the dominant cues controlling plant
preference and initiation of reproduction are detected early during the stylet penetration
process, well before the nutrient supply (phloem) is contacted. The author further explain
that aphids regularly puncture cells along the stylet pathway and ingest cytosolic samples,
and the cues stimulating settling and parturition likely are metabolites present in
peripheral (nonvascular) plant cells. He concluded that aphids’ host plant selection
involves responses to a variety of physical and chemical plant characteristics but is
fundamentally affected by gustatory cues detected during stylet penetration of peripheral

plant tissues.


Plant semiochemicals are known to produce a wide range of behavioral responses
in insects. Some insects sequester or acquire host plant compounds and use them as sex
pheromones or sex pheromone precursors. Other insects produce or release sex
pheromones in response to specific host plant cues, and chemicals from host plants often
synergistically enhance the response of an insect to sex pheromones (Reddy and
Guerrero, 2004).

Reddy and Guerrero (2014) concluded that the behavior of herbivorous insects is
often integrated with their host plants in a range of ways. This integration can be apparent
from the effects induced by host plants on insect physiology and behavior, including
reproduction, and by the plant defense responses to an attacking insect. Particularly
important are the effects of host plants on pheromone behavior, which appear to be part
of male strategies (to maximize encounters with females) as well as female strategies (to
gain access to new feeding and oviposition sites).

Models and empirical studies on host selection in plant by insects assumed that
the oviposition preference is determined by the quality of the oviposition site for
offspring development. Based on the oviposition-preference-offspring-performance
hypothesis, oviposition-preference hierarchy should correspond to host suitability for
offspring development because female maximize their fitness by optimizing offspring

performance (Scheirs et al., 2000).

Insect Reproductive Strategy

Reproduction is the biological process by which new individual organisms are
produced from their parents. Despite insects’ small sizes and apparent vulnerability, they
are the most diverse and abundant of all groups of animals because they employ many
special strategies during reproduction. They are equipped with high reproductive rates
and numerous behavioral and physiological adaptations that assure them a fair fight in the
struggle for survival (Owoma et al., 2016).

Fritz et al. (1982) and Tsuda (1982) have been able to delineate reproductive
strategies into two which termed as iteroparity and semelparity in insects. They proposed
criteria based on temporal pattern of egg maturation and deposition. Many insects do not
mature all their eggs at once and deposit them in a single clutch, but instead distribute
their reproductive effort over time and space which is termed as repeated reproduction
iteroparity. Iteroparous insects may deposit eggs singly (e.g. Pieridae, Papilionidae or in
several clutches or single eggs over their adult life (e.g, Culicidae, Tabanidae,
Lygaeidae, Coccinellidae). Bell (1976) stressed that the essential feature of this type of
production is the trade-off between reproduction at one time and subsequent survival to
the next generation. Geizel (1976) emphasized that insects exhibiting the iteroparous
mode of reproduction are clearly responding to considerable and unpredictable
environmental heterogeneity. Adult food consumption of iteroparous is important to

normal egg production (Slansky, 1982). Decisions are made regarding when to lay, how


many eggs and sometimes even what kind of eggs to lay affects or have a great impact on
the female fitness (Boggs, 1981).

Tsuda (1982) disclosed that having iteroparity mode of reproduction or prolonged
reproduction is favored for the persistence of a population in a decreasing population. If
populations are frequently exposed to decreased phase, selective pressure for slow
development and prolonged reproduction becomes stronger.

Insects having a semilparous mode of reproduction or big bang reproducers lay a
single clutch of eggs in their lifetime and deposit at one place (Fritz et al., 1982). Their
entire reproductive effort is committed at one time and die shortly after oviposition.
Insect groups that contain some semilparous species are Lepidoptera, Ephemeroptera,
Dermaptera, Plecoptera, Strepsiptera, Trichoptera, and Homoptera (Borror ct al.. 1976;
Elliott and Humpesch, 1980 as cited by Fritz et al., 1982). Slansky (1982) added that
species exhibiting semilparous reproductive strategy have extensive egg reproduction and
occur after the adult ecloses and probably little evaluation of environmental cues by the
adult prior to oviposition. In such species, poor food quality and other factors causing
reduction of offspring, frequently have a negative impact on adult fecundity (Barbosa et
al., 1981; Moscardi et al., 1981).

On the other hand, Boggs et al. (1986) emphasized that insects vary considerably
between and within orders, and even within the same genus, in the degree to which the
female's lifetime potential egg complement is mature when she emerges as an adult.
They quantified the reproductive performance of insect through ‘ovigeny index’ (Ol)

which is the number of eggs females have layed divided by the lifetime potential


fecundity-quantifies variation in the degree of early life concentration of egg production,
and also variation in initial reproductive effort. They stressed that the oviposition strategy
has several components, which include the range of substrates oviposited on (host plant
species, in the case of insect herbivore groups such as Lepidoptera), and also clutch size.
It is postulated that in Lepidoptera, these two behavioral traits are tied to oviposition
index via constraints relating to oviposition opportunities and the time available for

dispersal (Boggs et al., 1986; Jervis et al., 2005).

Effects of Host Plant Phenology on the
Ovipositional Pattern of Insects

Doak et al. (2006) concluded that the adult activity and larval development of
many species of butterflies are tightly constrained by environmental conditions and host
plant phenology. Reproductive success is often limited by oviposition opportunities
rather that egg production. Demster (1983) revealed that failure to lay a full egg
complement significantly impacted populations of 8 out of 14 butterfly species reviewed.
Butterflies that lay their eggs singly may suffer the largest impacts due to the greater time
investment per egg.

Rouault et al. (2004) highlighted the findings of McClure et al. (1998) that the
fitness of insects parasitizing discrete resources such as seed cones or seeds can, on
occasion, be linked to the synchrony between the timing of oviposition and host

development. Superimposition of the phenologies of seed chalcid oviposition and conifer


reproductive development has revealed that the oviposition period of Megastigmus
species occurs either before or after ovule fertilization.

The timing of oviposition and selection of the phenological stage of the host plant
can have significant consequences for development and success of offspring. and is
particularly important for endangered specialist species with rare habitats, such as
Phengaris alcon, butterflies. Amaldo et al. (2014) observed the synchrony of
development of P. alcon and their host plant to be more frequent on the apical and
youngest buds, with increased egg load by females during the first one-third of the flight
period. Offspring survival of about 55% was observed, with up to 15 caterpillars per bud.
Offspring survival was significantly higher from eggs that were oviposited on larger
flower buds and on flower buds in an early developmental stage.

Wiklund (1984) studied the egg laying pattem of 51 butterflies in Sweden and
three different patterns emerged. Firstly, although the majority of butterflies deposit their
eggs on the plants on which their larvae later feed, butterflies that overwinter in the egg
stage and use herbaceous host plants tend to avoid laying their eggs on host plants.
Secondly, butterflies which use host plants that are super abundant, notably the grass-
feeding satyrids, also tend not to deposit their eggs on the leaves on which the larvae later
feed. Thirdly, butterflies which use visually apparent host plants seem to find their host
plants without having to alight on non-hosts, whereas butterflies that use hosts that are
visually non-apparent frequently alight on non-host plants during the oviposition search

before they find the appropriate plants.


The synchronization of herbivores with their host plant phenology determines
quality and quantity of food resources and affects the preference—performance linkage
and abundance of herbivores (Yukawa, 2000). Cushman et al. (1994) estimated the
female reproductive success of threatened butterfly as influence of time of emergence and
host plant phenology based on age specific fecundity and both adult and offspring
survival. They found out that the relative timing of adult emergence and larval host plant
senescence strongly influenced reproductive success. They estimated that 64-88% of the
females produced offspring with less than 2% probability of reaching diapause due to
adult mortality and prediapause larval starvation due to host plant senescence.

Connor et al. (1994) in their study on the effects of leaf production phenology on
leaf mining moth, C. hamadryadella, noted that spring emergence of moth is coincident
with bud burst. Oviposition is slightly delayed relative to leafing so that females
encounter less pubescence. They suggested that the delay in oviposition may be an
adapatation to ensure that eggs can be securely attached to the leaf surface, rather than
mechanism to avoid competition.

Steinbauer et al. (1998) observed that beetles oviposited preferentially on E.
regnans when the branches of both eucalypt species displayed the full range of foliar
developmental classes, from immature to fully expanded. However, when the branches
were pruned so that both species displayed only immature and expanding leaves, no
difference in oviposition between the species occurred. Further, when the branches were
pruned so that E. regnans displayed only fully expanded leaves and E. nitens displayed

only immature and expanding leaves, females oviposited entirely on the latter species.


The result of the study supports and extends the hypothesis that the C. bimaculata's
ovipositional preference is dictated more by leaf age class than by the tree species from
which the leaves derive. A eucalypt that initiates and expands leaves rapidly will be less
preferred for oviposition than one that develops and expands leaves slowly because of the
smaller area of its canopy with less sclerophyllous foliage.

Smyth et al. (2003) investigated the effect of the host plant phenology on the
oviposition preference of Crocidolomia pavonana, a major pest of cruciferous crops.
Result showed a significant effect of cabbage developmental stage on oviposition
preference of C. pavonana. They observed that oviposition peaks in the field are
correlated with host plant phenology. That oviposition peaks in field populations of C.
pavonana may be correlated with stage 5 rather than stage 4. Cabbage is not so
consequential as is the dependence of patterns of preference on the combination of host
plant species presented. It was shown that relative oviposition preference for C. pavonana
female is contextual. The response to cabbage at a particular phenological stage is altered
by the identity of the other host plant in the experimental arena and vice versa. This
aspect of these results has implications for both trap cropping strategy and interpretations
of insect sensory physiology.

The study of Coyle et al. (2010) on the effect of host plant phenology on the
performance of invasive weevil, P. oblongus, showed that host foliage type phenology
affected several performance parameters of adult P. oblongus. Host foliage type did not
affect total adult longevity or female longevity, but longevity of putatively young males

was greater on old maple. There was no significant effect on total egg production or egg


production rate of which putatively young weevils produced over twice as many eggs on
young maple than on old maple. In contrast, egg production was not affected by host
foliage type in putatively older weevils.

Felland et al. (1992) conducted an oviposition choice by soybean looper.
Pseudoplusia includes, of soybean and cotton in two phenological stages in field cages.
Moths were released into field cages enclosing four contiguous rows for each two
treatments, and egg density per meter of row was determined. In test 1, blooming cotton
(planted 25 May) was paired with either blooming (23 June) or vegetative (11 July)
soybean. Relative to blooming, cotton with 81.1% canopy closure, blooming soybean
with 78% canopy closure received 2.6-fold greater oviposition, while vegetative soybean
with 41% canopy closure received only 0.24-times the eggs as blooming cotton. Test 2
compared oviposition on the two soybean classes in the absence of cotton. Oviposition
on blooming soybean was 11.2-fold more eggs than on vegetative soybean. Test 3 paired
blooming soybean with either blooming or pre-bloom cotton (planted 23 June). Relative
to soybean, the pre-bloom cotton with 68.7% canopy closure received 1.6-fold more eggs
than blooming cotton, although neither cotton treatment received as many eggs as
blooming soybean.

A separate study on the oviposition responses of soybean looper to varieties and
growth stages of soybean was conducted (Mascarenhas and Pitre, 1997). Four varieties
of soybeans belonging to different maturity groups were planted on four dates to
measure relative oviposition preference of P. includens. Results showed that the most

mature growth stages for the soybean varieties were preferred for oviposition. Moths laid


significantly more eggs in the middle to upper plant canopy than in the lower canopy. and
the bottom (abaxial) surface of the leaf was preferred over the top (adaxial) leaf surface.
stems, blooms, or pods. Knowledge of potential infestation levels of P. includens on
soybean varieties at different growth stages could assist in selection of planting dates and
varieties and enhance sampling efficiency and insecticide control technology.

Mcleod (1988) conducted an experiment on the influence of snap bean phenology
on Heliothis zea oviposition. He found out during his greenhouse preference test that H.
zea moths oviposited more eggs on blooming snap bean, Phaseolus vulgaris L. than on
pre-blooming plants. When moths were held in cages containing only | plant stage (non-
preference tests), significantly more eggs were laid on blooming snap beans than on
either pre- or post-bloom plants. Furthermore, this ovipositional response to blooming
plants was much more striking after moths were caged for 3 nights. During nights 4-6,
oviposition continued at a similar rate on blooming plants, while pre- and post-bloom
plants received very few eggs.

Muniz et al. (2012) investigated the phenological relationships of Eunica bechina
(Lepidoptera: Nymphalidae) and its host plant, “souari nut,” Caryocar brasiliense
(Caryocaraceae). It was found out that the abundance of E. bechina immature stages
followed the temporal pattern of leaf production by the host plant, with increased
numbers in the beginning of the rainy season (September-November) in neotropical
savanna.

Silva and Oliviera (2010) reported that pentatomids may cause direct and indirect

damage to important crop plants. An ecological account of Edessa rufomarginata De


Geer on Caryocar brasiliense (Caryocaraceae) in the Brazilian savanna reveal that the
phenology of E. rufomarginata matched that of its host plant, with immatures developing
in the wet season simultaneously with the production of vegetative and reproductive plant
tissue. Females do not exhibit parental care and lay eggs more frequently on larger plants.
Oviposition frequency, however, does not differ between plants with and without
flowers/fruits. Nymphs and adults usually feed on stem parts and more rarely on
flowerbuds and fruits. First- and second-instar nymphs remain aggregated, but disperse as
third-instar nymphs. Adults and nymphs were more abundant on mature stems of C.
brasiliense compared with other plant locations. Ants visiting the plant to search for
extrafloral nectar occasionally tap the abdomen of E. rufomarginata nymphs with their
antennae to obtain honey dew. This is the first record of trophobiotic interactions between
Edessa stink bugs and ants, and one of the few for heteropterans.The interaction of the
stink bug with other natural enemies, such as predaceous Heniartes (Reduviidae), was
also observed. Given the pest status of Edessa species for crop plants, additional field
studies on host plants, interaction with ants, and natural enemies in native habitats are
needed for an effective management of these stink bugs in tropical agricultural systems.
Toscano and Stern (1980) examined the degree of maturation of the ovaries or
testes, tracheole condition, and amount of fat body of female and male Euschistus
conspersus Uhler. Females were examined to determine if they had mated, whether they
were nulliparous or parous, and the appearance of the corpus luteum. By regular
dissection of E. conspersus, it was possible to predict seasonal oviposition periods.

Spring and summer generations were distinguished even when they overlapped. The


amount of fat body increased and the color of the venter changed in the summer
generation prior to overwintering diapause. Changes in the female reproductive system
provide a useful way to predict seasonal patterns in populations of E. conspersus.

An assessment of the seasonal occurrence and spatial distribution of Aphidius
colemani Viereck, Aphidius matricariae Haliday, Diaeretiella rapae (M’Intosh), Praon
staryi Kavallieratos & Lykouressis and Praon volucre (Haliday), all parasitoids of Myzus
persicae (Sulzer) on tobacco during the 1996 and 1997 growing seasons in Greece was
conducted. The experimental field was insecticide-free and tobacco leaf samples (from
the upper and lower half of plants) were taken from June until September, in both years.
Generally, high M. persicae densities were recorded in August (mid-season) of both
seasons. The mummification rate showed a specific increasing trend late in the season
(August-September). The percentage of mummification reached almost 61% at the end
of 1996, whereas in 1997, it remained at very low levels (<2%). The density of M.
persicae was higher on the leaves collected from the upper part of the plants than on
those from the lower part, but without significant difference. In contrast, the number of
mummified M. persicae individuals were significantly higher on leaves collected from
the lower part of the plants than on those from the upper part in both years. The relative
abundance of the aphidiine parasitoid species differed between the two years.

In an on-farm study in Georgia, Tillman (2010) found the species and abundance
of stink bugs (Heteroptera: Pentatomidae) in com (Zea mays L.) Seven species of
phytophagous stink bugs were found on com with the predominant species being Nezara

viridula (L.) and Euschistus servus (Say). All developmental stages of these two pests


were found which indicate that they were developing on the com crop. Adult N. viridula
were parasitized by the tachinid parasitoid Trichopoda pennipes (F.). There was a
pronounced edge effect in distribution of stink bugs in com. Population dynamics of N.
viridula and E. servus were different on early and late-planted com. Oviposition by
females of both stink bug species occurred in mid-to-late-May and again mid-to-late June
in com, regardless of planting date. In early planted fields, stink bug females oviposited
on corn in mid-July and the resulting nymphs did not survive to the adult stage in com
because ears were close to physiological maturity and leaves were senescing. Density of
stink bug adults in early planted com was relatively low throughout the growing season.
In late-planted com, females of both stink bug species consistently laid eggs in mid-to-
late-July on com with developing ears. This habitat favored continued nymph
development, and the resulting adult population reached high levels. These results
indicate that com management practices play a key role in the ecology of stink bugs in
com agroecosystems and provide information for designing management strategies to

suppress stink bugs in farmscapes with com.

During 2009 and 2010, the seasonal abundance and reproductive biology of
Chinavia hilaris (Say) and N. viridula (L.) were investigated in replicated 1.62-2.83-ha
farm scapes containing equal proportions of com (Z mays L.), cotton (Gossypium
hirsutum L.), peanut (Arachis hypogaea L.), and soybean [Glycine max (L.) Merr.].
Crops were sampled weekly by using whole plant examinations in com and sweep net
sampling in cotton, peanut, and soybean. In 2010 only, adults were dissected to rate their

reproductive development, and nymphs were classified to instar. No C. hilaris adults or


nymphs ever were observed in com; however, nymphs were observed in cotton and
soybean during late September with peak abundance occurring just after the autumnal
equinox. The peak of late-instar nymphs was followed within 2 weeks by a peak of non-
reproductive adults. More adults were observed in soybean than cotton. Stink bug feeding
on developing cotton bolls may result in reduced yield and loss of fiber quality.
Similarly, feeding on developing soybean pods can reduce yield and seed quality. In
contrast, NV. viridula nymphs and adults were found across all crops and had multiple
generations throughout the growing season. Results from this study indicate that C.
hilaris and N. viridula are different in voltinism, phenology, and use of hosts. These data
provide knowledge of stink bug biology and population ecology at the landscape level

and are useful for designing and implementing stink bug management programs.

CHAPTER 3.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Oviposition Preference of Rice Black Bug

Test Insects

Adult insects were collected from the different study sites and reared in potted
rice plants under green house conditions. Nymphs, when fully grown, were transferred
and reared in individual cages made of muslin cloth (0.30 m x 0.30 m x 0.75 m) to ensure
that only newly eclosed adults were used in the experiment. These newly-eclosed adults

were paired and kept in individual cages for mating which usually lasted for 1-2 days.

Test Plants

PSB Rc 160 rice variety was used in the experiment. Rice seeds were soaked for
24-36 hours with water being replaced every five to six hours. After soaking, seeds were
incubated at 30°C for 24-36 hrs. Incubated seeds were sown when roots were starting to
come out. They were planted in pots (21 cm in diameter x 18 cm in height) with soil from

rice paddy. Plants were fertilized based on the recommended rates (90-60-30). Planting

was done in a staggered schedule in order to produce five different phenological growth

stages (seedling, tillering, booting, soft dough and hard dough) at the same time.

Choice Experiment

The choice experiment was conducted in a cage made of muslin cloth measuring
0.75 m wide x 0.75 m long x 1.0 m high that served as the test arena (Figure 1). One
potted rice plant representing each of the following growth stages was arranged at
random inside the test arena: seedling, tillering, booting, soft dough and hard dough. Five
(5) pairs of adult bug were introduced and held in the cage for 10 days. Similar to the
procedure of Velasco and Walter (1992) in determining attractiveness of host plant, each
individual was marked uniquely in order to track the number of days an insect spent on a
plant and the number of times the plant was visited by the insect. Observation was done
the same time every day and the number of egg mass found on the plant was recorded.
Two trials of this experiment was conducted with three replications per trial. Data were
subjected to analysis of variance using Statistical Analysis Software (SAS), version 9.4.

Means were compared using Least Significant Difference (LSD).


Figure 2. Set-up of choice experiment to determine the ovipositional preference of
RBB.

No- Choice Experiment

A parallel no-choice experiment was conducted where a pair of RBB was
provided with one (1) plastic potted plant representing the seedling, tillering, booting,
soft dough, or hard dough stage. It was done in a cage made of muslin cloth measuring
0.30 m wide x 0.30 m long x 0.75 m high (Figure 3). The insects were held in this cage
for 10 days and the number of egg mass laid was counted and recorded every day. After

10 days, the female RBB was dissected to determine the remaining eggs in the ovary.


Analysis of variance was done and means compared by LSD using the SAS software,

version 9.4 (Gomez, et al.,1984)

Figure 3. Set-up of the no-choice experiment to determine the ovipositional performance
of RBB.


Population Dynamics of Rice Black Bug
Across Cropping Seasons

Study site

The study was conducted in Monkayo, a municipality of the Compostela Valley
Province in the northern part of Mindanao, Philippines. It lies 7°42° - 8°00" latitude and
125°57" - 126°12’ longitude. Monkayo’s climate falls under Type IV characterized by
even distribution of rainfall throughout the year. The months of November, December
and January are usually the wettest while May and June are the driest. The average
rainfall is 3,456 mm per year and the average temperature ranges between 26-30 °C.

Monkayo has approximately 1, 700 ha of rice land. From which, four (4) study
sites ( more or less 10 kilometers apart) were established and regularly observed (Figure
4). The study sites were selected on the basis on the regularity of the rice black bug
infestation. Each study site covered more or less 200 ha of fully irrigated rice fields. It
was planted with PSB Rc 160, the predominant variety grown in the municipality. Rice
was direct seeded. Chemical control of insect pests was practiced with an average of four
sprayings per cropping. Meteorological data from the nearest DOST- PAGASA weather
station (about 30 km away from the study sites) during the period of study are shown in

Figure 5.

Source:LGU-MPDO Monkayo ”

Figure 4. The agriculture map of Monkayo, Compostela Valley, Philippines showing
the four study sites.

Rainfall

(mm)

Temperature (°C)

—nainfall BE temperature

Figure 5. Meteorological data from January 2016 to September 2017
(DOST-PAGASA).


Field Sampling Procedure

Three (3) sampling stations of 500 m? each were stratified in each of the four
study sites described above. For every sampling time, 20 hills per sampling station were
systematically selected during a 250 linear meter walk across the rice field. The
designated place of the start of the walk was done at random for each sampling time.
Sampling was done weekly starting November 2016 up to September 2017, covering two

cropping seasons and the fallow period between them.
Data Gathered

The number of RBB was counted in each of the sample hill noting down the sex
of the adult and developmental stage of the immatures. During the fallow period between
cropping seasons, RBB population in rice stubbles was observed.
Data Analysis

Correlation analysis was used to determine the degree of relationship of host plant

phenology to the population age structure, density and sex ratio of the bug. The SAS

version 9.4 software was used for the analysis (Gomez, et al.,1984).

Reproductive Status and Fat Body Deposits

of the Rice Black Bug Field Population as
Affected by Rice Phenology

Sampling Plan

Samples of female RBB were taken from the four study sites during the following
phenological stages of rice: seedling, tillering, booting. and maturity as well as during the
fallow period. For each sampling, 100 individuals were collected at random and
preserved in 70% ethanol for at most a day before dissection. Dissection was done under
a binocular microscope. Ovarian development stage and fat body content were rated
following the key classification established by Ito et al. (1993) with minor modification
(Tables | and 2, Figure 5). The spermathecae were also examined for the presence of

sperm in order to determine if mating occurred.

Table 1. Key to classification of ovary status.

GRADE CONDITION OF OVARIES
I No visible eggs
" Immature eggs with the size as mature ones. Chorion is not
hardened.
i Mature eggs with hard chorion

IV Empty or spent



Table 2. Key to the classification of fat body status

GRADE CONDITION OF FAT BODIES.
I Very little amount of fat bodies are observed
i A large number of white fat bodies only are observed

bit A large number of transparent spherical fat bodies is only observed

Figure 6. Ovary conditions of rice black bug (a) No Matured eggs, (b) Immature eggs
with the size as mature ones, Chorion is not hardened, (c) Mature Eggs
with hard chorion, (d) Empty or Spent ovaries.


Data Analysis

Correlation analysis using the SAS version 9.4 was done to determine the
relationship of the reproductive status of the RBBs with phenological stage of rice

(Gomez, et al.,1984).

CHAPTER4

RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS

Oviposition Preference of Rice Black Bug

The variation in the the number of egg masses laid on the rice plants of different
phenological stage was statistically significant in either choice and no-choice tests (Table
3). In the choice test, the highest number of egg mass (2.44 +.22 egg masses) was
observed on the plants at the booting stage. This was followed by the soft dough stage
(1.33 + .19egg masses) which was not significantly different from the hard dough stage
(0.55 £.22 egg mass). The least number of eggs laid was observed on the tillering stage
but this number was so low to be significantly different from the seedling stage where no
egg was laid at all. In the no-choice test where RBB was confined to one rice growth
stage, the females laid at least one egg mass in a period of 10 days on all plant stage
tested except on the seedling stage. However, the variation in the number of egg mass

was not significantly different among the rice growth stages where eggs were laid.


Table 3. Mean number of egg mass laid by RBB during a 10-day period of a choice and
no- choice experiment under greenhouse condition

MEAN NO. OF EGGMASS

PHENOLOGICAL STAGE
OF RICE Choice" No-Choice’
Seedling 0.00c 0.00b
Tillering 0.22 + 0.1le 0.67 + 0.33 ab
Booting 2.44 +0.22a 1.00 + 0.00 a
Soft dough 1.33 £0.19b 1.00 + 0.00 a
Hard dough 0.55 + 0.22be 1.00 + 0.00a

Based on 5 pairs of RBB per cage, means with the same letter are not significantly different, alpha= 05.
*Based on | pair RBB per cage, means with the same letter are not significantly different, alpha= .05.

The experimental results seems to indicate that RBB discriminates against the
seedling stage as oviposition site. Although RBB lays eggs on any growth stages older
than the seedling stage, there is an indication that it prefers the booting stage of rice
growth. Oviposition preference may be determined by either physical or chemical cues,
or a combination of both (Renwick and Chew, 1994). Physical cues involve colour, leaf
toughness as well as leaf shape (Leuthardt and Baur, 2013). However, the cues used by
RBBs are not known and were not investigated in this present study. Rice, nonetheless, is
considered as ovipositional and developmental host of RBB (Litsinger, 2007). defined
developmental host is a plant that can sustain the growth of the insect from eclosion to

adulthood and can provide adequate nutrition for reproduction.


Number of Adult RBB and Days Spent on
the Different Phenological Stages of Rice

Over a 10-day period of observation, the mean number of adult RBB was
significantly highest on plants at the booting stage (4.00+.58 females) followed by
2.00+.00 at tillering and 1.67+.33 at soft dough and hard dough stages. Lowest mean
number of adult RBB was taken during the seedling stage (Table 4). For number of days
spent in the rice plant, a similar pattern was observed. This means that adult RBB stayed
longest in the rice plant during the booting stage (10.00+.00) and shortest during the

seedling stage (1.67+1.2)

Table 4. Mean number of adult rice black bug found and days spent in the phenological
stages of rice during a 10-day period of a choice experiment under greenhouse

condition.
MEAN/I0 day

PHENOLOGICAL

STAGE OF RICE Adult Found Days Spent
Seedling 0.67 £0336 1.67 £1.20
Tillering 2.00 +0.00b 5.33 £1.33be
Booting 4.00 +0.58a 10.00 + 0.00a
Soft dough 1.67 40.33 b 8.67 + 0.33ab
Hard dough 1.67 £0.33 7.67 * 0.33ab

Means with the same letter are not significantly different, alpha= 05.



Results of the test confirm that the booting and dough stages were more
attractive for RBB than other stages of rice. This implies that the spatio-temporal
abundance of RBB most likely happen in this stage. In the absence of particular stage.
RBBs most likely will disperse by flight or just crawl to the nearest areas having with

suitable rice stages.


Population Dynamics of RBB Across Cropping Seasons

The population dynamics of RBB was observed in terms of density, age structure
and sex ratio across cropping in different phenological stages of rice in two consecutive
cropping seasons (Figure 7 and 9). The population parameters are presented in figure, the
phenological stages of rice and rainfall data were included.

Density. The seasonal RBB population fluctuated relative to the phenological
stages of rice development. The numbers of individual stages of RBB were observed per
20 plants of rice. The proportions of adult stages were quite higher during the mid-
tillering and towards the reproductive stage (booting). It decreased towards the end of
cropping seasons. Nymphal stages peaked during the reproductive and at the beginning of
maturity stage of the crop since copulation were already higher on the tillering stage
where female RBB started to lay eggs. It was not surprising that an increase of population
in the reproductive and early maturity stages of rice because of the increase in number of
tillers and dense canopy that conducive for the RBB to reproduce and develop.

Age Structure. The age structure of RBBs during and between cropping
periods showed a growing populations of RBB of which a large proportions of young
RBBs were found in different phenology across sites. In November, which coincides
with seedling and early tillering stages, eggs were not observed. Eggs were visible in
December which was the mid-tillering stage of the rice plants until the ratoon period.
The 1 nymphal instar was recorded beginning January and reached its highest at ratoon

and slowly decreased until the next planting season. The 2” nymphal instar was

observed at maximum tillering and increased during the soft dough and hard dough
stages. In late December which coincides with panicle initiation. the 3rd nymphal instar
were recorded and reached a peak during the second week of March. The 4" and 5
nymphal instars were observed during panicle initiation and were highest during the hard
dough stage (2 week of February). These nymphal stages started to decrease until
ratoon (last week of February until May). Highest number of female adults was recorded
in December (stem elongation) and January (flowering) as well as during booting and
hard dough stages. Meanwhile, male adults were recorded highest during flowering and
booting. All age structures of the population were observed for the succeeding cropping
season ( June ~September). Distribution of immature stages of RBB from eggs to the 5”

nymphal instar is shown in Figure 8.

a
TD 3215
——a,

838888 8 H
ER EGE 8 SRREEREEREES
“squeyd
0z/Aysuag ‘aunpnays
aty

Monkayo, Compostela Valley,

Figure 7. Density and Age structure of rice balck bug recorded per 20 sample plants across two cropping seasons of rice in
ilippines (2016-2017).


+

“sO = 918 4< qolg_pue sanyer 4 SuIpuodsaxioo pue sersut jeyduicu ,¢ (J pue seisut jeyduXu ,f ( 2 -sersut peyducu
pf (PUeIsut jeydwidu ,,z (9 ‘veisut yeydwidy | (q 5839 (v :sqqY Jo sadeis aimrewuN wosayjIP ay) Jo UoHnguIsi °y aunty

WAVESSARANSANS

>

T ie ba

SSRANSAAANSAAS

SOAS AAAANAAAS
ie aes gy

SAASSAANASAS,

Pepe

WNAASASARNAAAS,
8 + = | ad s se
garnet

f

BVA SANS,

a |
am q he



Sex ratio across sites. Across sites, both male and female RBBs were observed
(Figure 9). As early as seedling stage, few female RBBs were found across study sites.
During the vegetative stage, the numbers of RBBs increased as the rice plants grew
where mean number female bugs were higher than that of male bugs across sites.
Highest number of RBBs for both sexes was observed at stem elongation. During the
reproductive stage, the same pattern was observed for both sexes. Highest numbers for
male and female bugs were found during flowering, booting and panicle initiation in
decreasing order. Lowest population was found during heading. At the ripening stage,
highest population for both sexes was found during hard and soft dough stages followed
by mature grain and milk grain stages. Population for both sexes decreased right after
harvest. Results suggest that regardless of sex, population of RBB was high as early as
vegetative stage until the reproductive stage.

This is in agreement with the findings of PhilRice that RBBs infest rice plants at
all growth stages as early as tillering until ripening. RBB population starts to increase
eight weeks after seeding and reached its peak three weeks later. Nymphs colonize the

rice plants at nine weeks after seeding and peaked after two weeks due to reproduction.

i -— = a



FY

E


a

FE

%

F

er

fF * *

~ Fre te SF
Ae + é a ~


Figure 9. Proportion of female and male RBBs across phenological stages of rice.

Results of the study are in agreement with Niones et al. (2009) that RBB adult
population is at highest when most of the rice fields are at harvest to fallow period...
However, RBB adult population is low when standing crops at vegetative to early
reproductive stages and dramatically increases towards crop maturiry then reached its
peak at crop maturity and early weeks of fallow period. Datas signifies that RBB able to
reproduce and develop within the cropping season of rice in one generation. The
microclimatic condition within the rice favors the development of the RBB. In general,
abundance of RBB_ is seemingly influenced by the growth stage of the rice crop present

in the field. The synchronization of herbivores with their host plant phenology determines


quality and quantity of food resources and affects the preference-performance linkage

and abundance of herbivores (Yukawa. 2000).


Reproductive Status and Fat Body Deposits
of the RBB as Affected by Rice Phenology

Reproductive Status of RBB in Relation
to the Phenological Stages of Rice

The reproductive status of RBB was determined to better understand the
population structure of RBB in the rice field. It was taken by examining the proportion of
mated and unmated RBB and ovary condition in relation to phenology of rice. The
highest number of mated RBB was observed during the reproductive stage particularly at
panicle initiation (Table 5 and Figure 10). High number of mated RBB was also

observed during mid-tillering and booting stages.

Table 5. Relative abundance of mated female population of rice black bug across two
cropping seasons in Monkayo, Compostela Valley, Philippines (2016-2017).

MONTH GROWTH STAGES MATED™
November yo, Early tillering 37.00
December egetative Mid tillering 84.67
Januai Panicle initiation 97.33

e] Reproductive Booting 86.33
February Ripeningy Dough stage 46.67
Maturity
March Ratoon 73.00
April Fallow period Raton 16.00
May Trapped catch 13,33
June Vegetative Tillering 35.33
July Reproductive Booting 87.67
August Ripening/ Dough stage 42.00
Maturity
Sample size=100

S21

=

i

HB vates unmated

Figure 10. Proportion of mated to unmated female rice black bug (RBB) in two
cropping seasons in Monkayo, Compostela Valley, Philippines (2016-2017).
Data revealed that mating of RBB mostly occurred as early as mid-tillering and
peaked during the reproductive stage of rice. On the other hand, low number of mated
RBB during fallow period (ratoon and trapped catch) implies that they were newly

eclosed individual. Mated and unmated spermatheca is shown in Figure 11


Figure 11. Spermatheca of RBB: (a) mated (spermatheca filled with sperm); (b)
unmated (unfilled with sperm)

Likewise, reproductive status of RBB was determined in terms of frequency
(condition of ovaries) categorized into | to IV across growth stages (Table 6 and Figure
12). At early tillering which falls in the month of November, no egg was visible but
immature eggs with unhardened chorion were observed. As the plant matures, eggs with
hard chorion appear and subsequently declined when the field goes into fallow period.
Most of adult trapped catch were having an immature eggs (May). This is in parallel with
the observation of Shepard et.al, 1985 and Ito et. al., 1993 that female trapped- catched
RBB were nulliparous, indicating that those bug undergo flight are mainly newly

emerged adults or females have already laid their eggs


Table 6. Reproductive status of female rice back bug (RBB) across two cropping seasons
of Rice in Monkayo, Compostela Valley, Philippines (2016-2017)

FREQUENCY

MONTH GROWTH MODE
STAGES 1 in ML Vv

November Early Tillering 7967 1233 8.00 0.00 T
December Mid-tillering 15.67 56.67 27.67_—0.00 in
January Panicle Initiation 233 40.33 $5.00 2.33 Ml

Booting 19.67 45.00 32.67 2.67 un
February Hard Dough 46.00 23.00 17.00 14.00 1
March Ratoon/stubbles 68.33 1833-267 10.67 1
April Ratoon/stubbles 7267 16.00 0.00 11.33 1
May Trapped Catch 86.00 867 5.33 0.00 1
June Tillering 8167 11.00 7.33 0.00 1
July Booting 17.67 41.00 41.33. 0.00 nm
August Dough Stage 4533 2767 23.67 3.33 i

Figure 12. Ovary condition of female rice black bug ( RBB) across two cropping seasons
of Rice in Monkayo, Compostela Valley , Philippines (2016 - 2017).


Test for normality of conditions of the ovary was done using the General Linear

Model Procedure (GLM). One-way ANOVA was performed using treatment
(phenological stages of rice) and condition of ovary (referred to as frequency) as
dependent variables. Results show that there were significant differences due to

treatment (phenological stages, frequency and interaction of treatment and frequency.

Fat Body Deposits

The fat body deposits were examined in relation to the phenology of rice. The fat
body plays major roles in the life of insects. It is a dynamic tissue involved in multiple
metabolic functions. One of these functions is to store and release energy in response to
the energy demands of the insect. Insects store energy reserves in the form of glycogen
and triglycerides in the adipocytes, the main fat body cell. Insect adipocytes can store a

great amount of lipid reserves as cytoplasmic li

id droplets. Lipid metabolism is essential
for growth and reproduction and provides energy needed during extended nonfeeding
periods (Arrese and Soulages, 2010).

Variation of fat body deposition of RBB was observed to occur at all growth
stages. A large number of white bodies (80%) was observed at tillering and fluctuates
during the other growth stages (Table 7 and Figure 13). However, fat bodies (Class III)
had also variable pattern but number was smaller at seedling and decreased until booting.
It then started to increase at dough stage and remained consistent during the fallow period

Results are substantiated with the ANOVA which gave significant differences in


treatment (phenological stages of rice plant), frequency (classification of fat bodies) and

their interaction .

Table 7. Proportion of fat body deposits of RBB across two cropping seasons of Rice in
Monkayo, Compostela Valley, Philippines (2016-2017).

FAT DEPOSITION FREQUENCY

MONTH MODE

GROWTH

STAGES I i it
November Early Tillering 60.00 25.00 ‘15.00 I
December _Mid-Tillering 5.67 75.67 18.67 I
January Panicle Initiation 56.33 3433.94.33 I

Booting 35.33 54.33 10.33 i

February Dough 32.67 37.00 30.33 0
March Ratoon/stubbles 12.33. 55.00 32.67 Wl
April Ratoon/stubbles 12.00 21.67 66.33 mM
May Trapped Catch 16.67 63.00 20.33 ul
June Tillering 6433 23.33 12.33 I
July Booting 3433 54.67 11.00 nl
August Dough Stage 3433 35.00 30.67 in


Mean aatng
=

i

= Grade | Grade I! mm Grade III

Figure 13. Fat deposition of female rice black bug (RBB) in relation to penological
stages of rice (Monkayo, Compostela Valley, Philippines, 2016-2017).

The results for fat body and ovarian development of female RBBs support the
suggestion that ovarian development corresponded with time, and largely synchronized
with waning fat body size (Banerjee et .al., 1985). The insects with full-half-full stomach
and mature ovaries had a small fat body, and obviously finished their feeding period
(Kiritani, 1963; Solbreck, 1972). On the other hand, take the case of the spent individuals
N. viridula with empty stomach and fat thinly spread over the venter might have used
most of the accumulated fat for ovarian development and subsequent egg laying. Possibly
the fully developed fat body and undeveloped ovaries synchronized with the orientation

of this insect migrating to hibernation during winter (Banerjee et al.,1985).

5s7

GENERAL DISCUSSION

Rice black bug is one of the most persistent pests of rice. Its reproduction is
highly organized with time-space dimension which is influenced by the existing
environment where the population evolves. As Medina (2002) emphasized, insects*
oviposition preferences are closely linked with the environmental cues that they are
likely to produce and reproduce only when surrounding conditions are favorable for the
survival of its offsprings.

In this study, the reproductive cycles and behavior of rice black bug( RBB) as
influenced by the rice phenology were examined and their implication to its flight and
aggregation behavior. Results revealed that RBB oviposition coincides with the booting
and dough stage of rice of which significantly higher number eggmass were laid. Field
population of RBBs was high and reproduced in one generation in a cropping. Most of
the invading adult RBBs in the riceficld at early vegetative were reproductively
immature and unmated. Ovary development commenced at the middle part of vegetative
stage of rice and peaked during the booting and dough stage of rice. It declined towads
the end of the cropping season of which the adult population were predominantly
reproductively immature coupled with high fat body desposition. Most dissected female
RBB from trap catched were observed with immature ovary with no visible eggs. These
results indicate that rice stages are critical for the survival, development and reproduction

of RBBs.


Rice as an important resource of RBB has evolved through times (Litsinger.
2007). Before rice is planted once in a year with long maturity period. But with the
advent of modern technology and the intensification of rice production. rice nowadays is
often planted synchronously or asychronously in two croppings seasons in a year with a
two- or four-month fallow period depending on the climatic conditions of the area.. This
implies that there are certain months of the year with no rice or having an overlapping
growth stages of rice which would eventually influence the spatio-temporal abundance
of RBB.

Most flight in insects is in prereproductive (i.e. reproductively immature),
‘occurring at a particular time in adult life (Johnson, 1963). It was generally observed that
RBB undergo dispersal through flight. RBB flight is regarded as an adaptation triggered
by unfavorable resources (i.e. absence or fragmented availability of appropriate growth
stages of rice) of which insects has no access for food and sites for oviposition.

In the absence of appropriate stages of rice, reproductively immature RBBs and
often fueled with high fat bodies (Table 6 and 7) will most likely undergo mass flight
depending on the build-up of population of RBB in a rice area. However, if the spatio-
temporal abundance of food sources will always be available, RBB most probably settle
and reproduce. And if the conditions (i.e. continues food sources and appropriate stages
for breeding) persist or prolong, heavy infestation of RBB most often occur.

In areas where farmers practicing synchronous planting with longer fallow period,
the reproductively matured RBBs (those can disperse in short distances) and nymphs

eventually find favorable areas and if absence soon they will die. However, in areas with

unsynchronous cropping, they will most likely transfer or move by crawling to adjacent
areas with suitable growth stages.

The seasonality of flight of RBB is most likely dictated of the phenology of rice.
This means that RBB will only undergo mass flight when there is unfavorable condition
( ie. absence of appropriate stages) to seek food sources and site for oviposition.
However, if favorable conditions prolong, RBB will just disperse in short distances and

often flight is undetected.

CHAPTER5

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION

The observed mass flight of the rice black bug (RBB) has remained to be poorly
understood. Whether the flight is endogenous or a response to environmental cue is still
unknown. In this study, the reproductive cycle and behavior of rice black bug (RBB).
Scotinophara coarctata in relation to the rice phenology were examined. It was designed
to offer a possible explanation of the flight and aggregation behavior of RBB by linking
these behaviors to the reproduction of the bug. Greenhouse and field studies were
conducted to determine if oviposition of RBB is confined to certain phenological stage of
rice and if this oviposition preference is reflected in the population dynamics of rice black
bug over two cropping seasons.

Behavioral experiments showed that RBB discriminated against the seedling stage
as oviposition site. No egg was laid in the seedling stage in either the choice and no-
choice studies. The significantly higher number of eggmasses laid on the booting and
soft dough stages of rice, as well as the number of visits and the length of time RBB
stayed on these stages compared to other stages seemed to indicate a preference to these
phenological stages.

It was evident from the age structure, population dynamics and monitoring of the
reproductive status of RBB over two croppings that individuals arriving in the rice field

were mostly immature and unmated. RBB reproduction commenced in early reproductive

Stages of rice and only one reproductive cycle was completed in a cropping season. It
declined towards the end of the season having a high proportion of reproductively
immature female RBB, fueled with high fat body deposition.

Based on the patterns observed in the reproductive development and age structure
of the field population coupled with the results of various behavioral experiments. there is
a very close relationship between the oviposition behavior of RBB and the phenology of
rice. This specific requirement for oviposition could trigger a young population of RBB
to fly and look for oviposition site if there are no booting and soft dough stages of rice
available for an extended period of time. This behavior must be happening all the time
but it could become more apparent and interpreted as mass flight if the absence of the rice
growth stage occurs in a wide scale like in the delay of a cropping season due to a lack of
irrigation water or drought in a certain area.

It is recommended that a landscape scale of analysis should be done to further test
the above hypothesis. A mark-recapture technique needs to be conducted to fully
document movement and flight of RBB. The management of RBB must be developed

involving areawide action plans.

LITERATURE CITED

ADALLA, CB and FD. ALZONA. 2007. Management of Malayan Rice Black Bugs in
the Philippines. pp. 427-434. In: Joshi RC, Barrrion AT, Sebastian LS
(eds.) Rice black bugs: Taxonomy, ecology, and management of _ invasive
species. Philippine Rice Research Institute, Mufioz, p. 787.

ARNALDO, PS, D. GONZALEZ. I. OLIVEIRA, . F. VAN LANGEVELDE and |.
WYNHOFF. 2014. Influence of —_ host plant phenology and oviposition date on
the oviposition pattem and offspring performance of the butterfly, Phengaris
alcon. Journal of Insect Conservation, 18(6):115-1122.

ARRESE, EL. AND JL. SOULAGES . 2010. Insect fat body: energy, metabolism, and
regulation. Annual review of entomology, 55, 207-225.

AWMACK, CS and SR. LEATHER, 2002. Host plant quality and fecundity in
herbivorous insects. Annual Review of Entomology. 47(1):817-844.

BANERJEE, TC. And M. CHATTERJEE.. 1985. Seasonal changes in feeding. fat body
and ovarian conditions of — Nezara viridula L.(Heteroptera:
Pentatomidae). International Journal of Tropical Insect Science, 6(6), 633-635.

BARBOSA, P, W. CRANSHAW and JA. GREENBLATT. 1981. Influence of food
quantity and quality on polymorphic dispersal behaviors in the gypsy moth,
Lymantria dispar. Canadian Journal of Zoology, 59(2):293-296.

BARRION, AT, RC . JOSHI, ALA. BARRION-DUPO, and LS. SEBASTIAN . 2007.
Systematics of the Philippine rice black bug. Scotino pharastal (Hemiptera:
Pentatomidae). Rice Black Bugs: taxonomy, ecology. and management of
invasive species. Joshi RC, Barrion AT, Sebastian LS (eds), 3-180.

BARRION, AT, 0. MOCHIDA. JA. LITSINGER. and ND. CRUZ. . 1982. The Malayan
black bug Scorinophara coarctata (F.) (Hemiptera: Pentatomidae): a new rice pest
in the Philippines. Int. Rice Res. News., 7(6): 6-7.

BATAY-AN, EH, PS .TORRENA and A. ESTOY . 2007. Bioecological studies on
rice black bug Scotinophara courctata (Fabricius) in Cotabato, Mindanao,
Philippines, p. 339-359. In: Joshi RC, Barrrion AT, Sebastian, LS (eds) Rice
black bugs: taxonomy, ecology, and management of invasive species.
Philippine Rice Research Institute, Mufioz, p. 787.

BELL, G. 1976. On breeding more than once. American Naturalist. 57-77.

BERNAYS, EA and RE. CHAPMAN.1994. Behavior: the process of host-plant
selection. Host-plant selection by phytophagous insects. 95-165.

BOGGS, CL. 1986. Reproductive strategies of female butterflies: variation in and
constraints on fecundity. Ecological Entomology. 11(1):7-15.

BOGGS, CL. 1981. Nutritional and life-history determinants of resource allocation in
holometabolous insects. American Naturalist, 692-709.

BRABY, MF and RE . JONES . 1995. Reproductive patterns and resource allocation in
tropical butterflies: influence of adult diet and seasonal phenotype on fecundity,
longevity and egg size. Oikos, 189-204.

CATINDIG, JL and K L. HEONG .2006. A review of the four important alien invasive
species on rice and mango in the Philippines. Entomology and Plant Pathology
Division, International Rice Research Institute Metro Manila. Philippines.

CONNOR, EF, RH. ADAMS-MANSON, TG. CARR, and M W. BECK . 1994. The
effects of host plant phenology on the demography and population dynamics of
the leaf-mining moth. Cameraria ~— hamadryadella_ (Lepidoptera:
Gracillariidae). Ecological Entomology, 19(2):1 11-120.

COYLE, DR, MS. JORDAN and KF. RAFFA . 2010. Host plant phenology affects
performance of an invasive weevil, Phyllobius oblongus (Coleoptera:
Curculionidae), in a _—northerm ~—hardwood ~—_ forest. Environmental
Entomology, 39(5):1539-1544.

CUATERNO, MWR. 2006. MANAGEMENT OF MALAYAN RICE BLACKBUG
(Scotinophara coarctata) USING BIOLOGICAL CONTROL AGENT IN THE
ISLAND PROVINCES OF THE PHILIPPINES. Proceedings of Areawide
Management of Insect Pests. Food and Fertilizer Technology Center for Asia and
the Pacific Region, Okinawa.

CUSHMAN. JH, CL. BOGGS, SB. WEISS, DD. MURPHY, AW . HARVEY and PR.
EHRLICH .1994. Estimating female reproductive success of a threatened
butterfly: influence of emergence time and host plant phenology. Oecologia, 99
(1-2):194-200.

DEMPSTER, JP. 1983. The natural control of populations of butterflies and
moths. Biological Reviews, 58(3):461-481.


DINGLE, H and G. ARORA . 1973. Experimental studies of migration in bugs of the
genus Dysdercus.Oecologia, 12: 119-140.

DOAK, P, P. KAREIVA and J. KINGSOLVER. 2006. Fitness consequences of choosy
oviposition for a time-limited butterfly. Ecology. 87(2): 395-408.

DOMINGO, IT and EA. HEINRICHS .1986. Two promising lines tolerant of the rice
black bug in Palawan, Philippines. Interagency Rice-Based Cropping Systems
Pre-Production Evaluation Program (IRCSPPEP). (Unpublished)

ELSEY, KD. 1974. Jalysus spinosus: effect of age, starvation, host plant, and
photoperiod on flight activity. Environmental Entomology 3: 653-655.

ESTOY, AB, EH. BATAY-AN, FPJ. TADLE, and PS. TORRENA. 2007. Biological
Control of the Rice Black Bug. Rice black bugs: taxonomy, ecology. and
management of invasive species, 329.

FELLAND, CM, RP . PORTER and HN. PITRE .1992. Soybean looper (Lepidoptera:
Noctuidae) oviposition preference relative to plant development in soybean
and cotton. Journal of Entomological Science, 27(3): 217-223.

FERNANDO, HE. 1960. A biological and ecological study of the rice Pentatomid bug.
Scotinophara lurida (Burm.) in Ceylon. Bulletin of Entomological
Research, 51(3), 559-576.

FRITZ, RS, NE. STAMP and TG. HALVERSON. 1982. Iteroparity and semelparity in
insects. The American Naturalist, 120(2): 264-268.

GIESEL, JT. 1976, Reproductive strategies as adaptations to life in temporally
heterogeneous environments, Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics, 57-79.

GOMEZ, K. A.. K. A.GOMEZ and A. A. GOMEZ. 1984. Statistical procedures for
agricultural research. John Wiley & Sons.

HEARD, TA. 1999. Concepts in insect host-plant selection behavior and their application
to host specificity testing. In: Host Specificity of Exotic Arthropod Biological
Control Agents: the Biological Basis for Improvement in Safety, Proceedings of
Session: X International Symposium on Biological Control of Weeds, pp. 1-10.

HEINRICHS, EA, IT. DOMINGO and EH. CASTILLO. 1987. Resistance and yield
responses of rice cultivars to the black bug Scotinuphara coarctata (F.)
(Hemiptera: — Pentatomidae). Journal of Plant Protection in the Tropics, 4(1):55-
64.



HERBERT, JJ and MICHAEL D. TOEWS, MD. 2012. Seasonal Abundance and
Population Structure of Chinavia hilaris and Nezara viridula (Hemiptera:
Pentatomidae) in Georgia Farmscapes Containing Com, Cotton, Peanut, and
Soybean. Ann. Entomol. Soc. Am., 105(4): 582-591

ITO, K, H. SUGIYAMA and CP. MIN .1993. Effects of lunar phase on light trap catches
ofthe Malayan black rice bug, Scotinophara coarctata (Heteroptera:
Pentatomidae). Bulletin of Entomological Research, 83(01): 59-65.

JERVIS, MA, CL. BOGGS and PN . FERNS. 2005. Egg maturation strategy and its
associated trade-offs: a synthesis focusing on Lepidoptera .Ecological
Entomology, 30(4): 359-375.

JOHNSON,CG.1963.Physiological factors in insect ~— migration —_by
flight. Nature, 198(4879). 423.

KAVALLIERATOS, NG, CG. ATHANASSIOU, Z. ZELIKO TOMANOVIC, A.
SCIARRETTA, , P . PASQUALE TREMATERRA and V. VLADIMIR ZIKIC.
2005. Seasonal occurrence, distribution and sampling indices for Myzus persicae
(Hemiptera: Aphidoidea) and its parasitoids (Hymenoptera: Braconidae:
Aphidiinae) on tobacco. Eur. J. Entomol., 102: 459-468.

KIRITANI, K.1963. The change in reproductive system of the southern green stink bug.

Nezara viridula, and its application to forecasting of the seasonal history. Jpn. J.
Appl. Entomol. Zool., 7, 327-337.

LEUTHARDT, FL. and B. BAUR. .2013. Oviposition preference and larval
development of the invasive moth Cydalima perspectalis on five European
box-tree varieties. Journal of Applied Entomology, 137(6). 437-444.

LITSINGER, JA. 2007. The Role of Alternative Plant Hosts in Rice Black Bug
Ecology. Rice Black Bugs: taxonomy. ecology, and management of invasive
species. Joshi et al., 307-315.

LITSINGER, JA. 2007. Cultural, Mechanical, and Physical Control of Rice Black
Bugs. RICE BLACK BUGS, 387.

MASCARENHAS, RN and HN . PITRE. 1997. Oviposition responses of soybean looper
(Lepidoptera: Noctuidae) to varieties and growth stages of soybean.
Environmental Entomology, 26(11):76-83.

MEDINA, DC. 2002. The reproductive biology of the Mango Pulp Weevil. PhD
Dissertation. Graduate School.University of the Philippines Los Baitos.


MCLEOD, P. 1988. Influence of snap bean phenology on Heliothis zea (Boddie)
(Lepidoptera: Noctuidae) oviposition. Journal of Entomological
Science, 23(2): 169-173.

MOSCARDI, F, CS. BARFIELD and GE. ALLEN. 1981. Impact of soybean
phenology on velvet bean caterpillar (Lepidoptera: Noctuidae): Oviposition,
egg hatch, and adult longevity. The Canadian Entomologist, 113(02):113-119.

MUNIZ, DG, AV. FREITAS and PS. OLIVEIRA . 2012. Phenological relationships of
Eunica bechina (Lepidoptera: Nymphalidae) and its host plant. Caryocar
brasiliense (Caryocaraceae), in a Neotropical savanna. Studies on Neotropical
Fauna and Environment, 47(2): 111-118.

NIAES. 2007. Asian —Pacific Alien Species Database.

NIONES, JT and PLP. SABES,.2009. Understanding rice black bug populations
dynamics through GIS [Geographic Information System]. Philippine Journal of
Crop Science (Philippines).

O’WOMA, OO, UP. CHIGOZIRIM, O. EMMANUEL and EM. CHUKWUEBUKA.
2016. Reproductive and Survival Strategies Utilized by Insect. A
Review.American Journal of Zoological Research, 4(1):1-6.

PHILRICE. 1995. Integrated management of Malayan black bug. Rice Tech. Bull. 1.

POWELL, G, CR. TOSH and J. HARDIE .2006. Host plant selection by aphids:
behavioral, evolutionary, and applied perspectives. Annu. Rev. Entomol., 51:309-
330.

REDDY, GV and A. GUERRERO. 2004. Interactions of insect pheromones and plant
semiochemicals. Trends in Plant Science, 9(5):253-261.

RENWICK, JA. and FS. CHEW. 1994. oviposition behavior in Lepidoptera. Annual
Review of Entomology, 39, 377-400.

ROUAULT, G, JN. TURGEONCANDAU. A. ROQUES and P .VON ADERKAS.
2004. Oviposition strategies of conifer seed chalcids in relation to host
phenology. Naturwissenschaften, 91(10): 472-480.

SCHEIRS, J, L. DE BRUYN and R. VERHAGEN .2000. Optimization of adult
performance determines host choice in a grass miner. Proceedings of the Royal
Society of London B: Biological Sciences, 267(1457): 2065-2069.


SHEPARD. B. M., G. S. ARIDA, AND K. L. HEONG. 1986."Sex ratio and productive
status of Scotinophara coarctata collected from light traps and rice fields."
International Rice Research Newsletter 11.3: 23-24.

SIBLY, RM and P. CALOW. 1986. Physiological ecology of animals. Blackwell
Scientific Publications.

SILVA, DP and PS. OLIVIERA .2010. Field Biology of Edessa rufomarginata
(Hemiptera; Pentatomidae): Phenology, Behavior, and Patterns of Host Plant Use
Environ. Entomol. 39(6): 1903-1910.

SLANSKY, F. 1982. Insect nutrition: an adaptationist’s perspective. The Florida
Entomologist, 65(1):45-71.

SMYTH, RR, MP. HOFFMANN and AM. SHELTON. 2003. Effects of host plant
phenology on oviposition preference of Crocidolomia pavonana (Lepidoptera:
Pyralidae). Environmental Entomology, 32(4):756-764.

SOLBRECK, C and I. PEHRSON. 1979. Relations between environment, migration and
reproduction in a seed bug, Neacoryphus bicrucis (Say) (Heteroptera: Lygacidae).

STEARNS, SC. 1976. Life-history tactics: a review of the ideas. The Quarterly Review
of Biology, 51(1):3-47.

STEINBAUER, MJ, CLARKE, AR and MADDEN, JL. 1998. Oviposition preference of
a Eucalyptus herbivore and the importance of leaf age on interspecific host
choice. Ecological Entomology, 23(2): 201-206.

TILLMAN, PG. 2010. Composition and Abundance of Stink Bugs (Heteroptera:
Pentatomidae) in Com. Environ. Entomol., 39(6): 1765-1774.

TOSCANO, NC and VM. STERN. 1980. Seasonal Reproductive Condition of
Euschistus conspersus. Ann. Entomol. Soc. Am., 73: 85-88.

TSUDA, Y. 1982. Reproductive strategy of insects as adaptation to temporally varying
environments. Researches on Population Ecology, 24(2):388-404.

VAN VREDEN, G and A. ABDUL LATIF. 1986. Pests of rice and their natural enemies
in Peninsular Malaysia, Wageningen Pudoc. 230 pp.

VELASCO, LRI and GH.WALTER. 1992. Availability of different host plant species
and changing abundance of the polyphagous bug Nezara viridula (Hemiptera:
Pentatomidae), Environmental Entomology, 21(4):751-759.


WIKLUND, C. 1984. Egg-laying patterns in butterflies in relation to their phenolo:
the visual apparency and abundance of their host plants. Oecologia, 63(1):23-29

YUKAWA, J. 2000. Synchronization of gallers with host plant phenology.Population
Ecology, 42(2):105-113

GOMEZ, K. A., K. A.GOMEZ and A. A. GOMEZ. 1984. Statistical procedures for
agricultural research. John Wiley & Sons.

