Macronutrient and Selected Mineral Contents and Sensory Characteristics of Loaf Bread with Nixtamalized IPB Var 6 Corn (Zea mays L.) Flour

DEBORAH CHRISTINE A. DE LEON, RND

UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES LOS BAÑOS

Master of Science in Applied Nutrition

DECEMBER 2019

ABSTRACT

Corn is the second most important crop in the Philippines, yet it is underutilized for
human consumption. The Philippines is self-sufficient in corn. This study aims to develop
a loaf bread with nutritional significance utilizing nixtamalized corn/wheat flour blends.
This will promote its consumption and subsequently contribute in the improvement of
Filipinos’ nutritional status. This study analyzed the proximate composition and selected
mineral content of the pulverized nixtamalized corn kernel. The developed loaf bread with
corn and wheat flour blend was analyzed for its proximate composition, selected mineral
content, sensory characteristics and acceptability. Results showed that the pulverized
nixtamalized corn kernel had significant increase for moisture content while there is a
significant decrease in crude protein, total ash, and carbohydrate. Using the response
surface methodology, the optimum nixtamalized corn and wheat flour blend is 5:95. The
developed loaf bread from the optimum blend was acceptable to the consumers and had no
significant difference with the loaf bread made of pure bread flour. In conclusion,
nixtamalization technology has improved the nutritional quality of IPB var 6 corn
specifically in terms of crude fiber, ash, calcium, and iron, Loaf bread is already part of
the Filipino diet hence, introducing a familiar product but with improved nutritional
significance can aid in alleviating malnutrition. Since the developed product is more
applicable for the food manufacturers, it is recommended to develop a nixtamalized
product which can be easily made at home for family use in order to reach the target
consumers.

Keywords: Ecological Nixtamalization, IPB Var 6, Nutritional Value, Sensory
characteristics, Loaf Bread

CHAPTER 1

INTRODUCTION

Background of the Study

Malnutrition is a global pandemic. It has affected people in any point of their life
stage from infancy to elderly, regardless of their gender, wealth status, and country of
origin. Every country is struggling with it in different forms: micro and macronutrient
deficiency or the excess of it, or an imbalance in the proportion of energy and/or nutrients
consumed by a person. Existence of malnutrition comes at a great cost for a country. Based
on the costing study of undernutrition conducted by the United Nations Children’s Fund
(UNICEF) in 2017, Philippines loses Php 220 billion annually because of the effects of
malnutrition such as child stunting, anemia, and iodine deficiency (Junio, 2018). The 8”
National Nutrition Survey (NNS) conducted in 2013-2014 revealed that three out of ten
children below 59 months are stunted, and one out of 10 adults are affected by Chronic
Energy Deficiency (CED). Childhood stunting or shorter height relevant for their age is a
form of undernutrition; this implies a chronic malnutrition status, which is an indicator of
a cchild’s over all well-being. Children below two years of age are commonly affected by
stunting which has irreversible effects such as short physical stature, impaired brain
development, reduced cognitive function, weakened immune systems, and a greater risk of

chronic disease in adulthood (De Onis and Branca, 2016). This condition when not dealt

with proper nutrition has consequences such as poor academic performance, limited work
opportunities, and compromised work productivity. On the other hand, CED in adults is
characterized by low body weight or a body mass index of below 18.5 kg/m? which is
associated with prolonged intake of calories less than the requirement (Philippine Statistics
Authority, 2008). Chronic energy deficiency is a consequence of prolonged deprivation of
nutrients from food that eventually leads to limited physical capacity and work
productivity.

The triple burden of malnutrition is the coexistence of undernutrition, overnutrition,
and micronutrient deficiencies (Capacci et al., 2013). Micronutrient deficiency is coined
as the hidden hunger. This occurs when a person consumes food to fill their stomach
without consideration of having the right amount of essential vitamins and minerals that
the human body needs for optimal growth and development. Micronutrient deficiency is
more common in countries whose staple diet involves rice, wheat, and com since it is rich
in carbohydrates but low in micronutrients (World Food Bank, 2018). The staple food of
the Filipinos is mainly rice, which is correlated to the state of current micronutrient
deficiency in the country. According to the eighth national nutritional survey of the Food
and Nutrition Research Institute (FNRI-DOST) in 2015, the overall prevalence of anemia
is 11.2%, which is considered “mild” public health problem. The prevalence of anemia
among infants aged 6 months to less than 1 year old is 40.5%, it is the population with the
highest prevalence of anemia and is considered as a “severe” public health problem. In
National Capital Region (NCR), 57.5% adolescents (13-19 years), 54.4% adults (20 years

and over), and 70.9% pregnant women had iron deficiency anemia (IDA). Consequences

of anemia include adverse effects on cognitive and motor development, fatigue and low
productivity. On the other hand, over-all prevalence of zinc deficiency is 25.6% , a “high”
public health concern. Highest prevalence of deficiency was observed among the elderly
(60 years and above) at 36.3%, followed by the adults (20-59 years) at 28.1%, and the
lactating women at 13.7%. Zinc deficiency is associated with growth retardation, loss of

appetite, and impaired immune function (National Institutes of Health, 2019).

The most common causes of micronutrient deficiencies are insufficient intake of

food containing these micronutrients and the presence of inhibitors such as phytate for iron
and zinc. In 2015, calcium and iron had the lowest adequacy levels wherein only 16% and
9.2% of the households were able to meet the estimated average requirement (EAR)
(Department of Science and Technology-Food and Nutrition Research Institute, 2016b).
‘Among all the food groups, food items under the rice and rice products are the main
contributors of calcium (19.6%) and iron (31.4%). For calcium, other main contributors.
are fish and fish products, vegetables, and milk and milk products. On the other hand,
vegetables, fish and fish products, and meat and meat products are the main contributor of

iron,

Malnutrition at any life stage has an impact in the individuals, families, and
country’s economy because of lost investments in human capital associated with
preventable child deaths and diet-related non-communicable diseases resulting to
premature adult mortality. Additional costs include impaired learning, poor school
performance, compromised adult labor productivity, and increased health care costs

(Global Panel on Agriculture and Food Systems for Nutrition, 2016).

The conceptual framework of malnutrition developed by UNICEF (2001) reveals
that malnutrition is multisectoral. One of the immediate causes of it is the inadequate
quantity and quality of dietary intake. Philippines is a rice-dependent country. According
to PSA (2017a), plain rice is the most commonly consumed food item by 93.9% of
households. It is also the primary source of calories and protein by providing 1,054.76
kilocalories per day per person and 22.16 grams of protein (PSA, 2017b) . However, the
issue of high demand and low supply in rice still exists and the retail price of well-milled
rice on the second week of October 2019 is at Php 41.89 per kilogram (PSA, 2019). High
price of rice would result into limited purchasing power of the families which may

eventually lead to compromised nutritional status.

Rice insufficiency is an old problem in the Philippines. The nutritional status of
Filipinos is highly dependent on the availability of food and one way of addressing it is by
introducing another source of nutrients. Currently, the increased supply and demand
problem of rice in the Philippines is addressed by the government through rice importation.
Aside from rice importation, the Department of Agriculture is also starting to introduce the
consumption of rice-com blend at varying proportions. The inclusion of com aims to
achieve food staple sufficiency and food security in the country. There are also health
benefits for consumers such as low glycemic index content and higher beta-carotene.
Furthermore, it is also cheaper at a price ranging from Php 35.00 to Php 37.00 per kilogram
as compared to Php 40.00 and above price of pure well-milled rice (Cabrera, 2013). Rice-
com blend will also benefit the corn farmers because of the assured market for their

produce.

In the Philippines, corn (Zea mays L.) is considered as the second most important

crop next to rice with 94.34% self-sufficient in 2017 (PSA, 2018). However, majority of

the com is used as ingredient for poultry and livestock feeds. Only 20% of the Fil
population especially in Souther Visayas and Mindanao consume com in significant
amount (Cabrera, 2013). According to PSA (2016), approximately 25% of the corn
production is for human consumption, 0.6% as seeds, 58.07% for feeds and waste, 11.9%
for processing, and less than 0.01% for export, and the remaining 4.6 % serves as an ending

stock.

Maize or more commonly known as com in the Philippines is the staple food in
Latin America and Africa. Although it provides the macronutrients and micronutrients
essential for the humans, it lacks the essential amino acids lysine and tryptophan which
results to protein malnutrition. In order to solve this problem, a nutritionally superior maize
termed as quality protein maize (QPM) was developed in Africa. It has a similar protein
content with the common com but the amount of lysine and tryptophan is two times greater
and the protein is 90% bioavailable (Nuss & Tanumihadjo, 2011). The developed QPM in
Africa was able to improve the nutritional status and health of Africans. This prompted
Dr. Artemio Salazar from the Institute of Plant Breeding of the University of the
Philippines Los Bafios (UPLB-IPB) to breed and develop QPM Var 6, also known as high
lysine and tryptophan com. IPB Var 6 contains 66.2% more lysine than regular white corn,
It has a high nutritional value since it is rich in protein, fat, fiber, essential vitamins and
minerals such as folate, iron, niacin, phosphorus, manganese, magnesium, copper, and zinc

(Barral, 2014). According to Dr. Artemio Salazar, as cited by Barral (2014), QPM has a

potential in addressing malnutrition especially in growing children by supplying essential
amino acids and other nutrients, Based on the feeding programs using the rice - com (IPB
Var 6) blend, higher weight gain was observed in children who were fed with rice
composites than rice alone. Previous researches on IPB Var 6 shows that it can be used as

araw material in developing food products that aims to aid in alleviating malnutrition.

In order to improve the quality of corn, nixtamalization technology was developed
in Mexico and Central America to improve its nutritional value. Nixtamalization is the
process of cooking com in an alkaline solution, soaking and washing in order to obtain the
nixtamal (Wacher, 2003). The traditional method involves the preparation of a lime
solution wherein the com grains are boiled and then steeped for eight to sixteen hours.
Based on the studies conducted in com-eating countries, nixtamalization enhances the
functional and nutritional properties of corn; hence, it can be utilized to improve the
nutritional value of com and its products. According to Bressani et al., (2002),
nixtamalization of com increased the calcium content by about 18-fold, higher amounts of
iron and zinc were observed, and the phytic acid which is an anti-nutrient was decreased.
Phytic acid is an anti-nutrient which impairs the absorption of iron, calcium, and zinc hence
the importance of lowering it. The same results were observed in the study of Wacher
(2003) which showed that nixtamalized com has increased calcium content and niacin
bioavailability. In the study of Martinez-Torres et al., (1987), iron bioavailability of
nixtamalized com increased from 2.3% to 4.5% associated with the decreased level of

phytic acid during the process of nixtamalization. In terms of B-carotene levels,

nixtamalization releases the carotenoids from the kernels resulting to a masa with 100-fold

higher B-carotene (Gutierrez-Uribe et al., 2014).

The potential benefits of nixtamalized corn urge the industry of corn-eating
countries to apply it and develop different com products such as table tortilla, tortilla chips,
brewed beverage, distilled spirits, baked products, breakfast cereals and others (Serna-
Saldivar, 2015). In the Philippines, bread products such as pan de sal, sliced/loaf bread,
and buns have also become a staple in the Filipino diet. Bread is a convenient and versatile
food item; it is consumed at any time of the day since it requires minimal preparation.
Preparation of bread involves basic ingredients such as flour, yeast, sugar, salt, oil, and
water. However, food manufacturers were able to modify the breads through enrichment
with vitamins and minerals and other modifications such as less fat and cholesterol or the
use of high protein wheat flour. Development of a nixtamalized product which is already
a part of the Filipinos’ diet, such as bread, would be easier to introduce and can be more

acceptable to the consumer.

In the Philippines, there are only two published studies in corn nixtamalization. Its
focus was on the textural, sensorial, and cooking characteristics of noodles from two white
QPM varieties (SWQI1 and SWQ 15) with different kemel characteristics (Anna et al.,
2014) while the other study tested the effect of traditional, classical, and ecological
nixtamalization on the proximate composition, functional component, and vitamin and
mineral content of Lagkitan com (Cayetano et al., 2019). Hence, this study aims to
supplement the gap on the proximate composition, bioavailability of minerals, and sensory

evaluation of a nixtamalized corn bread. Development of the nixtamalized corn loaf bread

aims to provide a nutritionally competitive product which can be easily introduced to the
Filipino diet. Since bread is already a part of Filipinos’ food selections it can contribute in

the improvement of their nutritional status.

Statement of the Problem

Com is the second most important crop in the Philippines, yet it is underutilized for
human consumption. More than half (58%) of the corn produced is used for animal feeds;
this is related to the common notation that yellow com is food for the animals. It is also
considered as the “poor man’s rice” since it is usually used as an alternative to rice. Despite
the high nutritive value of com, only 25% of the corn produce in the country is used for
human consumption. Based on PSA (2017a), the most usual form of corn used for human
consumption is the com on the cob, which is either boiled or roasted. However, boiling.
does not maximize the potential of the corn as a source of nutrients since most of the water-
soluble vitamins are dissolved into the water hence it is already lost during consumption.
According to the study of Chukwuma et al., (2016), boiling of com has decreased its energy
value, sodium, potassium, phosphorus, calcium, and magnesium. Food processing is
important in food preparation since it can cause nutrient losses. Furthermore, it can
influence the activation of anti-nutrient factors, hence the importance of adding a technique
which would minimize these losses and reduce the anti-nutrient factors. Currently, in the
Philippines, there is no technique applied in con preparation that enhances its nutritional

quality.

Significance of the Study

In 2017, the secretary of the Department of Agriculture, Emmanuel Pifiol reported
that the Philippines has achieved 103% sufficiency in yellow corn (Simeon, 2018). This
study aims to improve the utilization of IPB Var 6 for human consumption. Application
of nixtamalization technology also aims to enhance nutritional quantity and quality of IPB
Var 6. Incorporation of a nixtamalized com into a food staple such as bread will promote
com’s consumption as well as contribute in the improvement of Filipinos’ nutritional
status. This will also benefit food manufacturers as a basis in including the process of
nixtamalization in their corn-based products. Utilization of corn will also benefit the corn
farmers since it will assure them of a market for their produce. Lastly, this study will serve
as a baseline study for future research as a reference for nixtamalization process, its

product, and its effect on the nutritional quality of the com.

Objectives of the Study

The general objective of the study is to develop a loaf bread with nutritional

significance utilizing nixtamalized corn/wheat flour blends. More specifically:

1. To compare the effect of nixtamalization on the proximate composition and
selected mineral content, i.e., calcium, iron, and zinc of pulverized nixtamalized

IPB var 6 com kernel;

2. To determine the optimum proportion of nixtamalized IPB var 6 com and wheat
flour blend in preparation of loaf bread based on the protein content, calcium
content, loaf volume, and general acceptability;

3. To characterize the developed loaf bread from optimum proportion of nixtamalized
IPB var 6 corn kernel and wheat flour blend;

4. To evaluate the sensory characteristics and general acceptability of the developed
loaf bread from optimum proportion of nixtamalized IPB var 6 com kemel and
wheat flour blend; and

5, To compare the effect of nixtamalization on the proximate composition and
selected mineral content (calcium, iron, and zinc) and acceptability of the
developed loaf bread from optimum proportion of nixtamalized IPB var 6 com

kernel and wheat flour blend.

Scope and Limitations

This study covered the development of a loaf bread from nixtamalized corn and
wheat flour blend. The most optimum proportion of nixtamalized com and wheat flour
blends used in the preparation of loaf bread was determined based on general acceptability,

loaf volume, protein, and calcium content.

There are various underutilized corn varieties in the Philippines; however this study
only focused on IPB var 6 due to limited availability of other varieties. Currently, there
are three types of nixtamalization such as traditional, classical, and ecological. This study

was only limited to ecological nixtamalization. The proportion of nixtamalized corn and

wheat flour blends was limited to nine treatments based on the result of response surface

methodology.

CHAPTER 2

REVIEW OF LITERATURE

al Situation in the Philippines

Triple burden of malnutrition

Triple burden of malnutrition is defined as the co-existence of undernutrition,
overnutrition, and micronutrient deficiencies in a country. Malnutrition affects all life
stages from infancy to elderly. This threatens the survival, growth and development of
children, young and old people, and the overall economy of the country. The 2018
Expanded National Nutrition Survey (ENNS) conducted by DOST-FNRI (2019) reported
that among children under 5 years of age, there is a reduction in the prevalence of stunting
from 33.4% in 2015 to 30.3% in 2018, Stunting means that a person’s height is too short
for the average of his age, which represents chronic undernutrition. In terms of wasting or
thinness, 7.1% prevalence was categorized as “poor” public health significance based on
World Health Organization (WHO) cut-offs. In the first year of life, males are more likely
to be 24.5% underweight and 40.7% under height. However, on the third year of life,
females are more underweight (25.6%) and stunted (40.3%). In general, stunting, wasting,
and underweight are more prevalent in rural areas and those who belong in the poorest

quintiles (DOST-FNRI, 2016a). On the other hand, the prevalence of overweight for height

among children under 5 years of age, increased from 3.9% in 2015 to 4.0% in 2018 (DOST-

FNRI, 2019).

The 2015 Updating Nutrition Survey of DOST-FNRI (2016a) revealed that children
aged 5 to 10 years old has high prevalence of undernutrition with 31.2% being underweight
and 31.1% being stunted. Wasting at this age group is also considered as poor public health
significance with 8.4% prevalence. Similar with the younger age group, stunting,
underweight, and wasting were more prevalent in rural areas and poorest quintiles. As for
the adolescent children, double burden of malnutrition was evident with high magnitude
and severity of stunting at 31.9% prevalence, wasting is a serious public health concern
at 12.5%, and a significant increase in the prevalence of overweighVobesity from 8.3% in
2013 to 9.2% in 2015, Stunting, wasting, and overweightobesity were more prevalent in
males. On the other hand, stunting and wasting were more prevalent in rural areas and
other society in the poorest quintiles while overnutrition was more evident in people
residing in urban areas and those in the richest quintile. This is associated with their
financial capacity to purchase food. Those in the poorest quintile has lower means to
purchase food hence, lower quantity and quality of food is consumed thereby affecting
their nutritional status. The opposite situation can be observed for those in the urban areas
and those who belong in the richest quintiles. Since they have a higher financial capacity
to purchase food, they are more capable to purchase and consume greater quantity of food

as well as fast food and processed food which can contribute to overweightobesity.

For the adults aged 20 years old and over, CED had an annual decrease from 2003

to 2015. Chronic energy deficiency was highest among elderly adults 70 years old and

above, those living in rural areas, and among the poorest quintiles. On the other hand,
overweightobesity is continuously increasing since 2003. It is more prevalent at age 40 to
59.99 years old, those living in urban areas, and among the richest quintiles. Double burden
of malnutrition is more evident among females with CED rates at 10.5% and

overweight/obesity rates at 35.2% (DOST-FNRI, 2016a).

In general, across the population groups, double burden of malnutrition is prevalent
among children. The trend of chronic malnutrition is continuously increasing while acute
malnutrition remains unchanged. Overnutrition in adults increase their risk of developing

co-morbidities and non-communicable diseases.

Micronutrient deficiency is called the hidden hunger since it can occur in a person
who looks healthy and is able to fulfill his/her energy requirement. This occurs when a
person is deficient in one or a small number of specific micronutrients. This type of
malnutrition is difficult to detect in its early stages since clinical signs and symptoms only
manifest on the latter stages of deficiency. Hence, nutritional adequacy is determined
through biochemical assessment. According to the 8 NNS of DOST-FNRI (2015), overall
anemia prevalence in the country decreased from 28.9% in 1993 to 11.2% in 2013. Anemia
is a severe public health problem, which affects infants aged 6 months to less than one year
old. Anemia prevalence in pregnant women is considered moderate while it is mild public
health problem for lactating women. In general, those who are elderly and living in rural
areas have higher anemia prevalence. Specifically, the prevalence of IDA in adolescents,

adults, and pregnant women living in NCR is at 54,7%, 54.4%, and 70.9%, respectively.

The overall vitamin A deficiency (VAD) prevalence was at 6.2%. Vitamin A
deficiency is considered a severe public health problem among the preschool children aged
6 months to 5 years. Higher VAD prevalence was observed at 27.9% in younger infants
aged 6 months to less than one year as compared to older infants aged one to five years
with 19.6% prevalence. For vitamin D, males had higher levels as compared to female.
Deficiency is more prevalent among females. The overall prevalence of zinc deficiency is
a high public concern at 25.6% and is considered a high public health concen. High
prevalence of zinc deficiency was observed among elderly (36.3%), adults (28.1%), and
lactating women (25.2%) and is classified as a high public health concern. On the other
hand, lowest prevalence of zinc deficiency was among the pregnant women (13.7%) and
preschool children (17.9%) and is classified as moderately high public health concern

(DOST-FNRI, 2015).

Dietary Intake of Fil

Based on the framework of the causality of malnutrition developed by UNICEF
(2001), inadequate dietary intake is an immediate cause of malnutrition. Hence, dietary
assessment is used in order to determine the actual food intake and adequacy of energy and
nutrient intakes. Based on the 2015 Updating Survey of DOST-FNRI (2016b), among all
the food groups, cereals and cereals products is the most consumed food source. Around
1467 grams per day of cereal-based product is consumed compared to rice and rice
products, which only contributes 1263 grams per day. Vegetables at 496 grams and fish

and fish products at 392 grams followed cereal and rice. Vegetables constitute 14.6% of

the total intake while fish and fish products constitute 11.5%. The meat and meat products
and poultry contribute 3.2% of the total intake. The miscellaneous group such as
beverages, condiments and spices, and other food items was consumed at 112 grams per
day, contributing 3.3% of total intake. The least contributor in the total intake is the group

of dried beans, nuts, and seeds.

Generally, those living in urban areas and with better wealth quantile have higher
total food consumption. With increased intake of high caloric and processed foods,
prevalence of obesity and overweight is recorded at a higher percentage in these groups of

people.

According to DOST-FNRI (2016b), only 31% of the households were able to meet
100% of the energy recommendation in terms of meeting the nutritional requirement based
on dietary intake. Six out of ten of the households met the EAR for protein. Among the
micronutrients, niacin had the highest numbers of household who met the EAR at 85.1%.
On the other hand, calcium (16%) and iron (9.2%) had the least percentage of population

who were able to meet its daily requirement.

Each food group has its contribution in fulfilling the nutritional requirements. Rice
and rice products were the principal source of energy, protein, iron, thiamin, riboflavin,
niacin, and carbohydrates. Major sources of protein are fish, meat, and poultry. Vitamin
Ais being supplied by meat and meat products, leafy, green and yellow vegetables, poultry,
and fish and fish products. Lastly, vegetables serve as the main source of vitamin C

followed by fruits, starch roots, and tubers (DOST-FNRI, 2016b)..

Plant derived products were considered as the major food source, mainly rice and
coconut oil as the most commonly consumed food among Filipino household (DOST-
FNRI, 2016b). Ninety three percent of households is reported to consume plain rice
making it the most common food item. On the average, the country’s consumption of rice

per person averaged at 109.87 kilograms per year or 2.11 kilograms per week (PSA, 2017a.

Staple food refers to the food eaten regularly in every meal and in such quantities
that it constitutes a dominant portion of a meal. It is usually inexpensive, readily available,
and supplies one or more of the three organic macronutrients. Approximately 91% of the
households nationwide reported that rice is their staple food, 8.05% reported com as their
staple food while 0.08% had other staple foods such as bread, potato, cassava, sweet potato,
and mixed rice and corn (PSA, 2017b). Around 21% to 26% of those households who
considered rice as their staple food opted for rice substitution. The leading substitute for
Tice is bread, 65.12% of the households nationwide consume bread instead of rice during
meals. Ten percent reported that they consume saba banana in place of rice. Around 7%
use sweet potato and instant noodles for rice while 4% use corn and cassava as substitute.
The remaining 1.02% refer to other rice substitutes such as white potato, cereals and rice-
based products, other noodles and root crops. The major reasons for using rice substitute
is the preference for food items, followed by affordability, with least concern to health
reason. Other reasons cited were unavailability of rice, household residence was far from
the source of rice, poor quality of available rice; substitute being more available, lack of

time to cook, and no viand (PSA, 2017b).

Maize (Zea mays L.)

Production and Consumption in the Philippines

Per capita production refers to the volume of production of a particular commodity
available for each member of the population (PSA, 2017a). The annual production of com
per person dropped to 72.91 kilograms per year, which is only equivalent to 95% of the
base year’s level. The Net Food Disposable (NFD) of com is the volume of corn available
in its original (unprocessed) form for human consumption. Per capita NFD of corn
increased to 75.19 grams per day in 2018. The national average per capita consumption of
com is estimated to be 14.70 kilograms, equivalent to 0.28 kilogram per week. Across the
country, the Zamboanga Peninsula had the biggest per capita consumption at 159.92
kilograms per year. Central Visayas, Northern Mindanao, and Davao region approximately
consume 37 to 45 kilograms per year. Less than one kilogram corn consumption per person
per year was recorded each in NCR, Cordillera Autonomous Region (CAR), locos region,
Central Luzon, CALABARZON, and MIMAROPA (PSA, 2017a). When it comes to
nutrient contribution; corn contributed 267.66 kilocalories, 7.14 grams of protein, and 3.23

‘grams of fat per person per day (PSA, 2017a).

Com consumption in the country is less popular. The most commonly consumed
form of com is com in cob (10.79%) and com grits (10.49%). Cor in cob is purchased by
78.98% of the households, 71.23% for shelled corn, while 64.61% for com grits.

Consumption of own-produced corn is reported by 12.14% to 32.33% households. Most

of the households who purchase com are from NCR while those who consume their own
produce are from ARMM. 72.98% of households in Zamboanga Peninsula, 31.22% in
Northern Mindanao, 22.86% in Central Visayas, and 20.64% in Davao region reported corn
as their staple food. In the demographic situation on com consumption a trend was
observed that as the household size increases consumption of com decreases per person.
A household with one to three members and four to five members consumed around 15.70
kilograms per person per year while a household with at least 12 members only has 6.61

kilograms per person per year (PSA, 2017b).

Department of Agriculture has launched Agri — Pinoy Corn program which aims to
increase production of quality corn and cassava for human consumption, feeds, and
industrial uses, as well as empower the farmers and increase their income, hence improving

their quality of life (Cuesta, 2019).

Morphology

Maize (Zea mays L.) or commonly known as corn in the Philippines originated in
Mexico 10,000 years ago as a result of domestication of teosinte. Com is annual plant that
reaches a height of about 2.5 meters, Female flowers (ear or cob) and the male flowers
(tassel) are found in separate places on the plant which is cross-pollinated for its
reproduction. The grain is a caryopsis, a fruit with the pericarp is fused with the seed coat,
which develops in the cob. Each ear is 10-25 cm long and has about 300 to 1,000 kernels

in number of rows varying from 12 to 16 (Robles-Ramirez et al., 2012).


The main parts of the com kernel are endosperm (80-85%), pericarp (5-6%), and
germ (10-12%) (Figure 1), The endosperm is a continuous tissue with an outer zone, rich
in proteins and oil, called aleurone. The rest of the tissue is called starchy endosperm which
can be distinguished by two regions: vitreous endosperm and floury endosperm. The
vitreous endosperm near aleurone layer has a hard consistency and high protein content
while the floury endosperm located at the inner zone has an opaque characteristic
(Hoseney, 1991). The starch is mainly found in the elongated cells of the endosperm,
packed in granules of 5-30 um embedded in a continuous protein matrix. The protein
matrix is found thinly in the floury endosperm and does not fully cover the starch granule.
Floury endosperm is opaque due to the large amount of air spaces. On the other hand, the
vitreous endosperm is very compact, without air spaces, and has a thicker wall forming

polyhedral granules due to compression (Hoseney, 1991; Watson, 2003).

The pericarp consists of three layers namely: epidermis, mesocarp, and the layers
of cross and tubular cells. During grain development, the moisture loss is prevented bythe
wax covering the outer surface of the epidermis. The mesocarp is composed of thick-
walled elongated cells that form a compact structure. The inner layers of transverse and
tubular cells show intercellular spaces which provide a line of weakening between the
mesocarp and the inner layers of pericarp allowing the pericarp to be easily separated from

the rest of the grain (Brites et al., 2011).

The germ has a low starch content however it is rich in oil and proteins. Enzymes
which are capable of degrading endosperm starch are located in the germ. This serves as

the nutrient of the embryo during germination (Brites et al., 2011).


Figure 1. Components of com kernel.
Source: Girtz and Garcia-Casal, 2013

in the Philippines

The two main types on com that are cultivated in the Philippines are yellow com
and white corn. The white com variety corresponds to the open pollinated variety (OPV)
com while yellow com is represented by hybrid, inbreds and some genetically modified
organism (GMO) varieties. Hybrids, inbreds and GMO coms are selected for their high
yield and other physiologically important characteristics such as nutritive enrichment and

resistance to biotic and abiotic stresses.

Open pollinated variety. Traditional white corn varieties that are open pollenated
provides seeds which can be reused for every next planting cycle (Ocampo et al., 2013).
In 2014, white com only constitutes less than a third of the total production of the country
(PSA, 2016). This variety is more commonly used for human consumption as a substitute

of rice in periods of shortage (Gerpacio et al., 2004; Lanthier, 2013; Ocampo et al., 2013).


It requires few inputs and low production cost but provides nutrients which can benefit
health. It is easily digested and contains more protein, fibers, minerals, and antioxidants

than rice (Ocampo et al., 2013).

Hybrid lines. This variety was introduced in the Philippines in 1980s and is mostly
grown by farmers as cash income crop for cattle feed (Gerpacio et al., 2004; Lanthier, 2013;
Ocampo et al., 2013). It is specifically developed for better resistance to pests, diseases,
and other stresses, but has a low germination rate. However, as compared to OPV, its seed
is more costly, and it requires more inputs. Its implementation has replaced other crops

such as OPV corn, sugarcane, and vegetables (Gerpacio et al., 2004).

GMO lines. This high yield corn variety has been commercialized in the Philippines
since 2002. Currently, more than a third of the total corn produced in the country is GM
com (Luces, 2014; Ocampo et al., 2013). It has gradually replaced the OPV and hybrid
line on the market. The main advantage of GM corn is its resistance to pests however, it
requires fertilizer and is sensitive to bad weather conditions. (Ocampo et al., 2013).
Moreover, the GM seeds produces ample yields for addressing the demand of com forcing
the farmers to buy new seed for each crop cycle (Transon, 2017). Initially, single traits of
GM corn were introduced in the Philippines. First, insect resistant varieties using Bacillus
thuigiensis (Bt corn) and herbicide tolerant varieties called Roundup Ready (RR corn)
(Luces, 2014; Ocampo et al., 2013). Currently, the major GM cultivated com is a
combination of five different traits wherein each trait targets a specific pest (Transon,

2017). This is known as a stacked trait GM corn (Ocampo et al., 2013).


ity Protein Maize (QPM)

Quality Protein Maize is a variety of com which is specifically bred to improve
protein quality through the incorporation of the two most important limiting amino acids:
lysine and tryptophan. Studies on the development of QPM began in 1960s in order to
address the protein malnutrition experienced by the communities whose staple is com.
Opaque-2 maize was the first QPM with significantly increased lysine and tryptophan
content. This was named after the “opaque-2” single gene mutation which is responsible
for its improved protein quality (Food and Agriculture Organization [FAO], 2001).
According to Nuss and Tanumihardjo (2011), QPM is considered a biofortified food since
its nutritional profile has been improved using conventional breeding techniques. The
opaque-2 mutation is responsible for the shift in the synthesis of certain protein types in
the endosperm compartment of the com kemel that incorporates more lysine and
tryptophan codons. The common com contains nearly 70% endosperm protein as zein,
which is a lysine and tryptophan poor protein body. The opaque-2 mutation suppresses
zein synthesis while simultaneously increasing production of other non-zein proteins that

are rich sources of lysine and tryptophan.

IPB Var 6. In Africa, the developed QPM aid in the improvement of the nutritional
status, growth rate and health of those living in poverty. This prompted Dr. Salazar and his
team in the IPB to breed and develop the QPM Var 6, which is also known as High Lysine
and Tryptophan Com. Dr. Salazar also clarified that the crop is not a GMO but is

developed through conventional breeding with improved local adaptation before it was


released as IPB Var 6 in 2006. It contains 0.374 g of lysine which is 66.2% more than the
normal white corn which only contains 0.225 g of lysine (UPLB, 2017). In addition, the
QPM also has more dietary fiber, minerals, and antioxidants than rice alone (Nagares et

al., 2011).

The results of the study of Nagares et al., (2011) revealed that the IPB Var 6
contains higher amylose which is then related to a lower glycemic index. According to
Behall et al., (1998), as cited by Denardin (2012), starchy foods with high amylose levels
are associated with lower blood glucose levels and slower movement of the human
gastrointestinal tract compared to those with low levels of this macromolecule. These
conditions are relevant, especially in the formulation of diets for diabetics, the slower
digestion and absorption of carbohydrates help to maintain regular levels of glucose in the
blood and reduce insulin response due to increased time of intestinal transit. This delays
the feeling of hunger and reduce the weight of overweight individual (Hurtada, 2014 as

cited by Jamia, 2014).

The study of Purificacion et al., (2018), used IPB Var 6 as one of the standards in
comparing the nutritional properties of Filipino farmer — bred com varieties. The complete
profiling of IPB Var 6 (as shown in Table 1) reveals a quality protein maize (QPM) noted

for its high lysine (0.67%) and tryptophan (0.06%) content.


Table 1. Proximate, starch, amino acid, minerals, and phytochemical contents of
IPB Var 6.

‘Component IPB Var 6
Proximate composition, %
Moisture 5,52 £0.04
Ash 1.56 + 0.25
Crude Fat 4,66 + 0.36
Crude Protein 13.07 + 0.29
Crude Fiber 4.63 + 0.28
Total carbohydrates 70.30 + 0.69
Amino acid content, %
Lysine 0.67 + 0,04
Tryptophan 0.06 + 0.01
Starch profile, %
Total starch TBAS + 0.35
Amylose 28.10 + 0.65
Amylopectin 45.05 + 0.95
Mineral content, mg 100 g*
Iron 3.72 + 0.012
Zine 2.37 + 0.006
Potassium 228.19 + 0.77
Calcium 72.16 £1.21
Magnesium 137.78 + 0.51
Phytochemical content
DPPH?, % 66.83 + 2.71
TPC’, g GAE 100g" 4.1840.91
TFC, mg CE 100g" 5.29 £0.72
TCC’, mg 100 0.73 + 0.21

*=2,2-Dipheny!
>— Total Phenolic Content

*— Total Flavonoid Content
4— Total Carotenoid Content

~picrylhydrazyl (DPPH) Radical Scavenging Activity.

Nixtamalization

Com is a staple in countries such as Mexico and in Central America. It accounts

for 50% protein and 70% calories in their daily diet. Although corn has several nutritional


deficiencies such as limited essential amino acids and niacin, their population does not
develop diseases such as pellagra. This can be associated with their processing of corn

which is called nixtamalization.

Nixtamalization originated in Mesoamerica where corn was initially cultivated.
They discovered that the husk from the grain was softened and destroyed by an alkaline
solution which was produced from the mixture of water and ashes from the firewood that
was used for cooking. Limestone fragments were also found in the kitchen of the early
people who were corn dependent. According to Ellwood et al. (2013), the limestone may
have been used as an equipment for stone-boiling corn which has become nixtamalized and
as a result, corn proteins were made available for human nutrition. Later, the Aztec and
Malayan civilization developed the process of nixtamalization through use of lime (calcium
hydroxide) and ash (potassium hydroxide) in creating alkaline solutions (Robles-Ramirez

etal., 2012).

Nixtamalization, which originated from the word nixtli meaning ashes and tamale
which means dough or masa (Bressani et al., 2002). It is an alkaline cooking process which
involves cooking of com grains in a lime solution (up to 1.2% based com weight) for 30
to 45 minutes at a temperature below boiling point. The choice of alkaline solution may
vary depending on the type of nixtamalization process, traditional which uses lime,
classical which uses wood ashes, or ecological which uses calcium salts. The cooked corn
grains are steeped for 8 to 16 hours and then the alkaline solution called “nejayote” is
discarded. The remaining nixtamal is washed using hands to remove the pericarp, excess

lime and any solids which leached out of the kemel or grain followed by grinding into


stone mills to produce a dough known as “masa”. ‘ihe obtained masa is usually shaped to
produce tortillas, tamales, tacos, arepas or it can be dehydrated and finely grind to produce
flour (Wacher, 2013; Robles-Ramirez et al., 2012), The abovementioned method for
nixtamalization is based on the traditional or the method which is usually applied in the
household level. However, this consumes a lot of time and is laborious hence, and
industrial process was employed in order to produce nixtamalized corn flour which can

already be used on food preparation.

Different Types of Nixtamalization

There are three types of nixtamalization processes base on liming agent: traditional
nixtamalization, classic nixtamalization, and ecological nixtamalization. According to
Katz et al., (1974), archeological facts suggest that classic nixtamalization was used by the
Malays in the Pre-classic period to cook corn using wood ashes. After settling in Central
Mexico they substituted the use of ashes with lime or the calcium hydroxide Ca (OH)2
hence, the traditional nixtamalization which is now adapted in the industrial production of

nixtamalized com products.

According to Carrera et al., (2012), traditional nixtamalization has limitations in
achieving sustainability such as high dry matter losses (3-15%) in the nixtamal due to
cooking and washing steps. In addition, nutrients such as vitamins, fats, protein, dietary
fiber and some biological active compounds are lost during the process. Another
disadvantage is the high alkalinity of the cooking solution (nejayote) which contributes in

pollution and also damages the equipment used in industrial processing (Moreno et al.,


2015). Some of these problems can be addressed by the new ecological nixtamalization
process which was patented by Figueroa et al., (2011) as cited by Moreno et al., (2015).
Instead of calcium hydroxide, commercially available salts such as calcium carbonate and
calcium propionate can be used as the alkaline solution. Previous studies report that
nutritional properties of nixtamalized corn product such as tortillas was improved. This
was based on increased weight and high protein-efficiency ratio of the rats which were fed
with ecologically nixtamalized tortillas (Maya-Cortes et al., 2010). Another benefit of
ecological nixtamalization is inhibition of the degradation of anthocyanins and phenolic
compounds (Mendez et al., 2013). According to Bello-Perez et al., (2014), tortillas made
from ecologically nixtamalized corn resulted into a low glycemic index which is associated
to its high content of non-digestible carbohydrates. Moreno et al., (2015), reported that
tortillas made from ecological nixtamalization had higher fat values, higher dietary fiber,
and increased resistant starch than traditional and classic nixtamalization hence, they
classified the tortillas made from ecological nixtamalization as a low glycemic index food.
The fore mentioned benefits of ecological nixtamalization is the rationale behind using it

in product development and research.

Studies Conducted on Nixtamalization

Effect of nixtamalization in the microstructure of corn. According to Paredes-Lopez
and Saharopulos (1982), the outermost layer of the corn which is the pericarp is altered
into a corrugated-like structure during nixtamalization. Pericarp removal is associated with

the dissolution of the surface materials into the alkaline solution. On the other hand, the

aleurone layer which remains attached to the endosperm acts as a semi permeable
membrane that maintains the integrity of the germ and its components contributing to the
reduction in protein losses. During the boiling process in alkaline solution, starch granules
are removed resulting into great alteration in the soft endosperm. Alterations include
imegular arrangement of starch and attachment of dispersed starch granules by some fibrils.
Other changes include structural alterations associated with heat denaturation of proteins,
unusual amino acids produce cross-linkages, and tertiary structure of proteins are disrupted.

Changes in the physical appearance of protein scaffold and starch gelatinization caused by

the alkaline cooking aid in the improvement of digestibility of nixtamal protein.

Structural changes during nixtamalization. Alkaline cooking and steeping of com
causes the grain to uptake water and calcium. The degradation and solubilization of cell
wall components are caused by the alkaline solution which interacts with the calcium
framework of the cell. This results into partial removal of the pericarp, softening of the
endosperm structure, and denaturation of protein matrix. Physical constraints of the
endosperm cells and the insufficient heat and moisture levels during cooking and steeping
results into limited swelling of starch granules. Cellular components are connected through
the formation of a network aided by amylose which leaches out after starch swelling.
According to Robles et al., (1988), as cited by Gomez et al., (1992), amylose-calcium
interaction inhibits the gelatinization of starch during the alkaline cooking and steeping of
com. Retrogradation of amylose and amylopectin occur during com steeping results to the
recovery of some of the native starch crystallinity. On the other hand, masa grinding causes

the disruption of grain structure which releases the starch granules from the endosperm


cells and disperses cellular components and starch polymers. In terms of physicostructural
view, masa is defined as a network of solubilized starch polymers in a continuous phase
which supports the dispersed phase of the uncooked, and swollen starch granules, cell

fragments, and lipids (Gomez et al., 1992).

Impact of nixtamalization in the nutritional content of corn, \n Mexico,
nixtamalization has been considered as a mandatory process in processing of corn into
tortillas, flour, and other products mainly because of the benefits on the improved
nutritional content and increase bioavailability of selected nutrients. Bressani et al., (1990),
studied the changes in selected nutrient content and protein quality of common com and
QPM upon application of alkaline cooking. Results revealed that both common corn and
QPM had increased calcium and magnesium from raw material to processed tortilla,
furthermore it had a small decrease in sodium and potassium. In terms of total dietary
fiber, a decrease was observed from raw corn to masa while an increase was observed after
baking. Fatty acid composition was not affected by the alkaline cooking while protein
quality was improved from raw corn. Another evidence on the improvement of protein
quality is based on the significantly greater weight gain and protein efficiency ratio of rats
who were fed with alkaline cooked corn than those fed with raw corn (Bressani et al.,
1990). In another study of Bressani et al., (1958), in vitro digestion of proteins from
alkaline treated corn was digested more rapidly than the non-treated com. This can be
associated with the effect of starch gelatinization and modifications in starch matrix which
provided better accessibility to the com proteins (Sanderson et al., 1978). No significant

difference was observed on the available lysine content between raw, nixtamalized, and


extruded QPM flours. However, there was an increase in the biological quality of protein
after alkaline cooking (Martinez-Flores et al., 2002). The same study revealed that there

was a 14.5% increase in protein efficiency ratio of the extruded fresh masa contai

0.25% lime than raw corn.

Since nixtamalization is a process which uses calcium salts, its impact on the
improvement of calcium content has become significant in the quality of corn and its
products. According to Bressani et al., (2002), nixtamalization increased the calcium
content in the whole grain 18 times while 24 times in the germ. Higher amount of iron was
observed in germ both in raw and processed form however, there were losses upon
nixtamalization. There was a higher amount of zinc in germ both in raw and nixtamalized
form while there are losses in the endosperm. The effect of calcium absorption on physical
properties and composition of rat femurs were studied by Martinez-Flores et al., (2002).
The results revealed that the femur of rats fed with nixtamalized corn were heavier, thicker,
and longer, and were more resistant to fracture. On the other hand, the absorption of iron
is inhibited by phytic acid which has a high concentration in the germ. The loss in phytic
acid due to nixtamalization was 41.1%. Majority of the phytic acid is located in the germ
hence, the loss of phytic acid is 2.5 times greater in the endosperm than in the germ
(Bressani et al., 2002). The reduction of phytic acid can be attributed to its denaturation to

heat (Wacher, 2003). The relatively higher concentration of calcium than phytic acid aids

in the improvement of availability of iron due to calcium saturation, Calcium prevents the
iron from being chalated to phytic acid and as a result it becomes more bioavailable

(Wacher, 2003).


In the Philippines, Cayetano et al., (2018), compared the nixtamalized the
‘Lagkitan’ com using the ecological method with its unprocessed counterpart. Table 2
shows the comparison of the nixtamalized Lagkitan corn with its counterpart. There was
a significant increase in the moisture content and calcium of the nixtamalized sample. The
increased moisture content was associated with the alkaline cooking which facilitated the
diffusion of water into the whole grain. On the other hand, decrease was observed in the
crude fat, crude fiber, total ash, protein, and iron content. For the crude fat, decrease was
attributed to about 30% germ losses during nixtamalization and 17% losses during rinsing.
Decrease in crude fiber was associated to the loss of pericarp and external layers throughout
the process of nixtamalization, while decrease in ash content was attributed to the losses
during nixtamalization. Decrease in protein and nitrogen content was associated with the
effect of alkaline treatments on protein which may give rise to peptides which and not
biologically available and is detrimental to protein quality. No change was observed in the
zinc content. For the minerals, the increase in calcium content was attributed to the
absorption of calcium content from the alkaline reagent. The decrease in iron content was
associated with the steeping procedure due to the increase in calcium content which also
inhibits iron bioavailability.

Table 2. Proximate composition and selected mineral content of nixtamalized and

non-nixtamalized Lagkitan corn (Cayetano et al., 2019).
‘Component (%) Non-nixtamalized corn Ecologically nixtamalized corn
Moisture 41.67 + 1.33 47.00 3.00
Crude fat 3.66 + 0.02" 3.40 + 0.02

Crude fiber 1.99 + 0,009 1.85 + 0,03


Table 2. Continued...

‘Component (%) Non-nixtamalized corn Ecologically nixtamalized corn
Total ash 1.70 £ 0.010 1370.1
Nitrogen 0.0003 + 0.0 0.0002 + 0.0a
Protein 0.0018 + 0.0 0.0010 + 0.0a
Calcium 0,008 + 0.0 0.018 + 0.0
Iron 0.016 + 0.0° 0.012 + 0.0°
Zine 0.004 + 0.0" 0.004 + 0.0°

Values are reported as means = variance followed by the same superscript within the
same raw are not significantly different from one another at 0.05 level of significance.

Loaf Bread and Its Characteristics

One of the products using nixtamalized corn flour is bread (Gwirtz & Garcia-Casal,
2013). In the Philippines, the most popular baked product which uses com as an ingredient
is the comm muffin. Among the bread products, pan de sal is most commonly consumed,
54.32% of households prefers it as food, followed by 30.39% for buns, and 23.94% for
sliced/loaf bread (PSA, 2017b). Currently, there are composite flours which is used for
bread production such as 80% bread flour and 20% cassava flour which produced a special
type of aroma, texture, and distinct taste (Loreto & Orias, 2001). The potential of
incorporating com flour into bread was studied by Begum et al., (2013). According to their
research, incorporation of corn flour adversely affected the baking properties and leavening
of the dough; however, the nutritional quality was improved by the increase in energy and
fiber content. Sensory analysis shows no significant difference between the wheat bread
and bread with 10% corm flour, hence substituting 10% corn flour into wheat flour was able
to retain the nutritional quality, sensory properties and had a good overall acceptability.

This result was similar with the study of Gambo and Abubakar (2016) that revealed that


there was no significant difference between the 100% wheat flour and 10% com flour
suggesting that 10% com flour can be used in producing bread which is acceptable to the

consumer without compromising quality and palatability.

Incorporation of corn flour into baked products has become challenging because of
the reduced protein content resulting into weak viscoelastic networks and poor gas
retention capacity. However, nixtamalization of com can aid in improving the quality of
bread incorporated with its flour. According to Lobato-Calleros et al., (2015), some of the
com oil fractions are broken down into monoglycerides and diglycerides, while bonding
of proteins is being facilitated. The divalent calcium which is from the calcium salt that is
used, acts as a cross-linking agent for starch chains leading to improved gel viscoelastic
properties and network stability. Nixtamalization also increases the protein content and
resistant starch level which will compensate for the characteristic of hydrophobicity of the
com protein (Rendon et al., 2002). The result of their study was supported by Guadarrama-
Lezama et al., (2016). The result of their study showed that incorporation of nixtamalized
com flour was able to improve the viscoelasticity of the dough. The ability of the calcium
ions to compensate for the decrease in gluten through its cross-linking capacity helps the
dough regain its structure. In terms of bread characteristics, increasing proportion of
nixtamalized corn flour resulted into a more compact and porous microstructure related to
increase in hardness. Increasing nixtamalized com flour also led to a more homogeneous
bread crust color, characterized by a more subdued lightness and yellow hue. This shows
that nixtamalized com flour can be used in improving dough viscoelasticity resulting into

a more acceptable composite flour bread.


The consumer acceptability of a baked product depends on its characteristics such
as loaf height and texture. Since composite flours do not have the similar gluten content
that pure wheat flour the baking characteristics can be compromised. In order to monitor
the quality of bread, loaf volume, specific volume, and texture profile analysis should be

conducted.

Proximate Composition

Proximate composition of foods includes moisture, ash, lipid, protein, and
carbohydrate contents. These components are essential in the food industry for product
development, quality control or regulatory purposes. The analysis can be conducted either
through rapid methods for quality control or using the official methods which may be time-

consuming yet more accurate (Thangaraj, 2015).

Moisture content

Moisture content can influence the taste, texture, weight, appearance, and shelf life
of food. Hence, even slight deviation from the standard may cause adverse impact on the
properties of food. For example, in dry foods, moisture content can affect the consistency
of the product while excess moisture can cause the food material to agglomerate or become
trapped in the piping system during production. In addition, the rate of microbial activity
is highly dependent to moisture favorable for its growth. Higher moisture content is also
more prone to spoilage especially if proper storage conditions are not met (Appoldt &
Raihani, 2017).


Crude Protein

Protein, one of the main components of food, it is essential and abundant in all cells
with multiple roles in different biological functions and cell structure. Protein analysis is
important for nutritional labeling, functional property investigation, and biological activity
determination. Kjeldahl method is a quick and robust way in protein quantification. In
this procedure, sample was digested with sulfuric acid in the presence of catalysts. The

three general steps include digestion, nixtamalization, and titration (Chang, 2010).

Crude Fat

Fat is another macromolecule found in food, together with protein and
carbohydrate. Lipids are group of substances which are soluble in organic solvents such
as ether and chloroform but is insoluble in water. Lipids and fats are usually interchangable
however, lipid refers to the group of substances which have common properties and
compositional similarities. On the other hand, fats are lipids which are solid at room
temperature while oil refers to the lipid which are liquid at room temperature. Analysis of
fat is important for nutrition labeling, in determining whether the food meets the standard

of identity (Min & Ellefson, 2010).

Ash

Ash refers to the inorganic residue remaining after ignition or complete oxidation
of organic matter in food stuff. Ash content can be measured either through dry ashing or

wet ashing. Dry ashing is primarily used for proximate composition, and for some types


of mineral analysis. On the other hand, wet ashing is also used for analysis of certain
minerals. Analyzing ash in food analysis is important since it represents the total mineral
content in a food item and part for nutritional evaluation in order to identify food items

which are high in specific minerals (Marshall, 2010).

Crude Fiber

Crude fiber is primarily measured to comprehend the indigestible parts in the
sample and is consisted mainly of a part of lignin, pentosan, chitin, etc., in addition to
cellulose. The sample is boiled sequentially with diluted acid followed with diluted alkali,
which is washed with ethanol and diethyl ether. The residue is subtracted by its ash, and
the result is defined as the crude fiber. Crude fiber only corresponds to samples of plant
origin. There is a close relationship between the crude fiber content and nutritional value
of the sample. Generally, crude fiber content is inversely proportional to the nutrition value

of food product (Food and Agricultural Materials Inspection Center, 2014).

CHAPTER 3

MATERIALS AND METHODS,

Raw Materials

This study used the com variety IPB Var 6 which was obtained from the Institute
of Plant Breeding, College of Agriculture and Food Science, University of the Philippines
Los Bafios. The IPB Var 6 com kernels were sun dried until a moisture content of 14%
was obtained. The food grade calcium carbonate used in ecological nixtamalization was
purchased from the Institute of Chemistry, College of Arts and Sciences, University of the
Philippines Los Bafios. The ingredients used in the preparation of corn loaf bread were
bread flour (San Miguel Mills), pulverized nixtamalized IPB Var 6 com kernel, water,
active dry yeast powder (Red Star), whole milk powder (Birch Tree full cream milk), butter
(Anchor, unsalted), sugar (Hermano refined sugar), and salt (Robinsons supersavers
iodized salt). The bread flour was purchased from the Grocer’s store along Grove St. Brey.
Batong Malake, Los Bafios while the remaining ingredients were from Robinsons

supermarket.

Date and Place of Study

The study was conducted from January to November 2019. Nixtamalization and

proximate analysis was conducted in the Bio-Assay Laboratory. Specifically, the crude


protein content was analyzed in the regional standards and testing laboratory of the
Department of Science and Technology Region IV-A. The sensory evaluation was
conducted in the Health Care Laboratory of the Institute of Human Nutrition and Food,
College of Human Ecology, UPLB. The room for sensory evaluation has the optimum
temperature, is quiet, well-lighted, and free from any odor to minimize discrepancies. It is
suitable since it satisfies the requirements of a sensory laboratory set up in order to
minimize the biases of the panelists, maximize their sensitizing, and eliminate other
variables which do not come from the product. The mineral analysis was conducted in the
Institute of Plant Breeding, CAFS, UPLB. Lastly, the physico-chemical and texture
analysis of the loaf bread was conducted at the Institute of Food Science and Technology,

CAFS, UPLB.

Study Design

This study was an experimental research since it involves manipulation of one or
more variables while controlling of the remaining variables, and measuring of the changes
in other variables. For the corn flour, the control treatment was the use of raw corn IPB.
Var 6 while the experimental treatments were the boiled and nixtamalized IPB Var 6 corn.
Pulverized raw IPB var 6 com kernel, pulverized boiled IPB var 6 corn kernel, and

pulverized nixtamalized IPB var 6 com kernel were analyzed for its proximate composi

such as moisture content, crude fat, crude protein, ash, crude fiber, and nitrogen and for its
selected mineral content such as calcium, iron, and zinc. Each analysis was carried out in

triplicates.


For the corn loaf bread, the modified variables were the amount and type of flour
that were used while the remaining ingredients and baking procedure remain constant. The
control treatment used 100% bread flour while the experimental treatments involved
varying proportion of nixtamalized com and wheat flour blends as seen in Table 3. All
loaf breads were analyzed for its loaf volume, general acceptability, protein, and calcium
content. The optimum proportion of nixtamalized corn and wheat flour blend was
identified using the response surface methodology. The optimum corn and wheat flour
blend was used in developing the nixtamalized com flour supplemented loaf bread. The
optimum nixtamalized com flour supplemented loaf bread and loaf bread without corn
flour were analyzed for its proximate composition such as moisture content, crude fat,
crude protein, nitrogen, crude fiber, and ash; mineral analysis such as calcium, iron, and

zinc; loaf characteristics such as loaf volume, specific volume, and hardness; sensory

characteristics and general acceptability.


Com (IPB Var 6)
£ ¥ +
Production of pulverized Heat treatment without Heat treatment with
raw com kemel calcium carbonate calcium carbonate
ri es
I ‘Production of pulverized Production of pulverized
boiled com kernel nixtamalized com kemel
¥ z : Ti
Proxumate ‘Mineral analysis- Preparation of 9 treatments of
analysis Calcium, Iron, and Zine ‘experimental loaf bread
—— 4
Data Processing and Statistical Analysis Packaging
‘Z q q 4
Sensory ‘Analysis of ‘Analysis of
Evaluation || 0a Volume Crude Protein Calcium
Content
I
Response Surface Methodology
t
‘Optimum com and wheat flour blend
Opticmam.
nixtamalized com Loaf bread without
flour-supplemented ‘com flour
loaf bread
Proximate and Ca,
Fe, Zn analysis,
Loaf volume,

Data Processing and Statistical Analysis [*—] | Specific Volume,
Hardness

Sensory
Evaluation

Figure 2, Workflow of the experimental set up for identifying the optimal
nixtamalized IPB var 6 loaf bread.


Ecological Nixtamalization of IPB Var 6

Ecological nixtamalization process was used in this study based on the procedure
of Santiago-Ramos et al., (2017). One kilogram of com was cooked for 30 minutes at
94.4°C with two liters of water containing 1% of calcium carbonate for the nixtamalized
com while no calcium carbonate was added for the non-nixtamalized corn. The cooked
grains, also known as nixtamal, were removed from the heat and steeped for 16 hours in
order to reach room temperature. After 16 hours, com kernels were removed from the
nejayote and were washed with distilled water to eliminate excess calcium carbonate. The
nixtamal were dried in the oven dehydrator at 45°C for 16 hours. The dried com keels
were ground using the spice and herb grinder and was sifted using a flour sifter (0.5 mm).
Dried nixtamal flour were packed in polyethylene bags and stored in freezer until analysis.

Figure 3 shows the schematic diagram of ecological nixtamalization used in the study.

Cook in a lime


solution
1 kg Dried Com containing 1% Steep at room
(IPB Var 6) ‘CaCO, and 2 temperature for
Kernels liters of distilled 16 hours
Lo water (94°C; 30
minutes) 0
1 1 Dried in the
ene 4 oven dehydrator ral Washed with
‘obtain flour @ nie for 16 distilled water
urs
Pack in a
polyethylene

bag until use

Figure 3. Schematic diagram of ecological nixtamalization as described by Santiago-

Ramos et al. (2017).

Preparation of Loaf Bread

The formulation for corn loaf bread was based from the study of Begum et al.,
(2013). The list of ingredients used is on Table 3.


Table 3.Recipe for production of nixtamalized corn and wheat loaf bread.

Tngredients
Nixta Active
Treatme Bread malize y, ry Whole Shorte
ater ik Shore Sugar Salt
mt flour deorn (ayy yeast ge ning 7
(g) flour powde P* (5) e) ®
@) rig ©
Control 200 0 128 4 4 9.5 12 3
1 160 40 128 4 4 9.5 12 3
2 190 10128 4 4 9.5 12 3
3 175 25 128 4 4 95 12 3
4 190 10128 4 4 9.5 12 3
5 190 10128 4 4 9.5 12 3
6 11525128 4 4 9.5 12 3
fl 160 40128 4 4 9.5 12 3
8 160 © 40—s«128 4 4 9.5 12 3
9 17525128 4 4 9.5 12 3

The control loaf bread used 100% bread flour. Experimental treatments of bread
used different proportions of nixtamalized com flour used 5%, 12.5%, and 20% of total
flour. Percentage of nixtamalized com flour was based on the response surface
methodology run for optimization. A part of sugar was dissolved in a portion of warm
water. Dry yeast was added to the warm water (46°C) in order to facilitate activation. The
remaining dry ingredients were transferred into a dough mixer. The flour together with the
other ingredients were mixed with the water at speed 1 (lowest speed) for the first 2
minutes. Speed 2 (medium speed) were used for the next 10 minutes using the dough
mixer. The resulting dough was allowed to rest for | hour and 20 minutes in a container
at 28°C to allow rising. After relaxing, the dough was removed from the container and
divided based on the desired size. The divided doughs were manually rounded up and first

proofing was applied for 15 minutes. The dough was molded in the 8” x 3 4” x 2 1/2”


baking pan and proofed at 28°C for 30 minutes. The dough was baked in an oven at 200°C
for 25 minutes. After baking, the loaf was removed from the pan after 10 minutes of
cooling. The cooled loaf bread was packed in polyethylene bag to keep freshness for

sensory evaluation, Figure 4 shows the schematic diagram for baking com loaf bread.

Mixing of Te Me ogi

Ingredients > Pre-mixing of i) ingredients(Speed 1 for

flour, powder,
Sugar, yeast, + the first 2 minutes and
i Swaten sugar, salt syed 2 fr thenet 10
Bulk
Manual rounding, Divide based on fermentation for
up desired size 1 hour and 20

minutes at 28°C)

U

Benching (15 Mold in baking Proofing at 28°C
minutes) pan for 30 minutes

U

. Cooling for 10 Baking at 200°C
Packaging ca minutes a for 25 minutes

Figure 4. Preparation of corn loaf bread.

Characterization of Loaf

Bread characteristics were measured twenty-four hours after removal from the

oven. After cooling, the breads were weighed, and their volume were measured using the


mung bean seed displacement method. The specific volume (cm'/g) of the bread were
calculated as loaf volume/bread weight, Bread hardness was measured using the Shimadzu
EZ-SX texture analyzer. The loaves were cut into 2.5 cm x 3 cm x 3 cm. Double

compression was used with a degree of 50% to identify smoothness.

Sensory Evaluation

Non-probability sampling was used for the ten trained panel members who
evaluated the sensory characteristics of the com loaf breads. The panelists were either a
student or a faculty from the Institute of Human Nutrition and Food, College of Human
Ecology, UPLB. The target panelists were excluded from the study if he/she is unavailable
on the day of the sensory evaluation or if he/she has an allergic reaction to any ingredients.
The duration of the panelists’ participation in the study was two days during which briefing

and conduct of the actual sensory evaluation was made.

The ten panelists evaluated the general acceptability of 10 samples of loaf bread
with varying proportions of bread flour and corn flour using the 15-point line scale. One
(1) on the category scale denotes least acceptable while fifteen (15) being the most
acceptable. The test was conducted in one day. Participants were reminded not to use
perfumed cosmetics and to avoid exposure to foods at least 30 minutes before the

evaluation session.

After the optimization, another day was set for the sensory characteristic evaluation
of the control loaf bread and the developed loaf bread from the optimum nixtamalized com

and wheat flour blend. Prior to actual evaluation, the selected panelists were trained in


identifying the color, aroma, texture, and flavor. A consensus between the panelists and

the researcher was made in identifying certain level of each attribute.

For the actual sensory evaluation, a 15-point line scale was used to measure the
intensity of each sensory attribute (color, aroma, texture, and flavor) for the nine
treatments. One (1) on the category scale denotes the least intense condition and fifteen
(15) denotes the most intense condition. Appendix A shows the evaluation sheet used by

the participants.

Ethical Consideration

The study has been approved by the ethics review committee of the University of
the East Ramon Magsaysay Research Institute for Health Sciences with the assigned RIHS

ERC Code: 0728/E/2019/91.

All participants in the study were given an informed consent form written in English
and a signed consent form was obtained. The information sheet contains an explanation of
the purpose of the study. It was also mentioned that their participation is voluntary and
they have the right to cancel their consent at any time without any reason. The risks and
benefits of participating in the study was also mentioned. The participants were also
informed about the confidentiality of all the information and that they may request the
result of the research once it is completed. The written consent form is shown in Appendix

B.


Proximate Analysis

The proximate composition of the corn flour and corn loaf breads were obtained

based on the procedures as described in Association of Official Analytical Chemists

(AOAC, 2005).

Moisture Content

The moisture content was obtained using the air oven method. Two (2) grams of
the sample was weighed in previously heated aluminum moisture dish at 130°£3°C.
‘Samples were cooled in desiccator, and weighted soon afier reaching room temperature.
The samples were placed in an oven heated at 130°43°C. Once the over temperature
reached 130°C, I hour drying period begun. After an hour of drying, the moisture dish was

transferred to desiccator and weighed soon after reaching room temperature.

The percent moisture was calculated using the equation:
Moisture % =|weight of sample before drying — weight of sample after drying|x 100
Content Weight of sample before drying
Crude Fat

Paper thimbles were prepared by folding small sheets of filter paper and sealing off
one end by stapler. The weight of the paper thimble was measured. Approximately, 1.00
gram of the dried ground sample was placed in the thimble and were placed in a Soxhlet

fat extractor. Hexane was added into the boiling flask to reflux the samples for 8 hours.


The samples were placed in an oven for at least an hour at 130°C. After drying, the samples
were placed in a desiccator until it has equilibrated to room temperature. The exact weight
of the thimble and defatted sample was measured, Percent fat was calculated using the

formula below:

Crude Fat, % = (Weight of fat / Weight of sample) x 100
Where:
weight of fat = (weight. of thimble + sample before refluxing) - (weight of thimble + sample

after drying)
Weight of sample = (Weight of sample + thimble) - (weight of thimble)

Ash

One hundred (100) mg of dry, defatted, ground sample was weighed and placed in
a 30 mL porcelain crucible whose tared weight has been taken. The crucible was ignited
in the furnace overnight at 650°C. It was placed in the desiccator until it has reached the

equilibrium temperature. The % total ash was calculated using the following equation:

% Ash = weight of ash x 100
weight of sample used

Weight of ash = (weight crucible + sample after ignition)-(weight of crucible)

where:


Crude Fiber

Ina 100 mL Bercillus beaker, one hundred milligrams of dry, defatted sample were
placed. Fifty (50) mL of 2.5% sulfuric acid was added to reflux samples for 30 minutes.
The samples were washed with hot water until it reached neutral pH of 7. Fifty (50) mL
of 2.5% sodium hydroxide was added again and refluxed for another 30 minutes. It was
placed in an oven and dried overnight at 105°C. After drying, it was cooled in a desiccator
and the exact weight was measured. Lastly, the sample was ignited in a furnace and the

exact weight was measured. Percent crude fiber was calculated using the following

equation:
Crude Fiber, % = weight of fiber ] x 100
weight of sample used
Where:

weight of fiber = (weight of crucible + sample after drying) - (weight of crucible +
sample after ignition)

Nitrogen and Protein

Approximately 1.0 gram of sample was portioned into digestion flask. Fifteen (15)
grams potassium sulfate (K2SOx), 0.04 gram copper sulfate (CuSOs), 0.5-1.0 gram
alundum granules, and 20 mL sulfuric acid (H2SOs) were added into the flask. The
digestion flask was heated at a S-minute boil rate until dense white fumes clear bulb of
flask. Continuous heating with gentle swirling was made for additional 90 minutes. After

cooling, 250 mL distilled water was added and cooled to room temperature. Titration

SI

beaker was prepared by adding accurately measured appropriate volume standard acid
solution to amount of H2 such that condenser tip was sufficiently immersed. Three to four
drops of methyl red indicator solution were added. Two to three drops of tributyl citrate
were added to digestion flask to reduce foaming. Another 0.5 to 1.0 gram alundum
granules was added. NaOH solution was slowly added to the flask such that mixture has
become strongly alkaline. Flask was immediately connected to the distillation apparatus.
Samples were mixed completely, and distilled at ca 7.5 min boil rate until > 150 mL
distillate is collected in titration beaker. Excess standard acid in distillate was titrated with
standard NaOH solution. It was corrected for blank determination on reagents. Percent

nitrogen was calculated using the following equation:
Upon using standard HCl,

N, % (w/w) = [(Macia)(™Lacia) — (mLtk)(Mwaon) — (mLnaor)(Mnaon)][1 400.67]

mg test portion

Upon using standard H2SOs,

N, % (w/w) = [(Macia)(2)(mLacid)-(mLb)(Mnaors) — (mLaon)(Mnaori)][ 1400.67]

mg test portion

Percent crude protein is defined as 6.25 x percent nitrogen.

Mineral Analysis

The method for mineral analysis was based on the Association of Official

Analytical Chemists (AOAC, 1980).


Preparation of sample for mineral analysis

One gram of dried sample was weighed into 500 mL borosilicate beaker which was
then placed in a cool muffle furnace. The temperature of the furnace was increased to 500
= 550°C and the samples were incinerated until they turn to white ash. This process required
at least 8 hours. The samples were removed from the muffle and cooled in a desiccator.
Two mL concentrated HCI was added in each sample and then stirred. Two drops of nitric
acid were also added before transferring to 125 mL Erlenmeyer flask. Distilled water was
added until it has reached 50 mL. It was evaporated in a hot plate until only 10 mL remains.
It was cooled down for an hour and distilled water was added until it has reached 100 mL.
The aliquot (Solution A) was transferred in PET bottle until use.

Analysis of Calcium

Five milliliters of solution A was pipetted into a 125 mL Erlenmeyer flask. Distilled
water was added to the sample to bring the volume to 50 mL. The pH was adjusted to 12
using approximately 2 mL concentrated potassium hydroxide. 50 mg of murexide indicator
was added which was titrated with EDTA to a violet endpoint.
Calculation:
For 5 mL aliquot in 1 g sample.

% Ca= (mL EDTA) x 0.025 x (40.2) (50/5) > (100/1000)

% Ca= (mL EDTA) 0.050
Where:

(40/2) = equivalent weight Ca


0.025 = normality of EDTA

(50/5) = aliquot of sample
Analysis of Iron

One hundred mg of sample was weighed and ignited in a furnace at 550°C overnight
or until the ash is white. One mL concentrated HCI was added and mixed gently using a
stirring rod followed by 4.0 mL distilled water. It was heated on a hot plate or oven at
100°C. The solution was evaporated to about 2.0 mL added with equal volume of distilled
water followed by heating to about 90°C. It was filtered through ash less filter paper of
medium porosity using a volumetric flask as receiver. The crucible, filter paper and funnel
was rinsed with distilled water several times then the volume was diluted with distilled
water to 20.0 mL, the solution was mixed well.

An aliquot (0.10 mL) of the ash solution was obtained (estimated to contain no
more than 0.10 mg of iron). Approximately 0.01 g of ascorbic acid crystals was added.
Five (5) mL of sodium acetate trihydrate (pH 5.4 buffer solution) was added to the solution
and mixed, One (1) mL of 2' 2' bipyridin solution was added then the solution which was
diluted to 25 mL using distilled water. The solution was mixed well and was allowed to
stand for 1 hr. The absorbance readings was obtained using 520 nm in a spectrophotometer.
A blank was run using the same procedure and reagents. The iron content was calculated
using the formula below:

% iron =| weight of iron |X 100
eight of sample|


Calculations were made using data produce from the standard curve as seen in Appendix
D. Use the slope from the regression line to calculate for concentration of iron from the
equation of the line:

y=mx+b
Where:
y = absorbance b=0
m = slope of the line
X = concentration
Analysis of Zinc

The amount of zinc was determined spectrophotometrically following the modified
protocol of Platte and Marcy (1959). The absorbance of the blue zinc-zincon complex in
solutions was read at 620 nm using an Atomic Absorption Spectrophotometry.

For dry ashing, about twenty-five grams of the sample was accurately weighed into
a clean platinum or silica dish. The sample was charred and ashed at temperature not
exceeding 500°C. The temperature of the muffle furnace was raised slowly to avoid
ignition. When the ash became carbon-free, the ash was dissolved under watch glass, in
minimum volume of HCI (1:1). About 20 mL of water was added and evaporated to near
dryness on team bath. Twenty mL of 0.1N HCI was added and the heating was continued
for 5 minutes. The sample was filtered through pre-washed fast filter paper into 100 mL
volumetric flask. The dish and filter were washed with several 5 to 10 mL portions of 0.1N
HCI, and then cooled. The solution was diluted to volume with 0.1N HCl.

For the solution preparation, the buffer solution was prepared by dissolving 2.4 g

of sodium hydroxide in 60 mL of distilled water and then it was transferred to a 100 mL.


volumetric flask. To complete the volume, 3.73 grams of potassium chloride, 3.1 g of boric
acid, and distilled water were added. The pH value should be at 9. The Zincon solution
was prepared by dissolving 0.065 g of zincon in | ml of 1 M sodium hydroxide solution
and dilute to 50 mL.

For the procedure, 1.0 mL of aliquot sample containing 8.0 ppm of ZN?" was
pipetted to a 5 mL volumetric flask. 0.5 mL of the buffer solution was added to the sample
and then mixed well. Zincon solution was added drop by drop until the red color is one
drop in excess. It was mixed well again and diluted to 5 mL using distilled or deionized
water, The absorbance of the solution was measured at 620 nm. A standard curve using
different amounts of zinc was prepared and absorbance of each were recorded. This
standard curve was used to calculate the amount of zinc in sample.

The following formula was used to calculate the amount of zinc in sample:
y=mx+b

Where:

y = absorbance
m= slope of line from standard curve

x = concentration

and:

[iat fa

eight of sample


Statistical Analysis

The proximate composition and mineral content of the different types of flour were
evaluated using One-Way Anova followed Bonferroni for the post hoc test. Response
surface methodology using the Design Expert 10 software was used in identifying the
optimum cor and wheat flour blend based on its crude protein and calcium content, loaf
volume, and general acceptability. ‘The effect of nixtamalization on the proximate
composition, mineral content, and loaf characteristics was evaluated using the T-test. On
the other hand, the results of sensory evaluation and general acceptability was analyzed

using the Friedman rank sum test.


CHAPTER 4

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Proximate Composition and Mineral Content

The results of the proximate analysis of pulverized raw corn kernel, pulverized
boiled com kernel, and pulverized nixtamalized com kernel are shown in Table 4. Results
showed that there is a significant difference among the moisture content of all treatments.
PNC has a significantly higher moisture content than PBC, while PBC has a significantly
higher moisture content than PRC. The significant increase in moisture content of the PNC
can be attributed to alkaline cooking which causes the degradation and solubilization of the
cell wall components leading to the removal of pericarp and softening of the endosperm
structure which allows the diffusion of water and calcium ions into the starch granules
located in the grain. As a result, the diffused water produces the swelling and partial
gelatinization of the starch granules (Laria et al., 2007). The presence of lime may also
trigger the osmotic potential in the grain which allows the com to absorb more water until

equilibrium is attained (Sefa-Dedah et al., 2004).

The result of this study supports the findings of the study of Sefa-Dedah et al.,
(2004) wherein they observed that the moisture content of cooked and uncooked samples
increase with the increasing lime concentration which is an indication that lime

concentration facilitates the absorption of water. Higher moisture content was also


observed in the ‘Lagkitan’ corn which was nixtamalized using different methods (Cayetano
et al., 2019). They attributed the increased moisture content to the alkaline cooking which
facilitated the diffusion of water throughout the whole grain. Greater moisture content
was also absorbed by the nixtamalized sample than the boiled sample which is similar with

the observation of Chang and Hsu (1985).

Table 4. Proximate composition of pulverized raw corn kernel, pulverized boiled
corn kernel, and pulverized nixtamalized corn kernel.

~ Pulverized
Pulverized Raw putverized Boiled Nixtamalized

Component (%) Gated Corn Kernel (PBC) —_ Corn Kernel
i ontrel) (PNC)

Moisture’ __ 11.5440.07 12.47 £0.50" 18.07 + 0.23"
Crude fat ~~ 6.664075" «6.66 + 0.32" "5.8740.43"
Crude protein 7.95 0.06" 6.62 £ 0.04 6.10 £ 0.10°

_ Nitrogen 1.2740.017 «1060.01 (0,98 + 0.02
Crudefiber 2.1540. 15 £0.01 2.28 £ 0.128
Total ash 1.27 £0.02" 0.70 = 0.03 0.81 £ 0.00°
Carbohydrates! 60.22 £0.77 60.49 + 110° 52.06 + 0.15°

Values are reported as means + standard deviation followed by the same superscript within
the same row are not significantly different from one another at 0.05 level of significance.
Dry matter basis.

* As is.

J Calculated by difference.

However, not only water is being diffused into the grain, calcium ions from the
added calcium carbonate enters the seed. These calcium ions inhibit the gelatinization of
starch granules during steeping due to the strong calcium-amylose interaction which would
prevent the water absorption as well as preventing the swelling and degradation of starch
granules (Laria et al., 2007). This explanation contradicts the result of the study which is

the increased moisture content in the nixtamalized sample due to the softening of cell walls


which facilitates the removal of most of the pericarp, leading to increased surface area for

water absorption.

As per the crude fat, no difference was observed in the content of PRC and PBC.
On the other hand, PNC has a lower crude fat content than PRC and PBC. There is no
statistically significant difference between all the treatments. The decrease in crude fat
content may be associated with the alkaline pH of the medium which causes the hydrolysis
of lipid ester linkages freeing fatty acids that are lost in the nejayote which is drained after
steeping (Moreno et al., 2015). The hydrolysis of lipids due to alkaline substances was
also supported by the study of Yilmaz (2004). Another possible reason is the loss of
approximately 30% and 17% of the germ during nixtamalization and nixtamal rinsing,
respectively (Morales & Zepeda, 2017) that consist up to 90% of lipid of the keel. Germ

losses contribute in the decrease in crude fat content.

The decrease in amount of crude fat in the PNC sample was also observed in the
studies of Moreno et al., (2015) & Martinez-Flores et al., (2006). In the study of Martinez-
Flores et al., (2006), the lipid value decreased as the amount of alkaline used in
nixtamalization increases. They associated this with two factors. First, lipids may be
released during the cooking and steeping stages. Second, lipids may react with calcium
ions to form unsaponified materials which cannot be extracted efficiently with the solvent

used.

For protein and nitrogen, both PBC and PNC have significantly lower amounts than

the control. However, PBC has a significantly lower amount of crude protein than PNC.

The significant decrease of protein and nitrogen content of PBC and PNC can be associated
with the denaturation of protein due to the heat during cooking at 94.4°C for 30 minutes.
During nixtamalization, there is solubilization of some chemical components which are

released into the nejayote during the cooking and steeping stages (Bressani et al., 1990).

Biuret test was conducted in order to confirm if the losses in the crude protein is in
the nejayote,. Samples that were tested include the initial wash water, nejayote, and the
water used for rinsing the nixtamal after steeping. Among all the samples, the nejayote for
the nixtamalized sample and the cook-steep water for the boiled sample tested positive by
forming a mauve colored solution. Upon quantification using a spectrophotometer at 542
nm, the nejayote has a protein concentration of 0.014 mg/mL while the cook-steep water
from the boiled sample has 0.011 mg/mL. IPB Var 6 is a quality protein maize which has
improved lysine and tryptophan content however, lysine is a water-soluble amino acid
while tryptophan is alkali soluble. Since nejayote is discarded after steeping, these amino
acids may be lost during the process of nixtamalization. Approximately 5% decrease in
lysine content of nixtamalized corn was reported in the studies of Bressani and Scrimshaw
(1958); Serna-Saldivar et al., (1988) as cited by Gomez-Aldapa et al., (1999). On the other
hand, the tryptophan content of a nixtamalized QPM also decreased from 57 to 42 mg/g of
nitrogen (Bressani et al., 1990). It is recommended to conduct amino acid profiling in

nixtamalized IPB var 6 corn.

Similar result was observed in the studies of Pappa and Palomo (2010); Gomez-
Aldapa et al., (1999), wherein the protein content and quality of nixtamalized com is lower

than that of raw com. The protein value of com tortillas was studied by De Groot and


Slump (1969) which revealed that alkaline thermal treatment of proteins gave rise to
peptides, such as lysino-alanine, omithine and lanthionine, which are biologically

unavailable and have detrimental effects on protein quality.

The result of the present study is contrary with the results of the studies of Sefa-
Dedah et al., (2004); Bressani and Scrimshaw (1958); & Serna-Saldivar et al., (1987) which

shows that there is an increasing protein content as the concentration of lime increases.

For crude fiber, results showed that there is no significant difference between all
the treatments. However, an increase in the crude fiber content was observed in PNC
sample. Crude fiber are fat-free organic substances which are insoluble in acid and alkaline
media. It is a measure of the quality of indigestible cellulose, pentosans, lignin, and other
components of this type in foods. It is the residue of plant materials remaining after solvent

extraction followed by digestion with diluted acid and alkali.

The study of Ocheme et al., (2010) also had increase in the crude fiber content of
nixtamalized millet grains and it was postulated that the interactions between the ions, Ca?"
and OH, in the cooking solution and the constituents of the grains could have produced
some indigestible products which can be detected as the increased crude fiber content.
Crude fiber has little food value however it is important in providing the bulk necessary
for proper peristaltic movement in the intestinal tract which aids digestion. Hence, the

importance of the increased crude fiber content in this study.

Ash refers to the inorganic residue remaining after either ignition or complete

oxidation of organic matter in the sample (Maurice, 2010). For the total ash, there is a

significant difference in the content of all treatments. Upon comparing with the control, a
decrease was observed in the PBC while an increase in ash content in the PNC. The
decrease in the ash content observed in the PBC sample shows that water and alkali soluble
minerals may have been leached in the cook-steep water. Since the cook-steep water is
discarded, the level of ash content decreased. In terms of the PNC sample, even if a
decrease was observed from the control, it still has a higher ash content than the PBC. The
approximately 0.2% difference between the PBC and PNC samples can be attributed to the
increase in calcium due to the addition of calcium carbonate which is necessary for
nixtamalization. It can also be seen in Table 5, that there is a significant decrease in

calcium content of the PBC but a significant increase was observed in the PNC sample.

Lastly, for the carbohydrate content, There is a significant difference between all
the treatments. A decreasing trend was observed from PRC to PBC to PNC. There is no
significant difference between PRC and PBC while PNC is significantly lower than PRC
and PBC. It is recommended to conduct carbohydrate profiling such as resistant starch,
total dietary fiber, soluble, and insoluble carbohydrates to identify its properties and

bioactivity.

Table 5 shows that there is a significant difference in the amounts of calcium and
zinc except for iron. For calcium, all treatments are significantly different with each other.
A significant decrease was observed in the calcium content of PBC as compared to PRC
while a significant increase was observed upon comparing PNC with the control. Calcium
is soluble in water in its ionic form which is diffused out of the kernel, the inherent calcium

decreased upon discarding the cook-steep water from the PBC sample. On the other hand,


the significant increase in the PNC sample can be attributed to the use of calcium carbonate
for nixtamalization. In the study of Bressani et al., (1990), the calcium content of
nixtamalized corn increased from 38 mg/100 g to 129.1 mg/100g. Increase in the calcium
content of nixtamalized corn was also observed in the studies of Pappa et al., (2010). The
calcium content of the nixtamalized tortillas in the study of Gomez-Aldapa et al., (1999)
increased by 20-fold in relation to raw com while in this study there is an almost 6-fold

increase in the calcium content of the pulverized nixtamalized corn kernel.

Table 5. Contents of Calcium, Iron, and Zinc of pulverized raw corn kernel,
pulverized boiled corn kernel, and pulverized nixtamalized corn kernel.

Pulverized Raw Pulverized Boiled —_, Pulverized
Nixtamalized
Component Corn Kernel Corn Kernel plasty
(PRC/CONTROL) (PBC) ENC)
Calcium (mg/100g) 54,014 0.88" 14.51 2.07° 289.16 + 2.93
Iron (mg/100g) 12.60 + 0.70 12.574 0.222 13.05 + 0.722
Zinc (mg/100 15.39 + 0,047 14.70 + 0.02" 14.13 + 0,13"

Values are reported as means = standard deviation followed by the same superscript within
the same row are not significantly different from one another at 0.05 level of significance.
Dry matter basis.

Laria et al., (2007), studied the pathway of calcium ions during nixtamalization.
During the alkaline cooking and steeping of the corn kernel, the calcium ions become
associated with the pericarp almost instantaneously. In the initial parts of the process,
calcium becomes fixed at the aleurone layer and at the external surface of the germ in the
interstices between the germ and endosperm. After several hours of steeping, calcium

enters progressively from the outside toward the center of the endosperm. This entry is

more pronounced in the kernel part next to the tip cap end. After long periods of time,
calcium becomes evident in the germ. This mechanism shows that the calcium is absorbed
within the corn kernel hence, even after discarding the nejayote and washing after the

steeping process has no effect in the increased calcium content of the PNC sample.

The recommended calcium intake per day of children from 1 — 5 years old is 500
mg while for 19-49 years old is 750 mg (FNRI, 2015). Hence, theoretically, upon
consumption of a product containing 100 mg pulverized nixtamalized com kernel, it can
provide 70.58% and 47.05% of the daily requirement of children aged 1-5 years old and

adults aged 19-49 years old, respectively.

For iron, about 76% is located in the endosperm while 18% is in the germ (Bressani

et al., 2002). The recommended nutrient intake per day of adults aged 19-29 years old is
12 mg for men and 28 mg for women (FNRI, 2015). Although an increasing trend was
observed, there was no significant difference between all the treatments in terms of iron
content. Increase in iron and zinc were also observed in the study of Pappa et al., (2010)
and it was related to the contamination from the equipment used and the possibility that it
is from the lime and ash used for nixtamalization. Bressani et al., (2004) studied the effects
of processing conditions on the mineral content of nixtamalized corn. It revealed that lime
concentration and cooking time has no effect on the iron content of whole corn and in the
endosperm and germ. However, cooking time had a significant effect on the iron content
in the endosperm. The iron content had a significant reduction with prolonged steeping

time. According to Bressani et al. (2002),the increase in the iron content in the germ was

related to the decrease of iron content in the endosperm. Specifically, high amount of


phytic acid present in the germ binds the iron hence an increase in iron content. The phytic
acid in the endosperm is significantly decreased which explains the loss in iron content.
Hence, the increase in the iron content of the samples may be due to the phytic acid content.

Itis recommended to conduct phytic acid determination.

For zinc, there is a significant difference between all the treatments. Pulverized
boiled com kernel has a lower zinc content than PRC while PNC has a significantly lower
zinc content than PBC. Similar with iron, lime concentration and cooking time has no
effect in zinc levels. According to Bressani et al., (2004), only steeping time had a
statistically significant effect in zinc wherein up to 11% of zinc may be lost as compared
to the initial content of the grain. Hence, the zinc content may be related to maize
genotypes and phenotypes (Dickerson, 1992 as cited by Bressani et al., 2004). The
recommended dietary allowance for zinc for adults aged 19-49 years is 6.5 mg for men and

4.6 mg for women (FNRI, 2015).

Optimization of Nixtamalized IPB Var 6
Corn and Wheat Flour Blend
The optimization of com and wheat flour blend was based on four parameters:
protein content, calcium content, loaf volume, and general acceptability. One of the claims
of nixtamalization is the improved protein content and quality, and biofortification of
calcium due to the calcium salts added (Bressani et al., 2002 & Martinez-Flores et al.,
2002). A good quality bread needs a flour with good amylase activity and moisture content
(Giami et al., 2004). Incorporation of non-wheat flour may have an effect in the quality of

loaf bread hence, loaf volume and general acceptability were considered. The Design


Expert software was able to come up with nine runs consisting of three blends for wheat
and pulverized nixtamalized corn kernel such as 80% : 20%, 87.5% : 12.5%, and 95% : 5%

which were repeated thrice.

The designed model terms, wheat and nixtamalized com, are considered significant
since the value of prob >F is less than 0.0500. With 98.00 F-value it is considered as
significant and there is only a 0.01% chance that the F-value could be due to noise. The
predicted R-squared is in reasonable agreement with the adjusted R-squared with the
difference less than 0.02. This indicates that the data set fits the linear model of regression.
Figure 5 shows that as there is a linear relationship between the protein content and the
nixtamalized corn and wheat flour blend. As the proportion of nixtamalized corn decreases

and the proportion of wheat flour increases, the protein content of the bread increases.

Figure 5. Model graph for linear effect of nixtamalized corn and wheat flour blends on
protein content of loaf bread.


Nixtamalized corn and wheat flour variables are significant with a 99.9% level of
significance. The lack of fit value of 0.33 implies that it is not significant relative to the
pure error. The predicted R-squared of 1.0000 is in reasonable agreement with the adjusted
R-squared of 1.0000. Lastly, the adequate precision measures the signal to noise ratio. A
value of 7015.459 indicates an adequate signal and that the model can be used to navigate
the design space. Since the model is significant but it does not fit the linear model, it can
be concluded that the model can be used in predicting the calcium content of the loaf bread.
Figure 6 shows that there is a quadratic relationship between the proportions of
nixtamalized corn and wheat flour blend and the calcium content of the loaf bread as

observed from the analysis of variance is shown in Appendix G.

Two Component Mix

Figure 6, Model graph for quadratic effect of nixtamalized corn and wheat
flour blends on calcium content of loaf bread.

In model terms, nixtamalized com and wheat flour are significant based on the Prob

>F value of less than 0.0500 with 99.9% level of confidence. The lack of fit F-value of


0.44 implies that the lack of fit is not significant relative to the pure error. Hence, there is
67.76% chance that the lack of fit F-value is due to noise. Since the model is significant
while the lack of fit is not significant, it can be concluded that the model can be used in
predicting the volume of the loaf bread. Analysis of variances for factorial model is
presented in Appendix H. Figure 7 shows the linear relationship of the loaf volume and the
proportion of nixtamalized corn and wheat flour blend. As the nixtamalized corn flour

decreases and the wheat flour increases, the loaf volume increases, and vice versa.

Two Component Mix

Figure 7. Model graph for linear effect of nixtamalized com and
wheat flour blends on volume of loaf bread.

‘The model for general acceptability is considered significant as indicated by the F-
value 42.42. There is only a 0.06% chance that an F-value this large could occur due to.
noise. The value of less than 0.0500 of the Prob > F indicates that the model terms are

significant. For the lack of fit F-value, 0.89 implies the lack of fit is not significant relative


to the pure error. ‘There is a 53.75% chance that a “lack of fit F-value” this large could
occur due to noise. The predicted R-squared of 0.7408 is in reasonable agreement with the
adjusted R-squared of 0.8854. Lastly, the adequate precision ratio of 10.039 indicates an
adequate signal which confirms that the model can be used to navigate the design space.
Since the model is significant while the lack of fit is not significant, it can be concluded
that the model can be used in predicting the general acceptability of the loaf bread.
Appendix I presents the analysis of variance for the general acceptability of loaf bread.
Figure 8 depicts the linear relationship of the proportion of nixtamalized com and wheat
flour blend and the general acceptability of loaf bread. The general acceptability of the
loaf bread increases as the amount of nixtamalized com flour decreases while the amount

of wheat flour increases.

Two Component Mix

Figure 8. Model graph for linear effect of nixtamalized com and wheat flour
blends on general acceptability of loaf bread.


In consideration the amount of wheat, amount of nixtamalized corn, protein
content, calcium content, general acceptability and maximized loaf volume; a desirability
of 0.958 was obtained for the proportion of 95% wheat flour and 5% nixtamalized corn
flour. The proportion of 80% wheat flour and 20% nixtamalized corn flour had 0
desirability while 87.5% wheat flour and 12.5% nixtamalized com flour had 0.642
desirability. Hence, after combining all the responses and other factors the proportion with
95% wheat flour and 5% com flour is the optimum proportion for the nixtamalized com
and wheat flour blend. Figure 9 shows the model for optimum proportion of nixtamalized

corn and wheat flour.

jwo Component Mix

Figure 9.Model graph for the desirability of the optimum proportion of nixtamalized
cor and wheat flour blend.

After obtaining the optimum nixtamalized corn and wheat flour blend (5:95), the
statistical software had predicted values of each component. Upon re-analyzing the sample

for its protein content, calcium content, loaf volume, and general acceptability, all values


showed that there is no significant difference with the predicted. This indicates that the
model was reliable in predicting the response parameters. Table 6 summarized the

confirmation of characteristics of the optimum blend.

Table 6. Confirmation of the characteristics of loaf bread with optimum nixtamalized
corn and wheat flour blend (5:95).

Criteria Predicted Value ‘Actual Value P value
from RMS
Protein content, % 15.35° 15.35 0.860
Calcium content, 154.59 153.3* 0.227
mg/100g
Loaf volume 10817 1080* 0.710
General acceptability 119 1 0.263

‘Actual values reported are mean of triplicates followed by the same superscript within
the same raw are not significantly different from one another at 0.05 level of significance.

Characterization of the Loaf Bread with the 95:5 Proportion
of Wheat Flour and Nixtamalized Corn Flour

There is a decrease in the loaf volume of bread with com flour however, it is not
significantly different from pure wheat flour. This result is similar with the studies of
Menon et al., (2014); Julianti et al., (2017); and Bibiana et al., (2014), the decrease can be
associated with the presence of 5% com flour since loaf volume depends on the quantity
and quality of protein in the flour (Ragaee & Abdel-Aal, 2006). The specific volume refers
to the ratio of loaf volume to loaf weight and is considered as a more reliable measure of
loaf size (Shittu et al., 2007). Since there is a decrease in the loaf volume of the bread with
5% corn flour, there is also a non-significant decrease in its specific volume as compared
to the control bread. For the texture analysis, there is non-significant increase in hardness.

‘A higher firmness in bread made from composite flour was also observed in the study of


Julianti et al., (2017), Table 7 summarizes the comparison of the physical properties of loaf

bread produce with and without com flour.

Table 7. Physical properties of control bread and loaf bread with optimum
nixtamalized corn and wheat flour blend.

Bread without corn flour Bread with 5% corn
Component (control) flour
Loaf volume (ml) 1076.67 £ 68.07" 1053.33 = 55.08"
Specific volume (ml/g) 3.46 + 0.20° 3.36 £ 0.207
Hardness (N) 3.65 + 0.14% 3.68 £ 0.122

Values are reported as means + standard deviation followed by the same superscript within
the same row are not significantly different from one another at 0.05 level of significance.

There is a reduction in the wheat structure forming proteins that corresponds to
lower ability of the dough to enclose air during proofing that affects the volume by
depression. Since a non-wheat flour, corn flour, was incorporated and no preservatives
were added it is difficult to obtain a bread which has the same quality as the control bread.
According to Gallagher et al., (2003), this is due to the deficiency of a viscoelastic protein
called gluten. Gluten in wheat flour serves as the essential structure-building protein which
provides viscoelasticity to the dough, good gas holding ability, and good crumb structure.
Although the exact loaf characteristics cannot be duplicated upon addition of com flour,
there is no significant difference with the control bread in terms of loaf volume, specific
volume, and hardness hence, it is still comparable with the conventional bread made with

pure wheat flour.


Sensory Characteristics and General Acceptability

A 15-point line scale quality scoring was used in the sensory evaluation. For the
color, point 0 to 3 refers to lightest yellow, 3.1 to 6 as light yellow, 6.1 to 9 as dark yellow,
9.1 to 12 as darker yellow, and 12.1 to 15 refers to darkest yellow. Bread with 5% com
flour were noted to have a darker yellow based on the 4.04 score as compared to the 3.17
for the bread without corn flour. The difference was perceivable yet not significant. Both
values were under the category of light yellow. The perceived yellow color of the crumb

can be attributed to the other ingredients such as flour, butter, and milk.

For the com aroma, point 0 to 3 refers to little to no perception of com aroma, 3.1
to 6 as slightly perceived corn aroma, 6.1 to 9 as intense corn aroma perceived, 9.1 to 12
as more intense corn aroma perceived, and 12.1 to 15 as most intense corn aroma perceived.
Bread with 5% corn flour had a score of 4.65 which indicates that the intensity of corm
aroma was slightly perceived. On the other hand, the panelists were also able to recognize
acom aroma for the bread without corn flour with the score of 4.27. This is also under the
category of slightly perceived corn aroma. This may be due to the bias that they have
knowledge about the presence of corn in the product. There is also no significant difference
for the corn aroma. According to the study of Carbajo (2018), corn aroma is released as a
volatile compound from fermentation and lipids oxidation. Corn is one of the suitable
options which can improve the aroma of gluten-free breads due to the high content of

pleasant aromas and the low content in rancid volatiles, which induces a volatile profile


similar to the wheat bread. Table 8 shows the summary of all sensory evaluations of loaf

bread made with and without com flour.

Table 8. Mean sensory scores and general acceptability of control loaf bread and
bread with 5% nixtamalized corn flour.

Sensory Characteristics Bread Without Corn Bread With 5% Corn
jour Flour

Color’ 3,17 1,22 4,04 + 1.704"

Com Aroma” 4.27 £ 2.28 4.65 + 1.24"

Texture? 2.21 + 0.69% 2.78 + 1.32%

Com Flavor* 2.36 + 0.81" 4.214277

General Acceptal 13.38 + 0.99" 11.94 42.778

Values are reported as means + standard deviation followed by the same superscript within
the same row are not significantly different from one another at 0.05 level of significance.

'1- lightest yellow, 15 — darkest yellow
21-no corn aroma, 15 — most intense corn aroma
T-softest, 15 - hardest

“I-no corn flavor, 15 — most intense corn flavor
‘I-not acceptable, 15 — very acceptable

For the texture, point 0 to 3 point refers to softest, 3.1 to 6 as softer, 6.1 to 9 as
neither soft nor hard, 9.1 to 12 as harder, and 12.1 to 15 as hardest texture. Although there
is no significant difference, the panelists identified the bread with 5% com flour with a
harder texture as compared to the control bread. Breads without com flour and bread with
5% com flour were under the category softest with the mean score of 2.21 and 2.78,
respectively. The perceived hardness of the experimental bread than the control bread can
be attributed to the presence of non-wheat flour which has a lower gluten content thereby

decreasing the viscoelastic property of the bread (Gallagher et al., 2003).


For the corn flavor, point 0 to 3 refers to little to no perception of corn flavor, 3.1 to 6 as
slightly perceived corn flavor, 6.1 to 9 as intense com flavor, 9.1 to 12.as more intense com
flavor, and 12.1 to 15 as most intense corm flavor. Similar with the com aroma, the
panelists were able to identify a corn flavor in the control bread but a higher score of 4.21
was given to the bread with 5% com flour. The mean score, 2.36, for the bread without
corn flour was under the category of little to no perception of corn while the bread with 5%
com flour is under the slightly perceived com flour. No significant difference was

observed for the corn flavor.

Lastly, for the general acceptability, point 0 to 3 refers to not acceptable, 3.1 to 6
as least acceptable, 6.1 to 9 as acceptable, 9.1 to 12 as more acceptable, and 12.1 to 15 as
very acceptable. The control bread was more acceptable with 13.38 score than the bread
with 5% corn flour with 11.94 score. The bread without corn flour is under the category
of vey acceptable while the bread with 5% corn flour is under the more acceptable. No
significant difference was observed. All the sensory characteristics and the general
acceptability of the product has no significant difference with the control bread (Figure 10
and 11). Hence, the bread with 5% corn flour is comparable with the control bread yet it

has improved nutritional content.


Figure 10. Unsliced loaf bread without com flour (left) and
with 5% com flour (right).

Figurel1. Cross section of loaf bread without com flour (left)
and with 5% corn flour (right).

Evaluation of the Nutritional Contribution of the
Loaf Bread to Daily Recommendations

The bread with 5% nixtamalized com flour has a significantly higher moisture and
calcium. Total ash content of the experimental bread is also higher than the control bread


however, it is not statistically significant. The increased moisture content can be attributed
to the increased water absorption capacity of the nixtamalized pulverized corn kernel while
higher total ash, calcium, and zinc can be attributed to the added pulverized nixtamalized
com kernel which has increased contents of these micronutrients. In terms of crude fat,
crude protein, crude fiber, and carbohydrate, there is a significant decrease in its amount.
Lastly, iron content decreased but it is not statistically significant. Proximate composition

of loaf bread made from flour with and without com is summarized in table 9.

Table 9. Proximate composition and selected mineral contents of breads with and
without 5% nixtamalized corn flour.

Bread Without Corn Bread
Component Flour (Control) Nixtamalized Corn Flour
Moisture (%)* 37.89 0.49" 39,57 £0.10
Crude fat (%) 4.50 + 0.16 3.99 + 0.14«
Crude protein (%) 9.56 + 0.04 9.30 + 0,02"
Nitrogen (%) 1.53 + 0.00) 1.49 + 0.00)
Crude fiber (%) 0.44 + 0.025 0.39 + 0.01"
Total Ash (%) 1.19 + 0.03 1.24 40.04
Carbohydrates (%)° 22.89 + 0.47) 21.61 + 0.24"
Calcium (mg/100 g) 77.13 + 0,98" 93.42 + 0.88)
Iron (mg/100 g) 25.06 + 1.03) 25.04 + 0.97)
Zinc (mg/100g) 8.88 + 0.24) 9.12 £0.14

Values are reported as means = standard deviation followed by the same superscript within
the same row are not significantly different from one another at 0.05 level of significance.
Dry matter basis. * As is. * Based on computation.

Nutritional value of loaf bread with 100% bread flour and loaf bread with
pulverized nixtamalized IPB var 6 corn kernel were calculated per 120 g serving size and
is presented in table 10. The nutritional content of loaf bread was compared to the

recommended 2000 caloric requirement (FNRI, 2015). The energy requirement was

B

divided into 60% from carbohydrates, 15% from protein, and 25% from fat. Each serving
would contribute 10% of the total energy requirement per day. In terms of protein content,
bread with 5% com flour and contro! bread has the same content and for the calcium
content, bread with 5% corn flour can provide 3% more than the control bread. Each
serving of the bread with 5% corn flour can be considered as a source of protein and
calcium since, the protein content was able to meet at least 10% of the RENI while the

calcium was able to meet at least 15% of the RENI.

Table 10. Nutritional value of control loaf bread and bread with nixtamalized corn

and wheat flour blend.

Nutrition Facts
Bread without corn flour

Nutrition facts
Bread with 95:5 (Wheat:Corn) blend

Serving Size: 2 slices (120 g)
Amount per serving

Serving Size: 2 slices (120 g)
Amount per serving

Calories 204 Calories from Calories 192 Calories
Fat 49 from Fat
% RENI* % RENI*
Total Fat 5.4g 10% Total Fat 4.3 g %
Cholesterol 0 g 0% Cholesterol 0 g 0%
Protein 11.4 g 15% Protein 11.16 g 15%
Carbohydrates 27.5 g 9% Carbohydrates 25.93 g 8%
Fiber 0.53 g Fiber 0.47 g
Ash 1.43 g Ash 1.49 g
Calcium 92.56mg 12% Calcium 112.1 mg 15%
Iron 30.07 mg 251% ‘Tron 30.05 mg 250%
Zine 10.66 mg 164% Zinc 10.94 mg 168%
Vitamin A 0% Vitamin C 0% Vitamin A0% Vitamin C 0%

*Percent RENI (Recommended Energy
and Nutrient Intake) are based on 2000
calorie diet.

*Percent RENI (Recommended Energy
and Nutrient Intake) are based on 2000
calorie diet.


CHAPTER 5

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION

One way of addressing malnutrition in the Philippines is through introduction and
development of food products which has improved nutritional content, available and
accessible to the community. Com is the second most important crop in the Philippines
yet it is underutilized for human consumption. In order to maximize the potential of corn
for its nutritional value, the Mesoamerican technology of nixtamalization, specifically
ecological nixtamalization, was used in this study. The effect of nixtamalization on the
nutritional content of IPB Var 6 corn and on the characteristics of loaf bread with its com
flour was studied. For the proximate composition of the pulverized IPB var 6 corn kernel,
a significant increase in the moisture content was observed. The alkaline cooking step in
nixtamalization causes the degradation and solubilization of the cell wall components
leading to the removal of pericarp and softening of the endosperm structure which allows
the diffusion of water into the starch granules located in the grain. Nixtamalized sample
has the lowest crude fat content due to the hydrolysis of lipid ester linkages which causes
the free fatty acids to be lost in the nejayote. There is also a significant decrease in the
protein content of nixtamalized corn due to the solubilization of some amino acids and
polypeptides that are released into the nejayote during the cooking and steeping stages.
Confirmation through the Biuret test of the nejayote and cook-steep water of the boiled

sample tested positive for the presence of protein. Nixtamalized sample has a higher crude


fiber content than the pulverized raw corn kemel and the pulverized boiled corn kernel. It
was postulated that the calcium ions may have reacted with the alkaline in the cooking
solution and it may have produced indigestible products, which can be detected as
increased crude fiber content. Lastly, the pulverized boiled raw com kernel showed that
there is a decrease in the ash content due to the leaching of water and alkali soluble
minerals. However, the pulverized nixtamalized sample showed that even if there is a
decrease in ash content from the pulverized raw com kernel it still has a higher ash content
than the pulverized boiled com kernel which can be attributed to the retained calcium in

the grain during the cooking and steeping stages.

In terms of the mineral composition, a significant increase in the calcium content
of nixtamalized sample was observed. This is due to the absorption of calcium ions into
the kernel. Iron content was also increased while a decrease in the zinc was observed in
nixtamalized samples. The changes in iron content is associated with the presence of phytic

acid while the zinc content may be related to maize phenotypes.

For the optimization of nixtamalized IPB var 6 com and wheat flour blend base on
the protein content, calcium content, loaf volume, and general acceptability a desirability
of 0.958 was achieved by the 95:5 proportion of wheat flour and nixtamalized IPB var 6

com flour making it the optimum proportion used for the development of loaf bread

The loaf bread from 95:5 proportion of wheat flour and nixtamalized IPB var 6 com
flour was characterized based on its physical properties, sensory characteristics, proximate

composition, and mineral contents. For the physical characteristics, the loaf bread with


composite flour had a lower loaf volume, lower specific volume, and harder than the bread
with pure wheat flour, These characteristics are associated with the use of composite flour
which has a lower amount of gluten protein which is responsible for the desirable
characteristics of the bread. Differences in eating characteristics of bread form
nixtamalized IPB Var6 com are not statistically different from pure composite flour and
cannot be distinguished significantly. For the sensory evaluation of there are no significant
differences in all the sensory characteristics and in the general acceptability hence, the loaf

bread with corn flour is comparable with the control bread.

Lastly, for the proximate composition and mineral content of the breads, the bread
with 5% nixtamalized corm flour has a significantly higher moisture content than the control
bread. Total ash and zinc content of the experimental bread is also higher than the control
bread however, it not statistically significant. In terms of crude fat, crude protein, crude
fiber, and carbohydrate there is a significant decrease in its amount. Iron content decreased

but it is not statistically significant.

In conclusion, nixtamalization technology has improved the nutritional quality of
IPB var 6 com specifically in terms of crude fiber, ash, calcium, and zinc. Upon
incorporating the nixtamalized com in the loaf bread, there was no significant differences
in terms of sensory characteristics; yet it has improved nutritional value. Loaf bread is
already part of the Filipino diet hence, introducing a familiar product but with improved
nutritional significance can aid in alleviating malnutrition specifically, stunting because of

its protein and calcium content.


RECOMMENDATIONS

Due to limited time and resources, only the crude fat, crude protein, and crude fiber
were analyzed. It is also recommended to study the effect of nixtamalization on its fatty
acid content, resistant starch, and total dietary fiber. Since it was confirmed through Biuret
test that proteins leach to the nejayote during cooking and steeping, it is recommended to
analyze the nejayote for its nutritional composition and it can be further developed into a
beverage because of all the water soluble and alkali soluble nutrients. Amino acid
determination can also be included since IPB var 6 is a Quality Protein Maize that has
improved lysine and tryptophan content. One of the claims of nixtamalization is the
improved bioavailability of minerals due to the reduction in phytate content. Hence, it is
recommended to analyze the phytate level and correlate it with the bioavailability of

nixtamalized samples.

Since the developed protocol is more applicable for the food manufacturers, it is
also recommended to develop a protocol for nixtamalized product which can be easily
made at home for family use in order to reach the target consumers. Nixtamalization has
the potential to further improve the nutritional value of com and its products hence, the
government can further invest in researches which will dwell in other nutritional benefits
of nixtamalization not only in com but also in other cereals as well. Policies on mandatory
nixtamalization of com and other cereals may aid in the reduction of prevalence of stunting

and micronutrient malnutrition in the Philippines.

LITERATURE CITED

ANNA M, BIBAT DR, ROSARIO OM, MOPERA LE, COLLADO LS and FLORES FP.
2014. Characterization of alkaline-cooked quality protein maize as raw material for
noodle processing. Philippine Science Letters. 7(2):413-419.

APPOLDT Y and RAIHANI G. 2017, Determining moisture content. Retrieved from
https://www.foodqualityandsafety.com/article/determining-moisture-conten/ on 13
April 2019.

BARRAL LAD. 2014. Promoting the nutritional benefits of quality protein com. AgriMag.
Department of Agriculture — Bureau of Agricultural Research.

BEGUM R, UDDIN MJ, RAHMAN MA and ISLAM MS. 2013. Comparative study on
the development of maize flour based composite bread. Journal of the Bangladesh
Agricultural University. 11(1): 133-139.

BELLO-PEREZ LA, FLORES-SILVA PC, AGAMA-ACEVEDO E, FIGUEROA-
CARDENAS JDD, LOPEZ-VALENZUELA JA and CAMPANELLA OH. 2014.
Effect of the nixtamalization with calcium carbonate on the indigestible carbohydrate
content and starch digestibility of com tortilla. Jounal of Cereal Science, 60(2): 421-
425.

BIBIANI I, GRACE N and JULIUS A. 2014. Quality evaluation of composite bread
produced from wheat, maize and orange fleshed sweet potato flours. American
Journal of Food Science and Technology. 3(4):109-115.

BRESSANI R, PAZ R, PAZ Y and SCRIMSHAW NS. 1958. Com Nutrient Losses,
Chemical Changes in Com during Preparation of Tortillas. Journal of Agricultural
and Food Chemistry. 6(10):770-774.

BRESSANI R, BENAVIDES V, ACEVEDO E and ORTIZ MA. 1990. Changes in
Selected Nutrient Contents and in Protein Quality of Common and Quality-Protein
Maize During Rural Tortilla Preparation. Cereal Chemistry. 67(6):515—518.

BRESSANI R, TURCIOS JC and DE RUIZ ASC. 2002. Nixtamalization Effects on the
Contents of Phytic Acid, Calcium, Iron and Zinc in the Whole Grain, Endosperm and
Germ of Maize. Food Science and Technology International. 8(2):81-86.


BRESSANI R, TURCIOS JC, DE RUIZ ASC and DE PALOMO PP. 2004. Effect of
processing conditions on phytic acid, calcium, iron, and zinc contents of lime-cooked
maize. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry. 52(5):157-162.

BRITES CM, TRIGO MJ, CARRAPICO B, ALVINA M and BESSA RJ. 2011. Maize
and resistant starch enriched breads reduce post prandial glycemic responses in rats.
Nutrition Research. 31:302-308.

CABRERA C. 2013. Rice-corn grits could be option for better health, Department of
Agriculture-Philippine Rice Research Institute. Retrieved from
hitp://www.philrice.gov.ph/rice-corn-grits-could-be-option-for-better-health/ on 5
April 2019.

CAPACCI S, MAZZOCCHI M, SHANKAR B and TRAILL B. 2013. The triple burden
of malnutrition in Europe and Central Asia: a multivariate analysis. FAO Regional
Office for Europe and = Central_— Asia. Retrieved from
http://www. fao.org/3/CA1810EN/cal 810en.pdf on 5 April 2019.

CARBAJO J. 2018. Analysis of volatile compounds in breads and related products:
Improvement of gluten-free breads aroma. Retrieved from
https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/93c8/c582e 1 986 1287eb1b59f55e24f27eaf6c678.pdf.

CARRERA EMC, CARDENAS JDF, VILLA GA, FLORES HEM, JIMENEZ-
SANDOVAL SJ, and LUNA-BARCENAS JG. 2012. New ecological nixtamalisation
process for tortilla production and its impact on the chemical properties of whole comm
flour and wastewater effluents. International Joumal of Food Science and
Technology. 47(3):564-571.

CAYETANO AC, ATIENZA LM, and JUANICO CB. 2019. Proximate Properties,
Functional Components, and Vitamin and Mineral Content of Nixtamalized Lagkitan
Corn (Zea mays L.). EC Nutrition. 14(1):360-372.

CHANG YH and HSU KH. 1985. Extent of starch gelatinization during hydrothermal
processing of com for masa production. Cereal Foods World. 30:545.

CHANG S. 2010. Protein Analysis. In S. S. Nielsen (4 Ed.), Food Analysis. 106 - 115.

CHUKWUMA OE, TAWIO 0, and BONIFACE UV. 2016. Effect of the Traditional

Cooking Methods (Boiling and Roasting) on the Nutritional Profile of Quality
Protein Maize. Journal of Nutrition and Food Sciences. 4(2):34-40.


CUESTA J. 2019. DA Region 8 — Agri-Pinoy Corn Program. Retrieved from
http://da8.da. gov.ph/index. php/da-agri-biz-matching/corn/352-
agripinoycornprogram on 13 April 2019.

DE GROOT, A.P. & P. SLUMP. 1969. Effects of severe alkali treatment of proteins on
amino acid composition and nutritive value. The Journal of Nutrition. 98(1):45-56.
Retrieved from https://doi.org/10.1093/jn/98.1.45 on 25 October 2019.

DE ONIS M and BRANCA F. 2016. Childhood stunting: a global perspective. Maternal
& Child Nutrition. 12 (1):12-26.

DENARDIN CE. 2012. Amylose content in rice (Oryza sativa) affects performance,
glycemic and lipidic metabolism in rats. Cienca Rural. 42(2): 381-387.

DEPARTMENT OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY - FOOD AND NUTRITION
RESEARCH INSTITUTE (DOST-FNRI). 2015. Philippine Nutrition Facts and
Figures 2013: 8" National Nutrition Survey Overview. FNRI Bldg. DOST
Compound, Bicutan, Taguig City, Metro Manila, Philippines.

DEPARTMENT OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY - FOOD AND NUTRITION
RESEARCH INSTITUTE (DOST-FNRI). 2016a. Philippine Nutrition Facts and
Figures 2015: Anthropometric Survey. FNRI Bldg., DOST Compound, Gen. Santos
Avenue, Bicutan, Taguig City, Metro Manila, Philippines.

DEPARTMENT OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY - FOOD AND NUTRITION
RESEARCH INSTITUTE (DOST-FNRI). 2016b. Philippine Nutrition Facts and
Figures 2015: Dietary Survey. FNRI Bldg., DOST Compound, Gen. Santos Avenue,
Bicutan, Taguig City, Metro Manila, Philippines.

DEPARTMENT OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY - FOOD AND NUTRITION
RESEARCH INSTITUTE (DOST-FNRI). 2019. DOST-FNRI embarks on the
implementation of expanded national nutrition survey (ENNS). Retrieved from:
https://www.fnri.dost.gov.phV/index.php/programs-and-projects/news-and-
announcement/232-dost-fnri-embarks-on-the-implementation-of-expanded-national-
nutrition-survey-enns on 5 April 2019.

ELLWOOD EC, SCOTT MP, LIPE WD, MATSON RG and JONES JG. 2013. Stone-
boiling maize with limestone: experimental results and implications for nutrition
among SE Utah preceramic groups. Journal of Archaeological Science. 40(1):35~44.

FOOD AND AGRICULTURAL MATERIALS INSPECTION CENTER. 2014. Chapter
3 proximate composition and detergent _ fiber. Retrieved — from
http://www. famic.go.jp/ffis/oie/obj/nutrients.pdf on 5 April 2019.


FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION. 2001. Quality Protein Maize.
Retrieved from http://www. fao.org/3/0395e/T0395E0a.htm on 5 April 2019.

FOOD AND NUTRITION RESEARCH INSTITUTE-DEPARTMENT OF SCIENCE
AND TECHNOLOGY (FNRI-DOST). 2015. Philippine Nutrition Facts and Figures
2013: Biochemical Survey. FNRI Bldg., DOST Complex, Bicutan, Taguig City,
Metro Manila, Philippines. 2 Edition.

FOOD AND NUTRITION RESEARCH INSTITUTE. 2015. Philippine Dietary
Reference Intake 2015. Taguig, the Philippines: Department of Science and
Technology; 2015. Retrieved from http://www. fnri.dost.gov.ph/index.php/159-fnri-
launches-the-philippine-dietary-reference-intakes-pdri-2015 on 5 April 2019.

GALLAGHER E, KUNKEL A, GORMLEY TR, and ARENDT EK. 2003. The effect of
dairy and rice powder addition on loaf and crumb characteristics, and on shelf life
(intermediate and long-term) of gluten-free breads stored in a modified atmosphere.
European Food Research and Technology. 218 (1):44-48.

GAMBO A and ABUBAKAR SJ. 2014. Production and quality evaluation of bread from
composite flour of wheat and maize. Techno Science Africana. 9:169-175.

GERPACIO RV, LABIOS JD, LABIOS RV, and DIANGKINAY EI. 2004. Maize in the
Philippines: Production systems, constraints, and research priorities. Intemational
Maize and Wheat Improvement Center (CIMMYT). Mexico: CIMMYT.

GIAMI SY, AMASISI T, and EKIYOR G. 2004. Comparison of bread making properties
of composite flour from kernels roasted and boiled African bread fruit (Treculia
Africana decene) seeds. Journal of Materials Research and Technology. 1:16-25.

GLOBAL PANEL ON AGRICULTURE AND FOOD SYSTEMS FOR NUTRITION.
2016. Cost of malnutrition. Retrieved from: https://glopan.org/cost-of-mainutrition
on 5 April 2019.

GOMEZ MH, LEE Jk, MCDONOUGH CM, WANISKA RD, and ROONEY W. 1992.
Com starch changes during tortilla and tortilla chip processing. Cereal Chemistry.
69(3):275-279.

GOMEZ-ALDAPA C, MARTINEZ-BUSTOS F, FIGUEROA CJD, and ORDORICA
FCA. 1999. A comparison of the quality of whole com tortillas made from instant
corn flours by traditional or extrusion processing. International Journal of Food
Science and Technology. 34:391-399.


GUADARRAMA-LEZAMA AY, CARRILLO-NAVAS H, VERNON-CARTER E, and
ALVAREZ-RAMIREZ J. 2016. Rheological and thermal properties of dough and
textural and microstructural features of bread obtained from nixtamalized corn / wheat
flour blends. Journal of Cereal Science. 69:158-165.

GUTIERREZ-URIBE J, ROJAS-GARCIA C, GARCIA-LARA S, and SERNA-
SALDIVAR S. 2014. Effects of lime-cooking on carotenoids present in masa and
tortillas produced from different types of maize. Cereal Chemistry. 91(5): 508-512.

GWIRTZ J and GARCIA-CASAL MN. 2013. Processing maize flour and corn meal
products. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences. 1312(1):66-75.

HOSENEY RR. 1991. Protein in cereals. In Principles of Cereal Science and Technology.
American Association of Cereal Chemists Inc. St. Paul, Minnesota, US. 65-79.

JAMIA SB. 2014. True Grit from Corn Grits: Food of the Champions. Retrieved from
http://uplb.edu.ph/194-true-grit-from-comgrits food-of-the-champions on 5 April
2019.

JULIANTI E, RUSMARILIN G, RIDWANSYAH, and YUSRAINI E. 2017. Functional
and rheological properties of composite flour from sweet potato, maize, soybean and
xanthan gum. Journal of the Saudi Society of Agricultural Sciences. 16(2):171-177.

JUNIO L. 2018, PH losing P220-B yearly due to malnutrition. Philippine News Agency.
Retrieved from https://www.pna.gov.ph/articles/1022736 on 5 April 2019.

KATZ SH, HEDIGER ML, and VALLEROY LA. 1974, Traditional maize processing
techniques in the new world. Science. 184(4138):765-773.

LANTHIER S. 2013. Identification of economic and social outcomes of high-yielding
yellow com through commodity chain analysis: A case study in an upland area of
Bukidnon province, Philippines.

LARIA J, MEZA E, and PENA JL. 2007. Water and calcium uptake by corn kernel during
alkaline treatment with different temperature profiles. Journal of Food Engineering.
78:288-295.

LOBATO-CALLEROS C, HERNANDEZ-JAIMES C, CHAVEZ-EQUIVEL G, MERAZ
M, SOSA E, LARA VH, ALVAREZ-RAMIREZ J and VERNON-CARTER E).
2015. Effect of lime concentration on gelatinized maize starch dispersions properties.
Food Chemistry. 172:353-360.

LORETO A and ORIAS R. 2001. New products of future potential in the Philippines:
Cassava flour and grates. Retrieved from http://ciat-


library.ciat.cgiar.org/Articulos_CiaVasia/proceedings_workshop_00/587.pdf on 5
April 2019.

LUCES K. 2014. Genetically-Modified Crops, Fastest Adopted Technology in Recent
History Study. Retrieved from
http://www.gmanetwork.com/news/story/351702/scitech/science/genetically-
modified-cropsfastest-adopted-technology-in-recent-history-study on 5 April 2019.

MORENO RMM, FIGUEROA JDC, SANTIAGO-RAMOS D, VILLA GA, SANDOVAL
SJ, RAYAS-DUARTE P, VELES-MEDINA JJ, and MARTINEZ FLORES HE.
2015. The effect of different nixtamalisation processes on some physicochemical
properties, nutritional composition and glycemic index. Journal of Cereal Science.
65:140-146.

MARSHALL M. 2010. Ash Analysis. In S. S. Nielsen (4" Ed.), Food Analysis. 106-115.

MARTINEZ-TORRES C, TAYLOR P, LEETS I, TRAPPER E, RAMIREZ J, and
LAYRISSE M. 1987. Iron absorption from maize bread. Food and Nutrition
Bulletin. 9(4): 1-8.

MARTINEZ-FLORES HE, MARTINEZ-BUSTOS F, FIGUEROA JDC, GARCIA MER,
LOPEZ AMLB, GONZALEZ-HERNANDEZ J, and GARNICA-ROMO MG. 2002.
Physical properties and composition of femurs of rat fed with diets based on com
tortillas made from different processes. International Journal of Food Sciences and
Nutrition. 53(2): 155-162.

MARTINEZ-FLORES HE, GARNICA-ROMO MG, ROMERO VJU, and YAHUACA
JB. 2006. Evaluating the quality of lipids during alkaline cooking of com. Journal
of Food Lipids. 13:177-185.

MAURICE, M. 2010. Ash Analysis. Food Analysis. 105.

MAYA-CORTES DC, FIGUEROA CARDENAS JDD, GARNICA-ROMO MG,
CUEVAS-VILLANUEVA RA, CORTES-MARTINEZ R, VELES-MEDINA JJ and
MARTINEZ-FLORES HE. 2010. Whole-grain corn tortilla prepared using an
ecological nixtamalisation process and its impact on the nutritional value.
International Journal of Food Science and Technology. 45(1):23-28.

MENDEZ LIR, CARDENAS J, GOMEZ MR and LAGUNAS LLM. 2013. Nutraceutical
properties of flour and tortillas made with an ecological nixtamalization process.
Journal of Food Science. 78(10):1-6.

MENON L, MAJUMDAR SD, and RAVI U. 2014. Development and analysis of
composite flour bread. Journal of Food Science and Technology. 52(7):4156-4165.


MIN D and ELLEFSON W. 2010. Fat Analysis. In S. S. Nielsen (4" Ed.), Food Analysis.
106-115.

MORALES JC and GARCIA ZEPEDA RA. 2017. Effect of different corn processing
techniques in the nutritional composition of nixtamalized com tortillas. Journal of
Nutrition & Food Sciences. 7:580.

MORENO RMM, FIGUEROA JDC, SANTIAGO-RAMOS D, VILLA GA, SANDOVAL
SJ, RAYAS-DUARTE P, VELES-MEDINA JJ and FLORES HEM. 2015. The
effect of different nixtamalization processes on some physicochemical properties,
nutritional composition and glycemic index. Journal of Cereal Science. 65:140-146.

NAGARES N, HURTADA WA, RODRIGUEZ FM, and DIZON El. 2011. Nutritional
value, physico-chemical propertied and acceptability of rice (Oryza sativa L.)-com
(Zea mays L.) composites. Intemational System for Agricultural Science and
Technology. 20(1):2013-218.

NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF HEALTH. 2019. Zinc. Retrieved from
https://ods.od.nih. gov/factsheets/Zinc-HealthProfessional/ on 13 April 2019.

NUSS E and TANUMIHARDJO S. 2011. Quality protein maize for Africa: Closing the
protein inadequacy gap in vulnerable populations. Advances in Nutrition. 2(3):217-
224,

OCAMPO DM, COTTER J, PELEGRINA W, LLORIN VB, SORIANO Z and
BACONGUIS B. 2013. White Corn in the Philippines: Contaminated with
Genetically Modified Corn Varieties. Greenpeace. 1-26. Retrieved from
10.1177/1069397 16800300401 on 23 March 2019.

OCHEME OB, OLUDAMILOLA 00 and GLADYS ME. 2010. Effect of lime soaking
and cooking (nixtamalization) on the proximate, functional and some anti-nutritional
properties of millet flour. Assumption University Journal of Technology. 14(2):131-
138.

PAPPA MR and DE PALOMO PP. 2010. Effect of lime and wood ash on the
nixtamalization of maize and tortilla chemical and nutritional characteristics. Plant
Foods Human Nutrition. 65:130-135.

PAREDES-LOPEZ O and SAHAROPULOS ME. 1982. Scanning electronmicroscopy
studies of limed corn kernels for tortilla making. Journal of Food Technology.
17:687-693.


PHILIPPINE STATISTICS AUTHORITY. 2008. Underweight or chronic energy
deficient (CED). Retrieved from https://psa.gov.ph/content/underweight-or-chronic-
energy-deficient-ced on 5 April 2019.

PHILIPPINE STATISTICS AUTHORITY. 2016. Selected statistics on agriculture 2016.
Retrieved from
hitps://psa.gov.ph/sites/default/files/Selected%20Statistics%200n%20Agriculture%
202016.pdf on 5 April 2019.

PHILIPPINE STATISTICS AUTHORITY. 2017a. Consumption of selected agricultural
commodities in the Philippines Volume 1 — National and Regional. Retrieved from
Doi: https://psa.gov.ph/sites/default/files/2015-2016%20CSAC%20Voll.pdf on 5
April 2019.

PHILIPPINE STATISTICS AUTORITY. 2017b. Food consumption and nutrition.
Retrieved from
Doi:https://psa.gov.ph/sites/defaulv/files/ais_food_consumption_and_nutrition%2
017.pdf on 5 April 2019.

PHILIPPINE STATISTICS AUTHORITY. 2018. Food sufficiency and security report no.
2018-5. Retrieved from
https://psa.gov.phisites/defaulv/files/ais Food_Sufficiency_and_Security_2018.pdf.
on 5 April 2019.

PHILIPPINE STATISTICS AUTHORITY. 2019. Updates on palay, rice, and com prices
second week of ~— October 2019. Retrieved from
https://psa. gov. ph/sites/defaulvfiles/Updates%200n%20Palay%2C%20Rice%20and
%20Com%20Prices%2C%20October%202019%20%28Week%202%29.pdf on 5
April 2019.

PURIFICACION MV, PENTECOSTES KZ, BELTRAN AKM and LAUDE TP. 2018.
Nutritional Properties of Philippine Farmer-Bred Maize Varieties Nutritional
Properties of Philippine Farmer - Bred Maize Varieties. Philippine Journal of Crop
Science. 43(3):35-46.

RAGAEE S and ANDEL-AAL ESM. 2006. Pasting properties of starch and protein in
selected cereals and quality of their food products. Food Chemistry. 95(1):9-18.

RENDON R, BELLO-PEREZ L, OSAIO-DIAZ P, TOVAR J and PAREDES-LOPEZ O.
2002. Effect of storage time on invitro digestibility and resistant starch content of
nixtamal, masa, and tortilla. Cereal Chemistry. 79(3):340-344.



ROBLES-RAMIREZ M, FLORES-MORALES A and MORA-ESCOBEDO R. 2012.
Com tortillas: physicochemical, structural and functional changes. In Maize:
Cultivation, Uses and Health Benefits. 89-111.

SANDERSON J, WALL JS, DONALDSON GL and CAVINS JF. 1978. Effect of alkaline
processing of corn on its amino acids. Cereal Chemistry. 55(2): 204-213.

SANTIAGO-RAMOS D, FIGUEROA-C JDD and MARISCAL-MORENO RM. 2017.
Changes in the thermal and structural properties of maize starch during
nixtamalization and tortilla-making processes as affected by grain hardness. Journal
of Cereal Science. 74: 72-78.

SEFA-DEDAH S, CORNELIUS B, SAKYI-DAWSON E and AFOAKWA EO. 2004.
Effect of nixtamalization on the chemical and functional properties of maize. Food
Chemistry. 86(3):317-324.

SERNA-SALDIVAR SO, KNABE DA, ROONEY LW and TANKSLEY TD. 1987.
Effects of lime cooking on energy and protein digestibility of maize and sorghum.
Cereal Chemistry. 64:247-252.

SERNA-SALDIVAR SO. 2015. Maize: Foods from Maize. Encyclopedia of Food Grains:
Second Edition (2nd ed., Vol. 3-4). Elsevier Ltd. Retrieved from 10.1016/B978-0-12-
394437-5,00126-1 on 19 March 2019.

SHITTU TA, RAJI AO and SANNI LO. 2007. Bread from composite cassava-wheat flour:
A. Effect of baking time and temperature on some physical properties of bread loaf.
Food Research — International. 40(2):280-290. Retrieved from
10.1016/j.foodres.2006,10.012 on 15 October 2019.

SIMEON L. 2018. Philippines now 103% self-sufficient in yellow corn —Pifiol. Retrieved
from _ https://www.philstar.com/business/201 8/04/02/1 80184 I /philippines-now-
103-self-sufficient-yellow-corn-piol on 5 April 2019.

SURI DJ and TANUMIHARDJO SA. 2016. Effects of Different Processing Methods on
the Micronutrient and Phytochemical Contents of Maize: From A to Z.
Comprehensive Reviews in Food Science and Food Safety. 15(5):912-926. Retrieved
from 10.1111/1541-4337.12216 on 5 March 2019.

THANGARAJ, P. 2015. Proximate composition analysis. Pharmacological assays of
plant-based natural products. 21-31. Retrieved from 10.1007/978-3-319-26811-8 5
on 20 March 2019.


TRANSON J. 2017. Corn crops in Bukidnon, Philippines: Synthesis from field survey and
literature. LUCID Project — Social justice implications of land se change in the
Philippine uplands. 1-22.

UNITED NATIONS CHILDREN’S FUND (UNICEF). 2001. Causes of child
malnutrition. Retrieved from https://www.unicef.org/sowc98/figS.htm on 5 April
2019.

UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES LOS BANOS. 2017. IPB Var 6 com technology.
Retrieved from https://ovcre.uplb.edu.ph/research/our-technologies/article/185-ipb-
var-6-com on 5 April 2019.

WACHER C. 2003. Nixtamalization, a Mesoamerican technology to process maize at
small-scale with great potential for improving the nutritional quality of maize based
foods. Food based approaches for a healthy nutrition. 735-744.

WATSON SA. 2003, Description, development structure, and composition of the com
kernel. In Com: Chemistry and Technology (2"! Ed). 69-106.

WORLD FOOD BANK. 2018. The challenges of hidden hunger. Retrieved from
https://worldfoodbank.org/the-challenges-of-hidden-hunger/ on 5 April 2019.

YILMAZ E. 2004. An oil dilution technique used in small-scale frying to reduce oil
expenditure. Intemational Journal of Food Science & Technology. 39(3):245-251.
Retrieved from 10.1111/j.1365-2621.2004.00778.x on 27 October 2019.
