Assessment of Knowledge, Attitude and Practices of Adults on Cholesterol Management Towards Cardiovascular Health in CALABARZON Region

DIORELLA MARIE M. TRIA

UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES LOS BAÑOS

Master of Science in Applied Nutrition

APRIL 2019

ABSTRACT

High levels of total cholesterol (TC) are among the top significant contributing factor for
CVD. The public’s awareness of cholesterol at the community level is critical in potential
prevention and preparedness. The aim of this paper was to assess the level of knowledge, attitude
and practices (KAP) of adults (20-55 years) on cholesterol management and determine their risk
to CVD. KAP scores were predefined as high, moderate, low and very low risk. Majority
(N=263) of the population got good knowledge (85.2%), attitude (76.0%) and practice (71.9%)
scores. The assessment showed that female respondents and those at their 20’s had higher overall
KAP scores. High education and high earnings also contributed to lower risk to CVD.
Respondents who were active at work were better in attitude assessment. The result of the
correlation between knowledge, attitude and practice showed that there was significant
difference between the knowledge score points and attitude level (p-value: 0.0444) and also
between the attitude and practice level (p-value: 0.0208) of the respondents. Despite the gaps in
KAP measurement, respondents showed interest in cholesterol lowering interventions. Further studies are therefore necessary to fill with a more concrete resolution.

Keywords: knowledge, attitude, practice, cholesterol management, cardiovascular health,
CALABARZON, Philippines

CHAPTER I. INTRODUCTION

1.1 Background of the Study

Cardiovascular Disease (CVD) is still the leading cause of death in the Philippines
according to the Department of Health (DOH). The prevalence of diseases of vascular system
has shown a tremendous increase every year that is correlated to the common risk factors such as
smoking, stress, physical inactivity and unhealthy diet (Oommen, et.al, 2016). According to one
study, the annual mortality rate of CVD in the country has an average increase of 2.3% yearly.
And since 1990 up until the year of 2010, CVD cases across the country have increased by
52.2%, It has also been noted that mortality in both male and female in the Philippines is at
around 80 years of age but can happen as early as 5 years among children. Among the reported
top 5 risk factors that contributed to direct degradation of Filipino health are dietary risks, high
systolic blood pressure, tobacco smoking, high total cholesterol and environmental air pollution,
respectively (Graphiq, 2018). According to the same study, these risk factors were evidently

responsible to 89.8% of CVD-related death reports since the year of 2013.

On a global context, elevated low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) and high level
of total cholesterol (TC) are among the top significant contributing factor for CVD. Various
intervention trials and studies had shown promising evidences for the causative relation between
CVD and cholesterol. In addition, some clinical trials had established the safety use of lipid-
lowering drugs in successfully reducing CVD risk. Earlier treatment, as early as 30 years old, can
progressively improve the lowering of blood cholesterol level on CVD risk. This proves that
early screening and diagnosis of elevated LDL-C and TC are essential to successfully decrease

the CVD reported incidents. However, most adult population with high LDL-C and cholesterol

are undertreated and underdiagnosed. It has been also noted that for every percentage of
population who are at risk to CVD, almost 50% among the included are unaware of their
condition. The World Health Organization had also stated that only 36% is the average rate of

cholesterol awareness in both genders (Lee, 2014)

Wrong dissemination of information about CVD and cholesterol lowering treatments was
driven by the population’s poor knowledge about cholesterol. It is an alarming situation that even
those patients who are at high risks had poor compliance to cholesterol lowering therapy
(Catapano, et.al, 2015). One controversial movie released on year 2016 from Germany,
“Cholesterol: the Great Bluff”, received critics for its claims that cholesterol does not at all cause
heart diseases. It also highlighted that only smoking and having both high blood pressure and
sedentary way of living were the only causes to having heart failures and that having high blood
cholesterol was not one of them. The movie’s implication that cholesterol is an essential
compound produced by our bodies is correct. According to the study conducted by Hari (2015),
cholesterol is needed by our body to continue building healthy cells. However, the movie’s
another implication that lowering cholesterol is harmful for the human body received negative
feedbacks from viewers (Hall, 2017). Recent studies concluded that lowering cholesterol to
acceptable low levels is associated with improved health outcomes (Lee, 2014 & Oommen,
2016).

Social media technologies such as blogs, forums, and social networking sites are
becoming a reliable platform for sharing information to audiences regardless of stats and age.
The rapid spreading of information nationwide plays a vital role on affecting a person’s practices

and attitudes in terms of their awareness to their health being. According to the recent report by a

United Kingdom-based consultancy We Are Social, the Philippines had topped the world in
terms of social media usage. According to their 2018 report, a person spent an average of 3 hours
and 57 minutes a day on social media sites (Inquirer, 2018). And apart from social media,
Filipinos used the internet to access news sites and video propagandas of almost about anything
in the world. This report had led to the interest of many researchers about various awareness
level of every Filipino to any point of interest - the interest of how an adult is aware to a certain
subject considering the average allotment of a person in a social media is high and how this
awareness is connected to their habits and lifestyle.

CVD risk awareness was defined as one’s basic knowledge of CVD and what act can one
do, to lower the predicted risk. According to a study conducted among an adult population free
of Coronary Heart Disease (CHD), a risk-based approach was used for cholesterol- lowering
guidelines wherein goals and treatment initiation performance are lower for those at high risk
(Brown, et.al, 2013). The promotion of a change in healthier lifestyle will reduce CVD-related
long-term illness and disability by prevention and awareness. And it is an adept knowledge that
the population must be aware of CVD risks in order for them to adopt healthy lifestyle behaviors.
One study had stated that 40% of the general population underestimate their CVD risk and that
20% overestimate their risk (Woringer, 2017). False reassurance to one’s health status may
definitely lead to continuation of unhealthy behavior routine that can add to the progress of the
onset of the CVD.

The prevalence of hypercholesterolemia, which varies among population groups in every
region of the country, is based on established factors such as diet, exercise, lifestyle, age, family
history and adiposity. The association of these factors resulted to the summary overview of the

2015 Updating of FNRI that stated that there are 3 out of 10 (31.1%) adult Filipinos are at risk in

having elevated blood cholesterols in the body.

1.2 Significance of Study

High total cholesterol was one of the most prevalent cardiovascular risk factor among
adults worldwide. Cholesterol- lowering guidelines and other effective treatments had result to
reduction of cardiovascular incidents in various preventions.

‘A Knowledge, Attitude and Practices (KAP) surveys are a predefined questions that
provides access to quantitative and qualitative information. KAP survey can reveal
misconceptions and misunderstandings that may represent obstacles assessing every subject’s
general awareness to cholesterol management. On a clearer note, the KAP survey reveals what

was said but there may be considerable gaps between what is said and what is done.

The established uses of the KAP survey that is incorporated in this study are the following:
a. measure the extent of known situations to provide new tangents of reality;
b. enhance the knowledge, attitude, and practices of specific themes and identify
what is known and done about various health-related subjects;
c. establish baseline (reference value) for use in future assessment to help measure
effectiveness of health education and its ability to change health-related behaviors; and
d. suggest intervention strategy that reflects specific local circumstances and factors that

influence success of activities

The public’s awareness and knowledge of beneficial treatments for the risk factor

management of cholesterol at the community level are critical in potential prevention and

preparedness as a result of monitored everyday practice and routines. Thus, the aim to evaluate
the awareness, knowledge, attitude and practices of an adult to CVD risks are crucial. The
validated set of questions will accurately capture an individual’s views and will give the
researcher a more reliable data to measure what is intended to be measured in the study for where

the questionnaire might be used.

1.3 Objectives

The general aim of this paper is to assess the level of knowledge, attitude and practices of

adults on cholesterol management. Specific objectives are as follows:

1. to assess the overall risk to cardiovascular disease of adults according to
knowledge, attitude and practice;

2. to compare the level of knowledge, attitude and practices of cholesterol
management according to working mobility; and

3. to evaluate whether knowledge, attitude and practices on cholesterol

management vary according to profile characteristics of adults

1.4 Scope and Limitation

The result of the study was limited only to the working adults’ group selected and was not
to be conclusive to other groups of the same background. It only derived the area’s assessment

from the result of the pre-assessment and survey conducted in the study.

1.5 Date and Place of Study

The study was conducted in the region of CALABARZON formally known as Southern
Tagalog Mainland designated as region IV-A. The region comprises of five provinces namely
Cavite, Laguna, Batangas, Rizal, and Quezon. According to the latest digital data provided by the
Philippine Statistics Authority (PSA) (formerly the National Statistics Office (NSO)) released
this year 2018, the region is the most populous region in the country, having 12,583,009
inhabitants followed by Metro Manila with only 6% difference in total population. In addition to
being the most populous region in the country, CALABARZON is the 4" region with the highest
prevalence of obesity cases (34.2%) among all 17 regions. National Capital Region (NCR) is still
the first with 37.7% prevalent cases, followed by Cordillera Administrative Region (CAR) with

35.4%, and Davao as the 3" with 34.7% cases (FNRI Updating, 2015).

Due to the region’s proximity to Metro Manila, urbanization has taken place over the
years, And because of this, the region was known to be the sites of most food manufacturing and
high-tech industries. The study will focus on the top 3 provinces with the highest number of
populations among the region — Cavite (25.5%), Laguna (21.1%) and Batangas (18.7%) (PSA,
2018). Data collection will take place within the first semester until the I*' quarter of second

semester of academic year 2018 to 2019.

CHAPTER II. REVIEW OF RELATED LITERATURE

2.1 Overview of Cholesterol

Cholesterol is a component of a plasma membrane that is essential for life. It is a fatty
substance synthesized by enzyme HMG-CoA reductase and is a precursor of synthesis of steroid
hormones, bile acids, Vitamin D and substances that help in digesting food (Hari, 2015). There is
a substantial amount for cholesterol that will make a body healthy for it forms part of the cell
wall, making it an essential to produce hormones. But in today’s diet trends, more people are
engaged in overconsumption of food products, in which most of them don’t even know that they
are allowing their body to have cholesterol build up. The building up of cholesterol will harden

the arteries slowing down the flow of the blood from the heart throughout the body.

Abnormal cholesterol level such as hypercholesterolemia (high cholesterol) is highly
associated with cardiovascular and coronary heart disease incidents (Hari, 2015). The higher the
blood cholesterol level, the higher chance it is for an individual to likely develop a heart disease.
Too much cholesterol in the blood makes a person at risk to cardiovascular diseases because the
body is unable to remove excess amount of it. The unremoved cholesterol in the blood will
remain on the arterial walls, which will then form a fatty material called atheroma (Croi, 2014).
The build- up of atheroma (“atherosclerosis”) over time will narrow the arteries and may result to

CVD or CHD.

Cholesterol levels among the Filipinos are evidently increasing and is actually among the
top risk factors listed to contribute in deaths annually (Graphig, 2018). And unlike other
plausible risk factors, like family history or age, that may cause death in most Filipinos,

cholesterol level can be controlled. Environmental factors such as lifestyle and diet and the

involvement to physical activities are some of the few causes that plays an important role for
having an abnormal cholesterol levels. The reduction of saturated fat and cholesterol in diet will
lower blood cholesterol level, likewise adding healthy food to the routine. Inappropriate weight
management will also tend to increase the cholesterol level of the body, putting overweight and

obese individuals at higher risk.
2.2 Lipid Profile

According to the U.S. Department of Health, an individual aging from 20 years and above
should be well aware and concer to their own cholesterol numbers. It is a must fo r them to have
their cholesterol measured every 5 years and a lipid profile testing is one good example
(USDHHS, 2005). This is a preventive measure since having high cholesterol will not indicate
any symptoms, causing unaware individuals to be in a more dangerous health status, This kind of
test can give a detailed measurement of breakdown of an individual's total cholesterol (TC), High
Density Lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C), Low Density Lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) and

triglycerides (TG).

HDL cholesterol or good cholesterol is useful to remove LDL cholesterol or the bad
cholesterol from the arteries where it will be carried over to the liver for complete elimination.
And according to the information guide published by CROI, having a low LDL cholesterol is as
important as having high HDL cholesterol to have a well- functioning heart. In addition, Total
cholesterol comprises the good and the bad cholesterol and its level amount is used to primarily
assess an individual's risk to certain disease along with LDL and HDL cholesterol measurement
as combined indicators. Triglycerides are fatty-type substance found in blood. Its level amount

elevates with the increase consumption of sugary foods and alcoholic beverages (Hari, 2014).

Obese and diabetic patients are highly at risk to elevated TG and to development of heart-related
diseases. A lipid profile may be conducted at regular intervals to assess its efficacy for a
successful lifestyle change focusing on lipid-lowering therapy such as diet improvement and

physical activity involvement. Table | shows the ideal values for lipid profiling of an adult.

Table 1. Lipid Profile result values of an adult.

Desirable Borderline High risk
Total Cholesterol (TC) 200 mg/dl 200-239 mg/dl 240 mg/dl
Triglycerides (TG) <150 mg/dl 150-199 mg/dl 200-499 mg/dl
HDL Cholesterol 60 mg/dl 35-45 mg/dl <35 mg/dl
LDL Cholesterol 60-130 mg/dl 130-159 mg/dl 160-189 mg/dl
Cholestero/HDL ratio 4.0 5.0 6.0

‘Source: Diet Science Leader, retrieved from hiip: dietscienceleader.com blog 2013 07 20 unfold-your-lipid-profile

2.3 Blood Pressure and Cholesterol

Having some risk factors for cardiovascular diseases mean that there must be some
significant changes in one’s lifestyle that needs to be changed or monitored, According to the
latest study in the United States, there is a link in between high blood cholesterol and high blood
pressure that may lead to alarming condition to one’s cardiovascular health (Marzetti, 2018). The
presence of both factors in the body is likely to accelerate the development of CVD and its
related diseases. A pre-diagnosed individual for hypercholesterolemia must practice a more
cautious way of monitoring his BP results. According to a study published on Journal of

hypertension done on adults 40 to 59 years of age, there is a direct relation between dietary


cholesterol and systolic blood pressure but not on diastolic BP (Sakurai, 2011). Another study
done on adults with mean age of 57 + 8.3 in years showed that there is a significant positive
correlation of serum cholesterol with levels of diastolic blood pressure. The said study concluded
that the influence of blood cholesterol leads to the further development of hypertension in the
body (Behradmanesh, 2012). The following tables show the reading results of blood pressure

and ideal BP according to adult age.

Table 2. Low Blood Pressure range (Hypotension)

Systolic pressure(mm Hg) Diastolic pressure (mm Hg) Pressure Range
90 60 Borderline low blood pressure
60 40 Too low blood pressure
50 3 Dangerously low blood

pressure

Table 3. Normal Blood Pressure range

Systolic pressure (mm Hg) _ Diastolic pressure (mm Hg) Pressure Range
130 85 High normal blood pressure
120 80 Normal blood pressure

110 75 Low normal blood pressure


Table 4. High Blood Pressure range (Hypertension)

Systolic pressure (mm Hg) Diastolic pressure (mm Hg) Stages
210 120 Stage 4
180 110 Stage 3
160 100 Stage 2
140 90 Stage 1

Table 5. Normal Blood Pressure of adults according to Age.

Age (years) Systolic BP Diastolic BP
20-24 120 79
25-29 121 80
30-34 122 81
35-39 123 82
40-44 125 83
45-49 127 84
50-54 129 85
55-59 131 86
60+ 134 87

Source: Tables 2-5: Disabled World, 2017

2.4 Diet Trends and Cholesterol

People from the early times rely on endless search of food for survival. Many literatures
had said that the diet during those times consist of less fat in contrast to modern menu nowadays.
The diet of the Paleolithic hunters is believed to have approximately 35% meat and 65% plant

foods concluding that there was no consumption of cereals and dairy products at the said era


(Eaton, 1985). According to the same study, there are evidently low levels of fats found in hunted
wild animals for food source but considerably, wide varieties of plants, fruits and vegetables
were included in their diet. In contrast, plants today are less varied and fat contents to food are
almost everywhere.

According to the 8" National Nutrition Survey by the Food and Nutrition Research
Institute, the proportion of overweight individuals is gradually increasing among all adults today.
Three out of ten adult Filipinos are overweight or obese based from the said survey. Overweight
and obesity are considered major causative factor for many cardiovascular-related diseases.

People who are obese are at increased risk to CVD-related conditions such as high blood
pressure (hypertension), high LDL cholesterol, low HDL cholesterol, or high levels of
triglycerides dyslipidemia) (Bhaskaran, 2014). Diet-related non communicable diseases such as
hypertension, stroke, diabetes and hypercholesterolemia are relatively higher for adults
(Venkaiah, 2002). Today’s diet is shifting toward higher fat and lower carbohydrate content
intake in response to increasing awareness of adults into a healthier lifestyle. Today's
modemization, consumers finds processed foods such as canned, frozen, dehydrated, and
preserved foods to be as similar to unprocessed foods. Such given is highly unnatural sweetened
beverages resembling natural fruit juices (Hampe, 1964). According to Dr. Mandal, an unhealthy
diet is one of the modifiable risk factors for hypercholesterolemia and a balanced diet which is
Jow in saturated fats is one of the any suggested interventions. Today’s markets are convenient
enough to give the community easier access to thousands of food choices and those varieties of
processed food choices complicates the task of nutritional educators. The direct implications of

under and over eating to nutritional status is correlated to what the market offers today.

2.5 Smoking Trends and Cholesterol

The 8" NNS done by FNRI on 2013 had also gathered data on smoking status among
Filipino adults. According to the survey, there are 1 in 4 adults of 20 years and above of age are
current smokers. Moreover, there is a significant decline in the prevalence of smoking among
adults. FNRI had released the 2015 updating of the nutritional status across the nation. From the
data, 23% were said to be current smokers wherein male proportion was higher (42.8%) than
females (6.8%). Figure 1 shows the smoking status among Filipino adults from year 1998 to
2015. Also from the survey results, the proportions of current smokers were observed to be
insignificant between rural (23.1%) and urban areas (23.5%). Population from the poorest wealth
(29.1%) was observed to be greater consumers than the richest (17.9%). In addition, 39.7% of
adults have reported to have been exposed to secondhand smoke at home wherein rates are
higher among females (43.3%) than in males (35.5%). Significantly, 68.9% adults were exposed
to secondhand smoke outside their homes wherein rates are higher among males (74.8%) than in
females (63.9%). The combination of having high blood cholesterol in the body and smoking
habits increases one’s risk to cardiovascular-related conditions. According to a review that was
conducted on 45 areas from Europe, North America, Asia and Australia, quitting smoking is
associated in a rapid increase in HDL-C concentrations. The findings highlighted that some of
the adverse effects of smoking habits can be reversed at a progressive pace due to quitting. The
result strengthens the worldwide campaign for smokers to quit as early age as possible (Forey,

2013),


cr 637
59.2
50 545 55 54.3
x
g 40
5 —tNever Smokers
& 30 7 34.8 —BCurrent Smokers
. 31
co Former Smokers
ed 233
15.5
via 147 7
10.2
o
1998 2003 2008 2013 2015

Year of study

Figure 1. Distribution of smoking status among adults 20 years and over, Philippines, 1998-2015
(Source: FNRI: Updating, 2015)

2.6 Alcoholism Trends and Cholesterol

In developed countries, excessive alcohol use is a major cause of nutritional deficiency
and cardiovascular-related diseases because it is highly prevalent in urban and rural areas
Moderate consumption of alcoholic beverages may be beneficial to reduce risk to non-
communicable diseases but heavy use is associated with morbidity and mortality (Lieber, 1988)
According to the 2015 updating of nutritional status done by FNRI, 44.9% were currently
drinking alcoholic beverages. A higher proportion among males (69.1%) compared to females
(24.3%) of the current drinkers were observed, The age group that resulted to have the highest

proportion among adults was from 20 to 29.9 years with 50.9%, with ages 70 years and above as


the lowest (20.3%). Alcohol consumption in the country was highest in urban areas (48.3%)
among the richest (48.7%) of the population. Figure 2 shows the current alcoholic beverage
consumption status among Filipino adults.

According to a study about alcohol consumption, moderate alcohol intake is associated
with atherosclerosis risk due to increases HDL cholesterol concentrations. The study then
concluded that alcohol intake increases HDL-C in a dose-dependent manner (De Oliveira, 2000).

‘According to the same study, drinking more than the moderate amount can raise both cholesterol

and triglyceride levels
70 78.
69.8 69.1
R
8 50
& poe pi Ae all
340 as aug Male
E
30 Female
306 OS)
20 25.6 wane 243
a 98
1998 2003 2008 2013 2015

Year of study

Figure 2. Distribution of current alcohol drinking status among adults 20 years and over,
Philippines, 1998-2015 (Source: FNRI: Updating 2015)


2.7 Prevalence of Hypercholesterolemia in Philippines

There is a solid evidence that an elevated prevalence of hypercholesterolemia is found to
those group of individuals at high cardiovascular risk. The association of high levels of blood
cholesterol with CVD is the main reason of the significance of this high prevalence. According
to one study conducted in Spain, rates of lipid control are very low even to those patients who
receive pharmacological treatment in primary or even secondary level of prevention (Dela Sierra,
2015). The prevalence of hypercholesterolemia varies among population groups. Variations in
factors such as diet, exercise, lifestyle, age, family history and adiposity had led to different
measurements of the blood cholesterol through time. It has been also demonstrated that CVD
mortality is not significant to age because the difference of incidents to young adults compared

with older ones over time results a small gap recently (Lee, 2014).

According to the 2015 nutritional status updating of the FNRI, 3 out of 10 (31.1%) adult
Filipinos are overweight or obese, those who are more at risk at increasing cholesterol levels. The
same study had reported that among all regions of the country, National Capital Region (NCR-
37.7%), Cordillera Administrative Region (CAR-35.4%), Davao (34.7%), and CALABARZON
(34.2%) top the list of the prevalence of overweighVobese adults, respectively. The prevalence
rate of obesity was also measured by wealth index of the country for urban and rural areas
(35.7% urban; 26.2%-rural), giving the result of the richest group having a higher risk to
hypercholesterolemia over the poorest (43.7%crichest; 16.6%-poorest). Over all, there is an
increasing trend in the prevalence of overweight and obesity that is directly linked to
hypercholesterolemia. The survey also reveals that females within the borderline cholesterol
level are higher (35.2%) than on males (26.8%). There is a direct implication to different lifestyle
of both genders, In addition to the resulting rate of overweighVobese adults of 2015 updating

survey, a separate result for the prevalence of high waist-hip ratio was also reported. The


prevalence of obesity on high waist circumference was still highest among females (18.5%)
compared to males (30.0%). Evidently according to 8* NNS on 2013, about 61.9% of adults of
50 to 59 years of age have been suffering from borderline cholesterol, followed by adults aging
60 to 69 at 58.9%, then adults in their 70s at 57.5% and adults aging 40 to 49 at 51.5% ( NNS,
2013),

2.8 The Link between Cardiovascular Health and Cholesterol

The relationship of CVD and blood cholesterol has been established for many decades now. It
has been an alarming situation since the prevalence of CVD among the population is
progressively increasing, making it the leading cause to mortality worldwide. Evidently, the
management of cardiovascular health from every country has been a burden that is why
governments and international organizations have started to implement preventive actions on the
population level (Pajak, 2016). According to the database of FNRI, cardiovascular diseases are
accounted for 170,000 death incidents in the Philippines yearly. This data supports the existing
claim of the country that CVD is the leading cause of mortality rate among the Filipinos.
Evidences from various cohort studies in other countries have proven that HDL cholesterol is an
independent and inverse predictor of cardiovascular diseases which has a great impact in
increasing its prevalence rate. The relation between cholesterol and CVDs does not, however,
reach the extent that a claim to a successfully maintain the sufficient amount of cholesterol
needed by the body will lead to total alteration of the disease and its chance to mortality (Briel,

2009),


2.9 Treatment and Preventive Measures for Cholesterols

There are many therapeutic solutions worldwide for hypercholesterolemia that are widely
accessible and practiced to individuals most likely to be at risk to CVD and other diseases. The
proportion of morbidity and mortality of CVD are gradually reduced through early intervention
of cardiovascular risk factors. The enhanced way of living, sedentary lifestyles and unhealthy
dietary routines had widely contributed to the progress of age-standardized prevalence rate of
dyslipidemia or the abnormal amount of lipids (triglycerides, cholesterol and/or fat
phospholipids) in the blood (Zhang, 2017). The established standard treatment is based on diet
and lifestyle changes and medications to lower lipid levels.

However, a more advanced treatment and medication now are currently available to most
medical facilities of every country. An example is the use of statins as a lipid- lowering
medication and the use of ezetimibe, in cases of those who s how statin intolerance. Another
example of newly developed drug to lower lipid levels that are now being used to other countries
are named as monoclonal antibodies and kexin type 9 inhibitor. The established lipid- lowering
treatments and early screening evidently reduce the level of the so called bad cholesterol (LDL),
directly reducing CV mortality (Dela Sierra, 2015). Unfortunately, the treatment and control rate
to improve vascular health are not optimistic since the prevalence of CVD incidents has been
increasing. Some of the preventive measures that can be implemented are free screening
protocols, lifestyle modification, and increased publicity as well as proper dissemination of

information in regard to cardiovascular-related events in both urban and rural areas (Pan, 2016).


2.10 Awareness to Cardiovascular diseases and risk factors

CVDs are one of the top leading diseases that cause death rates to increase yearly around
the world. According to World Health Organization (WHO), about 17 million people died from
CVDs incurring a toll rate of 30% of the global burden. The importance of awareness of CVDs
and their risk factors will reduce the population's exposure to causative factors leading to
degradation of vascular health. More studies today across the world have assessed the knowledge
of children and adult populations regarding CVD. According to one survey in India, there is no
significant difference to lack of awareness of blood cholesterol level among non-educated and
educated people (Hari, 2015). Moreover, reported data on whether the Philippine population has
an adequate knowledge regarding CVD and risk factors is very limited that local government
today prioritizes the assessment of awareness to address the alarming public burden of CVDs
mortality rate. It is not known whether the relation among cardiovascular diseases, cholesterol
levels and their risk factors has reached the knowledge of the public within the nation.

The awareness of the general public will be a precondition for success in control of these
diseases (Aminde, 2017). The information about this will keep every individual engaged to adopt
health attitudes as their routine, to gradually reduce their own lifetime risk. Unfortunately,
growing misinformation towards cholesterol and CVDs are widely spread in public and in
various social media, It is another burden to keep in mind that individuals who are more aware
about risk factors of CVD and cholesterol importance were those with previous or existing
cardiovascular event (Frutuoso, 2016). This incident will defeat the sole purpose of preventing
cardiovascular events for those healthier populations. Informative programs are required urgently

to slow down the rising incidence of cardiovascular-related events.


2.11. Cardiovascular Disease Risk Factors and its early Prevention

Cardiovascular disease (CVD) is a broad term used to describe all conditions of linked
pathologies affecting the heart and the circulatory system of the body. Such conditions include
Coronary Heart Diseases (CHD), Coronary Artery Diseases (CAD), cerebrovascular diseases,
aortic aneurysms, peripheral artery disease, and many others (Stewart, 2017). CVD, despite the
significant progress to medical treatments and researches, remains the leading cause of morbidity
and mortality not only in the country but worldwide (Oommen, et.al, 2016). Treatments for CVD
both have health and social impacts in every individual. Financial resources will be the top
concern and a normal, worry-free life will be sacrificed if such health condition might occur to
one. This is the reason why prevention has played a vital role in the reduction of CVD morbidity
and mortality over the years (Kohli, 2014). One of the chances of an individual to recover his
normal health status is due to the slow occurrence of cardiovascular risks. A certain individual
can benefit from preventive interventions because CV risk progresses slowly over time.

Up to 90% of CVD may be prevented if risk factors are avoided. Local and international
programs with a common goal of reducing increased CVD rates have been widely spread and
being practiced around the globe. These are mainly focused on modifiable CVD risk factors
which can be controlled and minimized with altered behavior. People can lower their chances of
developing CVD by making certain lifestyle changes; however, possessing even just one or more
risk factors will be as otherwise.

A Cochrane Review concluded that specific interventions that aim for the reduction of
more than one cardiovascular risk factor have beneficial effects on blood pressure (to lessen the

chance of hypertension) and body mass index (to lessen the chance of obesity); however,


evidences were limited (Uthman, 2015). Another Cochrane Review found evidence that by
simply providing people with a cardiovascular disease risk score , may suggest reduction of CVD
risk factors by a small amount compared to usual care that is widely being practiced (Karmali,
2017).

Another study suggested that routine counseling is not recommended for adults without a
known diagnosis of hypertension, diabetes, hyperlipidemia, or cardiovascular disease because it
does not show evidences that doing so significantly alter the behavior to improve their lifestyle
(Moyer, 2012). The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) advises muscle
strengthening activities for 2 or more days a week and recommends 150 minutes of moderate
aerobic activity per week, or 75 minutes of vigorous aerobic activity (Stewart, 2017). The
established guideline states that any form of exercise shows evidence to CVD risk reduction.
According to the recommendations established by the American Heart Association (AHA) and
the Council on Clinical Cardiology, regular physical activity is a must and ust be started during
the early school years and throughout the lifespan of an individual. To follow on this, moderate-
intensity exercise for 30 or more minutes 5-7 days a week is recommended. However, to those
unable to give time to any types of a physical activity, a lower-intensity type of a workout for a
shorter duration of time can be followed as it is more preferable than to stay on a sedentary
lifestyle (Douglas, 2018).

The first step in prevention is always to assess a patient’s risk of having CVD. Risk
assessment is important to specifically determine the most suitable risk-reducing therapy.
Various studies have established different prevention strategy for high CV risk patients with the

attempts to simplify CV risk reduction into “ABC” format however varying in definitive


representations. The most common ABC approach stands for (A) Alc, to keep track on an
individual’s blood glucose; (B) Blood pressure, to keep track one’s risk to hypertension; and (C)
Cholesterol, to keep track the amount of fats in one’s blood (Gluckman, 2004). Alc is a test that
measures the level of hemoglobin to determine the blood sugar (to detect diabetes mellitus)
concentration of an individual. The American Diabetes Association (ADA) added the
hemoglobin Alc cutoffs for DM progression (ADA, 2018). The risk of CVD in diabetes mellitus
(DM) is estimated to be 2 to 10 times higher in general population (Hartz, 2018). Patients that are
at high risk to DM development are recommended to initiate lifestyle changes that focuses on
weight reduction, less intake of saturated fat (>10% of total energy consumed), increase in fiber
intake (15 g/1000 kcal), and moderate exercise (30 minutes/day) (Gluckman, 2004). The said
recommendations are benefial to both DM and prediabetes as primary and secondary prevention
step in reduction of CV risk.

Hypertriglyceridemia, as a type of a lipid disorder that impose a great risk to
cardiovascular health, denoted high blood levels of triglycerides (TG). Studies have shown a link
between elevated triglyceride levels and CV risk because it leads to atherosclerosis even in the
absence of hypercholesterolemia (Arca, 2017). According to NCEP/ATP III and AHA, <150
mg/dL (<1.7 mmol/L) is the normal borderline of TGs (Rygiel, 2018) and treatment is indicated
in patients with TG levels of >200 mg/dL (2.3 mmol/L) (Arca, 2017). Some studies have funded
ongoing trials to assess the efficacy of pemafibrate and omega-3 fatty acids for the treatment of
hypertriglyceridemia with evidences that it benefit in secondary prevention in CVD (Evans,
2018). Another study addresses the progressing impact of Pharmaceutical Care (PC)

interventions on clinical outcomes of patients who are at high risk to CVD and stresses also the


importance of cooperation between pharmacists and physicians that benefits the patients that they
handle (Rygiel, 2018).

Hypertension is one of the main cardiovascular risk factors which are treated by beta
blockers. One of the primary prevention is by the use of these drugs (beta blockers) to lower the
heart rate of a patient. These are used to reach the target blood pressure for CVD risk individuals
(<140/90 mmHg). The use of these drugs is recommended since it is far more affordable
compared to major procedures (e.g. bypass surgery) (Karunathilake, 2018). Proper lifestyle
modifications are the first step of preventive hypertension, rate of compliance to high
consumption of fruits and vegetables, regular exercises and maintaining desirable body weight
will increase, since doing so are all beneficial for blood pressure control. The same study also
found evidence that incorporating DASH (Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension) diet and
salt reduction lowers both systolic and diastolic blood pressure (Kokubo, 2014).

Dyslipidemia (abnormal level of blood lipids), and another type of lipid disorder, is the
most common cause of cardiovascular-related condition because it mainly leads to
atherosclerotic CVD (Karunathilake, 2018). Statins, or 3-Hydroxy-3-methyl-glutaryl-coenzyme
A reductase inhibitors, have been used for decades to manage blood lipids which can reduce the
so called bad cholesterol or LDL-C levels in the body. With its recognition worldwide, medical
groups such as the American Heart Association (AHA) recommend statins for primary
prevention of patients with serum LDL-C>4.9 mmol/L and other high-risk patients regardless of
risk profile (Piepoli, 2016). This lipid lowering drug that inhibits the body from creating
cholesterol can be also used in secondary prevention because study shows that its use can lower

mortality rate by 15-20% while lowering cardiovascular events efficiently. Although different


organizations conducted various studies about elevated levels of blood lipids, the current
classification schemes and treatment levels for the abnormal level of blood lipids are based on
the National Cholesterol Education Panel’s (NCEP) Adult Treatment Program-3 (ATP-II)
guidelines (Nelson, 2013), which includes the use of statins and other substitutes. However,
another study concluded that statins incompletely address CV risk due to mixed dyslipidemia and
suggested a combination therapy, with addition of a fibrate, ezetimibe, omega-3-fatty acids or
niacin, as a better alternative to lower the lipid levels in the body (Miller, 2009). Lifestyle
factors, including nutrition, supplementation, and modified diets, play an important role in
reducing cardiovascular risks as well. Different dietary approaches and supplements evidently
affect lipid levels despite of limited or no data to most interventions that reach clinical endpoints
(Tangney, 2018). Further studies are recommended to accumulate evidences for modified diets

proving its efficiency in lowering lipid levels in the body

2.12 Instrument development

A research, in general, requires collecting data. Analyzed data allows the researchers to
measure the variables needed in the study. Instrument is the general term that researchers use for
a measurement device (questionnaires, test, surveys, etc. ).

The instrument in gathering data is the key to a good research and according to one study,
the foundational element of reliability and validity of a study rests with a well-constructed
questionnaire (qualitative method) or to a survey (quantitative method) (Frary, 2002). The two
broad categories of an instrument are researcher-completed and subject-completed, in which

administered by researchers and completed by participants, respectively. Instrument chosen to


produce a measurement of a variable must be proven to hold a desirable degree of reliability and

validity.

Reliability

Reliability of an instrument measure the consistency of results regardless of the setting
although this testing does not assure of the accuracy of the data gathered. A reliable instrument is
proven to establish a measurement and procedure as replicated as such. Lack of reliability may

result to divergence or result (Bolarinwa, 2015)

Validity

Validity is a test defined to hold the degree to which a measurement measures what it is
intended to measure (Bolarinwa, 2015). These tests are divided into categories of internal and
external validities. Internal validity refers to accuracy level o n which the data from the research
itself is obtained while external validity refers to accuracy level on how data is obtained from the

subject samples.

2.13 Related published studies
Published cross-sectional study journals from 2010 were presented on table 6. The said
journals tackle related cholesterol awareness surveys with varying methods of data collection.

The study by Marzetti conducted on Italy used a questionnaire for specific assessments which

was developed based on previous experiences in similar surveys, The study by Upadhyay from
New York used the city health and nutrition examination survey 2004 for comparison. Results

showed the mean cholesterol levels in the city and the nation was similar. The study on China


and Korea used a structured pre-coded questionnaire designed according to age-standardized
protocol and techniques. The study by Hari on India administered a door to door visit to
determine cholesterol awareness rate using individual assessment and interviews. The study

concluded that only 29% are observed to be at the top list of awareness indicators.

——————

3]019359|049 syne] ‘aseosip
jo Aouanbasy Bunsay Joraysajoy> yeay dojanap
pue ssauaseme youd pidy pue —poojqso spuazy 04 Aaljiqudaasns pue pul ‘STOZ
Jo.ayel aBeyuaoieg on ewosul ON Joop 0y100q__——-joAouanbaiy —_jouaysajoyo pooig sory ‘e789 ‘Ue
jo7seIp
:BHuW 062
aBe 210xsAs
uo paseq quauneany HWW OPTS sjoraysajoys Jo1aysajou> Aanuns
pue ssauaseme raatsuayadAy —_aunssaud poojq pue was jayoudod)| uoneulwexa
‘sjoxaysajoyo (asaqo) ‘sajdwes pooq ‘wa —pazipiepueys ‘Aysuap-mo} Jeuonras e210 ‘ptOz
uinaas jo sjanaj ues wi/4 SZZING Jo uoneuuiayag -28y _yBIH jo juawaleuew “$5019 eye ‘a7
Wow 7O'T>>
sdnoiZa8e == -1GH pue 7/jowu. Suyjdwies pooq enwapidysAp
Suowe eiwapidyshp Ze'€<)-107 T/joww —pue quawainseaw quauissasse Jo Jonqu0> eulys
yossauaseme = O/T ZS91 “I/jowus d@ ‘asreuuonsanb: ewapidyjsAp pue quawjeas ‘Aanuns yseayyoN
puesadAyqusiayip —gTSzDL.: evaqU9 papoo-aid 404 sdnouB ‘ssauaseme [euonas ‘ct0z
Jo ayes aouayenaig e1wapidishq —paunyonuys jo asn ays. aBe Bullen ‘aouajenaid “sou Ye'ya ‘Bueyz
saoqpeid (moi) o9T>  _Aeains uoneunuexg yo1aysajou>
payodas-sjas (431y ‘pow) O€T> ONAN pue yyeaH 101 YY Jo jouyU0> ‘Aaruns: vsn
yum Suge ssauazeme (y1y) ooT> Jeuonen Bursn Jo1a3saj0y> puejuawjeay = uoeulwexa ‘YO, MON,
4o.ayed pue sana] —_(1p’Bu) sauyapind uostiedwios pue 707 yay ‘ssauaieme jeuonsas — ‘0TOz ‘132
Josaysajoys 1G] ueaW —=—J0483S9]0Y> II dl Byepyouonews; —_ pauyap-ill dlWV ‘anuajenaid “88019 “neAypedn,
(ua1y) opz< auleuuonsanb sjana|
(uaH Josaysajoy>
“pow) OpZ-007 payodar-sjas
aBequaciad ssauaseme (Jewou) o0z> — suaysueasal‘sioy0p —_ 0} uoswedwi0> Aanuns feu
JOuoeUMayep 10} :sal1089ye0(1p/3u) _—jeaipawAqajdoad —_u josaysajoy> jeuoysas — ‘gt0z ‘132
syinsas payiodal-sjas Janay o1aysajouD joquausssassy poo} [e101 1 “$5039 ‘mauew
Touayeduioy
eyUaseld syo-3np, yo S10,821puy aidos u3isaq Apms azunos

———

skeams ssouareae [019182049 poo|q mnoge sfeusnof Poysiignd “9 2142


2.14 Conceptual Framework
The conceptual framework below illustrates the causative relationships of factors to
adult’s risk for hypercholesterolemia based on published studies. Several similar socio-economic
factors are associated with the increase of risk to hypercholesterolemia leading to cardiovascular
diseases. Age, sex, educational attainment, household income, and civil status were positively

associated with a high prevalence of increasing cholesterol levels in the body (Marzetti, 2018).

Risk to Hypercholesterolemia

Poor Knowledge to Unhealthy Lifestyle
cholesterol and related © Smoking
risk © Alcoholism

© Low physical activity
© Non-initiative to visit
a physician

Socioeconomic Factors
© Age
© Sex
* Education
* Income
© Civil status

Figure 3. Conceptual framework of risk to hypercholesterolemia among adults


Unawareness to cholesterol and related risks imposed positive correlation to increased
tisk to CVD. Initiative to health care, balanced diet and sufficient knowledge about cholesterol,
result to have a positive feedback on decreasing chance of developing abnormal levels of
cholesterol. Findings from a study suggested that improved access to and engagement in medical
care improves health and reduce life-time cardiovascular risk (Zhang, 2017). And several studies
had proved the correlation of poor diet eating leading to obesity as a practice in which increases
tisk to many CV-related conditions such as hypertension (Bhaskaran, 2014). Poor dietary factors
are well known culprits behind overweight and obesity. And since there was no particular
assessment done to measure the respondents’ intake in this study, hence the dotted line on the
framework. In addition, a survey study concluded that awareness to cholesterol were
significantly lower in younger adults compared to older ones. Those younger adults with lower
rate of awareness have shown higher risk to CVD-related diseases, while the elderlies had shown
to be more in control of their cholesterol levels (Lee, 2014).

Unhealthy lifestyle can be attributed to low physical activity, smoking, alcoholism and
non- initiative to visit a medical doctor for check-ups and health updates. Adults, especially those
who are working, spend most of their times on their workplaces and no time to exercise anymore
or do any physical activities to keep them fit. Evidences from studies done on western countries
stated that the increase of intensity on physical activity is associated with lower BMI. In contrast,
lesser physical activity is correlated to higher BMI (Aminde, 2017). Smoking and alcoholism are
habits of people that even the government cannot totally stop. Most adults have become habitual
to this due to loaded schedule and work stress. Risk of obesity is higher to former and current

heavy smokers and heavy alcohol drinkers (8" NNS, 2013).

CHAPTER II. METHODOLOGY

3.1 Study Design

The assessment was a cross-sectional study that involved adults currently employed in a
company with varying work assignment. It was designed to determine the level of an individual’s
knowledge, attitude, and practices on cholesterol management. It was also designed to assess on
one’s risk to having an abnormal level of cholesterol in the body affecting his cardiovascular
health. A pre-developed 40-item questionnaire was given to every participant for them to

accomplish. (See Appendix A for the questionnaire).

3.2 Study Area

The study was conducted in the provinces of Cavite, Laguna and Batangas representing
the region of CALABARZON. The study focused on food companies as study sites since the
tegion is home to most food manufacturing industries (PSA, 2018). Company X, Y, and Z
represented the said provinces, respectively. The food industry covers a huge number of
diversified activities involved in creating various products from a wide range of sources. And as
a global regulation that must be strictly implied to food companies, health standards must be
followed. The health status of every employee of whatever work must be given priority to not put
the product quality and safety at risk for consumption when distributed outside the processing
area, Prolonged workings may result in health degradation. Every individual has different coping
Teactions based on different stress levels that they encounter on work, and this includes their
adapted habits and perceptions on their health and wellness over time (Kim, 2016). With this

being said, productivity, product quality, and employee morale may also suffer. Food industry

re dee ACY 31

businesses are continuously expanding every year due to the increasing demands of processed
food supplies. As a result, employment rate also increases, which means there is a good chance
that higher percentage of a population will be categorized under this type of work. Hence, it is
very important for the employers and employees in the food industry to gain and share their
knowledge, good attitude and practices to promote a healthier work area and lifestyle to render
good effect on food product outcomes that will be distributed to the community for
consumption. And since high total cholesterol was one of the most prevalent cause of death
among adults worldwide and that environmental factors, such as lifestyle, diet and involvement
to physical activities are some of the few causes that disrupt the normal levels of cholesterol in
the body, using food companies in the said region as a study site will give a more profound result

that can be improved furthermore afterwards. :

3.3 Study Subjects

The study targeted populations with eligibility criteria which included those who were
employed adults with age ranging from 20 to 55 years old and those who were not yet been
diagnosed with hypercholesterolemia and other severe chronic diseases. The participants were
categorized into 2 categories based on their usual mobility during work hours: (a) sedentary and
(b) active. In accordance to ACSM’s (American College of Sports Medicine) public health
guidelines for physical activity, “sedentary” is defined as lifestyle with moderate to intense
activities for atleast 30 minutes for <5 days/week and 25 days/week for “active” (Bennett, 2016),
These definitions of mobility determine the public health statistics of prevalence of sedentary

lifestyle which can be linked to various diseases. Categorization of subjects based on their


mobility during office hours was based on the type of job assigned to them in the company.

3.4 Sampling Procedure

Stratified random sampling (StRS) was used to select the participants in the study with
type of company and nature of their work as strata. The advantage of stratification of samples
includes (a) smaller error in estimation, (b) measurements become more manageable and/or
cheaper than when simple random sampling is used, and (c) existing relationships between the
subgroups was easily observed than when simple random sampling technique is used. In this
study, the use of stratification ensured that estimates were made with equal accuracy in different
regions. Selected employees from the company were included in the study by randomization.
Subjects representing each company were pre-assessed to ensure that they will satisfy the
requirements set on the general consent form and will be categorized as well according to their
work mobility.


Cochran’s formula (1), 29 = ma was used to determine the sample size of the study,

where, no is the sample size, z was the selected critical value of desired confidence level, p was
the estimated proportion of an attribute present in the population, q is 1- p and e was the desired
level of precision. The calculated sample size for a 95% confidence level and 5% marginal error
using the formula was 384. And since 384 exceeded the 5% value of the total population size

(834), the formula was reduced using Cochran's corrected formula (2), n = TEED where, ng
wT

was the sample size derived from the Cochran’s formula (1), and N was the total population size

of all strata, In order to implement stratified sampling, proportional allocation was done next to


divide the samples among the strata from the reduced population of 263. In this method, same
proportion of subjects from each stratum was drawn to serve as a sample. The equation,n, =
= xn, was used where, n, was the sample size for every stratum, Nx is the population of every
stratum, N was the total population of all strata, and n was the sample size computed using
Cochran’s corrected formula (De Smith, 2018). Table 7 shows the computed sample size for
every stratum.

Table 7. Computed sample size using Cochran’s formula.

Stratum of the Study

Population code x Y Z Total
N 156 41S 263 834
Proportion 0.19 0.50 0.32 1.0

n 49 131 83 263

N= population size, number of sampling units in ith strata
n= number of sampling units to be drawn from ith strata
3.5 Questionnaire: Development

The public’s awareness and knowledge of cholesterol at the community level are critical
in potential prevention and preparedness. Thus, a reliable and valid instrument to measure the
awareness, knowledge, attitude and practices of adult on cholesterol management was developed.
The development of the resulting 40-items questionnaire was carried out by a review among
published literatures from year 2010 up to the latest and was followed by expert panel reviews

and pilot testing. The key concepts used in searching related literatures for the drafting of the


questionnaire were guided by the following: (A) basic profile; (B) cholesterol knowledge (8
items); (C) foods and cholesterol (8 items); (D) cholesterol risk factors and practices (12 items);
and (E) attitude for a healthy lifestyle (12 items). The questionnaire was divided in these 5
sections. An expert panel comprised of a medical doctor, a statistician, and 3 health

professionals, were part of the systematic review in every stage of the revision.

3.6 Questionnaire: Validity and Relial

The developed questionnaire showed evidence of satisfactory reliability and validity. The
resulting 40- items questionnaire with satisfactory content validity (CVI20.80) was pilot-tested
on 50 random subjects (age range: 30-49 years) from San Pedro, Laguna April 25 and May | last
year 2018. Statistical analysis was done to interpret the gathered data. Cronbach’s alpha provided
a useful mode in analysis to determine the reliability of a certain item in its set (Bonett, 2015).
The Cronbach’s alpha for all the 5 sections of the questionnaire that undergone the analysis
resulted to have a value within acceptable and desirable range of 20.70. The aim of the pilot
testing was to determine the effectiveness of the structure and content of the questionnaire. The
Tesulting questionnaire, with the desirable reliability and validity, was used in determining the

level of awareness of an adult’s risk to hypercholesterolemia.

3.7 Variables of the Study

The next table shows the variables (categorized under dependent or independent) used in
the study. Dependent variable is defined as the variable that depends on other factors being
measured. These variables change as a result from the experimental outcome of the independent

variables. On the other hand, independent variable is defined as the stable variable which is not


affected by the other variables being measured. It is attributed to the condition of the

experimentation that is systematically manipulated by the investigator according to the study

design (Cramer, et al, 2010).

Table 8. Variables used in Data Collection

Variable Indicator Method of Assessment
DEPENDENT VARIABLES
Knowledge 2-item multiple choices (True Measured using the validated
or False) which were divided questionnaire from sections B &
into correct and incorrect c.
answer for scoring system.
Attitude Varying multiple choices __ Measured using self-assessment
which were divided into low & through the validated
high risk to questionnaire from section E.
hypercholesterolemia
categories for scoring system.
Practice Varying multiple choices Measured using self-assessment
which were divided into through the validated
healthier and unhealthier questionnaire from section D.
lifestyle categories for scoring
system.
INDEPENDENT VARIABLES
Sex Male Self-administered questionnaire
Female
Age 20-29 years Self-administered questionnaire
30-39 years
40-49 years
>50 years
Educational Attainment Elementary graduate Self-administered questionnaire
Highschool graduate
College level

College graduate
Post graduate



Monthly Household
Income

10,000 php Self-administered questionnaire
10,000-20,000 php
20,001-40,000 php

>40,000 php

Civil Status

Single Self-administered questionnaire
Married
Widowed

Working Mobility

Sedentary Evaluated according to ACSM's
Active guideline of physical activity

* (see Appendix B for scoring guide)

3.8 Operational definition of terms

Below are the technical terms that will be encountered before and during the completion

of the study, The corresponding definitions are intended on what the study aims to accomplish

Table 9. Operational definition of terms

Term Definition

Risk factors Variables that are associated with an increased risk of disease or
condition

Knowledge Definition:

(on cholesterol management)

Awareness or well-informed interest about maintaining normal
levels of cholesterol in the body

Good Knowledge Score:

A score point with >50% as the average (combined scores from
sections B & C) passing score which determines if a respondent
has background knowledge about cholesterol facts

Poor Knowledge Score:
A score point with <50% as the average (combined scores from
sections B & C)


Section B:
“Cholesterol Knowledge” section; an 8-item statements
constructed with true or false answer choices

Section C:
“Foods and Cholesterol” section; an 8-item statements
constructed with true or false answer choices

Attitude
(on cholesterol management)

Definition:

A settled way of thinking about the perception and what actions
‘one’s own should follow which would reflect his behavior
towards management

Good Attitude Score:
A score point with >50% as the average passing score which
determines if a respondent exhibits a lifestyle of being healthy

Poor Attitude Score:

A score point with <50% as the average which determines if a
respondent exhibits a lifestyle of being unhealthy as one of the
factors of CVDs

Section E:

“Attitude for a healthy lifestyle” section; a 12-item statements
constructed (with choices of: strongly agree, agree, disagree,
strongly disagree) to measure the level of good attitude score of
the respondents towards a healthier lifestyle

Practices
(on cholesterol management)

Definition:
Actual application of one’s repeated activity which in tum
becomes habit or routine

Good Practice Score:

A score point with >50% as the average passing score which
determines if a respondent is at low risk to
hypercholesterolemia



Poor Practice Score:
A score point with <50% as the average which determines if a
respondent is at high risk to hypercholesterolemia

Section D:

“Cholesterol Risk factors & Practices” section; a 12-item
questions constructed (with varying multiple choices) to
measure the level of good practice score of the respondents
towards cholesterol management

Overall KAP scores

Very low risk KAP score:
Passed in all knowledge, attitude and practice scores

Low risk KAP score:
Failed in either knowledge or attitude score

Moderate risk KAP score:
Failed in both knowledge and attitude scores

High risk KAP score:
Failed in all knowledge, attitude and practice scores or Failed in
practice score only

Instrument

Definition:
Assessment tool to measure the awareness, attitudes and
practices of working adults on cholesterol management

Valid Instrument:

It measures what the study intends to measure.

Determined using Content Validity Index with accepted value
of CVI > 0.80 as valid

Reliable Instrument:

It measures the consistency of results regardless of the setting,
Determined using Cronbach’s Alpha coefficient with accepted
value of a> 0,70 as reliable


Eligible subjects


Adults aging 20-55 years who are currently employed on the
selected company area or study site and who are not previously
diagnosed of hypercholesterolemia or related and/or severe
illness/condition.

Working mobility

Definition:

Usual mobility during work hours.

The 2 categories of works for the study will be:
(a) sedentary; and (b) active

Sedentary worker:
Defined as a personnel with lifestyle of moderate to intense
activities for atleast 30 minutes for <5 days/week

Active worker:
Defined as a personnel with lifestyle of moderate to intense
activities for atleast 30 minutes for >5 days/week

3.9 Data Collection, Processing and Encoding

Selected companies, Company X, Y, and Z, were surveyed prior to the study. A formal

letter was submitted to the office of their administration to request for permission and inform

them about the study and its objectives. After all of the formality took place, all employees that

were included in the final list were requested of their approval on taking part on the study.

Consent forms were distributed and the schedule for the data collection was given as well. Pre-

orientation was given to explain the content of the consent form and what the study intended to

aim and measure.


All data that were gathered from the survey were guided by the pre-developed
questionnaire which was tested for its validity and reliability. Gathered data were encoded using

Microsoft Word and Excel © 2010.

3.10 Statistical Analysis

Data were analyzed by the use of IBM SPSS v25.0. Summary statistics were done for all
data. Results for the response analysis were guided by the scoring system of the questionnaire
(see Appendix B). T-test was performed for independent variables to determine the difference of
risk level among adult employees with varying work mobility in terms of their mean knowledge.
The difference between the attitudes of sedentary and active workers was determined by
Wilcoxon rank-sum test. And for the difference among their varied chosen practices in life, Chi-
square test and graphical representations were used since under these comparisons are categorical
variables. Different statistical analyses were used to examine the relationship of risk to
hypercholesterolemia with the socioeconomic factors (age, sex, educational attainment, income,
civil status and occupation), unawareness to related risks (poor diet, lack of knowledge and non-
initiative to visit a physician), and unhealthy lifestyles (low physical activity, smoking and
alcoholism). Pearson’s correlation was used for interval or ratio data, Spearman’s correlation for
questions with ordinal items, Eta coefficient for nominal data, and Chi-square for the test of
independence among variables. Associations were considered significant at a value of p<0.05.

The table below shows the summary of the statistical tests used according to variables.

Table 10. Summary of the statistical tests used according to variables and KAP score points

‘Analysis Tnterpretation Variable/KAP
Eta 0-010 weak association Sex
(Coefficient) 0.11-0,30 moderate association Educational Attainment
>0.30 strong association

No computed p-value

Pearson’s correlation 0-0.20 very weak positive linear Age
(Coefficient) relationship

0.21-0.40 weak positive linear
relationship

0.41-0.60 moderate positive linear
relationship

0.61-0.80 strong positive linear
relationship

0.81-1.0 very strong positive
linear relationship

Significant: p-value<0.05
Not Significant: p-value>0.05

Spearman's correlation 0-0.20 very weak positive linear Monthly Income
(Coefficient) relationship Knowledge Score
0.21-0.40 weak positive linear Attitude Score
relationship Practice Score
0.41-0.60 moderate positive linear
relationship
0.61-0.80 strong positive linear
relationship

0.81-1.0 very strong positive
linear relationship

Significant: p-value<0.05
Not Significant: p-value>0.05

T-Test Significant: p-value<0.05 Working Mobility
Not Significant: p-value>0.05 (Knowledge Level)
Wilcoxon rank-sum Test Significant. p-value<0.05 Working Mobility
Not Significant: p-value>0.05 (Attitude Level)
Chi-square Significant: p-value<0.05 Working Mobility
Not Significant: p-value>0.05 Practice Level

Source: A comprehensive handbook of staustical concepts, echniques and software tools, 2018 Edison, De Smith, MJ


3.11 Ethical Considerations

This study was approved by the University of the East Ramon Magsaysay Memorial
Medical Center, Inc. with RIHS code: 0634/E/O/18/145 on 6 February 2019 before initiation of
the study. Data collection followed the correct methods of procedure. All the head authorities of
the different sites were contacted prior for the permission to conduct the survey and include their
company in the study. The personal space of the subjects was respected and consent was asked
prior to all data needed to be gathered. The use of subject code was strictly followed in data
encoding to avoid disclosure of persona. All filled out surveys and record sheets that were used
in the study were kept in a secure place. The encoded data copy was shared only to involved

researchers in the study.

CHAPTER IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

4.1 Profile Characteristics of Participants

Table 11 shows the sociodemographic data of the subjects (from section A of the
questionnaire). It shows that from the total of 263 participants, 48.3% were known to be male
while 51.7% were female. Studies have shown that there is a direct implication to different
lifestyle of both genders in terms of the quality of their lives (Aminde, 2017). Also, the local
survey revealed that females within the borderline cholesterol level are higher (35.2%) than on
males (26.8%) (FNRI: 2015 Updating). The mean age of the participants was 30 years old, with
20 as the youngest age recorded and 58 as the oldest. Age of an individual is one of the most
important risk factor determinants for cardiovascular diseases. Global organizations had
established that increasing age in years also escalates a person’s risk of developing different
heart diseases. Local survey from the country revealed that the highest of adult population of
which are 50 to 59 years of age have been suffering from borderline cholesterol (8 NNS,
2013). Moreover, 46.3% from the total subjects were reported to be college and post college
graduates and 43.4% have a source of income with not less than Php 20,000 per month. Among
all the subjects, 20.1% has a reported household monthly income below the average salary rate
in the country. Of the participants, 21.3% were married and are already parents while, 11.8%
were married but without any child. 3.4% were single parents and 62% were single without any
child. Meanwhile, from the total respondents, 4 (1.5%) were widowed. Sociodemographic
characteristics of an individual embodies opportunities and access to resources thus it is

established that higher or enough income can mean a lesser risk to unhealthy lifestyle. None


were previously or currently diagnosed with hypercholesterolemia and only 2.7% of all the
participants had declared that they are in a current maintenance for their medications.

Screened participants were surveyed and were asked to describe their job positions in
their respective companies to properly categorize them for their working mobility — either a
sedentary or an active worker. Below is the summary total of the respondents according to their
working mobility and demographic characteristics. The result showed that a higher percentage of

the population was considered to be active workers (61.6%).

Table 11. Profile characteristics of the respondents

Characteristics Indicators Total
Sex Male 127 (48.3%)
Female 136 (51.7%)
Age group 20-30 years 151 (57.4%)
31-40 years 84 (31.9%)
41-50 years 13 (4.9%)
>50 years 15 (5.7%)
Educational Attainment Elementary graduate 20.8%)
Highschool graduate 92 (35.0%)
College level 47 (17.9%)
College graduate 109 (41.4%)
Post graduate 13 (4.9%)
Monthly household income (php) <10,000 53 (20.1%)
10,000-20,000 96 (36.5%)
20,001-40,000 56 (21.3%)

>40,000 58 (22.1%)


Civil status Single (with child) 9 (3.4%)
Single (w/o child) 163 (62.0%)
Married (with child) 56 (21.3%)
Married (w/o child) 31 (11.8%)
Widowed (with child) 3(1.1%)
Widowed (w/o child) 1(0.4%)
Current maintenance in medications Yes. 7 (2.7%)
No 256 (97.3%)
Working Mobility Active 162 (61.6%)
Sedentary 101 (38.4%)

‘For Age characteristic: u- 30.4, Med - 28, Mo-.

4.2 KAP Scores of the Participants

4.2.1 Knowledge

The majority (85.2%) of participants had a good knowledge score. The knowledge on
how to properly manage cholesterol levels among respondents was high since most of the item
statements accumulated more than 50% of the correct answers. Two sections of the questionnaire
were constructed to measure the level of knowledge and awareness of every participant towards
cholesterol, and with the total of 16 questions, only 3 questions got an accumulated score of less
than 50% for the correct answers (Items K2, K6 and K16) (See Appendix C). The item with the
lowest score point (Item K16) from the respondents was about whether it is a fact to say that the
food is heart-healthy if it says “O mg cholesterol” in the product label. Only 35% of the
respondents got it correctly. Cholesterol free- labeled products, mostly not animal products, mean

that the food must contain fewer than 2 milligrams of cholesterol and 2 grams or less of saturated


fat per serving. However, consumption of strictly cholesterol-free foods does not reduce risk of
coronary disease events. The reduction of low density lipoprotein cholesterol still remains as part
of the lipid modifying interventions for a healthier well-being (Briel, 2009). Low average score
was followed by the statement (Item K2) about the fact that having high cholesterol numbers in
the body shows no symptoms at all, wherein only 46% of the respondents got it correctly. The
diagnosis of hypercholesterolemia can be based on the result of a medical examination and
family history. But since there are no established symptoms for elevated cholesterol numbers,
most people tend to have healthy lifestyle choices. The next low-score statement (Item K6) was
about asking whether or not the liver is considered the main organ in the body which produces
cholesterol. Only 49% of the respondents answered correctly. Although cholesterol level may
impose danger in one’s health, still it is needed by the body for hormone productions, vitamins
and for better digestion of food. Cholesterol production is so important that the liver produces
75% of it to keep the body healthy. And as a part of clinical management of CV risk,
consumption of omega-3 fatty acids to protect the liver can be helpful (Arca, 2017). The
statement (Item K8) with the most numbers of correct answers was about whether it is a fact that
even children can have high cholesterol level in their body, wherein 82% of the total respondents
got the statement correctly. Adults are not the only people affected by high cholesterol levels in
the body. Children may also develop hypercholesterolemia which can lead to various heart
diseases in the future. The average score for this item was a good indication that adult people can
make life choices that may lead to early prevention of elevated cholesterol level of their own
children or even for their younger relative. Moreover, majority of the respondents knows the

definition of cholesterol (80%) (Item K 1), the type of people who are at high risk to having high


cholesterol (79%) (Item K4), and the type of cholesterol and foods that may contribute to
hypercholesterolemia in the body (78%) (Items KS and K15). These high average scores for
every item also indicated that adult people were well aware that having an above the average
weight measurement, continuous consumptions of high-fat foods and not knowing the type of
cholesterol that one must maintain in the body, will increase the risk to developing high

cholesterol numbers in the body.

4.2.2 Attitude

Majority of the population (76.0%) also had a good attitude score that exhibits a lifestyle
towards being healthy in general. The respondents’ good attitude score points in managing
cholesterol levels were high since most of the statements that were used for assessment had
accumulated more than 50% good attitude answers. Section E of the questionnaire was used for
the attitude assessment with a total of 12 statement items. This section was constructed to assess
the intention of subjects to change every negative habit they have to improve their lifestyle for a
healthier one. All items have 4 choices which were categorized whether the choices they made
are for a healthier or unhealthier lifestyle. Two of the items got an almost perfect score point:
(Al) whether it is important to give some time to manage cholesterol (99.6%) and (A2) whether
doing exercise every day is important (99.6%) (See Appendix D). Physical activity improves
fitness level and myocardial perfusion. Several studies had concluded that physical inactivity is
associated with a two-fold increase in cardiovascular diseases and deaths (Moyer, et. al, 2012).
The high average score shows that most people give importance to doing exercises and managing
their own cholesterol levels. The highest score point was followed by the item (A8) stating the

willingness of every respondent to participate in any program for cholesterol management (92%).

Although more people are most likely to get involved by the government’s campaign towards
cholesterol management, the result of the Government Program Participation Component of the
recent local survey (FNRI Updating 2015) concluded that the need to a more innovative and
responsive strategies should be increased to encourage higher participation rate of every
individuals and households. The item (A9) with the lowest score, although it is still considered a
high score point, was about the respondents’ declaration of not having an extra time to educate
themselves regarding cholesterol management (55%). The prevalence of hypercholesterolemia
varies among population groups. Variations in factors such as exercise and lifestyle had led to

different measurements of the blood cholesterol through time.

4.2.3 Practice

Near to the result of Attitude score point, a high percentage (71.9%) overall, although the
lowest score rate among the KAP variables, was also observed to good practice score points
among the respondents. However, scores from some specific practice questions were relatively
low contrast to knowledge and attitude assessment (See Appendix E). From the results, 4 items
had accumulated average rate score of less than the 50% from the respondents (Items P1, P3, P4
and P6). The item (P5) with the highest score point (89%) was about the declaration of whether
the respondent had already experienced having a high blood pressure (>140/90 mm Hg). The
score point means that only 11% of the population had high risk to developing of
hypercholesterolemia using blood pressure as a risk factor. A good risk point item (P12) was
followed by the declaration about how often one is involved in stopping or reducing of the
consumption of alcoholic beverages (86%). The score point means that only 14% of the

Population had been into liquors more often than the recommended moderate drinking times. A

lower atherosclerosis risk is associated to moderate alcohol intake. Consumption of alcoholic
beverages increases High Density Lipoprotein Cholesterol (HDL-C) thus also increasing risk to
CVDs (De Oliveira, 2000). The next top scorer item (P11), 83%, was about the declaration of
how often one is involved in the consumption of smoking cigarettes. A high HDL-C
concentration has been consistently observed among smokers compared to non-smokers (Forey,
2013). The item (P6) with the lowest practice score (24%) was about how often respondents
measure their blood pressure rate. The score point means that majority of the population (76%)
have high risk to more cardiovascular diseases for not giving time to monitor their BP rates.
Studies have shown the correlation of Low Density Lipoprotein Cholesterol (LDL-C) with the
rate of blood pressure in which the hypertension development controls dyslipidemia
(Behradmanesh, 2012). Low score point item was followed by the question about how often one
gets his cholesterol checked (P3) and whether one knows his past or current cholesterol numbers
(P4). Both items only got an accumulated rate score of 38% respondents who think that checking
one’s own cholesterol numbers was as important as knowing one’s past or current number. The
score points mean that for both the questions, 72% of the population had their cholesterol
checked 3 years or more than or never and that they do not actually know their cholesterol
numbers or they have high level of it for the current time. These items depicted that majority are
at high risk to CVD-related diseases. Section D was more of a self-report section to assess how
much risk a respondent has to developing hypercholesterolemia. All choices from the 12 items
were categorized under low or high risk answers to determine the subjects’ perceived risk to
hypercholesterolemia. This part was intended to measure their intention to improved practices
asked about how often they should exercise, how will they monitor their diet and what kind of

diet best suits them, what will they do to lower their chance of developing hypercholesterolemia


and how confident are they to change their lifestyle for an improved one.

4.2.4 Overall KAP

Results indicate that 51.7% of the participants had a good overall KAP score and can be
considered to have very low risk of developing hypercholesterolemia. The KAP survey that was
used had provided a quantitative and qualitative data to assess the percentage rate of the
population who were at low and high risk to CVDs. A study had concluded that the combination
of unawareness, poor judgments and poor lifestyle choices promotes increased risk to developing
CVDs (Zhang, et al., 2017). However, 28.1% of the population was considerably at the highest
tisk of developing increased level of cholesterol in the body. This category was attributed to the
poor health practices of the respondents in accordance to everyday life choices they had to make.
Unhealthy lifestyle towards the development of CVDs from the poor practice assessment was
concluded by low physical activity, high involvement to smoking and alcoholism, and low
involvement to seeking medical assistance. And since CVD is still the leading cause of death in
the country, the association of the increasing prevalence of vascular system diseases and the
common risk factors involved was getting a lot more attention to the public health (Oomen, et al.,
2016). High prevalence rate of CVD and other related diseases in the country was driven by the
population’s limited knowledge, poor attitude and practices on cholesterol management
(Catapano, et al., 2015). Table 12 shows the overall score rates of KAP assessment of the
participants. Results show that although the highest percentage of the population were those who
had the lowest risk to hypercholesterolemia, there are more respondents who got high risk scores

compared to the combined rate of low and moderate risk score. “Very low risk” scores were


attributed to good combined scores of KAP, while “low risk” score was attributed to having a
failed score to either knowledge or attitude assessment. In addition, “moderate risk” score was
attributed to having failed scores to both knowledge and attitude assessment, while “high risk”

score was attributed to either failed scores to all KAP or only to practice assessment.

Table 12. Overall score rates for Knowledge, Attitude and Practice

Variable Score Points N%
Knowledge Good score 224 (85.2%)
Poor score 39 (14.8%)
Attitude Good score 200 (76.0%)
Poor score 63 (24.0%)
Practice Good score 189 (71.9%)
Poor score 74 (28.1%)
‘Overall KAP™ Very low risk score 136 (51.7%)
Low risk score 46 (17.5%)

Moderate risk score 72.7%)

High risk score 74 (28.1%)

"*See Table 9 for Overall KAP scores definition

4.3 Summary Statistics of KAP according to working mobility

Following ACSM’s (American College of Sports Medicine) guidelines for physical
activity, 61.6% of the respondents were considered to be active workers, while, 38.4% were
sedentary workers (see table 11 for profile characteristics of the respondents). Results show that
more than half of the population were considered to be active workers or those who work for

atleast 30 minutes for more than or equal to 5 day every week. Most of the active workers were

from the production team while most of the sedentary workers were the supervisors.

To compare the level of knowledge by working mobility, T-test for independent samples
were applied. Statistical result showed that the result score of active and sedentary workers were
significant with each other which imply that the mean knowledge of the 2 groups was of the
different level (p>0.05). To compare the attitude level of active and sedentary workers, Wilcoxon
Rank Sum test for non-parametric samples was applied. Statistical result showed that the result score
of active and sedentary workers were not significant with each other which implies that the median
attitude of the two groups are of the same level (p>0.05). Lastly, to compare the level of practice of
the respondents according to working mobility, Chi-square test for independent samples was
applied. Statistical result showed that the result score of active and sedentary workers are not
significant with each other which implies that the mean practice value of the 2 working groups
was of the same level (p>0.05) as well. Table 13 shows the summary statistics of KAP scores

according to working mobility.

Table 13. Summary statistics of KAP according to working mobility

‘Active Sedentary
Respondents with Respondents with

good KAP scores good KAP scores Statistical Analysis

129 (79.6%) 95 (94.1%) P-value-0 0382
KNOWLEDGE. Interpretation: Significant
128 (79.0%) 72 (71.3%) p-value: 0.1072
ATTITUDE Interpretation: Not Significant
PRACTICE 109 (67.3%) 80 (79.2%) ‘p-value:0.3285

Interpretation: Not Significant

percentage is based from the total sub popul ind sedentary workers


The results implied that the intensity of the physical activity done in everyday life was
associated only with a more favorable level of knowledge and not on both the attitude and level
of practice on cholesterol management. Over time, physical activity has been inversely related to
fatal and non-fatal CVDs (Shiroma, 2010). The awareness of the population about the benefits of
the treatments for the risk factors of increased levels of cholesterol is critical in the prevention of
CVD fatality. There were very limited data on whether the Philippine population is well adept on
the knowledge about properly managing cholesterol levels in the body. And also, data about the
correlation of awareness and physical activity as a preventive measure to hypercholesterolemia
towards CVD were limited as well. Several studies had shown the positive correlation of good
knowledge and low risk to CVD development, however, there were studies that showed no
significant difference to lack of awareness to blood cholesterol levels among those who were
educated and non-educated (Hari, 2015). According to a cross-sectional study done in America,
the association between sedentary behaviors and the development of CVD (and other negative
health outcomes) were constantly drawing attention to the public (Healy, 2011). From the
outcomes of several studies done about the correlation of awareness and the intensity of physical
activity as a preventive measure to vascular diseases, it can be said that high risks to CVD
fatality can be attributed to very low prevalence of cholesterol awareness and low intensity of
body movements. The ACSM’s guidelines for physical activity, which defines active as lifestyle
with moderate to intense activities for atleast 30 minutes for >5 days per week and <5 days per
week for sedentary, had established a standard measurement for a more comparable assessment
worldwide. Another study had concluded that activities undertaken in a sedentary way can be

unfavorably associated with ideal cardiovascular health (Crichton, 2014). In addition, another


study had implied that cholesterol levels decreased in a linear pattem with increasing duration of
intense physical activity (Crichton, 2015). However, the result from the same study had also
concluded that there were no significant associations found between the cholesterol levels and
the duration of the physical activity regardless of its intensity. In relation to lifestyle
modification, the results also implied that health attitude and practices of active workers were on
an unexpected lower level of percentage since there was no difference among sedentary workers.
The results of attitude and practice level on cholesterol management not having significant
difference between active and sedentary workers can be attributed to poor compliance with
lifestyle changes despite of the extensive literature and counsellings available today about health
improvement to lower one’s risk to hypercholesterolemia and CVDs (Mannu, et al., 2013). Based
from the same study, several factors that can contribute to poor compliance on lifestyle changes
may include poor motivation, poor cognition, inaccurate health beliefs and lack of clinical
checkups. For the prevention of hypercholesterolemia, target cholesterol levels set out in various
guidelines could be achieved if improvements on health attitude and practice are being focused
on. The results also implied that those with negative health attitude and practice on cholesterol
management can impose higher risk to CVD development or fatality.

In addition to the statistical result of the KAP scores of respondents according to
mobility, graphical representations (See Appendix F) were used to show the comparison of
practices between the two categories of work since bad practice scores are more critical to the
tisk of CVD development than on attitude scores. Results showed that 40% of the respondents
who are active think that they have low risk to developing stroke thus at having high cholesterol

levels as well. Among the respondents who were categorized as sedentary workers, 49% think


the same. Those who believe that they have higher risk to developing stroke than others, 21%
were active while 13% were sedentary respondents. Higher percentages of the population think
of themselves of having moderate risk to cardiovascular-related diseases (21%: active, 28%:
sedentary). From the total population, 30% declared to have no idea of the possibility of whether
or not to develop a stroke. Another factor to see is 45% of the sedentary group has immediate
family members with diagnosed hypercholesterolemia while only 22% of the active group has it
in their families. A big percentage, however, have declared of never having the time to get their
cholesterol numbers checked, in which active workers have higher rate (48%) compared to the
other group of workers (33%). The majority of the total respondents (90%: active; 86%:
sedentary) reported that they never had the occurrence of having blood pressure above the
normal rate. In relation to this, majority of the respondents have their BP measurement only
when a physician instructed them to do so. Diet and body weight are related to wide branch of
health status. As established as it is, self-monitoring plays a big role in reducing risks for many
health conditions. Another finding of this study showed that a total of 60% of the active group
monitors their weight few times a week or monthly and that also 60% of the sedentary workers
do the same. A good indication is showed since majority of the population (67%: active; 52%:
sedentary) have normal weight status for the current time. In addition, only 18% and 13% of the
active and sedentary respondents, respectively, never do exercises in a separate time from their
work hours. The combinations of having bad smoking and alcoholic drinking habits with having
high cholesterols in the body not only increase one’s risk to cardiovascular-related conditions but
also to a lower quality of life. Following the main findings of the national survey (FNRI

Updating 2015), there are | in 4 adults of 20 years and above of age are current smokers but


evidently, there is a significant decline in the prevalence of smoking among adults, In addition to
this survey, 44.9% were currently alcoholic drinkers with a higher proportion among males
(69.1%). In this study, results revealed that majority of the active (77%) and sedentary (76%)
respondents, with at almost equal rate, had never been engaged into the lifestyle of smoking
However, the population is distributed to how often they are involved in drinking alcoholic

beverages with a very low rate on weekly drinking (active: 13%; sedentary: 12%).

4.4 Correlation of KAP according to characteristics of respondents

4.4.1. Knowledge

The public’s awareness of cardio vascular-related diseases plays a vital role for risk factor
management. The importance of awareness will lead to potential prevention and preparedness to
CVDs. Thus, the aim to evaluate the knowledge level, attitude and practices reveal the current
cholesterol management awareness of the population.

Results showed that the level of knowledge is significant to the monthly household
income (p-value: 0.0050) and working mobility (p-value: 0.0382) of the respondents.
Meanwhile, that variables of sex (coefficient value: 0.1820), educational attainment (coefficient
value: 0.2550), and status (coefficient value: 0.2330) showed a moderate association to the
score points among all socioeconomic factors that needs to be considered towards cholesterol

management (see tables 14 and 15).

Table 14. Knowledge scores according to respondent characteristics

Respondents Respondents
Characteristics N(%)* with Good with Bad
Scores (%)"” Scores (%) “”

ALL 263 (100%) 224 (85.2%) 39 (14.8%)
Sex

Male 127 (48.3%) 102 (80.3%) 25 (19.7%)

Female 136 (51.7%) 122 (89.7%) 14 (10.3%)
Age (years)

20-29 151 67.4%) 137 (90.9%) 149.3%)

30-39 84 (31.9%) 69 (82.1%) 15 (17.9%)

40-49 13 (4.9%) 7 (53.8%) 6 (46.2%)

250 15 (5.7%) 11 (73.3%) 4 (26.7%)
Educational Attainment

Elementary Graduate 2(0.8%) 1 (50%) 1 (50%)

High school Graduate 92 (35.0%) 72 (78.3%) 20 (21.7%)

College Level 47 (17.9%) 37 (78.7%) 10 (21.3%)

College Graduate 109 (41.4%) 101 (92.7%) 8 (7.3%)

Post Graduate 13 (4.9%) 13 (100%) 0 (0%)
Monthly Household Income (Php)

<10,000 53 (20.1%) 46 (86.8%) 7(13.2%)

10,000-20,000 96 (36.5%) 79 (82.3%) 17 (17.7%)

20,001-40,000 56 (21.3%) 43 (76.8%) 13 (23.2%)

>40,000 58 (22.1%) 56 (96.6%) 2 (3.4%)
Civil Status

Single 172 (65.4%) 151 (87.8%) 21 (12.2%)

Married 87 (33.1%) 69 (79.3%) 18 (20.7%)

Widowed 4 (1.5%) 4 (100%) 0 (0%)
Working Mobility

Active 162 (61.6%) 129 (79.6%) 33 (20.4%)

Sedentary 101 (38.4%) 95 (94.1%) 6 (5.9%)

[%e- rate oul of the tolal population of the study (N- 263)

** Good/Bad score% - rate out of the total categorized subpopulation

Table 15. Summary statistics for the correlation of knowledge to respondent characteristics

Characteristics ‘Analysis Coefficient p-value Interpretation
Sex Eta coefficient 0.1820 Moderate association
Age Pearson’s correlation -0.1180 0.0570 Not Significant
Educational Eta coefficient 0.2550 Moderate association
Attainment.

Monthly Household _ Spearman's “0.1710 0.0050 Significant

Income (Php) correlation

Civil Status Eta coefficient 0.2330 Moderate association
Working Mobility T-test - 0.0382 Significant

Those who got an average score of >50% from the measurement of knowledge, were
considered under the well-knowledge population. From table14, all the sub groups of indicators
for the income had respondents who got good score points at >50% wherein, those who earned
above Php 40,000 had the highest passing rate of 96.6%. Respondents who earned from Php
20,001-40,000 got the lowest passing rate on the other hand. Data were determined using
Spearman’s correlation analysis, which also indicated that the factor of income (coefficient value:
-0.1710) had a very weak positive linear relationship to the level of knowledge. Level of
knowledge among the respondents varies from monetary earnings, with population from the
highest earnings also had the highest level of knowledge towards cholesterol (Frutuoso, 2016).
This indicated that higher income results to more means of educating one’s self about cholesterol
management and its risk factors. With the emerging advanced technologies today and big

impacts from social media wherein young adults are most likely to be active, information about


cholesterol management can easily reach them. As opposing to the scores of the highest earners,
with the lowest average points, those who eam from 20,001 up to 40,000 in peso, indicated that,
although can still be categorized under high earners next to the Php 40,000 eamers, had fewer
initiative, resources and chances to get themselves updated or aware about everything related to
CVD and cholesterol. Evidently, there is an existing significant gap in the level of awareness to
the adult population about CVDs (Aminde, 2017). The awareness levels of CVD risk factors
were relatively high but the differences were observed to different age group. The results on the
correlation of mobility to level of knowledge, however, implied that the intensity of the physical
activity was associated on how well adept a person is about cholesterol management. The
association between sedentary behaviors and the development of CVD is gaining much attention
today especially that the current prevalence on obesity and mortality brought about by physical
inactivity is continuously uprising (Healy, 2011). High risks to CVD mortality can be attributed
to very limited level of cholesterol awareness and low intensity of body movements (Scherer,
2006).

‘A number of sex differences were observed with respect to knowledge assessment
towards cholesterol management, in general wherein 89.7% of the total female population among
the respondents reached the average target score, while 80.3% of the male population had
achieved the same goal. Evidently, the national survey (FNRI Updating 2015) revealed that most
of the population who are at lower risk to CV-related diseases is women. Higher percentage of
women have normal blood pressure (M: 32.1%; F: 47.8%) and more males have hypertension
cases (pre-hypertension- M: 40.4%, F: 31.4%; Hypertension stage 1-M: 18.3%, F: 13.1%;

Hypertension stage 2-M: 9.2%, F: 7.7%). From the same survey about behavioral risk factors,


higher percentage of male is report to be smoking (M: 42.8%; F: 6.8%), alcoholic drinking (M:
69.1%; F: 24.3%) and in unhealthy diet routines (M: 77.4%; F: 71%). These results also revealed
that level of awareness towards cholesterol management is lower among males since they tend to
engage in activities that are at high risk to developing CVDs. Level of knowledge according to
the education also showed a moderate association towards the average score points among the
respondents (coefficient: 0.2550). And according to the civil status of an individual, which result
showed to have an association to the level of knowledge score points of the respondents, 57.4%
of the population who reached the average target score of >50% were single regardless of
whether they have children or none, 26.2% were married, and only 1.5% for the widowed
respondents. The result implied that, although level of responsibilities in one’s life is
immeasurable, married respondents are committed to dedicate most of their time to their families.
The higher percentage of awareness level from single respondents showed that they have more
means to gain or retain their knowledge about cholesterol management than to those with a more

solid obligation.

4.4.2, Attitude

The result for the evaluation of attitude showed that the variable monthly household
income (p-value: 0.0190) had significant difference to the median score of the set and that sex
(coefficient value: 0.1770), educational attainment (coefficient value: 0.2810) and status
(coefficient value: 0.1340) showed a moderate association to the score points among all

socioeconomic factors towards cholesterol management (see tables 16 and 17),

Using Spearman’s correlation analysis, the variable of monthly household income
(coefficient value: 0.1446) indicated a very weak positive linear relationship to the level of
attitude of the respondents. Those who got an average score point of >50% from the
measurement of attitude, were considered part of the population with “good” cholesterol

management attitude. The following were the result of the good attitude score points.

Table 16. Attitude scores according to respondent characteristics

Respondents Respondents

Characteristics N(%)* with Good with Bad
Scores (%)“* Scores (%)**
“ALL—S~S~S~™SOCSCSCSCSCSCSC« (OM) —_—200 (76.0%) TRA.) ——_
Sex
Male 127 (48.3%) 90 (70.9%) 37 (29.1%)
Female 136 (51.7%) 110 (80.9%) 26 (19.1%)
Age (years)
20-29 151 (67.4%) 117 (77.5%) 34 (22.5%)
30-39 84 (31.9%) 61 (72.6%) 23 (27.4%)
40-49 13 (4.9%) 9 (69.2%) 4 (30.8%)
>50 15 (5.7%) 13 (86.7%) 2(13.3%)
Educational Attainment
Elementary Graduate 2 (0.8%) 2 (100%) 0 (0%)
High school Graduate 92 (35.0%) 56 (60.9%) 36 (39.1%)
College Level 47 (17.9%) 39 (83.0%) 8 (7.0%)
College Graduate 109 (41.4%) 91 (83.5%) 18 (16.5%)
Post Graduate 13 (4.9%) 12 (92.3%) 17.7%)
Monthly Household Income (Php)
<10,000 53 (20.1%) 39 (73.6%) 14 (26.4%)
10,000-20,000 65 (67.7%) 31 (32.3%)
20,001-40,000 41 (73.2%) 15 (26.8%)

>40,000 58 (22.1%) 55 (94.8%) 3 (%5.2)



Civil Status
Single 172 (65.4%) 133 (77.3%) 39 (22.7%)
Married 87 (33.1%) 63 (72.4%) 24 (27.6%)
Widowed 4 (1.5%) 4 (100%) 00%)

Working Mobility
Active 162 (61.6%) 128 (79.0%) 34 (21.0%)
Sedentary 101 (38.4%) 72.(11.3%) 29 (28.7%)

"*N%- rate out of the total population of the study (N= 263)
** Good/Bad score% - rate out of the total categorized subpopulation

Table 17. Summary statistics for the correlation of attitude to respondent characteristics

Characteristics Analysis Coefficient p-value Interpretation
Sex Eta coefficient 0.1770 - Moderate association
Age Pearson’s correlation 0.0223 0.7194 Not Significant
Educational Eta coefficient 0.2810 - Moderate association
Attainment
Monthly Household = Spearman’s 0.1446 0.0190 Significant
Income (Php) correlation
Civil Status Eta coefficient 0.1340 - Moderate association
Working Mobility —T-test - 0.1072 Not Significant

The respondents that got the highest scores from the variable of household income
indicated that those who earned from 10,000 to 20,000 in Philippine currency were more likely to
impose good attitude towards cholesterol management compared to the other subgroups. This
result also implied to the purchasing power of every individual to access the resources in lacking,
enough or excessive amount. Going back to the latest survey done by the FNRI (Updating 2015),
high prevalence of obesity among adults was found in the rich (37.0%) and richest (43.7%) group

of population nationwide. The survey also revealed that an even higher percentage of the rich


(93.1%) and the richest (90.1%) group of people in the country have an unhealthy eating habit in
their households. Comparison with national survey also showed that the highest prevalence of
smokers was observed among the poorest (29.1%) and the poor (26.6%) wealth group of
population. The proportion of current smokers in the country decreases as socioeconomic status
improves. However, the proportion of current alcohol drinkers among adults, increases as the
status improves. Highest percentage of drinkers was those who belong from the rich (46.9%) and
the richest (48.7%) wealth status. And according to the civil status, which result showed to have
an association to the level of attitude score points of the respondents, 50.6% of the population
who were single reached the average target score of >50%.

Respondents with positive health attitudes are mostly grouped under the low risk
population towards CVD fatality (Robinson, et al., 2009). Most studies of CVD involving
attitude assessments correlates socioeconomic factors that may directly or indirectly influence
health improvement (Tindle, 2011). The result indicated that the level of attitude among the
respondents varies from subgroups of the population under the variable of educational attainment
and subgroups of monthly household income. Results also varied to sex differences and the civil
status of the respondents. The respondents that got the highest scores from the variable of
education indicated that those who got a passing score from the question set, are those who
reached college level, and graduated from college and post college degrees. And with the sub
group of post graduate population to have the highest passing rate of 92.3% followed by the
passing rate of college graduate and those who reached college and did not graduate (83.5% and
83.0%, respectively) means that majority of the respondents who were categorized under each

subgroup were more likely to be adept of decisions that can lead to early prevention of CVDs due

to a wider scope of information eamed from their longer periods of study compared to the
undergraduate population. From the total number of female respondents, 80.9% of them got a
good score point in the attitude set. However, this result is in contrast to the 2015 updating
survey wherein higher percentage of female adults were either overweight or obese (rural:
55.0%; urban: 60.6%). The same survey also revealed that prevalence of high waist
circumference and waist-hip ratio declined in both males and females. However, prevalence of
this occurrence was still higher among females, putting them at higher risk of developing non-

communicable diseases than males because they were more likely to suffer from android obesity.

4.4.3, Practice

Results showed that the level of practices is significant to the monthly household income
(p-value: 0.0489) and have a strong association to the educational attainment (coefficient value-
Dscore: 0.3160) among all socioeconomic factors (see tables 27, 28 and 29). Using Spearman’s
correlation analysis, the monthly household income of the respondents (coefficient value-
Dscore: 0.1216) showed a very weak positive linear relationship to their score points (See tables
18 and 19).

Similar to the result of the attitude assessment, the result for the practice set of
questionnaire also indicated that the “good” practice points (respondents who got >50% correct
items) varies from the 5 subgroups of educational attainment. For the category with the least
number of subjects, 100% passing rate were observed to those elementary graduate respondents,

while 73.9% of high school graduates passed the set.

Table 18, Practice scores according to respondent characteristics

Respondents Respondents
Characteristics N(%)* with Good with Bad
Scores (%)"" Scores (%)™”

ALL 263 (100%) 189 (71.9%) 74 (28.1%)
Sex

Male 127 (48.3%) 76 (59.8%) 51 (40.2%)

Female 136 (51.7%) 113 (83.1%) 23 (16.9%)
Age (years)

20-29 151 (67.4%) 113 (74.8%) 38 (25.2%)

30-39 84 (31.9%) 54 (64.3%) 30 (35.7%)

40-49 13 (4.9%) 9 (69.2%) 4 (30.8%)

250 15 (5.7%) 13 (86.7%) 2(13.3%)
Educational Attainment

Elementary Graduate 2 (08%) 2 (100%) 0 (0%)

High school Graduate 92 (35.0%) 68 (73.9%) 24 (26.1%)

College Level 47 (17.9%) 34 (72.3%) 13 (27.7%)

College Graduate 109 (41.4%) 74 (67.9%) 35 (32.1%)

Post Graduate 13 (4.9%) 11 (84.6%) 2(15.4%)
Monthly Household Income (Php)

10,000 53 (20.1%) 40 (75.5%) 13 (24.5%)

10,000-20,000 96 (36.5%) 68 (70.8%) 28 (29.2%)

20,001-40,000 56 (21.3%) 39 (69.6%) 17 (30.4%)

>40,000 58 (22.1%) 42 (72.4%) 16 (27.6%)
Civil Status

Single 172 (65.4%) 123 (71.5%) 49 (28.5%)

Married 87 (33.1%) 62 (71.3%) 25 (28.7%)

Widowed 4 (1.5%) 4 (100%) 0 (0%)
Working Mobility

Active 162 (61.6%) 109 (67.3%) 33 (32.7%)

Sedentary 101 (38.4%) 80 (79.2%) 21 (20.8%)

1% rate out of the total population of the study (N— 263)

** Good/Bad score% - rate out of the total categorized subpopulation

Table 19. Summary statistics for the correlation of practice to respondent characteristics

Characteristics ‘Analysis Coefficient p-value Interpretation
Sex Eta coefficient 0.1530 e Moderate association
Age Pearson’s correlation 0.0305 0.6220 Not Significant
Educational Eta coefficient 0.3160 = Strong association
Attainment
Monthly Household Spearman's 0.1216 0.0489 Significant
Income (Php) correlation
Civil Status Eta coefficient 0.1330 - Moderate association
Working Mobility T-test z 0.3285 Not Significant

Those who reached college level but did not graduate gave a passing rate of 72.3% while
respondents who were college and post graduates gave a passing rate of 67.9% and 84.6%,
respectively. Furthermore, the variable of monthly household income (Php) following its
subgroups also showed significance to the result of good attitude score points -- <10,000
(75.5%); 10,000-20,000, (70.8%), 20,001-40,000, (69.6%); and >40,000, (72.4%). High passing
rates were observed to all subgroups of education. Since only 0.8% of the total population was
elementary graduates, high chance of a 100% passing rate is quite possible considering the low

level of attainment, A small percentage of the total population


(4.9%) also showed a chance of high passing rate considering now the high level of attainment.
Of those categorized under this subgroup, 84.6% passed the set. Interestingly, respondents who
graduated from college resulted to have the least passing rate among all. Only 67.9% of those
respondents who graduated from college seemed to have passed the test. Considering the high
attainment, the result implied that the population of college graduates tend to engage in risky
cholesterol management practices such as smoking and drinking and are more likely to have
unhealthy behaviors related to diet and exercise. Some factors to consider are the health-related
characteristics of their environment, their social group and the time they allot on their passions
and careers, which are more likely to be on a higher scale compared on the other age groups.
There are no solid evidence about the lifestyle activities of adults according to the different age
group, however, overall assumptions from various studies stated that individuals who are more
engaged in social activities in life have lower rates of all-cause mortality, CHDs and CVDs,
given a healthier lifestyle is being accomplished (Kokubo, 2014). Often established early in life,
habits of harmful behavior can reduce the quality of life. On the other hand, only 15.2% of the
total population belongs to the subgroup that got the highest passing rate of 75.5%. The result
implied that those who eamed a monthly household income of <10,000 in Philippine currency
were more likely to impose good practices towards cholesterol management compared to the
other subgroups of social household income. Income is associated to health in three ways: (1)
gross national product of every country; (2) individual incomes; and (3) income inequalities
depending on social status and geographic areas (Marmot, 2002). Limited means to access
resources connotes that fewer goods and services are to be provided in a household for health

improvement. Thus, the more important the income of every individual is for health. An average


of 58% of the Filipino households belonged to the poor and poorest wealth status in urban and
rural areas (FNRI Updating 2015). Low household or individual income depicts poor material
conditions and lack of social participation (Marmot, 2002). There may be 2 possible reasons for
the link of poor wealth status to the good practice score points towards cholesterol management:
(1) since being healthy in a developing country is costly, people with limited sources of income
opt to avoid unhealthy habits such as smoking and alcohol drinking and tend to be more wary in
their health status; (2) lower income means fewer resources and thus their habits of choices are

limited as well (Karmali, et al., 2017).

4.5 Correls

n of overall KAP scores according to respondent characteristics

The overall KAP correlation to the characteristics of the respondents showed that the
scores were dependent only to the variables sex (p-value: 0.0290) and monthly household income
(p-value: 0.0300). Comparisons with the national surveys (FNRI Updating 2015) showed that the
female population is at risk to the development of increased cholesterol level in the body due to
the prevalence of obesity. In addition, population from the poorest wealth also showed higher
occurrence to CVDs. The prevalence rate of CVD occurrence was also measured by wealth index
of the country for urban and rural areas by other studies, giving the result of the poorest group
having a higher risk to hypercholesterolemia over the richest (Pajak, 2016 & Aminde, 2017).
Similar to this study, respondents who eamed lesser were at higher risk to hypercholesterolemia.
However, data from the same national survey done recently, said otherwise where in the
prevalence rate of CVD for the country, gave a result of the richest group having a higher risk to

hypercholesterolemia over the poorest (43.7%-richest; 16.6%-poorest).


Table 20. The correlation of overall KAP risk scores to respondent characteristics

KAP RISK SCORES

Characteristics Very tow risk Low risk Moderate High risk p-value Interpretation
ALL 136 (51.7%) 46 (17.5%) 7 (2.7%) 74 (28.1%)
‘Sex 0.0290 Significant
Male 45 (17.1%) 5 (19%) 21 (8.0%) 56 (21.3%)
Female 29 (11.0%) 2 (0.8%) 25 (9.5%) 80 (30.4%)
Age (years) 0.0630 _Not Significant
20-29 37 (14.1%) 4(13%) _29(11.0%) 81 0.8%)
30-39 30 (11.4%) 00%) 13 (49%) 41 (15.6%)
40-49 31.1%) 2(08%) 3(11%) 51.9%)
250 4 (1.5%) 10.4%) 1(0.4%) 93.4%)
Educational Attainment 0.6530 Not Significant
Elementary Graduate _0(0%) 00%) (0%) 208%)
High school Graduate 30(11.4%) 2(0.8%) ——‘18(6.8%) 42.(16.0%)
College Level 12(46%) 00%) 5(1.9%)  30(11.4%)
College Graduate 291.0%) 4(1.5%) —-21(8.0%) 55 (20.9%)
Post Graduate 3(1.1%) 1(04%) ——-2(08%) (2.7%)
Monthly Household Income (Php) 0.0300 Significant
10,000 11 42%) 00%) 3.0% __34(12.9%)
10,000-20,000 25 (9.5%) 1 (0.4%) 19 (7.2%) 51(19.4%)
20,001-40,000 13 (4.9%) 1(0.4%) 8 (3.0%) 24 (9.1%)
>40,000 15 (5.7%) 5 (1.9%) 11 (4.2%) 27(10.3%)
Civil Status 0.1020 _Not Significant
Single 49 (18.6%) 3 (1%) 29 (11.0%) 91 (34.6%)
Married 23 (8.7%) 3 (1.1%) 17(65%) — 44.(16.7%)
Widowed 2 (0.8%) 1 (0.4%) 0 (0%) 10.4%)
Working Mobility 0.3290 _Not Significant
‘Active 40 (15.2%) 5 (1.9%) 27 (10.3%) 90 (34.2%)
Sedentary 34 (12.9%) 2 (0.8%) 19 (7.2%) 46 (17.5%)

*N%- rate out of the total population of the study (N- 263)

Studies about lipid and glucose had reported that age, education, and sex influence KAP
on nutrition and quality of life (Parvin, 2010, Pajak, 2016, Aminde, 2017). However, this study
only showed sex and income to be significant, Outcomes may be attributed to certain limitations

when KAP study was carried out. The imbalance ratio of the subgroups may be considered.


Based from the results, female population, respondents from their 20’s, and those who

were single were at higher risk to CVDs. College graduates and low earners showed the same
results as well. Surprisingly, results also showed that active workers were at a higher risk towards
CVD compared to sedentary workers. This was in contrast to the result wherein active population
had the higher KAP scores. It can be said that active workers may be more involved in unhealthy
lifestyle practices even though they had higher knowledge rates. Since the questionnaires were

self-administered, their answers may be affected by the present environment.

4.6 Correlation of Knowledge to Attitude and Practice

Results from table 21 shows the correlation of knowledge score points to the level of
attitude and practices of the respondents. Using spearman’s correlation analysis, it can be
concluded that there is a very weak positive linear relationship between the score points of
knowledge and attitude and to practice as well. However, the correlation of attitude to the
knowledge level of the respondents shows significant difference between the two which also
denotes that the mean knowledge and attitude was not of the same level. In addition, the
correlation of attitude scores to the level of practices among the respondents shows significant
difference between the two which also denotes that the median attitude score were not on the
same level. Using spearman’s correlation analysis, it can be concluded that there is a very weak
positive linear relationship between the score points of the two being compared. The implication
of this result was that good attitude towards a quality of life which is at lower risk to disease was
not always followed by good practice and habits towards a healthier lifestyle (Tindle, 2010). One
can have a good attitude towards cholesterol management but practiced habits that don’t

contribute to reducing one’s CVD risk.


Table 21. Summary statistics for the correlation of Knowledge to Practice and Attitude

Variable Analysis Coefficient__p-value__Interpretation
Knowledge vs Attitude Spearman’s correlation -0.1241 0.0444 Significant
Knowledge vs Practice Spearman’s correlation 0.0869 0.1599 Not Significant
Attitude vs Practice Spearman’s correlation 0.1424 0.0208 Significant

Unhealthy lifestyle is one of the modifiable risk factor that directly influences CVD
development (Cox, et al., 2013). Previous studies had shown positive association of knowledge,
attitude and healthy living practices toward the risk factors of CVD morbidity and mortality. The
effect of insufficient knowledge, attitudes, and practice (KAP) towards the prevalence of the
occurrence of CVD had been highlighted several times to various studies (Amarasekara, et al.,
2016). One study about Bangladeshi rural adults had concluded that public health programs must
be continuously updated and improved because it was vital to increase KAP on CV-related
diseases and its implications (Islam, et al., 2014). Most of these studies promote the importance
of improving KAP for a better scale of cholesterol management towards cardiovascular diseases.
However, studies related to KAP levels according to working mobility were still limited.
Relating to other similar studies on CVDs and its risk factors, this study population demonstrated
no relationship between overall KAP and age in contrast to several studies that concluded that
age definitely influence overall KAP of a respondent (Amarasekara, et al., 2016).

On a deeper context to the summary findings to the correlation of unhealthy lifestyles
with variables attitude and practices, some factors were highlighted for the consideration of them

being the most critical in preventing CVD fatality, Based from the results of the study, 38.4% of


the working adults from the total population exhibited physical inactivity during work.
Respondents who were considered as sedentary workers were mostly the supervisors, managers
and superiors on the job. Evidently, majority of the respondents were observed to be engaging on
an exercise routine. There was 73% of the active population who declared to do exercises that
range from few times a week to almost never, while 79% were from the inactive population.
Exercises on most days of the week increase one’s physical activity and evidently, it can improve
cholesterol levels in the body. Increasing one’s physical activity prevents future diseases and
disability caused by unhealthy and sedentary living. In addition to this, among the respondents
who believed of them having a high risk to stroke development, 13% of them where categorized
as sedentary workers. The inactive group in comparison to the active group generally was at
higher risk of developing CVD and hypercholesterolemia. Studies on a similar account
demonstrated that regular participation in physical activity is inversely associated with high
cholesterol level (Uthman, 2015). Physical inactivity is a significant risk factor for CVD
especially with the combination of cigarette smoking, alcoholic drinking and elevated cholesterol
levels in the body. The combinations of having bad smoking and alcoholic drinking habits with
physical inactivity increases risk to developing chronic diseases. Findings from this study
regarding on the smoking and liquor drinking of the respondents showed that higher percentage
were observed to those who never smoke and to those who drinks only on occasional basis.

Majority of the population of the working adults declared to be not smoking, and results showed
that there were almost equal counts from active and inactive respondents who said so (77% for
active respondents, while 76% for inactive respondents). Cigarette smoking is one of the most

important risk factor in hypercholesterolemia because it involves damaging the walls of the blood


vessels making it easier to accumulate fatty deposits over time. Although with few evidences, it
is said that smoking might also be a factor to lowering the level of HDL or the good cholesterol
which is essential in the body (Zhang, 2017). In addition to this, respondents who drink alcoholic
beverages on occasional basis which ranges from few times a month to never were observed to
be at a higher percentage compared to frequent drinkers (85% active workers drinks seldom or on
occasional basis, while 88% were from sedentary workers). Alcoholic drinking raises
triglycerides and cholesterol in the blood, which when not regulated can build up in the liver
which causes fatty liver diseases that can lead to several heart diseases. As the body ages, the risk
to CVDs also increase, thus modification to a healthier lifestyle should be observed on most

population.

4.7 Implications for Research

The findings of the study have significant implications for further research, health policy
makers and national guidelines towards managing cholesterol levels as a risk factor of CV-
related casualties. Based on the results, the need for improvement in developing good
knowledge, attitude and practices is necessary for a reduced risk to CVD and other related
diseases among the employed adults. The need for the government officials of the country to
design and implement more profound strategies and programs for the purpose of improving the
community knowledge about the importance of managing cholesterol to prevent CVDs. There is
an assumption that an improved knowledge will also improve one’s attitude and good practice
skills for a healthier lifestyle. Appropriate modifications in the life of an adult are one of the most
important interventions in CVD risk prevention. In addition to this, further research to examine

the KAP for cholesterol management among adults who were previously or currently diagnosed


with hypercholesterolemia should be done as well. The recommended study will give more
information about the variations of their KAP levels in comparison to those adults who were not
yet been diagnosed with increased levels of cholesterol. The need also for a more constructive set
of questionnaires, focusing on a more detailed and advanced answers to address the gaps between
the measurements of KAP among adult respondents should also be implemented. Lastly, equally
strengthening public health promotion among the populations should also be done, since the
growing burden of CVD risk factors among adults are observed regardless of the socioeconomic

status.

4.8 Strengths and Limitations

The study managed to accomplish a 100% response rate despite of having different
location sites. The study sites also gave an opportunity to randomly select participants with
varying age and job titles to properly determine the level of KAP towards cholesterol
management in regards to the intensity of physical activity of an individual while at work. This
gave a more definite result to the findings for CVD risk reduction, But on the other hand, it
should be noted that the answers given by the respondents were all self-reported and hence, the
actual data to be reported might have been under or over-estimated since the respondents were all
considered healthy in this setting. Another limitation of the study is that the questionnaires only
covered few aspects of food and cholesterol knowledge, attitude and practices regarding the
previous and current life choices of an individual to measure the extent of keeping themselves

healthy and free from developing CV and related diseases.

CHAPTER V. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION

The results of this study showed the level of knowledge, attitude and practices among
employed adults, who are not yet been diagnosed with hypercholesterolemia and no past or
current chronic diseases, towards cholesterol management to be relatively high. The majority of
the respondents had a good knowledge, attitude and practice scores. Highest rate was observed
with the knowledge level (85.2%) of the population, however, lower ratios were observed for
good attitude and practices towards cholesterol management, which were 76.0% and 71.9%,
respectively. The overall prevalence of good assessment scores showed that female respondents
had higher KAP scores compared to male and that among the population, those who were on
their 20’s and those who were aged above 50’s had considerably higher good KAP rates. On the
other hand, those who had attained the highest educational level and those with the highest
monthly earnings also had the highest overall KAP rates. Population who were considered
widowed, since the smallest number of group among the population, got the highest KAP rates
however, good scores were also observed to the single population followed by those who were
already married. Moreover, grouping the population according to their working mobility showed
that those who exhibited sedentary work had better knowledge and practice rates than those who
work actively. This was in contrast to what the study had expected however, active workers were
observed to have better attitude rates. The associations of socioeconomic factors and mobility to
the knowledge, attitude and practice level among the respondents were also observed. Results
showed that the knowledge, attitude and practice scores vary with sex, education, monthly

household income, civil status and mobility. In general, the factors of income and mobility had


shown significant effect to KAP scores. Also, the factors of sex, education and status of the
respondents had shown moderate association to affect the KAP level of the respondents with
increased probability of having good knowledge, attitude and practices towards cholesterol
management, CVD and its risk factors. Overall, half of the population, 51.7%, was observed to
have very low risk to hypercholesterolemia, 17.5% was at low risk level, and 28.1% was at the
highest risk. Only 2.7% of the respondents were at the moderate risk towards CVD and other
related diseases. In addition, overall KAP rate was found to be dependent only to the factors of
sex and income. The result of the correlation between knowledge, attitude and practice showed
that there was significant difference between the knowledge score points and attitude level (p-
value: 0.0444) and also between the attitude and practice level (p-value: 0.0208) of the
respondents. This was implied to the result of the practice choices of the respondents with a
relative high rate in similar to the knowledge and attitude scores, but was considerably lower
than the latter. Despite the gaps in KAP measurement, respondents showed interest in cholesterol
lowering interventions. Further studies are therefore necessary to fill with a more concrete

resolution.

LITERATURE CITED

ADA, American Diabetes Association. 2018. 9. Cardiovascular disease and risk management:
standards of medical care in diabetes-2018. Diabetes Care; 41 (supplement 1): S86-S104,
doi: 10.2337/dc18-S009

AMARASEKARA, P., DE SILVA, A. SWARNAMALI, H., SENARATH, U., and
KATULANDA, P. 2016. Knowledge, attitudes, and practices on lifestyle and
cardiovascular risk factors among metabolic syndrome patients in an urban tertiary care
in sri lanka. Asia Pac J Public Health. 28(1 suppl): 32s-40s. doi: 10.117/
1010539515612123.

AMINDE, L.N., TAKAH, N., NAGWASIRI, C., NOUBIAP, J., TINDONG, M., DZUDIE, A.
and VEERMAN, J.L. 2017. Population awareness of cardiovascular disease and its risk
factors in Buea, Cameroo. BMC Public Health; 17: 545. Doi: 10.1186/s12889-017-4477-
3.

ARCA, M., BORGHI, C., PONTREMOLI, R., DE FERRARI, GM., COLIVICCHI, F.,
DESIDERI, G. and TEMPORELLI, PL. 2017. Hypertriglyceridemia and omega-3 fatty
acids: their often overlooked role in cardiovascular disease prevention. J. NUMECD
volume 28, issue, pages 197-205, doi: 10.1016/j.numecd.2017.11.001

BEHRADMANESH, S. and NASRI, P. 2012. Serum cholesterol and LDL-C in association with
level of diastolic blood pressure in type 2 diabetic patients. J Renal Inj Prev.; 1(1): 23-26.
Doi: 10.12861/jrip.2012.09

BENNETT, J. A., STONE, K.W., NAIL, L.M., and SCHERER, J. 2016. Definitions of sedentary
in physical-activity-intervention trials: a summary of the literature. Journal of Aging and
Physical Activity, 4, 456-477

BHASKARAN, K., DOUGLAS, I., FORBES, H., SILVA, I., LEON, D.A, and SMEETH, L.
2014. Body mass index and risk of 22 specific cancers: a population based cohort study
of 5.24 million UK adults, Lancet, 2014 Aug 30; 384 (9945): 755-65
Doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736 (14) 60892-8. Epub.

BRIEL, M., GONZALES, LF., YOU, JJ., KARANICOLAS, PJ., AKL, EA. WU, P.,
BLECHACZ, B., BASSLER, D., WEI, X., SHARMAN, A., WHITT, L, ALVES DA
SILVA, S., KHALID, Z., NORDMANN, AJ., ZHOU, Q., WALTER, SD., VALE, N.,
BHATNAGAR, N., O’REGAN, C., MILLS, EJ., BUCHER, HC., MONTORI, VM., and
GUYATT, GH. 2009. Association between change in high density lipoprotein cholesterol
and cardiovascular disease morbidity and mortality: systematic review and meta-
regression analysis. BMJ; 338:b92.


BOLARINWA, O.A. 2015. Principles and methods of validity and reliability testing of
questionnaires used in social and health science researches. Vol 22, issue 4. Pp 195-201.

BONETT, D.G. 2015. Cronbach’s alpha reliability: interval estimation, hypothesis
testing, and sample size planning, https://doi.org/10.1002/job. 1960

BROWN, T.M., TANNER, R., CARSON, AP., YUN, H., ROSENSON, RS., FARKOUH, ME.,
WOOLLEY, JM., THACKER, EL., GLASSER, SP., SAFFORD, MM., and MUNTNER,
P. 2013. Awareness, treatment, and control of LDL cholesterol are lower among US
adults with undiagnosed diabetes versus diagnosed diabetes. American Diabetes
Association. Diabetes care, volume 36, 2734-2740.

CATAPANO, A.L. & WIKLUND, O. 2015. Think again about cholesterol survey. Elsevier
Ireland Ltd.: Atherosclerosis Supplements 20, 1-5.

CICCHETTI, D.V. & SPARROW, S.A. 1981. Developing criteria for establishing interrater
reliability of specific items: applications to assessment of adaptive behavior. Am J Ment
Defic. Sep; 86(2): 127-37

COX, JL, VALLIS, TM., PFAMMATTER, A. 2013. A novel approach to cardiovascular health
by optimizing risk management (ANCHOR):behavioural modification in primary care
effectively reduces global risk. Can J Cardiol.; 29:1400-1407.

CRAMER, D. & DENNIS HOWITT. 2010. Institutional Review Board Guidebook: Introduction:
What are dependent and independent variables? The SAGE Dictionary of Statistics.
London: SAGE.

CRICHTON, GE., and ALKERWI, A. 2014. Association of sedentary behavior time with ideal
cardiovascular health: the ORISCAV-LUX study. PLoS One. 2014; 9: 99829. Doi:
10.1371 /journal.pone.0099829.

CRICHTON, GE., and ALKERWI, A. 2015. Physical activity, sedentary behavior time and lipid
levels in the observation of cardiovascular risk factors in Luxembourg study. Lipids
Health Dis; 14: 87. Doi: 10.1186/s12944-015-0085-3

CRO: HEART & STROKE CENTRE. 2014. Patient information Guide to Cholesterol “Get the
Facts’. Galway: Fighting heart disease and stroke. Acquired online through
http://m.nipc.ie/resources/Cholesterol.pdf

DE OLIVEIRA E.S.E.R, FOSTER, D., HARPER, MM, SEIDMAN, CE, SMITH, J, BRESLOW,
J, and BRINTON, E. 2000. Alcohol consumption raises HDL cholesterol levels by
increasing the transport rate of apolipoproteins A-I and A-Il. Circulation. Nov 7; 102
(19): 2347-52.


DELA SIERRA, A., PINTO, X., GUISARRO, C., MIRANDA, JL., CALLEJO, D., CUERVO, J.,
SUBIRA, R. and RUBIO, M. 2015. Prevalence, treatment, and control of
hypercholesterolemia in high cardiovascular risk patients: evidences from a systematic
literature review in spain. Springer healthcare: Adv Ther 32, issue 10, pp 944-961

DEPARTMENT OH HEALTH (DOH). 2018. “What are the leading causes of mortality in the
Philippines?” Acquired online through www.doh.gov.ph/node/10584 on February 8,

DE SMITH, MJ. 2018. Statistical Analysis Handbook: Comprehensive Handbook of Statistical
Concepts, Techniques and Software Tools, Acquired online through www.statsref.com.

DOUGLAS, PS. 2018. Exercise and fitness in the prevention of atherosclerotic cardiovascular
disease. Accessed online at https://www.uptodate,com/contents/exercise-and-fitness-in-
the-prevention-of-atherosclerotic-cardiovascular-disease on january 2019.

EATON, S.B. and M. KONNER. 1985. Paleolithic nutrition: a consideration of its nature and
current implications. N. Engl. J. Med. 312: 283289.

EVANS, MC., STALAM, T., MILLER, M. 2018. Cardiovascular ris assessment in patients with
hypertriglyceridemia. Curr Cardiol Rep, volume 20: 71, https://doi.org/10.1007/s11886-
018-1013-8

FOREY, B.A., FRY, JS., LEE, PN., THORNTON, AJ., and COOMBS, KJ. 2013. The effect of
quitting smoking on HDL-cholesterol- a review based on within-subject changes.
Biomark Res; 1:26. Doi: 10.1186/2050-7771-1-26.

FRARY, RB. 2002. A brief guide to questionnaire development. Acquired online through
http://ericae.neV/f/tamw/vpiques.htm

FRUTUOSO, J. and BOURBON, M. 2016. The need to create awareness towards cholesterol.
EAS16-0113, CVD risk factors. Abstracts/atherosclerosis 252 ¢1-e196.

GLUCKMAN, TJ., BARANOSKI, B., ASHEN, MD., HENRIKSON, CA., MCALLISTER, M.,
BRAUNSTEIN, JB., and BLUMENTHAL, RS. 2004. A practical and evidence-based
approach to cardiovascular disease risk reduction. Arch Intern Med; 164(14): 1490-1500,
doi:10.1001/archinte. 164.14. 140.

GRAPHIQ LLC. 2018, Cardiovascular Diseases in Philippines: Statistics on overall impact and
specific effect on demographic groups. Health Grove section. Acquired online through
http://global-disease-burden.healthgrove.com/\/41394/Cardiovascular-Diseases-
in-Philippines on February 8, 2018.


HALL, H. 2017. The Movie “Cholesterol: The Great Bluff” is an Exercise in Denialism.
Sciencebasedmedicine.org. Retrieved from_http://sciencebasedmedicine.org/the-movie-
cholesterol-the-great-bluff-is-an-exercise-in-denialism/

HARI, O.S. & SUMITRA, N. 2015. Awareness and trends of blood cholesterol and
susceptibility to develop heart disease. Advancement in Genetic engineering, volume 4,
Issue 3. Doi: 10.4172/2169-0111.1000138

HARTZ, JC., FERRANTI, SD., GIDDING, S. 2018. Hypertriglyceridemia in diabetes mellitus:
implications for pediatric care. Journal of the Endocrine society, vol 2, issue 6, pages
497-512, doi:10.1210/js. 2018-00079.

HAMPE, E.C., JR and M.WITTENBERG. 1964. The lifeline of America: development of the
food industry. McGraw-Hill, New York. 390 pp.

HEALY, GN., MATTHEWS, CE., DUNSTAN, DW., WINKLER, EA., and OWEN, N. 2011
Sedentary time and cardio-metabolic biomarkers in US adults: NHANES 2003-06. Eur
Heart J; 32: 590-597. Doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehq45 1.

INQUIRER.NET. 2018. PH is world leader in social media usage by Miguel R. Camus.
Retrieved from _https://www. google.com. ph/amp/s/business. inquirer. net/246015/ph-
world-leader-social-media-usage/amp

ISLAM FMA, CHAKRABARTI, R., DIRANI, M. knowledge, attitudes and practice of diabetes
in rural Bangladesh: the Bangladesh population based diabetes and eye study (BPDES).
2014,PLoS One;9:e1 10368.

KARMALI, KN., PERSELL, SD., PEREL, P., LLOYD-JONES, DM., BERENDSEN, MA., and
HUFFMAN, MD. 2017. Risk scoring for the primary prevention of cardiovascular
disease. The Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews (3): CD006887. doi
10.1002/14651858.

KARUNATHILAKE, SP., AND GANEGODA, GU. 2018. Secondary Prevention of
cardiovascular diseases and application of technology for early diagnosis. BioMed
Research Intemational Volume 2018, Article ID 5767864, doi: 10.1155/2018/5767864

KIM, LJ. 2016. Safety and Health Practices in the Food Industry and Ergonomic Interventions. J
Ergonomics 6:¢146. doi: 10.4172/21657556.1000e146.

KOHLI, P., WHELTON, SP., HSU, S., YANCY, CW., STONE, NJ., CHRISIPIN, J.,
GILOTRA, N., HOUSTON, B., ASHEN, MD. MARTIN, S., JOSHI, PH., MCEVOY,
JW., GLUCKMAN, TJ., MICHOS, ED., BLAHA, M., and BLUMENTHAL, RS. 2014.
Clinician’s Guide to the Updated ABCs of Cardiovascular Disease Prevention.
JAHA;3.doi:10.1161/JAHA.114.001098.


KOKUBO, Y. 2014. Prevention of hypertension and cardiovascular diseases: a comparison of
lifestyle factors in westerners and East Asians.. Hypertension; 63:655-660. doi:
10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA. 113.00543

LEE, Y.H., LEE, SG., LEE, MH., KIM, JH., LEE, BW., KANG, ES., LEE, HC., and CHA, BS.
2014. Serum cholesterol concentration and prevalence, awareness, treatment and control
of high low-density lipoprotein cholesterol in the korea national health and nutrition
examination surveys 2008-2010: beyond the tip of the iceberg. Journal of the American
heart Association. DO: 10.1161/JAHA. 113.000650.

LIEBER, C.S. 1988. The influence of alcohol to nutritional status. Nutrition reviews. Volume 46,
issue 7. July. Pp 241-254. Retrieved online on July 11, 2018.

MANDAL, A. 2014. Hypercholesterolemia and Diet. News Medical Life Sciences. Retrieved on
July 10, ~~ 2018~—— from ~—_https://www.google.com. ph/amps/www.news-
medical.net/amp/health/Hypercholesterolemia-and-Diet.aspx

MANNU, GS., ZAMAIN, MJ., GUPTA, A., REHMAN, HU., and MYINT, PK. 2013. Evidence
of lifestyle modification in the management of hypercholesterolemia. Curr Cardiol Rev.
Feb 1; 9(1): 2-14.

MARMOT, M. 2002. The influence of income on health: views of an epidemiologist. Health
Affairs. The determinants of health: Vol. 2, no. 2

MARZETTI, E., CALVANI, R., PICCA, A., SISTO, A., TOSATO, M., MARTONE, AM.,
ORTOLANI, E., SALINI, S., PAFUNDI, T., SANTOLIQUIDO, A., SANTORO, L.,
BERNABEI, R., and LANDI, F. 2018. Prevalence of dyslipidaemia and awareness of
blood cholesterol levels among community-living people: results from the longevity
check-up 7+ (lookup 7+) cross-sectional survey. BMJ Open 8 (6), 021627

MILLER, M. 2009. Dyslipidemia and cardiovascular risk: the importance of early prevention.
QUM. Sep; 102(9): 657-667. doi: 10.1093/qjmed/hep06s.

MOYER, VA. 2012. Behavioral counseling interventions to promote a healthful diet and
physical activity for cardiovascular disease prevention in adults: US Preventive services
task force recommendation statement. Annals of Internal Medicine. 157 (5): 367-71. doi:
10.7326/0003-4819-157-5-201209040-00486.

NELSON, RH. 2013. Hyperlipidemia as a risk factor for cardiovascular disease. Prim Care. Mar;
40(1): 195-211, doi: 10.1016/j.pop.2012.11.003.

OOMMEN, A.M., ABRAHAM, V.J., GEORGE, K., & JOSE, V.J. 2016. Rising trend of
cardiovascular risk factors between 1991-1994 and 2010-2012: A repeat cross sectional
survey in urban and rural Vellore. Cardiological Society of India: Indian Heart Journal
68, 263-269.


PAJAK, A., SZAFRANIEC, K., POLAK, M., POLAKOWSKA, M., KOZELA, M.,
PIOTROWSKI, W., KWASNIEWSKA, M., PODOLECKA, E., KOZAKIEWICZ, K.,
TYKARSKI, A., ZDROJESKI, T., DRYGAS, W., and WOBASZ investigators. 2016.
Changes in the prevalence, treatment, and control of hypercholesterolemia and other
dyslipidemias over 10 years in Poland: the WOBASZ study. Polskie Archiwum
Medycyny Wewnetrznej; 126 (9).

PAN, L., YANG, Z., WU, Y., YIN, RX., LIAO, Y., WANG, J., GAO, B., ZHANG, L., and
China National Survey of Chronic Kidney Disease Working group. 2016. The
prevalence, awareness, treatment and control of dyslipidemia among adults in China.
Atherosclerosis 248, 2-9

PARVIN, M., NASRIN, O. 2010. Nutritional knowledge, attitude and practice of teheranian

adults and their relation to serum lipids and lipoproteins: Teheran lipid and glucose study
Ann Nutr Metab; 56:233-240.

PIEPOLI, MF., HOES, AW., AGEWALL, S., ALBUS, C., BROTONS, C., CATAPANO, AL.,
COONEY, MT., CORRA, U., COSYNS, B., DEATON, C., GRAHAM, I., HALL, MS.,
HOBBS, FDR., LOCHEN, ML., LOLLGEN, H., MARQUES-VIDAL, P., PERK, J.,
PRESCOTT, E., REDON, J., RICHTER, DJ., SATTAR, N., SMLDERS, Y., TIBERI,
M,, VAN DER WORP, HB., VAN DIS, I, VERSCHUREN, WMM., BINNO, S., and
ESC Scientific Document Group. 2016. European Guidelines on cardiovascular disease
prevention in clinical practice: The Sixth Joint Task Force of the European Society of
Cardiology and Other Societies on Cardiovascular Disease Prevention in Clinical Practice
(constituted by representatives of 10 societies and by invited experts) Developed with the
special contribution of the European Association for Cardiovascular Prevention &
Rehabilitation (EACPR). Eur Heart J; 37: 2315-2381

PSA. 2018. Philippines Statistics Authority: Regional Quick Statistics 2018. Retrieved from
https:// www. psa. gov. ph/directory/civil-registration-department

PSA. 2018. Philippines Statistics Authority: Country Statistics 2018. Retrieved from
https://www. psa.gov.ph/directory/civil-registration-department.

ROBINSON, JG., FOX, KM., GRANDY, S., and SHIELD STUDY GROUP. 2009. Attitudes
about health and health-related behaviors in patients with cardiovascular disease or at
elevated risk for cardiovascular disease. Prev Cardiol. Summer, 12(3): 136-43. Doi:
10.1111/).1751-7141.200.00037.x.

RYGIEL, K. 2018. Hypertriglyceridemia — common causes, prevention and treatment strategies.
Current cardiology reviews, volume 14, numver 1, pp. 67-76 (10),
doi:10.2174/1573403X 14666180123165542


SAKURAI, M., STAMLER, J., MIURA, K., BROWN, IJ., NAKAGAWA, H., ELLIOTT, P.,
UESHIMA, H., CHAN, Q., TZOULAKI, L, DYER, AR., OKAYAMA, A., and ZHAO,
L. 2011. Relationship of Dietary Cholesterol to Blood Pressure: The INTERMAP Study.
J Hypertens. Feb; 29(2): 222-228. Doi: 10.1097/ HJH.0b013e32834069a5

SHIROMA, EJ., and LEE, IM. 2010. Physical activity and cardiovascular health: lessons learned
from epidemiological studies across age, gender and race/ethnicity. Circulation. 2010;
122: 743-752. Doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA. 109.914721.

STEWART, J. 2017. Primary prevention of cardiovascular disease: A review of contemporary
guidance and literature. JRSM Cardiovasc Dis. Jan-Dec; 6:204800401668721 1.

TANGNEY, CC. AND RS ROSENSON. 2018. Lipid lowering with diet or dietary supplements.
Accessed online at _https://www.uptodate.com/contents/lipid-lowering-with-diet-or-
dietary-supplements#H21537837 on January 2019.

TINDLE, H., DAVIS, E., and KULLER, L. 2010. Attitudes and Cardiovascular diseases.
Maturitas. Oct; 67(2): 108-113. Doi: 10.1016/j.matritas.2010.04.020.

UPADHYAY, U.D., WADDELL, EN., YOUNG, S., KERKER, BD., BERGER, M., MATTE,
T., and ANGELL, SY. 2010. Prevalence, awareness, treatment, and control of high LDL
cholesterol in new york city, 2004. Prev Chronic Dis. May; 7(3): A61

UTHMAN, OA., HARTLEY, L., REESE, K., et al. 2015. Multiple risk factor interventions for
primary prevention of cardiovascular disease in low- and middle-income countries. The
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews (8): © CD011163. — doi:
10.1002/14651858.CD011163.

U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES (USDHHS). 2005. High Blood
Cholesterol: What you need to know. National Cholesterol Education Program. NIH
Publication No. 05-3290.

VENKAIAH, K., DAMAYANTI, K., NAYAK, M., and VJAYARAGHAVAN, K. 2002. Diet
and nutritional status of rural adolescents in India. European Journal of Clinical
Nutrition; 56, 1119-1125. Doi: 10.1038/sj.ejen. 1601457.

WORINGER, M., NIELSEN, J.J., ZIBARRAS, L., EVASON, J., KASSIANOS, AP., HARRIS,
M., MAJEED, A., and SOLJAK, M. 2017. Development of a questionnaire to evaluate
patient's awareness of cardiovascular disease risk in England’s National Health Service
Health Check preventive cardiovascular programme. BMJ Open; 7: €014413. Doi:
10.1136/bmjopen-2016-014413.


ZHANG, F.L., GUO, ZN., WU, YH., LIU, HY., SUN, MS., XING, Y.Q., and YANG, Y. 2017.
The prevalence, awareness, treatment, and control of dyslipidemia in northeast china: a
population-based cross-sectional survey. Lipids in Health and Disease. 16:61. DOI
10.1186/s12944-017-0453-2.

8th NATIONAL NUTRITION SURVEY (NNS). 2013. Food and Nutrition Research Institute.

2015 Updating of the Nutritional Status of Filipino Children and other Population Groups. 2015.
Food and Nutrition Research Institute.

Disabled World. 2017. Blood Pressure Chart: Low, Normal, High Reading by Age Table.
Retrieved on July 6, 2018 from _ https://www.disabled-world.com/calculators-
charts/bloodpressurechart. php
