Effects of Root Pruning on the Root Growth Potential (RGP) of Three Philippine Native Tree Species

PAOLA ANDREA R. BURCER

UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES LOS BAÑOS

Master of Science in Forestry

APRIL 2020

ABSTRACT

Root growth potential (RGP) is the plant's capacity to grow new roots. an important
trait for seedlings to be used on any reforestation project. In the Philippines, these kinds of
program often end up in failure, as low quality seedlings are usually chosen due to
unfamiliarity with attributes that indicate good outplanting performance and the lack of a
reliable quality assessment method. This study aimed to determine the RGP of three native
species namely, Bignai (Antidesma bunius), Kamagong (Diospyros blancoi) and Molave
(Vitex parviflora), and find its correlation with other morphological parameters. Different
taproot pruning lengths (I-cm pruning, 2-cm pruning and no root pruning) were also
applied as treatments. In general, taproot pruning had no significant effects on the seedling
morphological attributes for all species. But, excluding Molave, the two other species had
mostly responded well to root pruning and can be recommended as treatment to induce
root growth development. RGP had generally complemented the results from the other
parameters, illustrating how root development was associated with the morphological
growth of the species. The study shows how RGP can be relied on for testing seedling
health and status.

Keywords: Root growth potential (RGP), root pruning, taproot, stock quality assessment, native tree species

CHAPTER 1

INTRODUCTION’

Reforestation projects in the Philippines often fail due to low survival of planted
seedlings. These sites are usually open areas with poor soil quality and subject to high light
intensity. Healthy seedlings are among the important factors that contribute to high survival
rates and forest growth performance in the field (Balangue, 2014). The proliferation of the
use of low quality seedlings are in part due to narrow sources of high quality seeds.
inadequate seedling propagation techniques, limited knowledge of nursery operators on
good planting stock traits, and lack of seedling quality appraisal method (Gregorio e1 al..
2016). Based on the Commision on Audit (COA) Annual Audit Reports (1998-2006), the
use of seedlings with substandard height and quality was one of the shortcomings of DENR
reforestation programs (Israel and Lintag, 2013). Planting low quality seedlings was also
responsible for the high mortality of seedlings in some National Greening Program (NGP)

sites (Balangue, 2016).

Unlike direct seeding method or the use of wildlings, seedlings from nurseries are
generally the source of planting stocks for reforestation projects as they have better chances
of surviving in harsh environments; which are characteristics often found in reforestation
sites. Determining the health or quality of seedlings before planting, therefore, would most

likely increase success rate of projects. Expenses for replanting and maintenance can also

v

be decreased as replanted seedlings may not always survive if the initially planted seedlings

cast shade to these seedlings, especially shade-intolerant species (Balangue. 2016).

Root Growth Potential (RGP) is known as a cheap and rapid way of assessing a
seedling’s health. It is the ability of the seedling to grow new roots in an optimum
environment and is developed as the seedling grows in the nursery (Ritchie and Tanaka,
1990), There had been some early misconceptions around the concept of RGP. as it does
not precisely predict seedling survival in the field, but rather, indicates the potential of a
seedling for survival. Therefore, it can be used as an appraisal of overall seedling health
(Burdett, 1987). Seedlings with high RGP are considered to have the ability to quickly
establish and create new roots, allowing access to adjacent soil reserves and preventing
water stress (Duryea, 1985). These are considered to be seedlings of high quality. As water
absorption is required for photosynthesis, the immediate establishment of roots when
planted or when environmental conditions are optimal, will contribute to its survival in the
field (Burdett, 1987). The predictive value of RGP lies on its ability to determine resistance
to stress or indicate if there are some damages in the planting stock (Ritchie and Tanaka,

1990).

Significance of the study

The increasing expanse covered by exotic tree species, and its associated negative

consequences to the ecosystem, led to the use of native species as an alternative in

reforestation and rehabilitation efforts. The idea is further motivated by the fact that the

number of native trees found naturally occurring in the forest is dwindling, as well as the

shift to endangered status of these same species. Although this may deal with concem over
biodiversity loss and site compatibility issues, the insufficient knowledge regarding their
early growth and seedling propagation leading to low quality seedlings, may actually be
counterproductive. Compared with exotics, native species have few quality seed sources,
slow seedling growth, high vulnerability to pest and disease, and poor competitive ability
(Woodcock, 2003). Nevertheless, the considerable ecological benefits and wildlife habitat
they provide, as opposed to exotics (Hawes and Smith, 2005), and the fact that these trees
can only be found in the country makes them irreplaceable. Thus, planting of these species

should still be encouraged.

In relation to this, a way to determine the stock quality of native species before
transplanting will help in decision-making in the nursery and contribute to its success in
the field. Local nurseries in the Philippines have little access to advanced tools which test
physiological seedling characteristics, so they often rely on morphological characteristics
of seedlings. RGP could fulfill this role instead, as it is an assessment of a morphological
part of the seedling (roots) but can indicate the physiological status of the seedling such as
dormancy, nutrient status, carbohydrate and moisture content (Davis and Jacobs, 2005).
Furthermore, the method does not require large expenses and can be performed rather
easily. Meanwhile, root pruning as a nursery practice had been perceived as not cost-
effective for transplanting due to the nature of the method (Watson and Sydnor, 1987).
However, a lot of evidence reports that pruning of roots helps improve root fibrosity and
root carbohydrate status (Ritchie and Dunlap, 1980). Root pruning was also observed to

increase long term growth (Watson and Sydnor, 1987), increase yields for both crops and

trees in agroforestry, and reduce below-ground competition (mostly fruit trees) (Ong et al.,

2002; Woodall and Ward, 2002).

The experiment focused on the determination of RGP expression of three native
species, Bignai (Antidesma bunius), Kamagong (Diospyros blancoi) and Molave (Vitex
parviflora), how each are affected by root pruning treatments, and how it is associated and
influenced by their specific morphological and physiological traits. This study could serve
as a baseline data for these species and provide an avenue for further research, especially

as RGP studies regarding native species are meager.

Statement of the problem

One of the reasons of failure in reforestation is planting seedlings of inferior quality,
which doesn’t last long in the field. A way to test or evaluate seedling quality is through
RGP. This method is especially useful to ascertain seedlings suspected of poor
physiological quality (Binder e” al., 1988). As the use of native tree species for reforestation

efforts are encouraged, assessment of seedling condition through RGP will help in

determining quality which could contribute to high survival and ant

pate seedling growth

in the field
Scope and Limitations

RGP measurement was limited to counting and measuring of length of new roots.
Morphological traits of each species such as relative growth rate (height and diameter),

number of leaves, root collar diameter (RCD), biomass (root, shoot and total) and length

of tap root, were recorded while root/shoot ratio, sturdiness quotient and seedling quality
index (SQl) were calculated to determine their correlation to the seedling’s root growth.
Root pruning of primary root at different lengths were also applied as treatments. Species

that respond well to the root pruning treatment were also determined.

Objectives of the Study

The main objective of the study was to determine Root Growth Potential (RGP)
and the effect of root pruning on the three native tree species. Bignai (Anlidesma bunius),

Kamagong (Diospyros blancoi) and Molave (Vitex parviflora).
Specifically, it aimed to:
1. Determine the RGP of the three native species as affected by root pruning treatments.

2. Find out if root pruning treatments for each species were effective in enhancing root

growth of the seedling.

3. Compare the response of each species’ morphological characteristics to the increasing

severity of root pruning treatments, and;

4, Examine the correlation of seedling parameters with each other and how it was affected

by the root pruning treatments.

CHAPTER 2

REVIEW OF LITERATURE

Root Growth Potential (RGP)

Several terms have been used to describe a scedling’s capacity to produce new roots
in an optimum environment, namely, Root Growth Capacity (RGC), Root-Regenerating
Potential, Root Regeneration Potential (RRP) and Root Growth Potential (RGP) among
others (Ritchie and Tanaka, 1990). It is often defined as an indicator of seedling health or
quality, and is practiced in nurseries as a rapid assessment of seedling performance when
outplanted. RGP has several advantages such as being a relatively simpler procedure, is
performed with lower-cost materials and generates easily interpretable results (Duryea,

1985), making it a good test alternative.

Even in a favorable environment, root development does not always occur.
Accordingly, seedlings with high RGP are expected to have better chances of survival and
growth in the field (Duryea, 1985). It plays a big role in survival as the ability of the planted
seedlings to produce new roots gives them immediate contact with the soil, which is
necessary to establish and adapt in the site. Although this reasoning seems logical, it had
been difficult to identify the direct link between the seedling performance and RGP

(Ritchie and Dunlap, 1980). It does not predict seedling survival in the field, but determines

its survival potential, with higher RGP having a higher chance of survival (Burdett, 1987).
Based on the concept, a seedling can only fully express its RGP potential in an optimum
environment. But in reality, different factors are in play and site conditions are not always
expected to be favourable for root growth, making it difficult to actually fully express RGP
(Duryea, 1985). Seedlings also undergo stress as they are transplanted from the nursery to
the planting site. To increase chance of survival, seedlings selected must be highly-resistant
to stress and highly capable of root growth, along with having well-prepared planting sites

and following proper planting practices (Grossnickle, 2005).

The History of RGP

Initially, the RGP method was developed as an attempt to predict the field
performance of conifer seedlings (Binder et al., 1988), While morphological characteristics
are important and commonly used as seedling parameters, it is an unreliable indicator of
plant quality and field performance (Davis and Jacobs, 2005). As was stated by Wakeley
(1948), it has long been perceived that morphological characteristics alone are insufficient
to predict seedling performance in the field and instead, those with better physiological

waits are the ones that persist (Ritchie and Dunlap, 1980).

E.C. Stone and other scientists explored the possibility of determining a seedling's
physiological grade even before transplant, through its capability to generate new roots

(Ritchie and Tanaka, 1990). They showed that RGP could vary in conifer seedlings taken

from different nurseries, even if't is of the same species (e.g. Ponderosa pine and Douglas-
fir), and that the local environment is a cause of variation as well (Burdett, 1987). As early
as its studies were presented in the New Zealand Planting Stock Quality conference during
1979 and its proceedings were first published, RGP has been widely used in nursery stocks

by various forestry organizations and nursery managers (Ritchie and Tanaka, 1990).

Factors affecting RGP

Both intemal (physiology) and extemal factors (environment) can affect the
expression of RGP. As root growth highly depends on carbohydrates, environmental
factors such as temperature, light intensity, soil water and nutrient availability (which
affects the process of photosynthesis), also affects the amount of carbohydrates that the
roots receive (Lynch et al., 2012). Different planting stock characteristics such as species,
seed lot, family and stock type also have certain degrees of influence on the intensity of

RGP that the seedling can develop (Duryea, 1985).

The shoot is the primary source of root growth stimulus. Leaves are especially
important as it is the major exporter of co-factors necessary for root development (Duryea,
1985), Removal of leaves has been demonstrated to disrupt root growth in several conifer
species while shoot dormancy also produces the same effect, possibly as a result of a
decrease in root growth promoters or increase of inhibitors (Ritchie and Tanaka, 1990).

This had been the case in northem red oak (Quercus rubra) wherein top-pruned seedlings

had a decrease in root production (Larson, 1975). Since root growth, nutrient absorption
and assimilation, mycorrhizal symbiosis, root-shoot ratio balance and root expansion (as,
caused by damage to the root system) are all processes requiring carbohydrates, these are
also mostly influenced by the amount of carbohydrates produced by the current
photosynthesis and carbohydrates from stored reserves (Lynch et al., 2012). The cambium
also plays a role in generating or transferring growth stimulus as evidenced by root growth
in stem cuttings and root growth inhibition by girdling or complete removal of stem

(Ritchie and Dunlap, 1980).

Shoot growth is usually attended by a halt or reduction in root growth as they both
compete for carbohydrates (Ritchie and Tanaka, 1990). It results from the adjustment of
biomass allocation depending on the plant's ability to capture resources such as light,

carbon, nutrients, and water (Waisel ef a/., 2002). This is what Farrar and Jones (2000)

refer to as a “functional equilibrium” of carbon acquisition between the shoot and root.

When nutrient and water requirements are limiting, the plants mostly expend carbohydrates
on root growth rather than shoot growth, in part to remedy the limited supply of soil nutrient
(Volder and lersel, 2019). In this regard, the time when the seedling has a weak shoot

dormancy and lack of shoot growth is when RGP is said to be at its highest

Similar with shoots, root growth and development are also managed by plant
hormones (Lynch et al., 2012). Among them, auxin plays the major role in both primary
and lateral root growth initiation (Tian ef al., 2014). Auxins are commonly manufactured

in the shoot’s leaves and distributed into the root system, where they promote root


development such as increase of length and number of roots (Overvoorde, et al., 2010)
Gibberellins, on the other hand, may prevent, promote or have no effect on root growth
while abscisic acid was shown to completely prevent both root initiation and elongation
(Ritchie and Dunlap, 1980). Cytokinin functions largely to oppose the effect of auxin such

as stimulating cell differentiation in the primary root meristem (Tian ef al., 2014).

Availability of water is largely involved in root growth, not only as a photosynthesis
requirement, but also for oxygen availability in the soil, and preventing dry soils that could
hinder root expansion (Lynch et al,, 2012). Soil water content and atmospheric water
demand dictates whether the seedlings will be susceptible to water stress, affecting their
ability to develop roots (Grossnickle, 2005). Water occupying all soil pore spaces may also

lead to a rapid decrease of oxygen needed for root respiration (Volder and lersel, 2019).

There are a lot of studies regarding the association of RGP to bud dormancy. Shoot
growth is known to be impeded by low temperatures than root growth, resulting to a higher
ratio of roovshoot (Lynch ef al., 2012). Generally, RGP was observed to be strongly
exhibited immediately after breaking from true dormancy as long as the buds were non-
dormant. This is why chilling or cold storage is done in some nurseries to manipulate the

timing of growth and dormancy intensity. However, this may not be applicable in tropical

countries such as the Philippines with only two generally distinct seasons in a year.

The physiological factors that affect root growth can also be influenced by a
nursery's cultural practices (Ritchie and Dunlap, 1980). Therefore, nursery practices

indirectly affect RGP expression and play an important role in cultivating it. In general,

Wu

improper handling of seedlings have a negative effect on the root development and can
negate the predictive potential of RGP (Binder et al., 1988). Root and top pruning of
seedling affect RGP by triggering the growth of lateral root, which encourage total root
length increase, while top pruning influences the number of leaves and buds important for
physiological processes (Ritchie and Dunlap, 1980). Soil compaction hinders root
elongation, due to high bulk density, soil drying, and respiration as roots require large
amounts of oxygen (Lynch ef al., 2012). Ethylene concentration also increases during
conditions of low oxygen such as in waterlogged or compacted soils (Volder and Iersel,
2019). in turn, high levels of ethylene concentration inhibits root growth and induces shoot
elongation (Lynch er al., 2012). Figure 1 shows the different factors affecting the
development and expression of a seedling’s RGP as summarized by Ritchie and Dunlap

(1980).

| mano va || sive ractons
3 eatemeretee

de Emin |

Figure 1. ‘The different factors affecting the development and expression of a seedling’s RGP
(Ritchie and Dunlap, 1980).


Measurement of RGP

AA standard approach in measuring RGP is to remove any new white tips from the
roots, transfer the seedlings to pots, and place in an environment ideal for root growth
(Ritchie and Dunlap, 1980). Root regeneration is then determined after a fixed time using

standard methods.

In assessing RGP, there are different ways used in studies as well as different
combinations of these methods. The simplest expression of RGP is usually counting the
total number of new roots and measuring total length of new roots. Others use volume or
weight of new roots, growth rate of an average root, percent of seedlings having any new
root growth at all, or the-total length or number of new roots above a certain minimum
length (Ritchie and Dunlap, 1980). Selecting a method would generally depend on the
assessment’s objectives. In the literature review of Ritchie and Tanaka (1990), most of the
methods used were the number of new roots (84%), followed by root length (44%), index
values (16%), root volume (6%) and root area (3%), although some used a combination of
these methods. To make tallying easier and more efficient, shortcuts to these basic methods
have been developed, such as only counting roots that match the minimum length required,
measuring only a few of the longest new roots, recording the seedling percentage which
had root growth, and others (Duryea, 1985). Root growth indexes are also used such as one

made by Burdett where growth values are di

led into six levels of progression (Ritchie

and Tanaka, 1990).


Volumetric determination is another way to assess RGP. It is done by measuring
the weight of water displaced when the root system is submerged in a water container and
calculating the change from the measurements before and after (Ritchie and Dunlap. 1980).
On the other hand, it may be inaccurate and unreliable due to water absorption by the roots
and the method is generally laborious to accomplish (Duryea, 1985). Previous studies using
root volume had been found to be directly correlated with outplanting performance (Davis.

and Jacobs, 2005).

In relation to this, hydroponic system had also been used as another method of RGP
test instead of the usual soil pot or soil bed. Hydroponics is a way to cultivate seedlings
without using a solid medium, and instead, placing them in nutrient solutions dissolved in
water (Jensen, 1997). Duryea (1985) enumerated several advantages of hydroponics which
are as follows: unrequired potting and use of potting medium; clean new roots and easier
to identify making assessment more accurate; feasible to perform non-destructive counting
methods; observable root growth throughout the experiment, and; requires less

maintenance.

The variation in methods makes data comparison between studies difficult since it
represents different physiological processes. For instance, there is the number of new roots
as root initiation, growth rate of an average root as root elongation, and total length of new

Foots as both root in

jation and elongation (Ritchie and Dunlap, 1980). To minimize this,
an important consideration in the RGP test is to conduct the experiment in a controlled and

constant environmental regime in order to fully attribute the results on the seedling quality.


Yet this cannot be done realistically as growth chambers are expensive unlike greenhouses,

which are more accessible and which are often used in most nurseries (Duryea, 1985).

RGP as a planting stock quality assessment

RGP tests are usually carried out to determine planting stock quality. This is done
as a way to determine the survival and performance of the seedling once it is planted in the
field (Duryea, 1985). A common interpretation is that RGP is an indication of seedling
health, Root growth not only suggests the efficiency of the root system in water absorption,
but also the condition of the shoot, as root growth relies on the current photosynthesis to
initiate it (Burdett, 1987). This indicates that the whole metabolic pathway. including the
translocation of water and photoassimilates through the xylem and phloem, root respiration
and water absorption of the root tips, is functioning properly (Ritchie and Tanaka, 1990).
‘As water absorption is required for photosynthesis, the immediate establishment of roots
when planted-or when environmental conditions are optimal, will contribute to its survival

in the field (Burdett, 1987).

The correlation findings between RGP and field performance can be mixed. Some
studies show a good correlation between RGP and survival, especially conifer species,
while others display a weak or even no relationship at all (Duryea, 1985). This could partly
be a result of incorrect nursery practices, such as watering the seedlings too much or too

little, errors during the RGP assessment like error in measuring instruments or inaccurate

1S

sampling, and mishandling of planting stocks as it is transported and planted in the field
(Ritchie and Tanaka, 1990). Even a seedling with high RGP would not be able to fully
express it if field conditions are limiting. The performance of outplanted seedling is the
outcome of both the environmental conditions, stock physiological and morphological
characteristics, and the interaction between the two (Grossnickle, 2005). This means that
poor quality seedlings (low RGP) have a high chance of survival on favorable sites while
good quality seedlings (high RGP) planted on harsh sites are unsure to survive (Ritchie and
Tanaka, 1990) (Figure 2). To make the RGP result more useful and interpretation more
accurate, other data related on the stock characteristics and site environment are necessary

(Binder et al., 1988).

=

z
cy

lure of RGP to predict field performance relates to the interaction of RGP with
field conditions (Ritchie and Tanaka, 1990).

Figure 2.

Planting low quality seedlings costs a lot more than losing good quality ones

(Binder et al, 1988). The stock quality dictates the degree of site preparation and


maintenance required (Burdett, 1987) making it decisive to recognize the quality of
seedlings beforehand for planting preparation and minimizing tending costs in the field.
Physiological tests are far from fully replacing morphological tests when it comes to its
applicability to nursery operations, making it essential to understand the relationship of the

seedling’s physiological processes and morphological traits (Davis and Jacobs, 2005).


CHAPTER 3

METHODOLOGY

Planting stock and species selection

The experiment was conducted in the CFNR (College of Forestry and Natural
Resources) greenhouse at the University of the Phillippines Los Bafios (UPLB) from
October to November 2019. Environmental conditions were measured once during the
morning (around 9:30 am) and once during the aftemoon (around 2:30 pm) using Extech
EN300 5-in-1 Environmental Meter. The mean relative humidity ranged from 78.99% to
71.9% during the day (Table 1). Mean temperature in the greenhouse ranged from 31.1 °C
to 28°C while radiation had a maximum mean of 2443 lux and minimum of 1063 lux during

the recorded period.

Three native species were used for the study, namely; Bignai (Antidesma bunius),
Kamagong (Diospyros blancoi) and Molave (Vitex parviflora). Choice of species was
based on its availability in the nursery, its locality (native species), and the lack of an RGP
study of the selected species. The planting stocks selected were those of plantable sizes
previously grown in the nursery and were estimated to be about 18 months old at the time
of the experiment. Seedlings of roughly similar height (around 33 cm, 28 cm, 40 cm for
Bignai, Kamagong and Molave, respectively) were selected for each species to minimize

error, as RGP is also influenced by seedling size (Duryea, 1985). Before transplanting,

roots were washed of any excess soil. All seedlings were transferred to 3.5 x 3.5 x Il
polyethylene bags filled with the same volume of top soil. Top soil from Mount Makiling,
Los Bafios was sterilized by heating it to 95 °C for an hour. This was used as the soil
medium for the seedlings transferred to new planting bags and was sent to the Agricultural
Systems Institute, Division of Soil Science for soil analysis. Table 2 shows the properties
of the soil medium used. The soil had a slightly alkaline pH of 7.3 and a textural grade of
sandy loam. Organic matter content and percent nitrogen was interpreted as very low while
phosphorus content was categorized as very high and potassium content as medium. Cation
exchange capacity (CEC) was also low at 24.96 cmoc/kg. No fertilizer was added in the
soil mix. These were placed under the nursery greenhouse so all seedlings were subjected

to a more or less similar light, temperature and humidity conditions.

Vable 1 Environmental conditions of the nursery at a $-hour interval during the experiment.
Dateand tine PSB sea age oc) itn,
cS estat oD 73.27- 7448 285-311 1063 - 1135
Oat ee 19-728 30.7 -32.3 1900 - 2130

ER TROT sas pore
Oa NS BOF hoa a

(2:30 pm)

Table 2. The soil properties of the soil medium used.


Experimental lay-out and seedling measurements

Experimental design was done in a completely randomized design (CRD) involving
a factorial treatment arrangement (Figure 3). A total of 36 seedlings (arranged 9 x 4) were
used for each experimental unit and were subjected to three pruning treatments (Figure 4).
Each treatment was replicated three times with a total of 972 seedlings used for the study.
Seedlings at the border of the experimental set ups were considered as border plants and
were not included in the measurements during the conduct of the study. Initial
measurements at the start of the experiment included, height, stem diameter, root collar
diameter (RCD), number of leaves and length of taproot after root pruning treatments were
done, Destructive sampling for root, shoot and total biomass, as well as RGP measurements
(number of new roots and length of new roots), were done at the end of the experiment.
The duration of the study lasted for 30 days before the final data collection of seedling

parameters and RGP were taken.

Legend: Bignai; || Kamagong; — Molave

TRY Replieae 1.2" Replewe 2:3 Replicwte
Figure 3. Experimental layout of the experiment done in a completely randomized
design (CRD)



Legend:
rl Border seedlings

1) Seedlings inctnded
in the observation

oO Block border

Figure 4. Arrangement of seedlings in a single experimental unit.

Root Pruning and Root Growth Potential (RGP)

The root system of each seedling was washed off thoroughly of soil before
‘transfering to potting bags. Root pruning was performed on the tap root as treatments.
Seedlings were pruned from the tip of the primary root at different lengths (Figure 5). The
taproot pruning treatments included no root pruning (control), 1-cm root pruning (treatment
1), and 2-cm root pruning (treatment 2). Taproot length was measured and recorded after

pruning and 30 days after the experiment using a measuring tape.

For RGP determination, the number and length of new roots with > 0.5 cm length
were measured for each seedling of each species. Roots were counted by dividing the root

system into the major laterals before counting each of the lateral roots as suggested by


Duryea (1985). The number of new roots was representative of all the counted new roots
from the first and second order lateral roots. The length of new roots per seedling were
added up to represent the root length parameter (Gazal et al., 2004). Root biomass was also

determined by measuring the root weight after oven drying at the end of the study.

ROOT
SYSTEM

1 emroot pruning
==. No root pruning
Figure 5. The three root pruning treatments applied for each species

Data Collection and Statistical Analysis

The other seedling parameters measured included the relative growth rate (height
and diameter), number of leaves, root collar diameter (RCD), root/shoot ratio, biomass
(root, shoot and total), length of tap root, sturdiness quotient, and seedling quality index
(SQN). Seedling heights were measured using a ruler from 5 mm above first order lateral

root to the apical meristem. Stem diameter and root collar diameter were measured using a


vernier caliper. The part measured was marked using correction fluid for consistency.
Height, diameter and number of leaves were recorded every after 15 days while RCD and
Jength of taproot were measured before and after the experiment. Total biomass, as well as
shoot and root, were recorded at the end of the experiment. The shoot and root of seedlings
were separated and oven dried at 80 °C for 24 hours or until constant mass was obtained
and was weighed using a digital electronic balance. Root/shoot ratio, sturdiness quotient
and seedling quality index (SQN) values were also calculated at the end of the study. A
sturdiness quotient of lower than 6 (ICRAF, n.d.) and an SQI value of greater than 0.2

(Dickson et al, 1960) indicates a good seedling quality.
Sturdiness quotient was determined with the formula:

seurdi vient < Height (cm)
rdiness quotient = Root collar diameter (mm)

Seedling quality index was calculated using the formula from Dickson ef al. (1960):

total biomass (g)

height (an) Shoot biomass (g)
Stem diameter (mm) * Toot biomass (g

sQl=

The correlation of seedling parameters and RGP were analyzed, as well as the
relationship of each parameters. All calculations and analysis were done using R software
(RStudio, Inc., Boston, MA) for generating the ANOVA, Tukey's HSD test for significant
differences, and Pearson correlation for determining significant relationships between

variables.


CHAPTER 4

RESULTS

Morphological Parameters

Diameter increment

There was a significant difference at 0.1% level in the diameter increment between
the root pruning treatments after 15 days for molave. Treatment 2 had the highest increment
of 0.21 mm while treatment | and contro! had a decrease in diameter (-0.13 and -0.08 mm,
respectively). For the whole 30 days of the experiment, treatment 2 still had the highest

diameter increment of 0.

mm followed by control (0.04 mm), while treatment 1 (-0.04
mm) obtained a negative value for means. All root pruning treatments did not have a
significant effect on the diameters of bignai and kamagong seedlings. Between species,
diameter increment of bignai was significantly different from kamagong and molave
(Figure 6). It had produced the highest diameter increment (0.51 mm) followed by

kamagong and molave at 0.11 and 0.07 mm, respectively (Appendix A).

A Mean diameter increment

1.40

1.20

1.00

80 ac
060 a1

“

0.40

020 L i
0.00 +.
M

Bignai Kamagong

Increment (mm)

0.20

B Mean height increment

Increment cm)

4.00
6.00 :
el Root Collar Diameter (RCD)
E 030
E ac
£ =n

‘Legend: C - Control (No root pruning); Tt — Treatment | (1-cm root pruning); T2 - Treatment 2 (2-cm root pruning)
Figure 6. _Effect of root pruning treatments on the RGP of three species A) Mean diameter

increment, B) mean height increment, and C) mean RCD increment of scedlings
afer 30 days.


Height increment

Height increment had no significant differences between treatments for bignai and
molave (Figure 6). The difference of the latter from the other species was extremely
significant, generating the lowest increment value, with a decrease in height for all

treatments (Appendix B). Bignai obtained the highest increment followed by kamagong.

The root pruning treatments had significantly affected the height development
between the second (after 15 days) and last measurement (after 30 days) for kamagong.
Treatment 1 was significantly different from control and treatment 2, having a value of
1.46 cm. Control and treatment 2 (0.06 and -0.59 cm, respectively) had no significant
differences, although the latter had a decrease in height. However, similar with the other

species, no significant differences were found between treatments after 30 days.

Root Collar Diameter (RCD)

Kamagong was found to have a significant difference at 5% level between
treatments for RCD increment after 30 days. Treatment 2 was not significantly different
from control and treatment 1, while the two were significantly different from each other.
The latter had produced the highest increment of 0.22 mm followed by treatment 2 (0.06
mm). Control had a negative means in RCD of -0.14 mm at the end of the experiment. For
molave, treatment means were significant at 0.1% level. Treatment 2 had the highest

increment of 0.16 mm and was significantly different from the other treatments, while



A Number of leaves
Pac
nie an
2. “72
°
Signal kamagong Molave
B Shoot biomass

E
4 Bignal kamagong Molave

Cc Total biomass

ac

a1

Weight (g)

an
; Bicol
Bignai Kamagong Molave
Legend: C - Control (No root pruning): Tl - Treatment 1 (1-cm root pruning); T2 - Treatment 2 (2-cm root pruning)
Figure 7. Effect of root pruning treatments on the RGP of three species A) mean number of

leaves, B) mean shoot biomass, and C) mean total biomass of seedlings after 30
days.


contro! and treatment 1 had a decrease in RCD (-0.14 and 0.10 mm, respectively). No
significant differences were found for bignai seedlings and root pruning treatments, but it
had the highest increment (0.27 mm) among species (Figure 6). Between species, bignai
had obtained the highest increment (0.014 mm) and was significantly different from

kamagong (0.045 mm) and molave (-0.027 mm) (Appendix C).

Number of leaves

For the mean number of leaves, significant differences between treatments after 15
days were found for kamagong. Treatment 2 had the highest mean number (17 leaves) and
was significantly different from control and treatment | (15 leaves for both). Between the
second and last measurement, both bignai and molave had significant differences. Control
(11 leaves) and treatment 2 (12 leaves) had the highest number of leaves for bignai while
control (13 leaves) and treatment | (13 leaves) had the highest for molave. After 30 days,
only bignai had significant differences between treatments, control (11 leaves) and
treatment 2 (12 leaves) having the highest number of leaves (Figure 7). Differences were
extremely significant at 0.1% level for all species. Kamagong generally had the highest

value (14 leaves), followed by bignai (1! leaves) and molave (9 leaves) (Appendix D).

Shoot biomass

Among species, only bignai was found to have a highly significant difference
between root pruning treatments for shoot biomass (Figure 7). Control had the highest
value of 3.22 grams, and was significantly different from the other treatments. Treatment
1 and treatment 2 were not significantly different from each other. having values of 2. 18
and 2.57 grams, respectively. All species means were significantly different from each
other at 0.1% level. Kamagong had the highest shoot biomass value of 6.11 grams.

followed by bignai (2.66 grams) and molave (0.96 grams) (Appendix E).

Total biomass

Root pruning treatments had significantly affected the total seedling biomass of
bignai and molave (Figure 7). For bignai, Control was significantly different from the two
other treatments and obtained the highest biomass of 5.41 grams. Treatment | and
treatment 2 were not significantly different from each other and had a total biomass of 3.63
and 4.22 grams, respectively. Control also generated the highest biomass (1.85 grams) for
molave, followed by treatment 1 (1.64 grams) and treatment 2 (1.45 grams). The species
were significantly different at 0.1% level, kamagong having the highest total biomass of

8.54 grams, followed by bignai at 4.42 grams and molave at 1.65 grams (Appendix F).

Root/shoot ratio

Roovshoot ratio is the proportion between the root and shoot of the seedling. A
higher root/shoot ratio is preferable as it indicates better anchorage of the root system and
the plant's ability to supply the shoot sufficient water and nutrients (Bertin ef al.. 2014).
The species had generated different rooVshoot ratios depending on the root pruning
treatment (Table 3). Treatment 2 had the highest rooUshoot ratio for bignai seedlings with
a value of 0.93 but was the lowest for kamagong seedlings with 0.39 ratio. Meanwhile,
control had obtained the highest root/shoot ratio for both kamagong and molave seedlings
(0.42 and 0.90, respectively) but had the lowest for bignai (0.73). However. no significant
differences were found between treatments for all species. Among species, only kamagong
had obtained the lowest roo/shoot ratio of 0.41 while bignai and molave had both obtained

0.80 ratio (Appendix G).

le Root/shoot ratio of seedlings.
Treatment

Specles — Control | Treatment 1 | Treatment 2 | Orand Mean
Bign __ 0.75” 0.93 0.80
~_Kamagong _ 041 | 039 O41
Molave 0.64 0.87 0.80
Grand Mean 0.68 0.60 0.73

Survival rate

Most seedlings had wilted in response to being transferred to new planting bags

during the first few days, but majority had survived. However, towards the end of the


experiment, a total of 70 out of 324 molave seedlings had died. It had the lowest survival
rate of 78% among species while bignai and kamagong had both obtained a 99% survival
rate. Generally, seedlings with control treatment had the highest survival rate for all species

while the lowest was treatment 2, excluding bignai where treatment I was the lowest (Table

4).
Table 4. Survival rate of seedlings after 30 days.
Treatment >
Species Control oa pr Total(%)
Bignai 100% 97% 100% 99%
Kamagong. 100% 997 98% 99%
Molave 87% 73% 78%
Total(%) 96% 90%

Root Growth Potential (RGP)

Number of roots

Among the species, all root pruning treatments for bignai was found to be extremely
significant at 0.1% level for the number of new roots. Control had the highest number of
roots (202 new roots), followed by treatment 2 and treatment 1 (148 and 113 new roots,
respectively). Bignai was also found to be significantly different from the other species and
had grown the most roots (154 new roots) (Appendix H). Kamagong and molave were not
significantly different from each other, having generated a means of 61 and 68 new roots,

respectively (Figure 8).


Length of new roots

No significant differences were found among root pruning treatments for the mean
length of new roots (Appendix 1). For species, means were extremely significant at 0.1%
level. Bignai had the highest root length of 47.99 mm, and was significantly different from
kamagong and molave which had mean lengths of 29.42 and 29.05 mm. respectively

(Figure 8).

Taproot length

No significant differences among root pruning treatments were found for all species
on taproot length (Figure 8). Bignai had the longest taproot (75.79 mm) and was
significantly different from the other species, while kamagong and molave were not

significantly different from each other (20.87 and 23.74 mm, respectively) (Appendix J).

Root biomass

Root pruning treatments were found to be extremely significant at 0.1% level for
the total root biomass of bignai. Control had the highest means (2.18 grams), and was
significantly different from treatment 2 and treatment 1 (1.65 and 1.45 grams,
respectively). The other species had no significant differences among treatments, however
differences between species were extremely significant at 0.1% level (Appendix K).

Kamagong had the highest root biomass of 2.43 grams followed by bignai and molave

>

No. of roots

=]


Increment (mm)
geese

°

a

Increment (mm)

ij]

Weight (g)

Number of new roots

Bet ae

Length of new roots

mel

Bignai Kamagong

Taproot length

Root biomass

ha

em i

Molave

Lilies

Molave

lids

Molave

eile

Molave

ac
an
an

ac
an
an

ac

an

ac
=m
an


Legend: C - Control (No root pruning); T1 ~ Treatment 1 (1-cm root pruning); T2 — Treatment 2 (2-cm root pruning)

Figure 8.

Effect of root pruning treatments on the RGP of three species; A) mean number of
new roots, B) mean length of new roots, C) mean taproot length, and D) mean root

biomass of scedlings after 30 days.


(1.76 and 0.69 grams, respectively). All species were significantly different from each

other (Figure 8).

Sturdiness Quotient and Seedling Quality Index (SQ1)

‘Another way to interpret a seedling’s morphological characteristics is through the
use of quality indices such as sturdiness quotient and seedling quality index (SQN). By
taking into consideration more than one parameter, the condition of the seedling can be
seen from a different perspective. Shoot growth as the sole criteria for seedling quality can
compromise the other traits needed by a seedling to survive in the field. Sturdiness quotient
measures the height over root collar diameter (RCD), with its proportionality determining
the stability of the seedling (ICRAF, n.d.). The quotient should have a lower value than 6
to expect the seedling to have higher survival on harsh sites. The seedling quality index
developed by Dickson ¢? al. (1960), utilizes more parameters, including the biomass, for a
better analysis of seedling condition (Ritchie, 1984). A higher index value indicates a

greater seedling quality.

Table 5 shows the mean sturdiness quotient of species and mean sturdiness quotient
of root pruning treatments for each species. For kamagong and molave, the controls
obtained the lowest sturdiness quotient (4. 91 and 11.60, respectively) while treatment |
had the highest value (5.26 and 12.46). Treatment 2 had the highest sturdiness quotient for
bignai (9.14), followed with control (8.40) and treatment 1 (8.10). According to the World
Agroforestry Centre (n.d.), seedlings should have a sturdiness quotient lower than 6 to be

acceptable. Of all species, only kamagong had a mean sturdiness quotient below 6 for all


treatments (Appendix L). The grand mean for all root pruning treatments also indicate no
sturdiness quotient values fall below 6, with control generating the lowest value and

‘treatment 2 the highest.

Table 5. Sturdiness Quotient of seedlings.

5 Treatment
Species Control | Treatment 1 | Treatment 2 | Grand Mean
Bignai 8.40 _ 8.10 9.14 835
Kamagong 491 5.26 4.99 5.05
Molave | __11.60 12.46 11.90 11,99
Grand Mean _ 831 8.61 8.68

Based on Dickson et al. (1960), seedlings with Seedling Quality Index (SQl) values
lower than 0.2 is undesirable, and that a higher value suggest a better seedling quality.
Control had generated the highest SQI for all treatments of bignai and molave (0.49 and
0.12, respectively), while treatment | had the lowest value for bignai and kamagong (0.33
and 0.95, respectively). In general, control and treatment 2 had similar and had the highest
SQI. Kamagong obtained the highest SQI value, followed by bignai and molave (Appendix

M). All root pruning treatments and species, apart from molave, had surpassed the 0.2 mark

(Table 6).

| Controt Treatment 1

0.49 0.33
Kamagong 0.99 0.95
Molave 0.12 0.09 0.08 0.10

Grand Mean 0.53 0.46 0.53



CHAPTER 5

DISCUSSION

BIGNAI

Antidesma bunius (L.) Spreng. is a native woody species described as shrubby.
reaching a height of around 3 to 8 m and occasionally up to 15 to 30 m with evergreen
leaves that forms a wide and dense crown (Orwa ef al., 2009). It is known for its edible red
berry-shaped fruit, which can be used as a seasoning, or converted to vinegar, wine, jam
and jelly (PCARRD, n.d.) It typically thrives on lower altitudes (0-1200 m), tolerates

acidic, alkaline and saline soils, and grows under light shade or full sun (Pfaf, n.d.).

For bignai seedlings, treatment 2 had the highest diameter increment while
treatment 1 and control also had increased but with lower values, although differences
between treatments weren't significant (Table 7). Height had increased after 15 days,
however, growth increment decreased for all root pruning treatments between the 15th day
and the last day of the experiment. Treatment 2 had resulted to more number of leaves but
this was not significantly different from control. Mean number of leaves was also constant
for all seedlings regardless of the date of measurement and treatments. Height increment,
number of leaves, RCD increment, shoot biomass and total biomass were all negatively
correlated with root/shoot ratio as these were parameters that were positively correlated

with shoot biomass, the denominator of the ratio. However no significant differences were


Table 7. Effect of different taproot pruning lengths on the different parameters of bignai seedlings
‘Shows all mean values (4SE value) and the significance of each treatment comparison.
Param Control (No | Treatment 1 (1 em | Treatment 2.2 em | Stenifcancs of
| taproot prening) | taproot pruning) | taproct pruning) | oven
aan rement | 9 s618 (0.05 | 0.223120.04" | 0.9403(20.60)" NS
Neen “me " 1 jes21gosiy | 1se10@osiy | 1.5795 40.539 NS
Namberofleaves | 11 @OS1)> Eri 12 e078 .
Root Collar
Diameter increment | 0.3177(40.06" | 0.2238 (20.06 | 0.2569 (20.06 Ns
(mum
Shoot biomass (g) | 32505 O20" | 2.1846 O19 | 2.5667 (20.19 *
Root biomass (g) | 2.1846 @O.16y | 1As62(@O.11P | —1.648 @OIIP we
Total biomass (a) | S401 @033" | 363082028" | 42154 2028 ci
‘Number of new 7 we
ber 202 (214.84) 113 aay 148 (210.91)
Vength of new | so gare e227 | 453ei6(e207e | 47.7256 (22.047 NS
a 8479 ( (224 T2356 (42 S
Taproot length 3 5
incement remy | 738934 (212.199 | 62.9344 (211.649 | 90.5387 (29227 NS
Roolshoot ratio | 0.73005" | 0.75 (@006" 093 EOP WS
Stordiness Quotient | #40031 B10 GOST 314 0397 WS
Sevdting Quality | assay | 0330.03 0.39,(20.047 .
Index
10%



found between treatments. Overall, the 1-cm and 2-cm root pruning treatments had no
significant influences on the growth and development of the seedlings, both on the shoot

and root, based on the statistical analyses.

Seedlings with no root-pruning had produced more new roots and higher shoot. root
and total biomass. Shoot biomass was positively correlated with both root and total
biomass, where control seedlings had higher values and was significantly different from
the other treatments. However, even with higher biomass values, it had obtained the lowest
root/shoot ratio (although not significant). This could mean that the large shoot growth was
not compensated with the same rate of root growth compared to the Treatment 2 seedlings.
Despite that, it had still produced a better seedling quality based on the Seedling Quality
Index (SQI) as it obtained the highest value among treatments. Diameter increment,
biomass (shoot, root, total), number of new roots and length of new roots were all positively
correlated with SQI. Its sturdiness quotient mean had been the second lowest (the lower
the value being preferable) but with only a small difference from the mean value of

seedlings with 1-cm root pruning.

Despite the results, the 2-cm root pruning had resulted to a higher number of new
roots and heavier shoot, root and total biomass, than I-cm root pruning. It also had no
mortality, similar with seedlings not root-pruned, and was the treatment with the highest
diameter increment. It also had the highest taproot length increment (not significant) and
‘was second to control with the highest number of new roots. The latter was the only

parameter that had positive relationship with taproot length. This means that an increase in


taproot length leads to an increase in the number of new roots, however, the root pruned
seedlings, which had longer taproot length increment had fewer new roots. But the fewer
roots may have led to the slightly higher root/shoot ratio of treatment 2 seedlings so it
cannot be said that bignai had been negatively affected by the root pruning treatment. It
indicated that taproot pruning had still improved the growth of bignai seedlings, and that a
longer root pruning length might be preferable as 2-cm root pruned seedlings generally had
higher increment than 1-cm root pruned ones. Some species have more tolerance to
intensive root pruning than others (Larson, 1975) while some have no response to it (Nabb

and Vanderschaaf, 2005).

Bignai had the largest diameter, height and root collar diameter (RCD) growth
among the species. It also had the highest mean for the number of new roots, new root
lengths and taproot length. In relation, Rindyastuti and Sancayaningsih (2018) had found
that bignai was one of the species in the study where relative growth rate had a strong
correlation with leaf nitrogen productivity and specific root length, which could be
identified as a slow-growing species that develop roots for plant biomass and can tolerate
dry climate. However, the good seedling performance was also most likely due to an
advantage of being transplanted first before the other species, thus the seedlings had more

time to acclimatize to the new environment.


KAMAGONG

Kamagong (Diospyros blancoi A. DC.) also called as mabolo for its fruit. is a
shade-tolerant native tree species often used for ornamental purposes or as a shade tree. It
can stand either as a short tree with drooping branches or as a tall and straight-boled tree
with rough, dark-grayish outer bark (Morton, 1987). The reddish fruit is large and covered
all over with velvety hairs, hence it is also called velvet apple (Binhi, 2018). It is often
found on primary and secondary forests with low to medium altitude and can usually

survive any type of soil (Morton, 1987).

Treatment 2 seedlings had increased in height but decreased in diameter for the first
15 days while the reverse happened for the latter half of the month (Table 8). This was the
opposite for the control and treatment | seedlings as height decreased after 15 days but had
recovered after that period. However, no correlation was found between the parameters of
height and diameter. Root pruning can terminate shoot growth, as growth-inducing
phytohormones, such as the interaction of gibberellin and cytokinins, are supplied by the
roots and root tips (Saure, 2007). In the experiment, the seedlings with more intensive
pruning had initially increased in height following the treatment, but had decreased later
(accompanied with a decrease in the number of leaves), implying that this was when the
influence of pruning on the shoot had occurred. Treatment 2 seedlings also produced the
highest root, shoot and total biomass, all of which were positively correlated with each
other. Although treatments had not shown a significant difference between means, the

seedlings had the highest mean length of new roots, number of new roots and the second


longest taproot. Positive correlation was also found between the RGP parameters, including
root biomass. While it had lower root/shoot ratio (not significant), the sudden decrease in
the number of leaves even though it had longer and more new roots could have been an
attempt to increase the balance of its ratio. Since root pruning initially decreased root/shoot
ratio, kamagong responded by shedding its leaves while increasing the number of new roots
and its length. Treatment 2 seedlings had also obtained the highest SQI value and its
sturdiness quotient value was also similar to control seedlings. Survival did not matter as

it only had two deaths.

The 1-cm root pruning was the only treatment with seedlings that did not decrease
in diameter at any measurement period. It had the highest increment for height during the
latter half of the experiment (not significant). However, this growth was not reflected when
the increment for the whole 30 days was computed indicating that the experiment might
had been too short. RGP tests are usually shortened to 7 or 14 days as a shorter period is
preferable when making decisions in the nursery (Ritchie and Tanaka, 1990). This duration
was shown to be feasible for a lot of conifer species so it could also depend on the species.
Another probable reason was because the seedlings studied were a bit older (plantable
height) than those usually used for RGP tests. Since younger seedlings are still developing,
they are more sensitive to external factors (Kozlowski et al., 1991) and are thus more
responsive. RCD increment was the only parameter with significant differences between
treatments, where treatment | seedlings had the highest value. However, it had the highest
sturdiness quotient and lowest SQI value, indicating a lower seedling quality. The increase

of shoot growth might not have been compensated with the same rate of root growth,


Table 8. Effect of different taproot pruning lengths on the different parameters of kamagong
seedlings. Shows all mean values (#SE value) and the significance of each treatment
comparison.

Conueiie | TEteeatTG | Treatment? (| Significance of
Parameters cm taproot em taproot treatment
taproot pruning) 3 P A
Praning) Pruning) comparison
Pane rement | 9.0928 (40.05 | 0.1379(20.05)" | 0.1077 0.06)" Ns
ait ent | 9.1436 (20.12 | 0.8821 (40.43 | -0.0462 (20.40) NS
Number offeaves | 14 @061" 13 say 14 0927 NS
Root Collar
Diameter increment | -0.1369 (40.097 | 0.2156(20.09)> | 0.0551 (20.07) o
(mm)
Shoot biomass (g) | 54590 2040" | 6.0462 (2032 | 6.8154 (20.48) NS
Root biomass (g) | 23564022" | 24 (20.15 23359 @017P NS
Total biomass (g) | 78154 (20.607 | 84462@043— | 93513 @063)" NS
Number of new . . > ;
nha 54 (45.52) 60 (27.07) 70 (212.47) Ns
Fength of new mols | 99 o964 (41.66) | 25.2914 (41.37 | 33.7629.(24.00¢ Ns
(mm)
_Taproot length | 17.7974 (47.66) | 24.0605 (47.05 | 20.7521 (27.62) NS
increment (mm)
Root-shoot ratio 0.42 (20.02)" 0.41 (20.027 0.39 (+0.02)* NS
‘Sturdiness Quotient | 4.91 (0.11) 5.26(20.15" | 4.99(20.11)* NS
Seine ATT To 55.20057 | assaooer | uneoary | NS
‘Survival rale 100% wm 98%

*=P<0.05; NS=Not significant



leading to an uneven proportion between the shoot and root systems. Usually, root pruning
leads to an increased photosynthate allocation, decreasing shoot growth while increasing
root growth and subsequently, the root-shoot ratio (Kozlowski et al., 1991). Root
development could be halted if outcompeted by an active shoot elongation (Ritchie and
Tanaka, 1990). However, the new roots that the pruning induced might had increased
cytokinin levels and restore gibberellin activity enough to produce significant shoot growth
(Saure, 2007). Despite having the lowest quality among treatments, treatment 1 seedlings

had grown the most, with high increments for diameter, height, RCD, and taproot length.

While control seedlings had no mortality and had the highest sturdiness quotient
value, they mostly had the lowest increment for the other seedling parameters. No other
correlation was also found between sturdiness quotient and other parameters apart from
height increment. Treatment 1 seedlings had grown the most while treatment 2 seedlings
had better seedling quality based on its parameters. Although differences weren't
significant, the duration of the observation might had been too short to generate significant
results. Since all kamagong seedlings, regardless of treatment, had passed the seedling
quality parameters, and as root pruned seedlings had actually produced better seedling

quality than control, pruning of taproot could be recommended to improve seedling growth.

Kamagong seedlings had the highest root, shoot, and total biomass, and the most
number of leaves. Along with bignai, it obtained a high survival rate of 99%. It had also
generated the highest SQI value and the lowest sturdiness quotient, where it was the only

‘species with mean value falling below the 6 threshold for desirable seedlings. When based


on these parameters, kamagong had better seedling quality than the other species. However.
it had obtained the lowest root/shoot ratio among the species. It follows that a large top
should also have an equally large root system which will supply water and nutrients
(Ritchie, 1984), but a small root system may be acceptable if there is an adequate supply
of water and nutrients (Greenwood, 1983 cited from Lynch ef al., 2012). In addition, having
a smaller root volume during transplant could have an advantage, as the seedling would
have a relatively small leaf area, minimizing water loss through transpiration (Davis and
Jacobs, 2005). Since kamagong has an unbalanced root/shoot ratio, it might actually benefit
from root pruning as it increased the number and length of new roots, as well as taproot

length, which could contribute to a more balanced proportion.

MOLAVE

Vitex parviflora Juss. or Molave, is a shade-intolerant native species widely used
for its timber. It is usually 30-38 m tall, with short branches though branchless up to 20 m,
and buttressed (Orwa e? al., 2009). It can grow on rocky ground, grassy slopes, or dry
limestone soils and thrives on forests with distinct wet and dry seasons (Binhi, 2018).
Molave is also used for environmental services such as shelterbelt, soil erosion control and
sediment retention (Orwa ¢/ al., 2009). It is often planted in reforestation projects and is

known for its hardness and durability (Castafeto, 2001),

Control seedlings had the highest increment for height, had the highest shoot, root

and total biomass, and had grown the longest and the most new roots. All biomass (shoot,


root and total), number of leaves, number of new roots, and length of new roots were all
positively correlated with each other. Moreover, it had the best seedling quality based on
the sturdiness quotient and SQI parameters where the latter was positively correlated with
biomass (shoot, root and total), number of new roots, length of new roots and roo/shoot
ratio. Nevertheless all seedlings regardless of the root pruning treatment had obtained an

‘SQI lower than 0.2, which was undesirable for seedlings.

Pruning of taproot appears to be unsuitable for molave as root-pruned seedlings had
obtained lower values with longer pruning length for most parameters. It also had lower
seedling quality than unpruned seedlings as identified from the sturdiness quotient and SQI
values. Seedlings with low sturdiness quotient are expected to be resilient on windy and
dry sites (ICRAF, n.d.) and to be capable of withstanding physical damage (Thompson
1985 cited by Budiman ef al., 2015). Its lanky form could be susceptible to wind damage
if unsupported by a firm root system (Kozlowski ef al., 1991). Root/shoot ratio was also
lowest with treatment | seedlings and highest with control, however differences weren't
significant. The slightly higher ratio for treatment 2 seedlings could be a result of the
tendency of trees to maintain a constant rooUshoot ratio (Kozlowski, Kramer and Pallardy.

1991).

Diameter and RCD increments had highly significant differences between
treatment means where treatment 2 seedlings had obtained the highest values. It had the
lowest height and diameter decreases compared with the other treatments. Diameter of

control and treatment 1 seedlings had

ally decreased for the first 15 days but had


Table 9. Effect of different taproot pruning lengths on the different parameters of Molave seedlings.
‘Shows all mean values (4SE value) and the significance of each treatment comparison.
‘Treatment 1(1 | Treatment 2(2 | Significance of
Paemaers | Comite | ret | ecapret | reatwent
sete i) pruning) pruning) comparison
C aa rement | 9.359 20.05" | 0.0444 (20.04 | 0.2123 (20.05) one
Height increment .
‘om 4.0487 (21.479 | -3.6667(21.23" | -2.9385 (£1.03) NS
Number of feaves 3 @osey 10 (@1.10F 8067" NS
Root Collar
Diameter increment | -0.1382 (40.05)* | -0.0982 (40.04) | 0.1559 (40.07) °
(mm)
Shoot biomass (g) | 1.0282 (20.09) | 1.0103 (20.07 | 0.8282 (40.05)" NS
Root biomass (g) | 0.8205(20.08" | 0.6359(40.07" | 06179 (20.07) NS
Total biomass (g) [1.8487 (40.15)" | 1.6462 (40.13) 1.4462 (£0.10) NS
Number of new 79 (29.12) 66 (27.98) 60 (25.68)* Ns
roots
Fength of new rots | 39 6156 42.17 | 29.3043 (21.82) | 27.2436 (41.28) NS
(mm)
Root-shoot ratio | 0.90 (20.13)" 0.64 (20.067 0:87 (20.137 WS
Sturdiness Quotient | 11.60 0.52" 12.46 (20.547 11.90 20:52)" NS
‘Seedling Quality —- 7
ie 0.12 (20.01 0.09 (20.01) 0.08 (20.01)
‘Survival rate 3% 73% 3%



increased after that period. Although the cumulative increment had showed that only
treatment | seedlings had decreased in diameter for the duration of the experiment, its mean
value was not significantly different from control seedlings. Treatment 1 seedlings had a
small height increment during the first 15 days, but it had also decreased as with the control
and treatment 2 seedlings and obtained the lowest mean height towards the end. Height had
all decreased regardless of the treatment and mean values generated had no significant
differences, Control seedlings also had the highest survival rate while root pruned seedlings

had obtained low percentages.

Contrary to kamagong, instead of the height decreasing for the root pruned
seedlings of molave (since the reduction of a part of the root system should unbalance the
rool/shoot ratio, especially molave with a lanky stature), the unpruned seedlings ended up
having the highest decrease in its height. These seedlings had higher root biomass, more

new roots and longer new roots (not significant) so it could have been the response of

molave to retain its root/shoot r: If the sturdiness quotient and SQI is used as the basis,
root pruning should not be done for molave as it could establish more new roots without
this intervention. The downside may be the decrease in height but this resulted with higher

rootshoot ratio and quality index values, which could be more important in field survival.

Molave had obtained the lowest value for most parameters. Moreover, it had the
highest sturdiness quotient values and was the only species with an SQI mean value which
fell below the 0.2 mark for low quality seedlings. This was because the molave seedlings

were generally spindly, having a tall height but small girth, as evidenced by its sturdiness


quotient values. This had also reflected the negative correlation between height increment
and SQI, as an increase in height would make the seedling more spindly. However. it had
the same mean root/shoot ratio with bignai, and was also similar with the root/shoot values

of molave grown on copper contaminated soils observed in a study by Tulod ef al. (2012).

The negative response of the species could have also been caused by the
morphological characteristics and age of the planting stock selected for the study. The
planting height and RCD for molave were 30 cm and 7 mm respectively, which was the
standard used for the RP Japan Forestry Development Project in Nueva Ecija. The
seedlings used at the start of the experiment were about 18 months old, 40 cm in height,
and 3.11 mm in RCD; hence, already past its plantable age. Furthermore, its average
sturdiness quotient value was high at 12.86, which is considered to be of very low quality
(low sturdiness). The Department of Environment and Natural Resources (DENR) required
a standard height of 22 to 30 cm and stem diameter of 3 to 5 mm for planting in RGP sites
(Balangue, 2016). Another guideline for seedling quality such as a height of more than 30
cm from the root collar, at least 5 mm base diameter, with a straight stem, good health, and
having at least six leaves, was found in a seedling production contract of DENR officers in
Region 8 (Gregorio et al., 2016). However, as argued by the authors, the criterion is not
useful because of the lack of an upper limit on height and number of leaves should be
considered together with root volume. If based on the requirements stated above, only

kamagong can be considered to pass the standards.


Root Growth Potential (RGP)

The RGP values had mostly reflected the quality of the seedlings and
complemented results obtained from the other parameters. Seedlings of high quality
(sturdiness quotient and SQI) which generated high growth increments, had also grown
more new roots, had longer new roots and had the highest root biomass. A positive
correlation was also found between the biomass parameters and the number and length of
new roots for all species. Taproot length increment had deviated from this pattern.
Treatment | seedlings had the longest taproot increment for both kamagong and molave.
While treatment 2 seedlings had shorter taproot growth, it was still longer than the control
seedlings. In the case of bignai, treatment 2 seedlings had the longest taproot increment
while treatment 1 seedlings had the shortest. Taproot pruning resulted to larger increment

for taproot length compared to seedlings without pruning.

A positive relationship was found between taproot length increment, number of
new roots and length of new roots for kamagong, and between taproot length increment
and number of new roots for bignai. The length and number of new roots, in tum, was
positively correlated with SQI for all species. This suggest that taproot pruning was
effective in stimulating root elongation and root initiation. Root pruning had since been
reported to improve root fibrosity and root carbohydrate status (Ritchie and Dunlap, 1980).
A higher number of lateral roots improves root-to-soil contact, an important factor for
water and nutrient uptake (Grossnickle, 2005), which is necessary for seedlings to

immediately adapt in the field. A similar study by Corpuz et al. (2013), also determined


Table 10. Correlation between the parameters of bignai seedlings. Shows all correlation coefficient values.
DH NL RCD SB RB 1B NR LNR TP _RSR__SQ__SQI

D 1.00 0.13 001 0.09 0.03 0.04 0.08 0.06 0.02008 0020.12 0.34"
H 1.00 0.09 0.03 0.15% 005 012 001 007 0.09 0.19" 0.05 -0.004
NL 1.00 0.34% 057" 0.16 044° O41 014 0.08 0.29" 0.49" 0.08
RCD 1.00 0.31% 0.08 0.23" 026° 0.12 0.003 0.19" 0. 0.03
SB 00 0.69" 095" 053" 024 003 0.36" 0.16 0.64"
RB 1.00 0.88" 0.44" 032" 0.03 0.03 0.16 0.83"
TB 1.00 0.54" 0.29% 0.009 -0.25* 0.03 0.77"
NR 100 032" 0.20" 0.10 0.03 0.40"
LNR 100 0.09 0.01 0.08 0.23
iid 100 007 0.13 -0.02
RSR 1.00 0.19" -0.10
SQ 100-36"
SQ 1.00
Table 11 Correlation betwoen the, of kamagong seodlings. Shows all correlation coefficient values.

DNL RCD SB__AB TB NR INR TP __RSR__SQ___SOr
D100 0006 021° 030° 01S 016 016 0.12 -009 009 004-002 019°
" 100-006 012 -00$ 006-002 003. 003-=ssoS- 027-007
NL 100 0008059" 039" 056" 029" O31 002-021" 004 047"
RCD 100 010 00s 013 002 010-002-018 o0s
SB 100 079" ase alt 012-018" 002087"
RB 100 050" 034" 021" odor 005 Ose
DB 100 050" 041" 01S 0006-004 O94e
NR 100 068 023" O18" D004 048
LNR 100 021% 010082037"
P 100 017 007s.
RSR 100 O11 ot
sQ 100.024

5Q) 100,
Table 12. Correlation between the parameters of molave seedlings. Shows all correlation coefficient values.
NR ENR TP RSR__SQ_SQr

DH NL RCD SB RDS
D100 O01 002037" Gol D008 DOl__003 003 01s" 0003 00} oT
i" 100 035" 005 024 = 0101s" 2s 01013-0162
NL 100 010 034" 019" 030" 025" O21" 0005-017 OMY 0S
RCD 100 008 002 003-004-005 «007 10-007
sn 100 058 oa 049" 043" 00S 024" GUT UT
RB 100 08s 037" ass oom 050" «007 ont
7" 100 048" 050" 003. o1S 200 ome
NR 100 039% 011 0s 010 oe
LNR 100 0007 003 005 aut
a 100 0s) 012, on
RSR 100 01S 026+
sq 10 oa
sai 100

1D = Diameter, 11 = Height: NL. = Number of leaves; RCD = Root Collar Diameter increment, SB
hoot biomass; RB = Root biomass; TB = Total biomass; NR = Number of new roots; LNR = Length of
‘new roots: TP = Taproot length; RSR = Root-shoot ratio: SQ = Sturdiness Quotient; SQL
‘Quality Index.

“Significant at P = 0.05



the effect of different root pruning lengths on the number of new roots and taproot length
of four hardwood tree species namely narra (Pterocarpus indicus), Thailand shower
(Cassia fistula), supa (Sindora supa), and dao (Dracontomelon dao). Similar with the
study, the response of species had varied depending on the root pruning length. but the
influence on the number of new roots and taproot growth was mostly positive. Abod and
Webster (1990), and Sudmeyer e” al. (2004), also found increased new root growth and
elongation (Malus pumila, Tilia cordata and Betula pendula), and density of roots (Pinus
pinaster, P. radiata, Eucalyptus globulus and E. kochii), respectively, for several root
pruned species compared to those unpruned. However, there are also studies that found no
advantage of applying root pruning to seedling growth. Taproot pruning had negatively
affected the seedling growth of Pterocarpus angolensis although it had induced lateral root
growth (Munyanziza and Oldeman, 1994). Intensive root pruning had resulted to lower
survival rate, height increment, RCD increment, shoot dry weight, taproot regrowth, and
SQI for all height groups of Quercus acutissima seedlings in a study by Na et al. (2013).
The large-sized seedlings (over 35 cm) had a better response on the root pruning intensities
which had severely affected, in particular, the small-sized seedling group (under 15 cm in
height). This was opposite with the assumption that pruning will impair the growth of taller
seedlings as this would easily lead to a disproportionate root to shoot ratio. It was also the
case for this study as the species had generally responded well to the root pruning
treatments. Inconsistencies between results should be expected owing to the diverse range

of species, severity of pruning, and environmental conditions (Abod and Webster, 1990).


Number of leaves was also positively correlated with the number of new roots
(bignai) and length of new roots (kamagong and molave). The shoot (buds. leaves. and the
terminal and lateral meristems) serves as stimulus for root growth and has been described
in many studies, how removal of leaves leads to a reduction or halt in root growth for a lot
of species (Ritchie and Dunlap, 1980; Ritchie and Tanaka, 1990). Root development
requires an ample amount of carbohydrates, and this is often provided by the current
photosynthesis especially if there is low nutrient availability in the soil and insufficient
stored reserves (Lynch et al., 2012) which could be the case for seedlings immediately
transplanted. Auxin, a chief regulator of lateral root formation and initiation, is also

primarily produced by the shoot (as well as the root) (Overvoorde et al., 2010).

‘As was mentioned by several authors, the potential of RGP as a test is to determine
the seedling’s current condition and detect its ability to survive. RGP can be utilized as an
indicator of the adaptability of seedlings. Gazal e/ al, (2004) observed the highest number
and length of new roots for Prerocarpus indicus seedlings watered with 50% and 75% field
capacity, than those with 100% field capacity. Simpson (1990) found that frost hardiness,
RGP and field performance were directly correlated with each other for Pseudotsuga
menziesii and Pinus contorta species. An experiment by Insley and Buckley (1985) found
that root-pruned seedlings of Fraxinus excelsior either before or after being subjected to a
24-hour drying period had similar reductions to its growth, suggesting that the loss of roots
is the same as desiccation for the seedlings. Tinus (1996) who performed an RGP test on
Pseudotsuga menziesii var. glauca seedlings with increasing levels of drought-stress, found

‘that RGP was reduced with severe stress, while highly-stressed seedlings had lower


survival rate and height growth. This was also the case for Pinus halepensis, were the RGP
results of seedlings grown on the greenhouse and growth chamber had accounted for the
variation in the survival of outplanted seedlings, enough for it to be reliable (del Campo et
al, 2007). These demonstrate that there is indeed a degree of correlation between root
growth and performance in the field. However, this predictive power may diminish as the
time grows between the RGP test and the planting of the seedlings in the field (Tinus,
1996). Therefore, RGP would be more reliable as long as the test is done as close as
possible to the planting date (del Campo ef al., 2007). Deep knowledge on the
particularities of the site, including the handling of seedlings and planting procedures, will

increase the odds of accurately predicting field performance (I.’Hirondelle et al. 2007),

Moreover, it is much more difficult to predict seedling performance using only the
usual morphological characteristics. This is because not a single parameter or even a set of
parameters can completely predict the actual performance of the seedling in the field
(Ritchie, 1984; Burdett, 1987; Davis and Jacobs, 2005). On the other hand, RGP still has
some predictive power when determining which seedlings are more resistant to stress and
which seedlings could be damaged (Ritchie and Tanaka, 1990). Some studies also show
how else RGP can be interpreted for seedling assessment. RGP results had been more
useful in detecting vigor loss for Pinus halepensis seedlings instead of its morphological
and physiological attributes (del Campo et al., 2007). Root phosphorus of Quercus ilex
seedlings was also strongly correlated with RGP (number of new roots) and was more
responsive to fall fertilization than its shoots; however, there was no relationship between

shoot height and RGP (Oliet ef a/., 2010). Combining root pruning with gibberellin Avr


stem injection to Picea mariana seedlings increased seed, pollen cone and reproductive bud
production than using only one of the treatments (Smith and Greenwood, 1995) and
increased male and female flowering for Larix laricina (Eysteinsson and Greenwood,
1990). Meanwhile, L’Hirondelle et al. (2007) had recognized the combination of RGP and
chlorophyll fluorescence as an effective performance predictor of the outplanted conifer
seedlings. This study illustrates that there could be other physiological parameters which
has a direct relationship with RGP that could warrant a more reliable field performance

indicator.


CHAPTER 6

CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATION

Root growth potential is used as a measure of the seedling's capacity to generate
new roots in an optimum environment, determining the plant health status to a certain
degree and its ability to survive when outplanted. For this study, the RGP of three native
species were identified to test seedling quality and determine the relationship between root
growth and the secdling’s morphological parameters. Taproot pruning at different lengths,
control (no pruning), treatment | (1-cm pruning) and treatment 2 (2-cm pruning), were also
performed as treatments to demonstrate if pruning can improve seedling growth and RGP,
and identify which species were tolerant. In general, taproot pruning had no significant
effects on the seedling morphological attributes for all species. However, RGP parameters
such as number and length of new roots were positively correlated with the taproot length
increment which tended to be highest with root pruned seedlings (although not significant).

While different root pruning lengths had not reflected any significant differences, the

duration of the experiment may had been too short to observe its influence on root
elongation. Root pruning seems to be unsuitable for the studied molave seedlings as
treatment 2 had obtained the lowest values for most parameters. While seedlings unpruned
obtained high parameter values, bignai seedlings could be tested for a more intensive
pruning as it had generally responded well with 2-cm root pruning than I-cm root pruning.

In the case of kamagong, since it has a low rooUshoot ratio, it might actually benefit from


root pruning as it increased the number and length of new roots, which could contribute to
a more balanced proportion. While the species had generated the lowest roov/shoot ratio. it
also had obtained good index values, the highest biomass (shoot, root and total) and number
of leaves, all of which were positively correlated with the number and length of new roots.
The latter were consequently, strongly correlated with taproot length increment. The results
suggest that pruning of taproot can still be recommended to induce elongation of the

primary roots and the initiation of new lateral roots.

The RGP parameters had generally complemented the results from the other
attributes, confirming how root development is associated with the morphological growth
of the seedling. Seedlings of high quality (sturdiness quotient and SQI values) and high
growth increments had also grown more new roots, longer new roots and heavier root
biomass. These parameters were also found to be positively correlated with one another.
The study indicates that using RGP has a lot of potential and can be included in nurseries
asa stock quality indicator. RGP studies can also be performed on other native species, not
only to fill our knowledge deficiency on how natives develop, but may also give us insight
on how to conserve these species. It could also further encourage the use of native species
for reforestation programs. The experiment duration could be a bit longer than 30 days or
younger seedlings could be used to produce a more comprehensive result. A field
performance assessment could also be done to supplement the RGP findings as most of the

trees with these studies are conifer species.


LITERATURE CITED

ABOD, S. A., and A. D. WEBSTER. (1990). Shoot and root pruning effects on the growth
and water relations of young Malus, Tilia and Betula transplants. Journal of
Horticultural Science, 65(4), 451-459. doi: 10.1080/0022 1589.1990.11516078

BALANGUE, T.O. (2014). Best Practices in Philippine Reforestation Using Indigenous
Forest Species: Learning from the Field. Energy Development Corporation. Metro
Manila.

BALANGUE, T. O. (2016). National greening program assessment project: Environmental
component - process evaluation phase, PIDS Discussion Paper Series, No. 2016-
11, Philippine Institute for Development Studies (PIDS), Makati City

BERTIN, T., Z. TCHOUNDJEU, A. DEGRANDE, E. ASAAH, A. GYAU, F. NUMBISI.
N. FREDERICK, and A. TSOBENG. (2014). Assessing the Quality of Seedlings
in Small-scale Nurseries in the Highlands of Cameroon: The Use of Growth
Characteristics and Quality Thresholds as Indicators. Small-scale Forestry. 13.
10.1007/s11842-013-9241-7.

BINDER, W.D., R.K. SCAGEL, and G.J. KRUMLIK. (1988). Root Growth Potential:
Facts, Myths, Value. Combined Western Forest Nursery Council, Forest Nursery
Association of British Columbia, and Intermountain Forest Nursery Association
meeting; 1988 August 8-11; Vernon, British Columbia.

BINHI. (2018). Kamagong. Retrieved from http://binhi.test-sites.online/tree/kamagong/
BINHI. (2018). Molave. Retrieved from http://binhi.test-sites.online/tree/molave/

BUDIMAN, B.. D. J. SUDRAJAT. D. K. LEE, and Y. S. KIM. (2015). Effect of initial
morphology on field performance in white jabon seedlings at Bogor, Indonesia.
Forest Science and Technology, = 11(4),,- 206-211. doi:
10.1080/21580103.2015.1007897

BURDETT, A. N. (1987). Understanding root growth capacity: theoretical considerations
in assessing planting stock quality by means of root growth tests. Canadian Journal
of Forest Research, 17(8), 768-775. doi:10.1139/x87-123

CASTANETO, Y.T. (2001). Growth Response of Molave (Vitex parviflora Juss.)
Seedlings to Biocore and Mykovam, Philippine Journal of Science, 130(2), 97-101.
ISSN 0031-7683

CORPUZ, O., E. ABAS, and Z. ADAM. (2013). Root growth potentials of selected
hardwood tree Species in the Philippines. Direct Research Journal of Agricultural
and Food Science. 1. 48-51.

S7

DAVIS, A. S., and D. F. JACOBS. (2005). Quantifying root system quality of nursery
seedlings and relationship to outplanting performance. New Forests, 30(2-3), 295—
311, doi: 10,1007/s11056-005-7480-y

DICKSON, A., LEAF, A. L., and HOSNER, J. F. (1960). Quality Appraisal of White
‘Spruce and White Pine Seedling Stock in Nurseries. The Forestry Chronicle, 36(1),
10-13, doi: 10,5558/tfc36010-1

DURYEA, M. L. (1985). Proceedings: Evaluating seedling quality: principles, procedures,
and predictive abilities of major tests. Workshop held October 16- 18, 1984. Forest
Research Laboratory, Oregon State University, Corvallis. ISBN 0- 87437-000-0

EYSTEINSSON, T., and M. S. GREENWOOD. (1990). Promotion of flowering in young
Larix laricina grafts by gibberellin A4/7 and root pruning. Canadian Journal of
Forest Research, 20(9), 1448-1452. doi: 10.1139/x90-191

FARRAR, J. F., and D. L. JONES. (2000). The control of carbon acquisition by roots. New
Phytologist, 147(1), 43-53. doi: 10.1046/).1469-8137.2000.00688.x

GAZAL, R., C. BLANCHE, and W. CARANDANG. (2004). Root growth potential and
seedling morphological attributes of narra (Pierocarpus indicus Willd.) transplants.
Forest Ecology and_=— Management, = 195(1-2), 259-266.
doi; 10.1016/j.foreco.2004.03.023

GREGORIO, N., J. HERBOHN, S. HARRISON, A. PASA. and A. FERRAREN. (2016).
Regulating the Quality of Seedlings for Forest Restoration: Lessons from the
National Greening Program in the Philippines. Small-scale Forestry, 16(1), 83-102.
doi:10.1007/s1 1842-016-9344-z

GROSSNICKLE, S. C. (2005). Importance of root growth in overcoming planting stress.
New Forests, 30(2-3), 273-294. doi: 10.1007/s1 1056-004-8303-2

HAWES, E., and M. SMITH. (2005). Riparian Buffer Zones: Functions and
Recommended Widths. Yale School of Forestry and Environmental Studies.

ISRAEL, D. C., and J. H. LINTAG. (2013). Assessment of the Efficiency and
Effectiveness of the Reforestation Program of the Department of Environment and
Natural Resources, PIDS Discussion Paper Series, No. 2013-22, Philippine
Institute for Development Studies (PIDS), Makati City

JENSEN, M. H. (1997). Hydroponics. Department of Plant Sciences, University of
Arizona, Tucson. Hort. Science, 32(6)

KOZLOWSKI, T. T., P. J. KRAMER, S. G. PALLARDY, and J. ROY. (1991). The
Physiological Ecology of Woody Plants. Burlington: Elsevier Science.


LARSON, M. M. (1975). Pruning Northem Red Oak Nursery Seedlings: Effects on Root
Regeneration and Early Growth. Canadian Journal of Forest Research, 5(3), 381—
386. doi: 10.1139/x75-052

L'HIRONDELLE, S. J., D. G. SIMPSON, and W. D. BINDER. (2007). Chlorophyll
fluorescence, root growth potential, and stomatal conductance as estimates of field
performance potential in conifer seedlings. New Forests, 34(3), 235-251. doi:
10.1007/s1 1056-007-9051-x

LYNCH, J., P. MARSCHNER, and Z. RENGEL. (2012). Effect of Internal and External
Factors on Root Growth and Development. Marschner’s Mineral Nutrition of
Higher Plants, 331-346. doi: 10.1016/0978-0-12-384905-2.00013-3

MORTON, J. (1987). Mabolo. p. 418-419. In: Fruits of warm climates. Julia F. Morton,
Miami, FL.

MUNYANZIZA, E. and R.A.A. OLDEMAN (1994). Prerocarpus angolensis D.C.: field
survival strategies, growth, root pruning and fertilization in the nursery. Fertilizer
Research 40, 235-242 (1994). https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00750470

NA, S. J., D. H. LEE, and I. S. KIM. (2013). Influence of Initial Seedling Size and Root
Pruning Intensity on Growth of Transplanting Seedling of Quercus acutissma.
Korean Jounal of Plant Resources, 26(6),. 709-717. doi:
10.7732/kjpr.2013.26.6.709

NABB, K. M., and C. VANDERSCHAAF. (2005). Growth of graded sweetgum 3 years
after root and shoot pruning. New Forests, 29(3), 313-320. doi: 10.1007/s11056-
004-5654-7

ONG, C. K., J. WILSON, J. D. DEANS, J. MULAYTA, T. RAUSSEN, and N. WAJJA-
MUSUK WE. (2002). Tree-crop interactions: manipulation of water use and root
function. Agricultural Water Management, 53(1-3), 171-186. doi:10.1016/s0378-
3774(01)00163-9

OVERVOORDE, P., H. FUKAKI, and T. BEECKMAN., (2010). Auxin Control of Root
Development. Cold Spring Harbor Perspectives in Biology, 2(6), a001537—
001537. doi:10.1101/cshperspect.a001537

ORWA C., A. MUTUA, R. KINDT, R. JAMNADASS, and S. ANTHONY. (2009).
Antidesma bunius. Agroforestree Database: a tree reference and selection guide
version 4.0 (http://www.worldagroforestry.org/sites/treedbs/treedatabases.asp)

ORWA C., A. MUTUA, R. KINDT, R. JAMNADASS, and S. ANTHONY. (2009). Vitex
parviflora, Agroforestree Database: a tree reference and selection guide version 4.0
(http://www.worldagroforestry.org/sites/treedbs/treedatabases.asp)


PCAARRD (n.d). Antidesma—bunius. ~—sL. ~—=Retrieved-— from
http://www pcaarrd.dost.gov, phuhomefnomentun/s Snider php?option=com_co
ntent&view=articled&cid=402&catid=87&Itemi

PFAF. (n.d). Antidesma bunius _- (L.)__ Spreng. Retrieved from
hitps://pfaf.org/user/Plant.aspx?LatinName=Antidesma+bunius

RINDYASTUTI, R. and R. P. SANCAYANINGSIH. (2018). The growth strategies
analysis of ten woody plant species for effective revegetation. Biotropia. 25. 43-55.
10.11598/btb.2018.25.1.705.

RITCHIE, G. A., and J. R. DUNLAP. (1980). Root Growth Potential: Its Development and
Expression in Forest Tree Seedlings. New Zealand Journal of Forestry Science.
10(1): 218-48

RITCHIE, G. A. and Y. TANAKA. (1990). Root Growth Potential and the Target Seedling.
In: Rose, R.; Campbell, S.J.; Landis, T. D., eds. Proceedings, Westem Forest
Nursery Association; 1990 August 13-17; Roseburg, OR. General Technical Report
RM-200. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky
Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station: 37-51.

SAURE, M. C. (2007). Root Pruning—A Poorly Understood Management Practice in Fruit
Trees, International Journal of Fruit Science, 7:2, 43-56, DOI:
10.1300/J492v07n02_05

SIMPSON, D. G. (1990). Frost hardiness, root growth capacity, and field performance
relationships in interior spruce, lodgepole pine, Douglas-fir, and western hemlock
seedlings. Canadian Journal of Forest Research, 20(5), 566-572. doi:10.1139/x90-

SMITH, R., and M. GREENWOOD. (1995). Effects of gibberellin A4/7, root pruning and
cytokinins on seed and pollen cone production in black spruce (Picea mariana).
Tree Physiology, 15(7-8), 457-465. doi: 10.1093/treephys/15.7-8.457

TIAN, H., I. D. SMET, and Z. DING. (2014). Shaping a root system: regulating lateral
versus primary root growth, Trends in Plant Science, 19(7), 426-431. doi:
10.1016/j.plants.2014.01.007

TINUS, R. W. (1996). Root growth potential as an indicator of drought stress history. Tree
Physiology, 16(9), 795~799. doi: 10.1093/treephys/16.9.795

TULOD, A.. A. CASTILLO, W. CARANDANG, and N. PAMPOLINA. (2012). Growth
performance and phytoremediation potential of Pongamia pinata (L.) Pierre,
Samanea saman (Jacq.) Mert, and Vitex parviflora Juss. in copper- contaminated
soil amended with zeolite and VAM. Asia life sciences. 21. 499-522.



VOLDER, A., and M. VAN IERSEL. (2019). Root Growth, Physiology, and Potential
Impact of Soilless Culture on Their Functioning. Soilless Culture, 15-32.
doi: 10.1016/6978-0-444-63696-6.00002-5

WATSON, G. W., and T. D. SYDNOR. (1987). “The Effect of Root Pruning on the Root
System of Nursery Trees.” Journal of Arboriculture, 13 (5).

WAISEL, Y., A. ESHEL, T. BEECKMAN, and U. KAFKAFI. (2002). Plant roots: The
hidden half (3rd ed.). Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press.

WOODALL, G. S., and B. H. WARD (2002). Soil water relations, crop production and
root pruning of a belt of trees. Agricultural Water Management, 53(1-3), 153-169.
doi: 10.1016/s0378-3774(01)00162-7

WORLD AGROFORESTRY (ICRAF) (n.d.). Seedling quality. Retrieved from
http://www.worldagroforestry.org/NurseryManuals/Research/SeedQuality.pdf

WOODCOCK, D. (2003). To Restore the Watersheds: Early Twentieth-Century Tree
Planting in Hawai'i. Annals of the Association of American Geographers. 93(3).
624-635. doi:10.1111/1467-8306.9303006
