Active Transfer of NxThinking Knowledge to High School Research Practice via Hybrid Workshop

JENSHIAM E. BALGUA

University of the Philippines Diliman

Master of Technology Management Program

January, 2023

Abstract

On 21-22 October 2022, the PSHS-CVC (academe), Shell (industry), and
the LGU Cauayan City (government) collaborated on a Triple-Helix project
to conduct a NXplorers hybrid workshop for the City’s research students
and teachers. The NXplorers program trains highschoolers into becoming
positive change actors for issues in food, water, and energy sustainability. The 106 teachers and students from 18 senior high schools in Cauayan City
completed six one-hour workshops and then pitched their ideas forward
using video presentations. Collectively, their NXtools outputs were rated
satisfactory on the criteria of content quality, technical fidelity, and idea
continuity in a double-blind evaluation by experts in NXthinking. This meant
that the participants were able to practice what they learned from the
training. The participants acknowledged the benefits of the program on their
problem statement definition, solutions ideation, social impact study, and
knowledge transfer approaches to research. The participants considered how the method used — hybrid workshop — may
be improved to bridge the polarizing challenges of the high cost of large in-
person workshops and the low knowledge retention in full virtual training. In
a focus group discussion, the participants validated the results of post-event
surveys that hybrid workshops are a viable training method in situations
where people involved cannot easily congregate in one place due to
distance or health safety concerns, and yet participants need tactile and
real-time experience in using the actual tools for skills enhancement. To get the full picture, they stacked up seven team-based training formats
versus quality indicators such as scalability, learning, and retention; and the
aggravating factors of complexity, vulnerability, and cost. They decided that
small-group coaching is the best method for and hybrid workshops can only
measure up when the technical challenges inherent to online training are
minimized and audience interactivity is improved. Finally, the results were submitted to the knowledge management office of
NXplorers Global for the improvement of the program. In the end, a positive
step towards wider adoption of systems thinking was implemented and
evaluated to equip high school students with timely and practical research
skills and contribute to increasing the number of early-trained social action
leaders and solution engineers in the country.

Keywords: NXthinking, knowledge transfer, hybrid workshop, Triple Helix

1. Introduction

NXplorers is an educational program that trains high school students with
the complex skills needed to solve problems involving food, water, and
energy sustainability (Shell Global Solutions, 2021). It is one of the
environmental, social, and governance actions of the Shell multinational oil
and energy company. It was advanced worldwide by the London-based
Shell Global Solutions International with the help of nonprofits and learning
institutions from participating countries.

In this paper, Shell collectively refers to the whole Shell business interests,
Shell Global Solutions International B. V., and non-profits involved in the
NXplorers program. Locally, the Pilipinas Shell Foundation, Inc. supervises
NXplorers' efforts in the Philippines.

The program implements NXthinking — a paradigm and practice built upon
systems thinking, scenario planning, and the theory of change (Shell Global
Solutions, 2019). Students are trained using NXtools, a set of graphic
organizers for analyzing societal problems and their feasible and scalable
solutions (Shell Global Solutions, 2020).

High school students were trained in the method through in-person
workshops. As an alternative, Shell used a webinar format in countries
affected by the lockdowns due to the COVID-19 pandemic. In the
Philippines, PSF! conducted workshops in the years 2018, 2020, and 2022.
An innovation contest, called The Bright Ideas Challenge, follows each
workshop season for students to showcase their achievements (Shell
Philippines, November 2021).

The NXplorers website lists the schools that benefited from the workshops
from Australia, Brazil, Brunei, China, Egypt, Hong Kong, India, Indonesia,
Kazakhstan, Malaysia, Netherlands, Oman, the Philippines, Qatar, Russia,
Singapore, Trinidad & Tobago, UAE, and Vietnam. Every two years,
NXplorers Global recognizes the best projects, teams, and facilitators from
these participating countries (Shell Global Solutions, December 2020).

Student teams from the Philippine Science High School - Cagayan Valley
Campus (PSHS-CVC) have been recognized as exemplary by NXplorers
Global in 2020 and 2021, resulting from their winnings in the national
NXplorers TBIC. As of September 2022, these students are coached, jointly
and severally, by sixteen NXplorers-trained teachers.

2. The Problem

As of September 2022, 27 Philippine schools are registered NXplorers
Schools, most of which offer the K-12 senior high school program. This is
about 0.25% of the 10,795 public and private high schools in the country
(Department of Education, May 2018). In contrast, developed countries
have significantly higher diffusion ratios. In Singapore, 56 out of 128
secondary schools participated in the program, or 43.75% (Hirschmann,
November 2021). In Qatar, it is 55.88% or 19 of their 34 secondary schools
(Web Solutions LLC, 2022). Based on this data, it can be argued that the
adoption of the NXthinking theory and practice is relatively slower in the
Philippines.

The PSFI prefer to conduct the workshops in-person and per host school.
However, memoranda issued by the education overseer on class disruption
(Department of Education, March 2005) and regulation of co- and extra-
curricular activities of students (Department of Education, October 2020)
are roadblocks to wider implementation. This research proposed that
adoption may be faster if (1) it is coordinated first with the Committee on
Education of target local government units, who may mediate the project to
the schools division head after endorsement by the regional office, (2) with
research teachers and students as the target audience, and (3) empower
local teachers trained in the method to serve as workshop facilitators.

This project implemented a NXplorer workshop based on these arguments.
In the technology management practice, this follows a Triple Helix approach
where success is dependent on the synergy between the academe,
government, and industry participants (Pique, Berbegal-Mirabent, &
Etzkowitz, December 2018). To leverage this collaboration model, the
PSHS-CVC, as a trainer pool, sought permission from the DepEd Region II
Office and then tapped the City of Cauayan to finance the project and assist
in onboarding the participant schools, while PSFI coordinated with the Shell
Global Solutions on the use of copyrighted NXplorers training materials (see
Annex J for the signed communiques).

The Philippine NXplorers Lead Facilitator was assured that the NXplorers
method will be transferred effectively to the students considering that it will
be delivered by teacher-facilitators and not by Shell in-house trainers (Dy,
September 2022). An agreement was reached on September 16, 2022 (1)
to use published NXplorers materials, (2) to evaluate the outputs of
participants, and (3) to evaluate the conduct of the workshop itself. PSHS-
CVC, as the training host, was also allowed to design a workshop format
that is acceptable for the target participants and compliant with existing
regulatory requirements on education, accounting, and COVID-19 safety.


2.1 Statement of the Problem

This project facilitated a NXplorers Hybrid Workshop, with Cauayan City,
Isabela senior high school research teachers and students as participants.
It sought to answer the question: “Will a hybrid workshop format cascade
the NXthinking paradigm to participants as well as other training formats ?”

2.2 Specific Research Objectives

1. Describe training coverage based on the number of schools
represented in the workshop versus the number of public and private
senior high schools in Cauayan City, Isabela (Philippines).

2. Compare the hybrid workshop with other training formats based on
the participant responses in a focus group discussion, with a focus
on the application of learning and improvement of the training format.

3. Determine the quality of the practice of NXthinking by the workshop
participants based on the evaluation of their outputs by NXplorers
experts.

23 Significance of the Study

Participants became more aware of their role as positive change actors
toward achieving the United Nations’ Sustainable Development Goals,
particularly along the nexus of food, energy, and water sustainability.
Indirectly, the workshop contributed to increasing the ranks of early-trained
researchers and innovators in the Philippines.

For participating schools, a pool of students was trained for innovation
competitions and got them to propose quality capstone projects that
effectively address the pain points of relevant stakeholders.

For the PSHS-CVC, their teachers and students gained more experience in
facilitating innovation workshops with the end goal of designing the School's
training program for innovation.

For the City of Cauayan, this activity served as an accomplishment towards
the promotion of the local government as the Smarter City in the North.

For the Pilipinas Shell Foundation, the adoption of NXthinking was further
advanced to the Philippine senior high schools. The results of the
evaluations served as a knowledge management feedback loop to
recommend improvements for the next season of NXplorers workshops.


3. Review of Related Literature

The cascading and subsequent application of new knowledge can be
morphologically different across factors such as context, quality of the
source, participant engagement, and method of instruction. Subsequent
topics in this section discussed these factors in order. First, literature
contemporary with the COVID-19 pandemic was cross-referenced to
surface issues about the continuing need to boost the number of
researchers and innovators with a socio-entrepreneurial mindset. Second,
a"systems thinking" paradigm by the Shell NXplorers Global was presented
as a platform to train highschoolers. Finally, methods to cascade said
knowledge was discussed with an exploration of their pros and cons for
promoting engagement and retention.

3.1 State of Talent in the Philippine Tech Landscape

In a benchmark survey, founders and funders expressed their constructive
recommendations on how to bridge the gap between the quality of
education and skills of the contemporary Filipino workforce versus the
specific needs of the nascent Philippine startup ecosystem (Gobi Partners
and Core Capital, November 2022). Experts agree that we should place a
premium now on workforce readiness and quality because resilience and
adaptability are already proven Filipino traits. However, they say that it will
require a quad-helix collaboration to equip the current workforce and new
graduates with the skills they need to contribute towards economic growth
(RiConfigure, May 2021).

This is neither new nor specific to developing countries like the Philippines.
Several works of literature from academics, regulators, and government
statisticians point out the correlation between the number of researchers
per capita and economic growth. Israel and Singapore, two of the top-most
innovative countries, both have the highest ratio not only in talent per capita
but also in the number of unicorns per capita, patents per capita, and R&D
fund ratio to country annual budget (Gobi Partners and Core Capital,
November 2022). Other factors catapult the economies of nations; however,
this research focused on the need for quality and patriotic talent.

According to The Future of Jobs 2020 report, critical thinking, creativity, and
complex problem-solving remain the top skills that future employers need
(World Economic Forum, October 2020). With the skill sets listed in the
teport geared towards digitalization and social action, the digital-native
Generation Z is naturally primed to take on the challenge. Regardless, the
needs of data-driven businesses require continuous upskilling and reskilling
of current human capital for them to adapt to market opportunities.


To teach 21st-century skills at college might be too late for new talents to
survive in these uncertain times. The Dream a Dream Trust posits that the
young must proactively acquire life skills and future-proof competencies to
adapt to the complex world (Talreja, July 2019). Thus, this paper argues
that future researchers and innovators must be trained as early as possible
by the academe and industry immersion partners.

In the first of three papers for a global study in 24 countries on the Future
of Education, Google highlighted three post-pandemic trends driven in part
by dire global issues and the accelerated rate of technological innovation
(Google EDU, December 2022). These trends mean developing new
paradigms and skill sets to become effective problem-solvers, and evolving
learning to be more outcomes-based and socially positive, to best train
future technopreneurs and leaders.

3.2.1 The rising demand for global problem-solvers

The academia will be at the forefront of helping future generations
embrace global mindsets and skill sets, beginning with guiding them
to ideate for civic and environmental issues affecting their
communities (HundrED, April 2022). From these learning
experiences, students can scale up towards making their ideas a
reality through investigatory projects, innovation contests, and social
advocacies (LoopMe Philippines, December 2019).

Creative thinkers as they are, the young need teacher guidance and
the right tools to properly frame their focus, consistently grit towards
completion, and reduce the effect of bandwagon or biases. It was
observed that when students see that their actions make a
difference, they gain a sense of agency and responsibility.

3.2.2 Change in the skill sets required for work

As technology advances, education focuses on equipping students
with the high-demand skills they will need to thrive in a new world of
work. The O*Net Resource Center categorized the skills needed
based on the cross-sectional factors of worker profile, specific
occupation, cross-discipline, and industry (O*Net, June 2022). From
these lists, the WEF highlighted what mindsets and skills the young
have to acquire, or at least be exposed to, to be more competitive in
the fast-changing world they are living in (World Economic Forum,
October 2020).


3.2.2 Shift to a lifelong learning mindset

As lifespans increase and societal change accelerates, the idea of
lifelong learning is gaining traction, with more tools available for
upskilling and advancement. More student-centered schools design
their curricula based on six Deep Learning dimensions: character,
citizenship, collaboration, communication, creativity, and critical
thinking (Quinn, McEachen, Fullan, Gardner, & Drummy, 2020).

The six global competencies in Deep Learning are a synthesis of the
most-relevant 21st-century skills — fewer and more measurable than
other literature proposes. Adherence and continual improvement
along these six dimensions drive innovative practices among lifelong
learners. Proponents of 6C designed several tools for planning,
adoption, implementation, and evaluation of the paradigm.
Ultimately, any individual or group may represent their 6C
compliance through a radar chart (Barcelona Field Studies Centre,
September 2022).

Figure 3.1
Sample Deep Learning Assessment Chart

Character

\

Qitizenship

Critical Thinking

Creativity, Coflaboration

\ Y

Communication


3.2 NXthinking and the Shell NXplorers Program

NXplorers as a program. NXthinking as a paradigm. and NXtools as
work templates are the intellectual property of Shell Global Solutions.
cha for fair use. all materials borrowed from NXplorers.com
redited. Access to privileged information is only given
gistered NXplorers. PSHS-CVC was recognized as a NXPlorers
| in May 2019. Compliance duly verified, NXplorers Philippines
wed the publication of this paper to the public domain (Annex L)

The NXplorers community at the Philippine Science High School - Cagayan
Valley Campus facilitated a NXplorers Workshop for this research. As a
recognized NXplorers School, trained teachers and scholars have access
to training materials saved in the knowledge base pages of the NXplorers
website. With this authority, the School is allowed to design, initiate, and
facilitate workshops promoting the program as long as the local NXplorers
partner was duly informed. The Pilipinas Shell Foundation, Inc. was the
local partner that represented the industry in this collaboration.

As described earlier, NXplorers is an ESG program of Shell that equips high
school students with a subset of the complex skills they need to solve
problems involving food, water, and energy sustainability. At present, it is
used as an alternative learning activity for students from 20 countries
including Filipino high school learners (NXplorers.com, June 2022).

To confirm the practice of the learned theory and skills, Shell hosts a yearly
competition — the NXplorers The Bright Ideas Challenge. This competition
accepts proposals for change from NXplorers teams of the trained schools.
The top ten or 15 entries usually present their work in an in-person science
fair and defend their solution to a panel of experts. During the pandemic,
Shell hosted TBIC through video-conferencing and live-streaming.

NXplorers is one of the ideal education platforms to train high schoolers on
systems thinking and 21st-century skills because of their expert-validated
end-to-end content and graphical ideation tools (NXplorers.com, July 2022).

3.2.1 The NXthinking Paradigm

As stated in their whitepaper, NXthinking offers a way to explore real-
world problems and generate potential solutions. It encourages
young people to be analytical and creative, to dig beneath the
surface, to appreciate the complex and interrelated possible and
preferred futures, and to think about what could be done differently
to bring about positive change (Shell Global Solutions, 2019).


NXthinking takes many of its ideas from the disciplines of systems
thinking, scenario planning, and theory of change. Integrating these
approaches creates a new way of looking at global complexities, and
shows young people how to approach the complex challenges the
world faces, now and in the future.

Specifically, the paradigm argues that:

1. Thinking about THE BIG PICTURE helps practitioners to see
beyond the pieces and appreciate the multiple connections and
relationships in a system.

2. Thinking about CONNECTIONS helps make complex problems
and situations easier to understand.

3. Thinking about the PERSPECTIVES of stakeholders helps
practitioners understand systems and their effect on the world.

4. Thinking about the FUTURE helps practitioners see how they can
act to create change in any situation.

5. Thinking about CHANGE considers the enablers and how they
can overcome the barriers and inspire others with their ideas.

3.2.2 Graphical NXTools

NXplorers equip high schoolers with the tools to reimagine the world.
It is a facilitated program, run in accredited learning centers, where
staff and students learn about and engage in real-world issues
(NXplorers.com, August 2022).

There are three stages to the NXplorer program - Explore, Create
and Change — with tools and resources for each. At present, their
library has the following NXtools available : (1) Perspectives Circle,
(2) Confidence Triangle, (3) Causal Loops, (4) Connections Circle,
(5) Change-Over-Time Graph, (6) Scenario Planning Quadrant, (7)
SCAMPER Tool, (8) Feasibility Funnel, (9) If-Then Chain, (10)
Persuasion Pyramid, (11) Ripple Effect, and (12) Compass Tool.

To quickly progress through the program with sufficient practice,
NXplorers workshops often take a focused progression through the
stages of the program using a priority set of NXtools listed next page.


. Explore — Perspectives Circle
Learners collate the sentiment of various stakeholders on a
specific sustainability issue, framed as a "How-Can-We" prompt.
Data-gathering in this exploration stage includes interviews,
FGDs, surveys, and a review of news and literature.

. Explore — Connections Circle
Upon group review, several factors emerge from the stakeholder
perspectives and are then laid out along the perimeter of a circle.
Causal relationships between the factors were determined and
then defined whether that relationship is reinforcing or balancing.
The teams decide on two leverage points that affect most of the
other factors, preferably in a positive manner.

. Explore — Scenario Planning Quadrant
The teams laid out the two leverage points from their connections
circle in a Cartesian quadrant with each factor on either axis. With
one axis direction the extreme opposite of its other end, the two
factors create 4 scenarios that the participants may consider.
They describe each of the scenarios and finally decide on which
one is the most ideal future.

. Create — Feasibility Funnel

Individually and independently, team members generate ideas on
how to achieve the ideal future scenario. They may ideate
inventions, innovations, training programs, advocacies or
campaigns, process improvements, web or mobile apps, and
other creative outputs with the end goal of generating as many
candidate solutions as possible. Aided by this practical tool, they
brainstorm whether each idea can pass through the criteria filters
such as capability, support, cost, scalability, social impact, etc.
where the team themselves choose the order of the filters.

. Create — Ripple Effect Tool

If a solution made it through the spout of the Feasibility Funnel, it
must be investigated further. With water ripples in a pool as an
analogy, teams consider that with every action is a reaction, and
that effect can be intended or unintended. A solution can only be
accepted if the intended positive results far outweigh the
multifaceted costs of unintended consequences. Else, they will
be creating more problems rather than solutions.


F. Change — Persuasion Pyramid
The teams train themselves in presenting their bright idea. The
structure of the persuasion pyramid enables them to create an
elevator pitch that communicates their solution effectively and
expediently regardless of the audience.

3.3 Training Format vis-a-vis Participant Engagement

Learnt skills and tools used by the students to adapt to remote learning are
here to stay. Having experienced the benefits of distance learning allowed
them to reconsider approaches to team learning. However, academic
discussions validated by human gestures are a social factor that should be
revived and encouraged with the return to face-to-face instruction.

While the world is cautious about opening completely post-pandemic,
training providers prefer online training rather than in-person workshops.
Companies, such as Butter.us, built their business model on this opportunity
by integrating workshop tools into their video-conferencing software
(Teresa, November 2020). This capstone project proposed an alternative
method that uses the best of both formats to address the social gap.

3.2.2 Learning and Working with a Team

Considering the nature of the problems the world faces today,
successful solutions are often inter-disciplinary and collaborative.
Gone are the days where a single individual can ideate, design, and
implement a panacea for a social ill, or engineer the most effective
and cheapest solution to a technology challenge (Banks, Scheyvens,
& Leonard, November 2020).

Renaissance thinkers and tinkerers had apprentices, Edison had a
workshop, AT&T had Bell Labs, and Alphabet designs software
solutions at their Googleplex. It can be argued that these setups are
run like companies but it is evident that employees are organized into
teams that look into specific projects (Gertner, 2013).

The same can be said about student projects, where teachers
sometimes purposely and equitably group students based on
parameters that promote group dynamics and encourage inclusivity
and agency, with the end goal of task expediency and output quality
(Forsyth, 2019).


3.2.2 Categories of Team-based Training

Arranged based on the estimated number of participants in a single
physical or virtual venue (Gore, January 2022), training may be:

A. Full Virtual Training

This format accommodates the most audience at once.
Mainstream video conferencing tools can host hundreds of video
participants and even be live-streamed on video-sharing sites.
This method has become the norm during the pandemic. Some
video-conferencing services revised their business model to
include breakout rooms, opt-in scheduling, SocMed interactivity,
and integration of collaboration tools (Teresa, November 2020).
However, this method can be adversely affected by technical
difficulties, weak connectivity, or unscheduled power cuts.

B. Large Group In-person
Mistakenly interchanged by many with the concept of "training",
participants benefit from plenary sessions and seminars, attend
parallel workshops, and consult with fireside mentors. However,
this method can be a logistical nightmare with all the venue
preparation, issuance of travel documents, and coordinating for
the accommodation of the participants and facilitators.

C. Hybrid Workshop
It is a compromise that takes the best features of both virtual and
in-person large group training to host situations where training in
a single location is too costly, logistically challenging, or a health
tisk. This requires, however, that training materials must be sent
to the participants first before the online training schedule. This
method was used in the Belt and Road Teenager Maker Camp
2022 where organizers send robot kits to the participating teams
while training is delivered through a secure website on-demand.

D. Focus Group Discussion
This format allows the participants to directly contribute to the
pool of knowledge by either asking questions, pitching their ideas,
or voting on certain concerns to be resolved immediately. The
process will require a moderator and a secretary. Learning is
bilateral because while the FGD participants are expected to give
verbal answers to FGD questions, the moderator may summarize
responses and discuss their implications. The feedback loop in
this method has a fast turnaround time and the opinions of all
participants are valued. This method is best for brainstorming but


may be challenging if the purpose is a top-down cascade of
knowledge, where the knowledge is not anymore open to
interpretation.

E. Small Group Coaching

This method is designed to mentor a team of students with the
end goal of finding a consensus at the end or coaching them to
complete a task they have started. This method is arguably the
most effective for small functional teams of two to six members.
As this method is designed for a very small group, a high ratio of
knowledge diffusion cannot be achieved unless this method is a
subset of a larger gathering and more trainers are available.

F. Courseware
Teams or individuals may learn through a self-paced or cohort-
based online or paper-based courseware. Many open online
courses offer training for free but masterclasses are offered at
cost to augment the text or to provide guided mentorship.

G. Self-study
In this method, the teams or learners are free to gather the
information they need from various sources, either through online
or in-person means. Because the content is not curated, there is
a possibility for misinterpretation.

In-person training is presumably the best, especially if the training is
immersive, experiential, outcomes-based, and mentors are within
arm’s reach. However, hosting a single-venue training becomes
proportionally complex with the number of participants, especially if
they are from different places. Transport, permits, and outsourced
accommodation are often aggravating logistical factors.

On the other end of the spectrum, online webinars tend to be a one-
sided transfer of knowledge, with low indicators of whether the
participants apply, or even recall, what was taught. It is cheaper to
host than large in-person training but the impact is less relatively.

Looking at these categories, there are formats in-between these
extremes, and one of them is a hybrid workshop. This study aimed
to prove or disprove the suggestion that a hybrid workshop is a win-
win method to deliver training where:

1. single-venue training is logistically not feasible, costly, or a risk;
2. participants must access local materials and respondents; and
3. speakers are from various places or prefer remote training.


4. Conceptual Frameworks
The conceptual framework of the study is presented in the following IPO
Diagram, based on the Lean Six Sigma practices (Sankar, July 2011).

Figure 4.1
Input-Process-Output Diagram of the Study

p PROCESS eee

(Hybrid) NXplorers Training Evaluation of
Workshop Design for Students Workshop and Outputs
Trained ; Researchues| ' $$$ ..-----) ¥ a 7
Teachers as ! Teachers as t Feedback Loop i
Facilitators | 1 Chaperons 1 for Improvement «
A ; z ee ed
1 ' 1 '
ooneeee ee ee eee eee eee)

The hybrid workshop itself served as the data-gathering venue and used a
Triple-Helix scheme (Chatzinikolaou & Viados, May 2019), as shown:

Figure 4.2
Triple-Helix Collaboration Diagram
[ACADEME] e Funding
e Stakeholder Mediation
Phlippine e Material Distribution
Science H/S -_+ TE
CVC / \
—— NXplorers [GOVERNMENT] | \
Planning & Legwork | Hybrid ner |
e On-boarding Schools Workshop F i}
e Workshop Facilitation for Cauayan eoreuGy
e Documentation City SHS : . ,
Pest

[INDUSTRY]

Training Materials

Pilipinas Shell Training of Trainors
Foundation xpert Evaluation

I _/ | ¢ Promotion

|


4.1 Definition of Terms

Coverage — an objective in this research defined as the ratio between
the number of schools participating versus the actual number of
senior high schools in the target geographical region.

NXperts — refers to NXplorers alumni with prior involvement in
training others or have had successes in innovation contests using
the NXtools and not organizers of the hybrid workshop itself.

Senior high schools — Philippine high schools, either public or private,
that offer grades 11 and 12 and are compliant with the K-12
education system.

Quad-helix — a collaboration between the academe, the government,
the private sector, and the community of volunteers.

Triple-helix — a collaboration between universities, the government,
and the industry.

4.2 Limitations of the Study

This study evaluated the implementation of a hybrid workshop by comparing
that to the earlier experience of the participants with the other formats of
team-based learning. It is possible that the participants might not have tried
out the other formats prior and thus might misinform their decision. To
balance out this phenomenon, it was aimed to onboard as many participants
from as many schools as possible within the geographical bounds of the
City of Cauayan, Isabela (Philippines).

The evaluation of the workshop came from the responses of the participants
to quantitative surveys and their qualitative feedback in the post-event focus
group discussion. The quality of learning was through quantitative
evaluation of the participant outputs by NXplorers experts. However, only
descriptive statistics were used as there are no population data to compare
the means of the sample with.

Furthermore, the results only reflect the sentiment of the 106 students and
teachers that participated in the workshop, the nine FGD active participants,
and the opinions of the nine experts that evaluated their outputs.

Finally, the study covers the knowledge transfer of NXthinking and no other

method of systems thinking. Thus, the results cannot generalize the transfer
of knowledge of similar paradigms even if using the same training method.


5. Methodology

The study is an action research for the benefit of the NXplorers community
and is evaluated by the participants and experts using quantitative and
qualitative means and the results interpreted using descriptive statistics.

First, a Triple-Helix collaboration between the PSHS-CVC, PSFI, and LGU
Cauayan City was signed to conduct a NXplorers workshop for the senior
high schools in the City. Next, training materials and financial support were
distributed to the schools followed by an online orientation and dry-run of
the event with the teacher-chaperons of the 18 participant schools.

On 21-22 October 2022, the workshop was conducted using a hybrid
format. That is, the training was delivered online semi-interactively by
PSHS-CVC teachers via Zoom® in 30-minute lectures followed by 30-
minute workshops. The participants follow through the instructions video-
streamed from a single computer only while working together inside their
tespective schools. This way, the participants were encouraged to use
printed worksheets they received earlier and not to rely on digital tools.

In each remote venue, the participants ideated solutions for food, water, and
energy sustainability issues affecting the City of Cauayan, with the guidance
of their teacher-chaperon. These three nexus issues cover most of the 17
Sustainable Development Goals of the United Nations. In each workshop,
they were taught how to use the NXtools to frame a "How-Can-We" problem
statement, identify factors and leverage points, contrast scenarios, and
critique their solutions toward achieving a desired future.

To gather stakeholder data, they interviewed random individuals within the

walls of their campuses on the questions:

1. What issues in food, energy, and/or water sustainability confront the
residents of Cauayan City?

2. What's causing the issue? How do you envision a future without this
issue?

3. As a/an {alternate role in society}, what are your actions or suggestions
that could bring about positive change?

They were considered NXplorers graduates after they presented their ideas
in a pitch session where their work was critiqued by the teacher-facilitators.
Their outputs were forwarded to experts gathered by PSFI for evaluation of
learning quality. Finally, the 106 participants evaluated the performance of
each speaker and the quality of the training itself as required by PSFI, and
then a stratified subset of the graduates validated their quantitative
evaluation through active participation in a focus group discussion.


5.1 Training Content and Program of Activities

Overall, the participants learned to use six of the twelve published NXtools.
They also attended lectures on the global progress of the NXplorers
program, the basis and myriad application of NXthinking, and how to frame
an actionable problem statement. There were also panel interviews with
previous winners of innovation contests on their team journeys, the direction
their innovative projects took post-competition, and best practices toward
expedient and efficient plans of action for opportunities.

The program of activities is shown in the following slide screenshot:

Figure 5.1
Program of Activities

DAY 4: Friday 21 October 2022
Start End Part

Twelve PSHS-CVC teachers, all trained by Shell Global Solutions, served
as speakers and trainers. They were assisted by ten PSHS-CVC students
and alumni, four of them were captains of winning teams in the first three
NXplorers TBIC iterations and similar innovation competitions.

In the week before the workshop proper, orientation and technical dry-run
were conducted to prepare the teacher-chaperons for their roles and to
answer their concerns. However, because the training was partly online,
there were technical glitches encountered but expediently resolved with
contingency plans set in place by the organizers.


5.2 Planning, Preparations, and Responsibilities

After an exploratory meeting with the Lead NXplorers Facilitator for the
Philippines on the sidelines of the third NXplorers Workshop for PSHS-CVC
on August 30, 2022, a Project Plan was submitted for review by the
stakeholders. On September 20, 2022, a conforme to initiate the plan (see
Annex A) was finally signed by:

Mr. Jenshiam Balgua, a PSHS-CVC teacher, representing facilitators
Ms. Angel Iniego, a PSHS-CVC scholar, representing host committees
Mr. Erick John Marmol, Director III, representing the PSHS-CVC offices
Ms. Beverly Berberabe, NXplorers Country Head, for Shell and PSF
Mr. Garry Galutera, City Councillor, representing LGU Cauayan City

OPRON>

From then on, planned activities were plotted into a Gantt Chart based on
a Work Breakdown Structure of the project, as shown below. The Gantt
Chart, both proposed and implemented, was documented in Annex B.

Figure 5.2
Work Breakdown Structure

NXplorers Hybrid Workshop
for Cauayan City SHS

PREPARATION EXECUTION CONTROL EVALUATION
Pilot Meetings Coach Orientation Sourcing Funds Proofread Slides
Project Planning Remote Dry-Run Fund Distribution Design Eval.Tools

Probono Speaking

Liaising —_ LL ae

Materials Prep Topic Webinars.

Live Pitch/Critique

Equipment Resp. Topic/Speaker Eval.

Hosting Dry-run NXtool Workshops

|

Speaker Dry-run Panel Discussions Time Direction Focus Group Disc.
I = I
Registration L Program Outro | Plan Contingencies Expert Evaluations
Paper Distribution Support & Promotion Certificates/Tokens Compliance Reports


Queuing Speakers Whole Event Eval.


In a RACI Matrix, the organizers considered the roles of all parties involved
including the participating schools. The focal persons — Mr. Balgua and Ms.
Iniego — were also categorized as project managers because of their
oversight roles. This served as a blueprint for success because the chart
specifies who was responsible, accountable, consulted, and informed of
each activity (Morris, October 2022). Role assignments were consistent with
PMBOK® (Project Management Institute, 2021), a definitive reference in
the project management discipline.

Table 5.1
Responsibility Assignment Matrix

ACTIVITY
Pilot meetings with stakeholder representatives
Project planning by the project managers

Liaising for approval of plans and permits
Preparation of training materials

|_Dry-run on the hosting activities

|_Dry-run of the lecture and workshops

Registration of schools and their participants
Distribution of physical training materials to schools
Orientation of and Q&A with the teacher-chaperons
Video-conferencing dry-run with the remote venues
Opening session to introduce the NXplorers program
Webinar-lecture of the NXthining topics

Hybrid workshop using NXtools

Panel discussion with winners of innovation contests
Closing session for wrap-up activities:

Support and promotion via SocMed and the official website
Sourcing of funding for materials, per diems, and tokens
Distribution of financial assistance to participating schools
Serving as pro bono teacher-facilitator
Responsible use of equipment in the broadcast room
Seamless queueing of speakers

D-|O) OOS

DPIDS|>|>) [Ol

D/D|>|>|>|>

DOQOQ|O\|OlO|}S|}H|D)/—|P| DD) |Q|O|e

|) |2}7)7)

>\_lslalsl_lsls[5[-[-|2

—|-|>|-|-|-|o]o]o|—||>|-|2

_Directing the program flow vs. time allotment
Contingency scenarios and risk treatment plans

Control of distribution of certificates and tokens
Proofreading presentation slides and emcee scripts
Design and validation of evaluation tools

Live elevator pitch and expert critique

Quantitative evaluation of the speakers’ expertise
Individual evaluation of the conduct of the whole event
Validation of evaluations through focus group discussion
Quantitative evaluation of outputs by NXplorers experts
Submission of post-event reports CLA 1

STAKEHOLDERS: 1. Project Managers R — Responsible

Facilitators/Mentors A-— Accountable
Hosts/Committees C —Consulted
PSHS-CVC Offices | — Informed
Shell NXplorers / PSFI
Cauayan City LGU
Participating Schools

2B) O)-|O|O|a\a\-|

BS) NO/O\O|}S|P|O|>

=|9)OIO|—|O|O/O|/-|a

>|—|=|—|-|9|>|0|2)0|-|-

=|AIAIA\A\AIO| |>|>\—

MlA|>|P|>/> 0] 0 O}D|DO|—|Q|9|D]O|—|DO/O)}—| =|) S| —|9|O|H| | | Dl =

Jee
m

fe)

IN OOP why


6. Results and Analyses

Concerning the Problem Statement and Specific Objectives stated in
Section 2, participants and experts evaluated certain aspects of the
conducted workshop to get an objective basis for the recommendations.
Data were gathered using surveys and a focus group discussion.
Interpretation of the results was through descriptive statistics.

6.1 Analysis of Results for Specific Objective #1

The first specific objective sought to describe the training coverage based
on the number of schools represented in the workshop versus the number
of public and private high schools in Cauayan City. This is a descriptive
statistic presented as a ratio.

Based on the DepEd website, there were 23 high schools in Cauayan City
offering various strands in the senior high school program of the K-12
education system of the Philippines. Of this number, 22 schools were invited
except for Linglingay National High School because of weak Internet
connectivity in the vicinity of the school.

The approved project plan aimed for a training coverage of at least 75%.
Likewise, based on the financial support from LGU Cauayan City, at least
96 participants (24 schools with 1 teacher and 3 learners per school) were
expected to register for the program.

At the end of the training, 18 out of the 23 schools completed the program,
or 78.26% training coverage. Likewise, 106 participants completed the
training (88 students and 18 teachers), 20 heads more than the target count.
This is because the schools decided to onboard more learners despite the
lesser distributed per-person per diem from the city government.

In a post-event Q&A with the NXplorers Lead Facilitator for the Philippines,

she disclosed that this workshop trained more schools in two days than

what they were able to reach from July to November 2022. As a result, they

awarded the following benefits to the 18 new NXplorers senior high schools

in Cauayan City:

1. Certificate of Completion for the teachers and learners and certificate of
participation for the school;

2. Access to the collaboration space and the NXplorers courseware on the
Official global website (NXplorers.com, September 2022);

3. Eligibility to participate in the forthcoming iterations of the NXplorers The
Bright Ideas Challenge.


6.2 Analysis of Results for Specific Objective #2

The second measurable objective evaluated the conduct of the workshop
using survey tools and focus group discussion. Two survey forms were
floated to the participants (1) to comply with the process improvement
requirements of the collaborating agencies and (2) to generate the best
questions to ask in the post-event focus group discussion.

The first survey was a quantitative evaluation of the competency of the
speakers. The results were not included in the main text because it was
fielded to comply with the Quality Management System of PSHS-CVC.
However, the results and analyses were included in Annex C.

The second survey was an objective evaluation of the workshop as a whole.
Before the event was closed out, the participants were asked to rate the
totality of the workshop using a secure Google Form. Shell often uses an
online qualitative survey for participants to evaluate the workshop they just
completed. However, in consultation with his faculty-adviser, the researcher
designed a questionnaire with the following sections: (1) Training/Workshop
Content; (2) Potential Impact of Learning; (3) Management of Training/
Workshop; and (4) Evaluation of the Hybrid Workshop Format.

SO#2 was concerned with comparing the hybrid workshop with other
training formats based on the participant responses in a focus group
discussion, highlighting the application of learning and _ iterative
improvement of the training format. While the survey results and its
subsequent analyses were the basis of the post-event FGD questions, the
data and statistics were post scripted to this report instead. The reader is
enjoined to refer to Annex D, Annex E, and Annex F, if necessary.

On 18 October 2022, 19 teachers and students took time to attend a Focus
Group Discussion called by the organizers to validate the results of the post-
activity evaluations. The FGD was moderated by the researcher. After a
short online socialization, the participants were informed that their
responses will be recorded and that the data waiver they signed earlier
covers this activity. They were encouraged to speak up their opinion on
each of the focus questions, preferably on-mic and on-camera.

Nine participants agreed to join and answer the FGD questions. For each
question, they selected from the preset options but not more than the set
maximum for each item. The options were distilled from the gathered
responses from the two surveys. The questions and the results are in the
next pages.


6.2.1 Discussions for FGD Item #1

The open-ended question in the second survey elicited the ways the
participants might apply what they learned from the workshop. Their
short responses were coded for similarity and the following themes
were collated:

A. Learning Material
NXplorers is a relevant and purposeful way to enhance the
curriculum. Teachers can use the NXtools as an experiential
template for their students to ideate solutions to a myriad of
problems. Students can use the materials and their experience
as primary references. They can also review the paradigm and
practice using the courseware on the NXplorers global website.

B. Contest Opportunity
The NXtools is a springboard for ideating innovation contest
entries and elevator pitches. The opportunities are not limited to
the NXplorers Challenge because the skills are transferable
regardless of the competition theme, complexity, and duration.

C. Research Focus
With SHS students and teachers as participants, their impetus
was to design capstone projects and action research that
addresses real-world problems. The paradigm and practice allow
deeper consideration of the United Nations SDGs, particularly
with the food, energy, and water nexus.

D. Social Action
NXplorers champions may horizontally scale their project to
benefit the community without asking for anything in return. It can
be their altruistic pursuit to hands-on address the pain points
affecting their beneficiaries and stakeholders.

E. Sharing Forwards
NXthinking is knowledge worth sharing in various ways
regardless of transfer media and audience. It can be an informal
conversational piece or presented as a formal topic by academics

F. Life Solutions
By reflection, NXthinking was used by everyone daily. Informed
decisions are best when after a study of facts and factors to
choose the best action forwards.


G. Work Improvement
The NXtools is loosely procedural and yet intentional. Thus,
students regardless of grade, and workers regardless of trade,
can form positive habits for improving their work and workplace.

The categories were listed based on their frequency in the coded
data. Because the responses were not grouped by demographics,
no further statistical test was conducted. However, the exact order of
categories was then fielded as options for the first FGD question:
“Within the next six months, in what ways will you use what you’ve
learned in the NXplorers training? (Choose 4)". The following
screenshot of the Slido poll was the summary of their responses:

Figure 6.1
Summary of Responses for FGD Item #1

Within the next six months, in what ways will you use what you've learned in the
NXplorers training? (Choose 4)





60'

Based on these results, participants from Villa Concepcion High
School — Baculud Extension recognize the power of the NXthinking
paradigm in proposing sustainability-aligned investigatory projects.
Teachers agree that it can benefit their action research, too. Mr.


Joseph Eco, the research coordinator of the Villa Concepcion
National High School shared that the training made him reframe the
problem statement of his research proposal for a scientific poster
presentation for teachers. Ms. Maricel Yadao of Saint Claire College
appreciated the quality of the program as a learning material for
learning social research methods (FGD, October 2022).

6.2.2 Discussions for FGD Item #2

The third quantitative item in the post-event survey asked the
participants to compare and contrast the hybrid workshop against the
two extremes of in-person and virtual training formats. To verify their
awareness of the other training formats for team-based learning and
to determine their willingness to attend training in such formats, this
question was asked next to the FGD participants: "Which are your
preferred modes of learning NXthinking while using the NXtools?
(Choose 4)". The following screenshot of the Slido poll results was
the summary of their responses:

Figure 6.2
Summary of Responses for FGD Item #2

Which are your preferred mode of learning NXthinking while using the NXtools?
(Choose 4)



22%



While Mr. Jerome Suigitan of Isabela Colleges agreed that FGDs are
an ideal training format, he was worried that their response might
also have been influenced by their democratic experience in the
current session. As for the students, Ms. Raki Santos of UPHS —
Isabela Campus mentioned that some students do not have stable
connectivity and that might be a reason why they haven't attended
training that uses some of the formats yet. (FGD, October 2022).

This two-strike dilemma prompted participants — with exposure to at
least five of the seven training formats — to review the results of the
poll for this FGD question by collaboratively editing values in an ad-
hoc Google Sheet. After 28 November 2022, they completed a
custom scorecard of the various training formats, taking into
consideration enhancing factors such as (1) audience scalability, (2)
experiential learning, and (3) knowledge retention; and negative
indicators such as (4) logistics complexity, (5) technical vulnerability,
and (6) cost of implementation. The absolute value of each score is
the collective rating of the volunteers about the relative extent of each
factor to the effectiveness of the training format under consideration.

Table 6.1
Custom Scorecard of the Training Formats
1 2 3 4 5 6 Score
A 3 1 1 -1 -3 -1 0
B 2 2 2 -3 -2 -3 -2
Cc 2 2 2 -2 -2 -2 0
D 2 2 3 -2 -2 -2 1
E 1 3 3 -1 -1 -1 4
F 2 2 2 -1 -2 -2 1
G 2 1 1 -2 -2 -1 -1
TRAINING FORMATS: CRITERIA:
A. Full Virtual Training 1. Audience Scalability
B. Large Group In-person 2. Experiential Learning
C. Hybrid Workshop 3. Knowledge Retention
D. Focus Group Discussion 4. Logistics complexity
E. Small Group Coaching 5. Technical Vulnerability
F. Courseware 6. Cost of Implementation
G. Self-Study


Comparing the scorecard with the previous poll results, the small
group coaching format rose through the ranking by having the
relatively lowest score on the aggravating factors. This was followed
by a tie of FGDs and courseware. In a follow-up call with the
presumptive leader of the volunteers, Mr. Jorich Primero of Centro
De Cultura clarified that for online courses to be effective, the
platform must have a pool of experts or a community of peers that
can provide on-demand mentoring time or certification. At the middle
of the spectrum are hybrid workshops and full virtual training. Mr.
Primero opined that this was because both formats were vulnerable
to almost the same technical difficulties (Primero, December 2022).

6.2.3 Discussions for FGD Item #3

To form a feedback loop for improvement, the FGD participants were
asked to reflect on their observations and experience with the hybrid
workshop format used to train them with the NXthinking paradigm
and practice. At that instance, the FGD participants were asked: "/n
what aspects should the NXplorers hybrid workshop improve to be
as effective as the other modes? (Choose 4)". This item is an
adaptive follow-up to the quantitative and qualitative responses of
the participants in the post-activity evaluation.

Mr. Nifio Basubas from San Antonio National High School and Ms.
Lian Ines from the Metropolitan Bible Baptist School discussed back
and forth selected difficulties in the conduct of the hybrid workshop
before prioritizing them using a Slido poll (FGD, October 2022).

These were the categories of issues considered, collated from the

results of earlier surveys:

1. More interactivity to get higher audience engagement

2. Stable connection (client side) to ensure technical availability at
the remote venues

3. Longer workshop time to prepare outputs for presentation

4. Longer lecture time for more depth of presentation/discussion

5. Stable connection (host-side) to ensure technical availability at
the broadcast center

6. Assured critique time to give all teams equal time with experts

7. More workshop days to pace discussion and breaks well

8. Social factor to be able to be with other participants (in-person)
or being able to interact via breakout rooms (virtual)

9. Fair chance to present to give all teams equal time to demo

10. Time-based dry-run to ensure smooth flow of the program


The participants prioritized the issues as shown in the next figure.

Figure 6.3
Summary of Responses for FGD Item #3

In what aspects should the Nxplorers hybrid workshop improve to be as effective as
the other modes? (Choose 4)







6.3 Analysis of Results for Specific Objective #3

Based on the results and discussion for SO#2, there was a consensus that
implementation issues affect the effectiveness of the hybrid workshop to
deliver NXthinking knowledge and skills. However, because there were no
Shell-approved studies conducted as of yet on the effectivity of transferring
NXthinking knowledge using any of the formats, the researcher accepted
the objective evaluation of the participants’ outputs by NXplorers experts as
an indicator of actual practice and retention of knowledge gained through
the hybrid workshop.


The data were gathered from the experts using an approach that assured
the integrity of the results. The double-blind survey format ensured that
neither the researcher nor the enumerator may influence the response of
the evaluators. This survey method was implemented as follows:

1. The researcher anonymized the outputs of the 18 schools and placed
them in a structured Google Drive folder.

2. Mr. Edan Viel Aguada, the team leader for evaluations, was instructed
(see Annex G) to invite nine NXplorer experts to evaluate the outputs.

3. The outputs were equitably distributed to the nine NXperts such that
each expert will rate three of the 18 output sets.

4. The evaluation form used was presented in Annex H. The tool includes
the link to the Google Drive folder and explicitly states the output set to
be evaluated.

5. Mr. Aguada did not know which outputs are from which schools; the
researcher never knew who were the evaluators; and the NXperts
themselves are not aware of the identity of the other respondents.

6. Inthe end, each output received evaluations from exactly three NXperts.

To further data privacy and expediency, Mr. Aguada translated the printed
form into a secure Google Form, as shown below, and embedded the same
in emails to the invited NXperts. As to their credentials, Mr. Aguada declared
that three were NXplorers facilitators from different countries, two were
PSHS-CVC teachers who did not serve as speakers in the workshop, two
were employees of research organizations who were themselves NXplorers
alumni, and the last two were members of past TBIC winning teams.

Figure 6.4
NXpert Evaluation Google Form


The NXperts evaluated the outputs in three dimensions: (1) Content Quality,
(2) Technical Fidelity, and (3) Idea Continuity. For each criterion, each
NXtool output was rated based on a 4-point Likert Scale (1 — Poor, 2 —
Average, 3 — Satisfactory, 4 — Excellent). The raw data are in Annex | and
the results are discussed in the specific subsections on the next pages.

6.3.1 NXpert Evaluation Results on Content Quality

First, nine NXperts evaluated if the participants were able to present
their ideas completely and clearly by using the NXtools. Means of the
scores for each NXtool output were taken, and then a Mean of Means
Test was implemented using built-in functions from Google Sheets
and compared to a 4-point Likert Scale. The results are as follows:

Table 6.2
NXpert Evaluation Results on Content Quality
NXtool Output Mean
Perspectives Circle ta kat _ 3.2778
Connections Circle 2.9074
| Scenario Planning Quadrant 3.2037
| Feasibility Funnel __ | 2.8889
| Ripple Effect Tool 3.0741
Persuasion Pyramid | 2.7407
Likert Scale for Interpretation.
3.50 to 4.00 — Excellent MeanichMesns 3.0154
2.75 to 3.49 — Satisfactory Standard Deviation 1.0234
2.00 to 2.74 — Average z
1.00 to 1.99 — Poor Interpretation Satisfactory

While the overall results were satisfactory, the substandard score on
the Persuasion Pyramid outputs was because some teams did not
submit the paper output after they did the viva presentation. Their
elevator pitches used the said NXtool as a script and were video-
recorded. However, sending the recordings to the NXperts will fail
the double-blind format because anonymity will be compromised.

The critique of the teacher-facilitators of their outputs, after each
elevator pitch, was that their outputs were of the level of quality
observed from first-time users of the NXtools. That is, points for
improvement are expected. The video recording of their elevator
pitches is at https://bit.ly/NXcyn-day2.


6.3.2 NXpert Evaluation Results on Technical Fidelity

Second, the invited NXperts checked if the graduates followed the
tules of using the graphical NXtools. Means of the scores for each
NXtool output were taken, and then a Mean of Means Test was
calculated using built-in statistical tools from Google Sheets and
interpreted according to the stated Likert Scale. The next table
presents the results:

Table 6.2
NXpert Evaluation Results on Technical Fidelity
NXtool Output Mean
Perspectives Circle el PRE
| Connections Circle - _ | 3.0556
Scenario Planning Quadrant 3.2963
Feasibility Funnel 3.0741
Ripple EffectTooh 3.2407
| Persuasion Pyramid _ ‘ a 2.8148
| Likert Scale for Interpretation: Mean of Means 3.1235

3.50 to 4.00 — Excellent
2.75 to 3.49 — Satisfactory Standard Deviation 1.0079

2.00 to 2.74 — Average ei é
1.00 to 1.99 — Poor 8 Interpretation Satisfactory

Overall, the participants were found compliant with the norms of
using the NXtools. These rules include (1) the direction of arrows to
show cause-and-effect relationships in the Connections Circle, (2)
the plus or minus labels to denote the acceptability of scenarios in
the Planning Quadrant and Ripple Effect Tool, (3) synching content
and speech time with the Persuasion Pyramid, etc.

These observations were highlighted by the teacher-facilitators when
they critiqued the participants’ outputs midway through the program.
The video recording can be accessed at https://NXcyn-day1.

6.3.3 NXpert Evaluation Results on Idea Continuity

Finally, the NXperts objectively rated the logical flow of the ideation
and polishing of their solution starting with the Explore NXtools up to
the Ripple Effect Diagram. The mean scores given for each output
set were found using Google Sheet statistical functions and then
compared against a 4-point Likert Interpretation Scale. Refer to the
table on the next page for the results of this criterion:


Table 6.2
NXpert Evaluation Results on Idea Continuity

Likert Scale for Interpretation: Mean 20
3.50 to 4.00 — Excellent 3.0556
2.75 to 3.49 — Satisfactory Standard Deviation 0.8777

2.00 to 2.74 — Average c z
| 1.00 to 1.99 — Poor Interpretation Satisfactory

These results suggest that the participants were able to hold on to
the goals of their project statement and ideated a feasible solution
towards achieving a desired future when they went from using the

NXtools in the logical order.


7. Conclusions and Recommendations

Based on the results of the NXpert evaluations and FGD scorecard, it can
be argued that the participants were able to learn NXthinking and practice
the same to ideating solutions for real-life problems using NXtools using a
hybrid workshop training format as the mode of transfer of learning. There
is room for improvement in the interactivity and choreography of the
workshop, and this was well noted by the organizers for the future iteration
of the workshop. The results were likewise acknowledged by the copyright
owner and, at their discretion, use the results to improve the content and
training materials used in in-person, virtual, and self-paced formats.

The “Satisfactory” outputs of the participants are as good as can be
expected from the maiden outputs of anyone who hears a concept, learns
a new skill, or uses new tools. The NXthinking paradigm is a particularly
demanding practice because practitioners are expected to think of ideas
that work and solutions that address societal pain points without adding
palliatives or unintended negative consequences.

In the Q&A meeting with the Shell representative in parallel with the FDG
on 28 October 2022, they recognized that six of the 18 outputs are already
pre-qualified for participation in the next NXplorers TBIC, the showcase
competition for ideas generated in the NXplorers workshops across the
country (FGD, October 2022), but there are still forms and waivers to submit
to comply with the data privacy and intellectual property regulations.

Shell recommended that the participants continue practicing NXthinking in
research, as this was the primary and long-term goal of the program. Dy
(2022) highlighted that NXthinking skills are not single-purpose knowledge
but a future-proof skill that can serve them well for their whole life. However,
retention and continued practice of learning, while ideal for future follow-up,
is beyond the scope of this research. For this reason, the researcher
recommends that:

1. Shell may conduct parallel workshops of different formats, gather
quantitative evaluations from the participants, and compare the results
using t-test statistical approaches;

2. The organizers to conduct a full in-person refresher for one-half of the
hybrid workshop graduates, and full virtual training for the other; and
compare the quality of their work in this cycle with the quality of their
work in the hybrid workshop to see if there was an improvement; and

3. To train teacher-chaperons first so that they can guide their students
well in each remotely-connected school in the next online workshops.


Bibliography

Banks, G., Scheyvens, R., & Leonard, S. (November 2020). Implementing
an interdisciplinary Masters of the SDGs. Retrieved from https://ic-
sd.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/1 1/Samantha-Leonard.pdf

Barcelona Field Studies Centre. (September 2022). Radar Chart Creator.
Retrieved from https://geographyfieldwork.com.

Chatzinikolaou, D., & Vlados, C. (May 2019). University-industry-
Government Linkages and the Helix Theory on the Fourth Industrial
Revolution. Semantic Scholar.

Department of Education. (March 2005). Department Order 9, Series of
2005: Instituting measures to increase engaged time-on-task and
ensuring compliance therewith. Retrieved from
https:/Avww.deped.gov.ph/2005/03/02/do-9-s-2005-instituting-
measures-to-increase-engaged-time-on-task-and-ensuring-
compliance-therewith/

Department of Education. (May 2018). List of Senior High Schools.
Retrieved from _https:/Avww.deped.gov.ph/k-to-12/senior-high-
school/list-of-senior-high-schools/

Department of Education. (October 2020). Memorandum OUCI-2020-307.
Retrieved from Suggested measures to foster academic ease during
the COVID-19 pandemic: https:/Awww.deped.gov.ph/wp-
content/uploads/2020/1 1/OUCI-2020-307_ACADEMIC-EASE-
DURING-COVID-19-final-version-01Nov2020.pdf

Dy, M. (September 2022). In-person meeting transcript.

FGD. (October 2022). Video Recording of Focus Group Interview dated 28
October 2022. (J. Balgua, Interviewer) Retrieved from
https://bit.ly/NXcyn-fgd

Forsyth, D. (2019). Group Dynamics, 7Ed. Cengage.

Gertner, J. (2013). The Idea Factory: Bell Labs and the Great Age of
American Innovation. Penguin Press.


Gobi Partners and Core Capital. (November 2022). State of Talent in Tech:
Philippines 2022.

Google EDU. (December 2022). Trend Forecast Report 2022, Future of
Education, Part 1: Preparing for a new future.

Gore, E. (January 2022). Different Types of Training Methods. Retrieved
from Learning Lab: https://elmlearning.com/blog/training-methods/

Hirschmann, R. (November 2021). Number of secondary schools in
Singapore from 1960 to 2021. Retrieved from  Statista:
https://www-statista.com/statistics/865463/singapore-number-of-
secondary-schools/

HundrED. (April 2022). Reap Benefit. Retrieved from
https://nundred.org/en/innovations/reap-benefit

LoopMe Philippines. (December 2019). NXplorers: TBIC 2019 Awards 10
Schools for Innovative Problem-Solving. Retrieved from LoopMe.PH:
https://www.loopme.ph/looptalk/nxplorers-tbic-20 19-awards-10-
schools-for-innovative-problem-solving

McGrath, J. (1964). Social Psychology: A Brief Introduction. Holt, Rinehart
& Winston.

Morris, L. (October 2022). Understanding Responsibility Assignment Matrix
(RACI Matrix). Retrieved from https://project-
management.com/understanding-responsibility-assignment-matrix-
raci-matrix/

NXplorers.com. (August 2022). NXplorers Facilitator Resources (Approved
access required). Retrieved from https://nxplorers.com/en/facilitator-
resources

NXplorers.com. (July 2022). NXthinking Toolkit (Partial public access
allowed). Retrieved from https://nxplorers.com/en/nxthinking

NXplorers.com. (June 2022). NXplorers Programme (Main Page, Public
Access). Retrieved from https://nxplorers.com/en/about

NXplorers.com. (September 2022). NXplorers Classroom (Alumni access
required). Retrieved from https://classroom.nxplorers.com/dash


O*Net. (June 2022). O*Net Content Model. Retrieved from O*Net Resource
Center.

Pique, J., Berbegal-Mirabent, J., & Etzkowitz, H. (December 2018). Triple
Helix and the evolution of ecosystems of innovation: the case of
Silicon Valley. Springer Open Access.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1186/a40604-018-0060x

Primero, J. (December 2022). Recording of phone call with Mr. Joseph
Primero. (J. Balgua, Interviewer)

Project Management Institute. (2021). A Guide to the Project Management
Body of Knowledge (PMBOK® Guide), 7th Ed.

Quinn, J., McEachen, J., Fullan, M., Gardner, M., & Drummy, M. (2020).
Dive into Deep Learning: Tools for Engagement. Corwin/SAGE.

RiConfigure. (May 2021). Quadruple Helix Collaborations in Practice:
Stakeholder Interaction, Responsibility and Governance. European
Commission.

Sankar, S. (July 2011). Lean Six Sigma. (A. Coskun, Ed.) Lean Six Sigma:
Projects and Personal Experiences.

Shell Global Solutions. (2019). NXthinking Poster. Retrieved from
https://nxplorers.com/uploads/docs/Shell_NXthinking_A3_Poster.pd
f

Shell Global Solutions. (2020). Facilitator Resources. Retrieved from
https://nxplorers.com/en/facilitator-resources

Shell Global Solutions. (2021). NXplorers Brochure. Retrieved from
https://nxplorers.com/uploads/docs/Shell_NXplorers_Brochure_202
1.pdf

Shell Global Solutions. (December 2020). 2020 NXplorers Recognition
Awards. Retrieved from https://nxplorers.com/en/events/2020-
global-recognition-awards

Shell Philippines. (November 2021). Shell NXplorers The Bright Ideas
Challenge: STEM student teams solve global challenges. Retrieved
from https:/Avww.shell.com.ph/media/media-releases/2021-media-
releases/shell-nxplorers-the-bright-ideas-challenge-stem-student-
teams.html


Talreja, V. (July 2019). World Youth Skills Day: ... the Critical Role of Life
Skills ... Retrieved from https://vishaltalreja.com/

Teresa, C. (November 2020). Meeting video recording via Butter App.
Retrieved from https:/bit.ly/outter-cheska

Web Solutions LLC. (2022). Qatar: Secondary Education. Retrieved from
https://education.stateuniversity.com/pages/1246/Qatar-
SECONDARY-EDUCATION. html

World Economic Forum. (October 2020). The Future of Jobs Report 2020.
