Nutrient Content, Health Properties and Acceptability of Taro (Colocasia esculenta (L.) Schott)-Corn (Zea mays L.) and Sweet Potato (Ipomoea batatas (L.) Poir)-Corn Noodles

HAZEL TOLENTINO LAT

UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES LOS BAÑOS

Master of Science in Applied Nutrition

DECEMBER 2014

ABSTRACT

The nutrient content and health properties of noodles made from taro-corn and sweet
potato-corn flour mixtures were studied. Sensory characteristics and acceptability of the
different proportions of the taro-corn and sweet potato-corn noodles were also
determined. Except for crude protein, glycemic index and dietary fiber, a significant
decrease (p>0.05) on the proximate composition, mineral content, phytochemical
components was observed when the noodles were processed. A significant increase in the
total dietary fiber content and in the glycemic index were observed. Exposure to high
temperature during processing could have greatly affected the reduction in the nutrients
and other components. The 70:30 taro-corn and 70:30 sweet potato- corn noodles were
both slightly liked for their aroma, texture and flavor and, was acceptable as compared to
the other proportions. Based on the CODEX ALIMENTARIUS the taro, sweet potato and
IPB var. 6 white corn flours are sources of energy, protein, zinc and iron, while the noodles are sources of protein and energy.

INTRODUCTION

Carbohydrates, such as rice, breads, and noodles are the major sources of food. It
provides most of the daily energy needs, which is cheaper than meat and meat products.
Also, even in disaster situations, foods that are being provided are carbohydrate-rich
sources, such as porridge, noodles and breads.

The importance of carbohydrate rich foods, especially those that are wheat based, can
be traced back from historical times. The noodle is a type of staple food made from
unleavened dough which is rolled flat and cut into one of a variety of shapes (Oxford
Dictionary). For example, Asian Noodles, one of the oldest forms of processed food can
be traced back at 7000 years ago. As evidence of this, millet-based noodles that
resembled the /a-mian noodle, which is a traditional Chinese noodle is made by
repeatedly pulling and stretching the dough by hand, were found in archaeological digs in
China in 1999. These noodles were dated back from the late Neolithic period, around
4000 years ago (Santos 2010).

Asian noodles are different from pasta products in the ingredients that are being used,
the processes involved and their consumption patterns. Pasta is made from semolina
(coarse flour usually made from durum wheat) and water, and is extruded through a metal
die under pressure. Pasta is a dried product. After cooking, the pasta noodles are often
eaten with different sauces. On the other hand, Asian noodles are characterized by thin
strips slit from sheeted dough that has been made from flour (wheat or other composite

flours), water, and salt. Asian noodles are often consumed in soups (Santos 2010).

Noodles are popularly known for their ease in preparation, affordability and
availability. It is deemed as a cheap source of carbohydrate, which costs less than 20.00
Php. Because of its economic value, it also acts as a common viand taken together with
rice or bread for most of the Filipino population. Also, we can see noodle products in
different cuisines, such as Japanese and Chinese cuisines.

Almost all of the Asian countries including the Philippines have its own way of
noodle preparation. As stated above, Asian noodles differ from the pasta noodles due to
the ingredients being used, the processes involved in the preparation and also in the
consumption patterns. Generally, there are two processes for making noodles-handmade
and machine made noodles. Handmade noodles being a traditional method, is seen as an
art by many. Until now, handmade noodle still surpasses the machine made noodle in
terms of favorable texture output. On the other hand, the machine made noodles are
more economical, especially in mass production and ingredient utilization (Santos 2010).

The usual ingredients of noodles are wheat flour, egg, and salt. These ingredients
provide high energy, but most often, it does not contain other nutrients that are beneficial
for growth and development. That is why noodles in the country are starting to be
fortified with vitamins and also have additional vegetable ingredients. Although, it will
be good to try substituting wheat flour with indigenous flours, for additional nutritional
and health benefits such as taro flour, sweet potato flour, and com flour.

Tubers and root crops, such as taro, and sweet potato and crops such as corn or maize,
are basically important sources of carbohydrates as an energy source and as a staple in

the tropical and sub-tropical countries (Liu et al. 2006). These products have nutritionally

beneficial components, such as a resistant starch and mucilage. Mucilage extracted from
various tubers and roots has been reported to possess angiotensin converting enzyme
inhibitory and antioxidant activities. On the other hand, resistant starch has been
attributed with a slow digestion in the lower parts of the human gastrointestinal tract
which results in the slow liberation and absorption of glucose and aids in the reduction of
the risk of obesity, diabetes and other related diseases. Also, tubers and roots do not
contain any gluten, which is an important factor when considering a carbohydrate source.
Tubers used as a source of carbohydrates, instead of carbohydrates that contain gluten,
may aid in a reduction in the incidence of celiac disease or other allergic reactions
(Aprianita et al. 2009).

The glycemic index concept was developed in human nutrition in an attempt to
characterize foods according to their postprandial glycemic response rather than their
chemical composition (Jose-Cunilleras 2004). The glycemic index measures how rapidly
an element is digested by the body. Complex carbohydrates have a lower glycemic index
since they are digested more slowly, while simple carbohydrates are processed faster and
have a higher index. A food’s glycemic index is also influenced by processing, type of
starch, fiber, ripeness, fat and acid content, preparation and a person’s metabolism. Foods

with a high glycemic index tend to raise blood sugar and insulin levels.

Objectives of the Study

The general objective of the study was to evaluate the nutrient content, health
properties and acceptability of Com [Zea mays L]-Taro [Colocasia esculenta (L) Schott]
and Com - Sweet Potato [Ipomoea batatas (L.) Poir] noodles.

Specifically the study aimed to:

1. determine the nutritional value such as proximate composition (% moisture,
% crude fat, % crude protein, and total ash), carbohydrate profile (starch and
amylose), mineral content (iron and zinc),and total dietary fiber of the raw
taro flour, cor flour, sweet potato flour, and the cooked and uncooked taro-
com and sweet potato-com noodles;

2. determine the antioxidant activity and phytochemical components namely
phenols, tannins, flavonoids, saponins and alkaloids of the raw taro flour, com
flour, sweet potato flour and the cooked and uncooked taro-com and sweet
potato-com noodles;

3. measure the glycemic index of the raw taro flour, com flour, sweet potato
flour and the taro-corn and sweet potato-corn cooked and uncooked noodles;

4. determine the effect of processing on the nutrients, dietary fiber,
phytochemical components and glycemic index in the raw taro, com, sweet

potato and taro-based and sweet potato-based noodles;

Date and Place of the Study

The study was conducted from June 2013 to June 2014 at the Bio-assay Laboratory of
the Institute of Human Nutrition and Food (IHNF) and at the Students’ Laboratory of the
Institute of Food Science and Technology (IFST) at the University of the Philippines Los
Bafios (UPLB), Laguna.

Scope and Limitation of the Study

The study only investigated the nutritional value, phytochemical components, and in
vitro glycemic index of taro, corn, and sweet potato in their powdered form and in the
taro-com and sweet potato-com based noodles. Only the taro-comn and sweet potato-com
flour mixture that has formed an acceptable noodle mixture was used based on the result
of the preliminary study. Only zine and iron from among the minerals were analyzed.

Taro-com and sweet potato-corn based noodles were produced at laboratory scale only.

REVIEW OF LITERATURE

Taro (Colocasia esculenta (L.) Schott)

Physiology and Taxonomy

Taro is a crop that originated in the Southeast or Southern Central Asia, where it was
probably cultivated before rice. Nowadays, the plant is grown throughout the world, in
Africa, Asia, the West Indies, and South America (Lee 1999). In Asia, it is widely
planted in south and central China and is grown to a lesser extent in India. In many
islands of the Pacific, including Papua New Guinea, it is a staple food, has prestigious as
well as economic value, and plays an important role in traditional gift-giving and
ceremonies. In Indonesia, taro is a staple food on the Mentawai Islands and for
Melanesians in Irian Jaya. Also, in Malaysia, taro has been used for more than 2000 years
and is now found throughout the country. In the Philippines, taro is grown throughout the
country, but is most important in eastern and central Visayas and in the Mindanao and
Bicol Regions (Wilson and Siemonsma 1996).

Taro belongs to the genus Colocasia, within the sub-family Colocasioideae of the
monocotyledonous family Araceae (Onwueme 1999). It is a large perennial herbaceous
plant up to 2 meters in height. The leaves are large (20-85 cm long and 20-60 cm wide),
petiole attached to the leaf near the center with leaf tips pointed and rounded basal lobes.

The petioles are up to 2 meters in length, rise up in whorls from the apex of the corm,

variable in color from light greenish yellow to dark red depending on cultivar and not
necessarily uniform, variegated petioles occurs. Inflorescence is a spadix (a simple
fleshy spike) surrounded by a bract-like spathe. The spathe consists of two unequal parts:
the lower green, is up to 5 cm; while the upper part deciduous, yellow, is up to 35 cm and
is distally rolled. The overall length of the spathe reaches up to 40 cm and is usually
twice as long as a spadix (Figure 1). The flowers are unisexual and located on the spadix.
Green pistallate flowers are found at the base of the spadix with sterile or aborted flowers
located above, followed staminate flowers toward the end of the spadix. The fruits are
‘small ellipsoid berries. Not all taros flower naturally. Roots are mainly on the surface,
fibrous, and adventitious. The corm is large underground starchy system that is glandular
or oblong in shape, with up to 20 cm in diameter and weighs up to 1 kg or more (Figure
2). Colors cover a range from grey to purple, to red to yellow. Corm color is also not

necessarily uniform throughout (Manner and Taylor 2001).

Fig. 1. Taro plant

Fig. 2. Taro corms

Nutritional and Health Value

Taro is easily digested, and practically non-allergenic. It has very small starch
particles with diameter of 1-6.5 im. Per 100 g edible portion, the raw corms contain
approximately 70 g water, 1.1 g protein, 26 g carbohydrates, 1.5 g fiber, and 15 mg
vitamin C. Energy value of the raw taro corms per 100 g averages to 475 kJ, Half a cup
of cooked taro leaves provides 97 % of vitamin A and 39 % of vitamin C, based on the
U.S. RDA (Wilson and Siemonsma 1996). The corm is an excellent source of energy.
Also, the corms are good sources of the minerals calcium and iron, which are essential
for the body. Calcium helps to make strong bones and teeth, while iron helps keep the
blood healthy. Also the taro corms are rich sources of zinc, which is an essential mineral
that protects against infection, builds the blood and protects against vitamin A deficiency.
It is also considered as one of the few non-animal sources of zine (SPC, 2006).
Additionally, taro with yellow-fleshed corm contains higher levels of B-carotene than the

corms that have white flesh. High levels of B-carotene support vitamin A production

which is important for a healthy immune system. Foods containing high levels of
carotenoids have been shown to protect against chronic diseases, including
cardiovascular diseases, diabetes and certain types of cancers (Engelberger er al. 2003).
According to Manner and Taylor (2001), given the taro’s nutritional value and
digestibility (98.8 %) and because it is a hypoallergenic starch, taro in the form of poi
makes an excellent food for babies and elderly. Also, taro has a low glycemic index, thus
is an excellent food for persons with diabetes, who require slow breakdown of glucose
into the blood. Taro contains protein inhibitors but these are destroyed during cooking

(Wilson and Siemonsma 1996).

Processing Possi

The main advantages of root crops as a staple food compared with cereals are that they
are a cheaper source of energy, and they can be cultivated easily and provide more
dietary energy per hectare at a lower cost. According to Tilahun (2009), many of the
developing world’s poorest producers and most undernourished households depended on
roots and tubers as a contributing, if not the main, source of food and nutrition.

Between the root and tuber crops of the tropics are the edible aroids- taro (Colocasia
esculenta) and tannia (Xanthosoma sagittifolium). These tuber crops are widely grown as
staple food in many parts of Africa, America, the Pacific Islands and Asia. The potential
of these crops is particularly high in the humid and sub humid tropics which are not

suitable for cereal production (Purseglove 1968).


The high viscosity of taro starches make it very useful in food applications where high
thickening power is desired, as well as the small particle size being useful for noodle or
bread production (Aprianata ef al. 2009). Taro has been reported to have 70%-80%
starch with granules of small size. The small size granules make Taro highly digestible,
so it is used in preparation of infant foods in Hawaii and the other Pacific islands. Given
these characteristics of taro flour, it has much potential for use in food formulation
(Sanful 2011). Additionally, the fine granules and small particle size of the taro flour may
offer improved binding and reduced breakage of products, as was known in the past
studies by Huang ef al (2007). According to Aprianata ef al. (2009), taro has a smooth-
textured gel, which would make it suitable for noodle processing, which requires a
smooth mouth feel and avoidance of a grainy texture. It also has a higher content of
resistant starch therefore the use of taro in any of the above products may offer additional
health benefits.

Although taro is not an industrial crop, it also has applications as a fried product, in
soft drinks and flour for home consumption. Starch grains of taro is small, thus it
improves digestibility, which is an important factor when selecting a starchy food that
will not be cumbersome on the digestive system. For this reason, taro can be used as a
composite in the manufacture of infant meals, foods for convalescing patients with
problems that require carbohydrate as a source of energy that will not stress their
metabolic process (Ikpeme ef al. 2007). Moreover, taro as a food ingredient is used in the
production of a variety of foods including chips and breads. The corms are boiled in

water or steamed, fried or mixed with other products like wheat flour in bread production.

ll

Composite flour that incorporates taro has also been used in extruded products such as
noodles and macaroni (Ojinaka et al. 2009).

Taro has also been found to be an important ingredient in the production of beverages
and for partial replacement of wheat flour in bread, cookies, taro-based desserts and
miscellaneous taro-based products (Sanful 2011). A beverage powder can be prepared
from cooked taro by incorporation of flavoring and sweetening agents, followed by drum
drying. The beverage powder mixes readily with milk and water and is considered highly
palatable. Taro can also be utilized in the preparation of various types of breakfast foods,
such as grits and flakes. The process of manufacture involves cooking, flavoring, drying,
and toasting. Food products made from taro have been shown to be of value in preparing
diets for wheat allergy cases and can be canned as a substitute for potatoes or other
starchy crops (Payne ef al. 1941).

With the development of new process for efficient production of taro flour,
development of value-added products from taro flour will certainly increase opportunities
to expand the utilization of taro in the tropics (Nip ef al. 1994). Because of this, it will
definitely help improve the economy of taro-producing areas in the world. In addition,
considering the nutritive value of taro, that is twice the carbohydrate content of potatoes
and containing high amounts of fiber, magnesium, vitamin C, iron and potassium,

blending taro flour with wheat flour is very beneficial (Tekle 2009).

Effect of Processing on the Nutrient Content and Health Properties

Root crops and tubers are not easily digested in their natural state, and should be
cooked before they are eaten. Cooking improves its digestibility, promotes palatability
and also improves their keeping quality as well as making the roots safer to eat. The heat
used during cooking can be dry heat like that in baking in an oven or over an open fire, or
wet heat as in boiling, steaming or frying. Heat application helps to sterilize the food by
killing harmful bacteria and other pathogenic microorganisms. It also increases the
availability of some nutrients. An example would be the cellulosic cell walls of plant
foods are not readily broken down in the gut of monogastric animals such as humans; but
these cell walls are degraded by heat, and the nutrients within are made available.
Heating also solubilizes starch and makes it more available. Proteins are irreversibly
denatured by heating at 100°C and thus, causes insoluble collagen, present in the
connective tissues of animals, to be denatured to gelatin, which is more readily available
because it may be attacked by proteolytic enzymes of the small intestine. Similarly,
enzyme inhibitors present in plant foods, including many tropical root crops, are
denatured or inactivated at 100°C and hence are no longer able to inhibit the action of
enzymes such as trypsin, an enzyme involve in the digestion of protein in the small
intestine. However, processing may reduce the nutritional value of some root crops as a
result of losses and changes in major nutrients, including carbohydrates, proteins,
minerals and vitamins (FAO 1990). Another effect of processing is that it would reduce

the availability of essential amino acids such as lysine, which is due to the Maillard


reaction between reducing sugars and the amino groups of proteins and amino acids
(Mepba et al. 2007).

The term “food processing” covers an enormous field; from simple boiling to
irradiation. Processing (cooking) can both be beneficial and detrimental to the nutrient
composition of foods. It is known that techniques used in processing may decrease the
amount of some nutrients in food. For example, there is inevitable leaching of nutrients
into the cooking water during boiling. The water may or may not be discarded, depending
upon cultural or personal preferences. On the other hand, the beneficial effect of
processing is that it may enhance the nutritional quality of food by reducing or destroying
the anti-nutrients present in the food, as well as increasing the protein and starch
digestibility. Elimination or inactivation of anti-nutritional compounds is absolutely
necessary to improve the nutritional quality and effectively utilize human food to their
full potential. Some processing methods, such as boiling, baking, microwave and
pressure cooking, are known to achieve reduction or elimination of these anti-nutrients.
Radiation processing and extrusion have also been used as a means to inactivate anti-
nutritional factors that are naturally present. The combination of cooking and
fermentation improved the nutrient quality and it drastically reduced the anti-nutritional
factors to safe levels much greater than any of the tested processing methods. However,
excessive heat processing should be avoided, because it adversely affects the protein
quality of foods. It is therefore important that processing is done within the recommended
guidelines for heat and pH, because over processing will further destroy not only nutrient

content but also the taste and appearance of the food (Morris et al. 2004).


According to FAO (1990), peeling is usually the first step in the processing of any
root crop. This step may remove some of the nutrients if it is not done carefully. Also,
nutrients loses during cooking can be reduced by retaining the skin to minimize leaching
and to protect the nutrients. Sometimes, it is advisable to peel the root crops after it has
been boiled, and to make use of the cooking water in order to conserve the water-soluble
nutrients. Nutrients may be lost during cooking in two ways: (1) by degradation, which
can occur by destruction or by other chemical changes such as oxidation and (2) by
leaching into the cooking medium. Vitamins are susceptible to both processes while
minerals are affected only by leaching. Free amino-acids could also be leached or may
react with sugars to form complexes. Starches may be hydrolyzed to sugars. The
percentage loss will depend partly on the cooking temperature and on whether the food is
prepared by boiling, baking or roasting. Baking losses may appear deceptively low if
expressed on a fresh weight basis, due to the concentration of nutrients by loss of water.
However, less damage is done by baking than by canning or drying.

Heating is one of the most important methods developed to extend the shelf life of
foods and increasing the availability of nutrients to the consumers. Thermal processes
such as blanching and pasteurization increases the shelf life of foodstuffs and minimize
food-borne diseases while cooking is aimed primarily at increasing the palatability and
digestibility of food. The reduced protein contents of cooked vegetables could be
attributed to the severity of thermal process during cooking. Data on mineral analysis
indicate that blanching and cooking caused significant (p <0.05) reductions in the K, Na,

Ca, Zn, Fe and P contents of vegetables and root crops (Mepba et al. 2007).

Sweet Potato (Ipomoea batatas L. Poir)

Morphology

Sweet potato is believed to have its center of origin in tropical America where its
starchy tubers have long been used as food. The sweet potato was brought to Europe by
Columbus during his voyages of discovery and subsequently introduced to Africa and
Asia by Portuguese and Spanish traders (Edmond 1971). It is globally the sixth most
important food crop with over 105 million metric tons produced annually. Developing
countries produce about 95 % of the global sweet potato. It is grown mainly in the
tropics, but has the ability to adapt to a wide range of climatic conditions (Nabubuya ef
al. 2012).

The mature storage roots ranges in shape from almost spherical to spindle-shaped, in
length from a few centimeters to more than 30 cm and weigh from 0.1 kg several
kilograms. The surface of the root is covered by a thin layer of cork and may be smooth
or irregularly ribbed (Kays 1998).

Sweet potato belongs to the moming glory family (Convolvulaceae), and both the
storage roots and leaves are edible. Sweet potato has a starchy sweet taste, with different
varieties having their own unique flavor profiles. They are open grouped into 2 categories
depending on texture; some are firm, dry, and mealy when cooked, while others are soft

and moist when cooked (Kays 1998).


The plant is an herbaceous perennial vine, bearing alternate heart-shaped or palmately
lobed leaves and medium sized sympetalous flowers. The edible tuberous root is long and
tapered, with a smooth skin whose color ranges between yellow, orange, red, brown,
purple, and beige. Its flesh ranges from beige through white, red, pink, violet, yellow,
orange, and purple. Sweet potato varieties with white or pale yellow flesh are less sweet
and moist than those with red, pink, or orange flesh (Nelson and Elevitch 2011).

The roots are large, fleshy, edible storage roots and are formed by the thickening part
of the adventitious roots, close to the subterranean part of the stem at nodes which rest in
the soil. Thirty to forty tubers are produced per plant. The length of the tubers may vary
from a few inches to over a foot. They may be spindle shaped or almost spherical with a
smooth surface or one that is irregularly ribbed (Nelson and Elevitch 2011).

It has a trailing or twining stems, up to four meters long, which sends roots into the
soil at the nodes. The leaves are heart-shaped or halberd shaped. The flowers have
purplish throats and white margins, resembling those of the moming glory and the
blossoms are rare and may not produce seeds. The tubers are also variable in shape, size
and color. Some are long and cylindrical, while others are short, thick and rounded at the
ends. The skin may be whitish, dull straw-colored, light red or purple. The flesh is also
variable in color, texture, moisture and quality. Classification of varieties is usually based
on the shape of the leaves (Department of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries, Republic
of South Africa 2011). Apart from the roots, the leaves are also used for foods and as

feeds (Kays, 1998).

RUMP EAGREEE
By

flower
r=]
a
pineal oe

aE oe __leaves

ays

pencil

roots —~ fibrous

roots
storage

Fig.3. Sweet potato plant

Varieties

There are several hundred varieties of sweet potato differing greatly in size, shape,
texture and color. The color of peelings and flesh of the roots is often used as a basis of
varietal classification (Maina 1992). The color of the tubers ranges from white through
shades of yellow to red and purple. Each has a varying nutrient content. Onwuene (1978)

classified sweet potato into three groups based on the texture after cooking. These are:

a. Those with firm dry texture after cooking;
b. Those with soft gelatinous flesh after cooking; and

c. Those with coarse flesh which is suitable for animal feed.


Von Loesecke (1955) classified sweet potato into categories based on their moisture

content, namely moist flesh and dry flesh varieties.

Nutritional and Health Value

Sweet potato is undeniably one of the world’s most important food crops throughout
the tropical and subtropical and at least half of the temperate zone as it is the best
substitute for the staples rice and corn. It has a high yield potential (Edmond 1971; Maina
1992) and is highly adaptable crop having great tolerance to an extended range of edaphic
and climactic conditions than other root crops. Due to this, its main importance as food
has been the carbohydrate content or starch source as a dietary staple (Edmond 1971;
Maina 1992).

Nutritionally, sweet potatoes usually have rather higher protein content as compared
to other tubers such as cassava and yams. An earlier comparison by Bradbury (1988)
shows that sweet potatoes produces 1.3 to 1.9 times the amount of edible energy/ha/day
to that of cassava and rice. Investigations by Huang (1982) and Woolfe (1988) revealed
that the content of protein in sweet potato is mainly in the form of globulin, is low and
provides 4% - 6 % of the total calories. Carotenes, the precursor of vitamin A production
are often present in yellow varieties. Sweet potatoes are excellent sources of energy and
are also good sources of vitamin B, C, calcium and iron (Edmond 1971).

Sweet potatoes, mainly consists of carbohydrates (80 % to 90 % of the dry weight of

the roots), with starch being the most abundant component of the roots’ dry matter


forming 50 % to 80 %. The amylose/amylopectin ratio of the sweet potato starch
influences the physicochemical properties of sweet potato flour such as gelatinization,

retrogradation, water absorption and pasting viscosities (Nabubuya et al. 2012).

Effect of Processing on Nutritional Value

Root crops are not easily digested in their natural state and should be cooked before
they are eaten, Cooking improves their digestibility, promotes palatability and improves
their keeping quality as well as making the roots safer to eat. The heat used during
cooking can be dry heat as in baking in an oven or over an open fire, or wet heat as when
boiling, steaming or frying. Heat helps to sterilize the food by killing harmful bacteria
and other microorganisms, and it increases the availability of nutrients. Proteins are
denatured by heat. In this form they are more easily digested by proteolytic enzymes;
cellulosic cell walls that cannot be broken down by monogastric animals like man are
broken down, and some anti-nutritional factors such as enzyme inhibitors are inactivated.
However, processing may reduce the nutritional value of some root crops as a result of
losses and changes in major nutrients, including proteins, carbohydrates, minerals and
vitamins (Maina 1992).

Nutrients may be lost during cooking in two ways: first, by degradation, which can
occur by destruction or by other chemical changes such as oxidation; secondly by
leaching into the cooking medium. Vitamins are susceptible to both processes while

minerals are affected only by leaching. Free amino-acids could also be leached or may


react with sugars to form complexes. Starches may be hydrolyzed to sugars. The
percentage loss will depend partly on the cooking temperature and on whether the food is
prepared by boiling, baking or roasting. Baking losses may appear deceptively low if
expressed on a fresh weight basis, due to the concentration of nutrients by loss of water.
However, less damage is done by baking than by canning or drum drying (Maina 1992).

The first step in processing any root crop is usually peeling. This may remove
nutrients if it is not done carefully. Cooking losses can be reduced by retaining the skin to
minimize leaching and to protect the nutrients. It is sometimes advisable to peel after
boiling, and to make use of the cooking water in order to conserve water-soluble nutrients
(FAO 1992).

Vitamin A is fat-soluble and thermo-stable so it will not normally be degraded by
cooking. During studies on the canning of sweet potato, it was also found out that there is
no effect on the vitamin A content of the product due to syrup concentration, 0 to 35 %
sucrose, to cooking time, 30 to 90 minutes, or to the peeling conditions. However, Elkins
(1979) reported about 14 % loss of vitamin A activity after processing sweet potato but
no additional loss over 18 months, while other investigators have reported a 20 to 25 %
loss of vitamin A activity on cooking. This is probably because of the destruction of the
beta-carotene. The main reaction that could take place during the canning of sweet potato
is the isomerization of beta-carotene, to neo-beta-carotene leading to a reduction in the
vitamin A activity from 95 to 91 %. The loss will be greater with increasing temperature
(FAO 1992). Losses of carotene and the development of off-flavors occur when sweet

potato is stored at an ambient oxygen concentration at which antioxidants are not


effective. About 20 to 40 % of the carotene could be destroyed in the first 30 days from
autoxidation (FAO 1992). At the same time autoxidation of the lipids, which are highly
unsaturated, may occur leading to the development of the off-flavors. Complete retention
of thiamine and nicotinic acid in canned sweet potato has been reported, even after
storage for 18 months (FAO 1992).

The major change in amino-acids that occurs on cooking is the Maillard reaction
which makes lysine unavailable, thereby reducing the nutritive value of the roots. Loss of
free amino-acids also takes place through leaching. When sweet potato was canned in 30
% sucrose or water, the concentrations of essential amino-acids as a percentage of the
original were 70 and 58 % respectively, aromatic amino-acids 69 and 48 % and sulfur
amino-acids 86 and 60 % respectively. Purcell and Walter (1982) noted a significant
reduction in the lysine and methionine content of sweet potato on canning, which may
probably be due partly to leaching (FAO 1992).

Minerals are usually lost through being leached into syrup during canning, most
especially with potassium, calcium and magnesium; though the minerals can be
completely retained if the tubers are vacuum-packed. The iron content of canned sweet
potato increased threefold after 18 months of storage and was obviously derived from the

metal can (FAO 1992).


Corn/ Maize (Zea mays L)

Physiology and Taxonomy

Maize is one of the world’s three most popular cereal crops together with wheat and
ice. It is grown worldwide and has a remarkable productive potential. However,
considerable variations exist among varieties in morphology and growth habit (Diaz
2013).

Maize (also known as corn), is the common name for a cereal grass widely grown for
food and livestock fodder. Maize ranks with wheat and rice as one of the world’s chief
grain crops. More starch is produced from maize than other crop. The maize plant has an
erect, solid stem. Its height varies widely, some dwarf varieties being little more than 60
cm (2 ft.) tall at maturity, whereas other types may reach heights of 6 m (20 ft.) or more.
The average height is 2.4 m (8 ft.). The leaves, which grow alternately, are long and
narrow. The main stalk terminates in a staminate (male inflorescence), or tassel. The
tassel is made up of many small flowers termed spikelet, and each spikelet bears three
small anthers, which produce the pollen grains, or male gametes. The pistillate (female)
inflorescence, or ear, is a unique structure with up to 1,000 seeds borne on a hard core
called the cob. The ear is enclosed in modified leaves called husks. The individual silk
fibers that protrude from the tip of the ear are the elongated styles, each attached to an
individual ovary. Pollen from the tassels is carried by the wind and falls onto the silk,

where it germinates and grows down through the silk until it reaches the ovary. Each


fertilized ovary grows and develops into a kernel. Com is a native to Central and South
America and had been the staple food for the Aztecs and the Mayas. The spread of com
colonized Central and South America. Today, maize is the most important raw material

for industrial starch and syrups (Santos 2010).

Nutritional Value

Maize has a good reputation of being a nutria-cereal among developing countries
because of its good nutritional qualities. It is a major source of energy, protein and other
nutrients for both humans and livestock. It contains many vitamins including A, C, and E;
though white com is lower in vitamin A. It also has high carbohydrate content and
therefore is a good source of calories. In fact, maize makes up 15 % of all food crop
protein and accounts for 15 to 56 % of the total daily calories of people in about 25
developing countries where animal protein is expensive for a vast sector of the

population. Also, maize contains high levels of insoluble fibers (FAO, 1992).

Maize Kernel Composition

Like other cereal grains, the maize kemel is comprised of two zygotic tissues, namely
the germ (embryo) and the endosperm which are both embedded in a fused protective
envelope made up of the testa (or seed coat) and the pericarp (Hartings ef. al 2012). The

maize kernel (Figure 4) is divided as 6 % pericarp, 82 % endosperm and 12 % germ


(Prasanna ef al. 2001).The endosperm serves as the main storage of starches and protein,
while the embryo is mainly composed of lipids. The nutritional value of maize kernel is
mostly derived from the endosperm which is largely made up of starch, a complex

carbohydrate that supports the embryo during germination (Hartings et al, 2012).

Hull and fiber

‘Germ

Tip
Fig. 4. Parts of a Maize kernel

Gibbon and Larkins (2005) divided the endosperm into several distinct regions with
different physical properties. The aleurone is the outermost layer in which hydrolytic
enzymes are secreted by the specialized cells during germination. Beneath the aleurone
are the two distinct regions made up of endosperm cells. These regions are the ‘vitreous’
or glassy endosperm and the ‘starchy’ endosperm. The vitreous endosperm transmits
light, whereas the starchy endosperm does not.

Different kernel parts are characterized by different nutritional profiles. The pericarp
contains 87 % crude fiber. It includes 67 % hemicelluloses, 2 % celluloses and 0.1 %
lignin (Burge and Duensing 1989). The endosperm is 87 % starch and 8 % protein while

the germ contains 8.3 % starch, 18.4 % protein and also 33 % crude fat. Unfortunately,


despite all the good nutrients in com, it does have some deficiencies. The endosperm,
which constitutes 80 % of the kernel, is deficient in two essential amino acids ~ lysine
and tryptophan (Mertz ef al. 1964). According to the Food and Agriculture Organization
(FAO), the endosperm protein contains <3 % lysine, which is below the recommended
concentration of 5.5 % for human nutrition. In addition to lysine and tryptophan,

threonine and methionine are also limiting amino acids in maize protein.

Quality Protein Maize (QPM)

Normal maize protein is known to have a biological value of 40 % that of milk and
therefore, needs protein supplementation from legumes and animal products. The
essential amino acids like lysine, tryptophan and threonine are found in reduced
quantities, lysine being the most limiting, followed by tryptophan. In contrast, quality
protein maize (QPM) has nearly twice the amount of lysine and tryptophan, which make
the protein from QPM equivalent to 90 % of the milk protein. Therefore, the nutritional
quality of the normal maize can be improved substantially by altering the composition of
the zeins present in the maize endosperm (Gupta ef al. 2009). Table 1 indicates the
composition of some QPM varieties including IPB variety 6 of the Institute of Plant

Breeding, College of Agriculture, University of the Philippines Los Bajios.


Table 1. Composition of quality protein maize (QPM) varieties

CONSTITUENT TPB var. 6* OPAQUE-2**
Moisture (g/100g) 5.07 3.16
Ash (g/100g) 1.60 2.95
Protein(g/100g) 12.76 3.33
Fat(g/100g) 2.55 15.86
Fiber(g/100g) 3.85 =
Nitrogen Free Extract (g/100g) 74.17 66.45
*Nagares ef al (2011)

** Omage et al (2009)


Starch

The robustness of starch as a food and industrial product has made it one of the most
important plant products, because it can be obtained cheaply and in large amounts, thus it
is flexible in application and can satisfy demand in many processing and manufacturing
ventures (Numawaya ef al. 2011).

Starch is a carbohydrate occurring in granular form in the organs of certain plants.
Starch molecules are polysaccharides composed almost exclusively of anhydro-glucose
units. Starches are hydrophilic colloids, It is a product of photosynthesis and is
predominant food reserve substance in the plants. Starches are synthesized in specialized
cell particles called plastids. Starches are the source of 70 to 80 % of the total caloric
intake worldwide. Commercial starches are obtained from cereal grain seeds particularly
from rice, corm wheat and also from tubers, and roots particularly potato, sweet potato,
cassava (tapioca), and yam and legumes- which contain significant amount of starches
(De Leon et al. 1999).

According to De Leon ef al. (1999), starch is unique among carbohydrates because it
occurs naturally in granules which are relatively dense and insoluble and hydrate very
slightly in cold water. When it is dispersed in water, they produce slurries of very low
viscosity but when the slurry is cooked to about 80°C with stirring, a very viscous

product results.


Physical Structure of Starch Granules

Starch molecules are laid down in the leucoplasts of plant cells in an orderly manner
described by some of the authors as “rolled up”, thereby appearing as granules. It is
postulated that hydrogen bonds are the forces that hold the starch molecules of a granule.
When plant cells are ruptured, by crushing or milling, the hydrogen bonding is weakened
and granules are released. The starch granules vary in size, shape, and markings
characteristics of species. Starch granules diameter ranges from 3 to 150 microns (De

Leon ef al. 1999).

‘Chemical Properties of Starches

There are two basic starch polymers, the linear polymer amylose and the branched or
tree-like polymer amylopectin (De Leon et al. 1999).

Amylose. Amylose molecules (Figure 5) contain 250 to 350 glucose units with
molecular weights from 40,000 to 300, 000 (De Leon ef al. 1999). It comprises 23-31 %
of the dry weight of starch (Aprianita, 2010). It is made up of more than 2000 glucose
units linked into an extended chain via 1,4- glycosidic linkage (De Leon ef al. 1999).
Amylose can be depicted as either a straight chain or helix. The interior or helix contains
hydrogen atoms that allow amylose to form complex with free fatty acids, alcohols,
lipids, or iodine (Aprianita 2010). It is more soluble in water than the B-fraction. It has

the ability to thicken, gel and retrogradate (De Leon e7 al. 1999)


Fig. 5. Structure of amylose molecule.

Amylopectin. It is a highly branched polysaccharide (Figure 6). Amylopectin

molecules have 500 to 2000 glucose units with molecular weights from 4 to 6 million,
thus, it is a larger molecule than the A- fraction or the amylose and its glucose alignment
is described as tree- like or bushy (De Leon ef al. 1999). It consists of a-D-
glucopyranose residues linked mainly by several (14) linkages and many non-random
(1-46) linkages to give a highly branched structure (Aprianita 2010). Because of this
branched nature of the molecule, it is less soluble in water and its paste is less opaque.
Amylopectin thickens more readily than amylose and is responsible for cohesiveness of a
starch paste. However, it does not gel unless concentration is over 30 % (De Leon et al.

1999).


a-(16) linkage

es Z ne

Fig. 6. Structure of the amylopectin molecule.

Properties of Starch

Gelatinization, gelation, retrogradation, and syneresis are the most important
properties of starch. The study of these properties might help our understanding of the
relationship between the structural and functional properties of starch. Additionally,
knowing these properties might also help in determination of further applications of
starches and flours.

Gelatinization temperature. Gelatinization is the process of disruption of semi-
crystalline structure of starch, when a starch suspension is subjected to heating in the
presence of large amount of water. During this process, heat disrupts hydrogen bonds
between polymer chains weakening the granules. Then, the amorphous region, which
contains less hydrogen bonds and is more susceptible to dissolution starts to imbibe water
and increase in size (swelling). Amylose begins to solubilize and leaches out from the

granule into the aqueous solution causing the increase of viscosity (Aprianita 2010).


Range of temperature when starch begins to undergo this change is called gelatinization
temperature range (Aprianita 2010).

Gelatinization temperature of the starch is the point at which the individual granules
first commence to swell and simultaneously lose their interference crosses as viewed
under the polarized microscope. The gelatinization temperature depends on (1) the
method of measurement; (2) the starch to water ratio; and (3) the granule type (De Leon
etal. 1999).

Gelation. It is the setting of the sol into a solidified mass. In starchy gels, the gel
structure has been described as an interlacing network formed by amylose, amylopectin
and water molecules held together by intermolecular bond called micelles. These bonds
weaken with further heating when granules disintegrate. They become stronger when
intact swollen granules are cooled. The higher the percentage of amylose, the more
readily the mixture gels. Also, the amylose of higher molecular weights gel faster than
those of the smaller molecules, Waxy starches which do not contain amylose cannot gel
unless a high concentration of 30 % is used (De Leon ef al. 1999).

Retrogradation. It is a molecular rearrangement of the micelles such that the linear
molecules aggregate into a crystalline mass. Thus, the amylose fractions are more
involved in the retrogradtaion process due to their linear configuration (De Leon er al.
1999). Retrogradation occurs in two stages; the first stage is the formation of crystalline
regions from retrograded amylose. The second stage involves the formation of an ordered
structure within amylopectin. At first, the formed gel is elastic and cuttable. However,

with the passage of time, this gel tends to transient into rubbery structure and release


water (syneresis). The ability of starch to aggregate and crystallize is important since it
determines the texture of starch-based food products. Retrogradation and syneresis are
undesirable traits, especially in refrigerated or frozen foods. It also increases stiffness of

food products during storage (Aprianita 2010).

Uses of Starch

Nutritive contribution of starch is mainly due to carbohydrates, which yields four
calories per gram. Starch is an inexpensive source of energy. As compared with cellulose
that has beta-linkages between glucose units, starch has alpha-linkages which is
hydrolysable by the human digestive tract (De Leon et al. 1999).

Starches functions as thickening agents in sauces, gravies, pie fillings and soups. It
also functions as gelling agents in gum drops, pudding, and other starchy gelled desserts;
as a stabilizing agent in beverages, syrups and salad dressings, as well as coloring (De

Leon ef al. 1999).


Dietary Fiber

Dietary fiber is an important part of a healthy diet. It helps move food and waste
efficiently through the digestive system. Fiber is the part of plant foods that cannot be
broken down by human digestive enzymes in the small intestine. Fiber is the mostly
complex carbohydrates (www.uhs.berkeley.edu).

Dietary fiber is the remnants of the edible part of plants and analogous carbohydrates
that are resistant to digestion and absorption in the human small intestine with complete
or partial fermentation in the human large intestine. It includes polysaccharides,
oligossacharides, lignin and associated plant substances. Dietary fiber exhibits one or
more of either laxation (fecal bulking and softening; increased frequency; and/or
regularity, blood cholesterol attenuation, and/or blood glucose attenuation (AACC Report
2001). However, more recently, the definition has been expanded to include
oligosaccharides, such as inulin and resistant starches. Simplistically, fibers have been
classified as soluble or insoluble fiber (Anderson ef al. 2009). Soluble fibers or the fiber
that can be dissolved in water, such as pectins and gums found in beans and some fruits
and vegetables, slows the movement of food through the body but does not increase fecal
bulk. It helps maintain a healthy cholesterol level, normalize blood sugar levels in
diabetics and may even help reduce blood pressure. On the other hand, Insoluble fiber
cannot be dissolved in water. This type of fiber attracts water to the intestines, making
stools bulky and soft. It also speeds the movement of food through the digestive tract.

Therefore, it may help prevent diverticular disease, colon cancer, hemorrhoids, and


constipation. Cellulose, hemicellulose and lignin are insoluble fibers. They produce the
tough, chewy texture of wheat bran, whole grains, corn bran, and some vegetables
(www.uhs.berkeley.edu). Current recommendations for dietary fiber intake are related to
age, gender, and energy intake, and the general recommendation for adequate intake (Al)
is 14 g/1000 kcal. This AI includes non-starch polysaccharides, analogous carbohydrates
(eg. resistant starches), lignin and associated substances. Using the energy guideline of
2000 keal/day and 2600 keal/day for men, the recommended daily dietary fiber intake is

28 g/day for adult women and 36 g/day for adult men (Anderson et al. 2009).

Table 2. Constituents of dietary fiber*

NON-STARCH [ALOGOUS
POLYSACCHJARIDES AND CARBOHYDRATES
RESISTANT OLIGOSACCHARIDES _ Indigestible Dextrins
Resistant Maltodextrins

Cellulose Resistant Potato Dextrins
Hemicellulose Synthesized Carbohydrate
‘Arabinoxylans Compounds
Arabinogalactans Polydextrose
Polyfructose Methyl cellulose
Tnulin Hydroxypropylmethyl Cellulose
Oligofructans Indigestible (“resistant “*) Starches
Galactooligosaccharides
Gums LIGNIN
Mucilages
Pectins

SUBSTANCES ASSOCIATED WITH THE NON-STARCH
POLYSACCHARIDE AND LIGNIN COMPLEXES IN PLANTS

Waxes Saponins
Phytate Suberin
Cutin Tannins

Adapted from AACC Report, Cereal Foods World, 2001


Phytochemicals

Phytochemicals, though nonessential to sustain human life, are non-nutritive plant
chemicals that have protective or disease preventive properties. Technically, the term
phytochemicals refer to very naturally occurring chemical substances present in plants,
especially those that are biologically active. There are more than 900 different
phytochemicals that have been identified as components of food and many more

phytochemicals are being discovered (Caragay 1992).

It is estimated that there may be more than 100 different phytochemicals in just
serving of vegetables (Polk 1996). Table 3 displays some of the phytochemicals earlier
discovered.

Plants produce chemicals to protect themselves. During the process of photosynthesis
a huge number of free radicals are produced. The plant requires a high concentration of
antioxidants to protect itself against cellular damage by these free radicals. Antioxidant
plant pigments, primarily carotenoids and flavonoids, provide most of this protection but
recent research has shown that ingestion of these compounds by human results in similar

protection and therefore, can protect human beings against diseases (Polk 1996).

Table 3. List of Phytochemicals**


Alkaloids
Caffeine

Theobromine
Theophylline

Anthocyanins
Cyanidin

Carotenes
Lycopene

Coumestans

Flavan-3-ols
Flavonoids
Hesperidin
Kaempferol
Naringin
Quercitin
Resveratrol

Hydroxycinnamie Acid
Chicoric Acid
Coumarin

Ferulic Acid

Scopoletin

Isoflavones
Daidzein

Genistein

Phytosterols
Beta-sitosterol

Saponins

Triterpenoids
Ursolic Acid

Lignans
Silymarine

Monophenols
Hydroxytyrosol

Monoterpenes
Geraniol
Limonene

Xanthophyils
Astaxanthin
Beta-Cryptoxanthin

Organosulfides
Allicin
Glutathione
Indole-3-carbinol
Isothiocyanates
Sulforaphane

Other phytochemicals
Damnacanthal
Phytic Acid

Phenolic Acids
Capsaicin
Ellagic Acid
Rosmarinic Acid
Tannic Acid

¥¥ Adapted from Yu 2007

Beneficial Action of Phytochemicals

Different phytochemicals work differently. The following are some possible

actions of phytochemicals (Mascio 1991):

1. Antioxidant. Most phytochemicals have antioxidant activity and protect our cells

against oxidative damage and reduce risk of developing certain types of cancer.

Some examples of phytochemicals with antioxidant activity are the following:


allyl sulfides (onions, leeks and garlic), carotenoids (fruits, carrots), flavonoids
(fruits and vegetables), polyphenols (tea, grapes).

2. Hormonal Action, Isoflavones, found in soy imitate human estrogens and help to
reduce menopausal symptoms and osteoporosis.

3. Stimulation of enzymes. Indole, the phytochemical found in cabbage, stimulate
enzymes that make the estrogen less effective and can reduce the risk for breast
cancer. Other phytochemicals, which interfere with enzymes, are protease
inhibitors (soy and beans), terpenes (citrus fruits and cherries).

4. Interference with DNA replication. Saponins found in beans interfere with the
replication of cell DNA, thereby preventing the multiplication of cancer cells.
Capsaicin, found in hot pepper protects DNA from carcinogens.

5. Antibacterial effect. The phytochemical allicin from garlic has antibacterial

properties.

Antioxidant

An antioxidant is a molecule capable of slowing or preventing the oxidation of other
molecules. Oxidation is a chemical reaction that transfers electrons from a substance to
an oxidizing agent. Oxidation reactions can produce free radicals, which start chain
reactions that damage cells. Antioxidants terminate these chain reactions by removing

free radical intermediates and inhibit other oxidation reactions by being oxidized


themselves. As a result, antioxidants are often reducing agents such as thiols or
polyphenols (Smirnoff 2005).

Antioxidants are defined by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) as
preservatives that specifically retard deterioration, rancidity or discoloration due to
oxidation. Oxidation of food occurs when oxygen is added to unsaturated sites of
molecules. Oxygen, light, heat, heavy metals, pigments, alkaline conditions and degree of
unsaturation are catalysts in this process (Hui 1992).

Generally, there are two basic categories of antioxidants: natural and synthetic.
Recently, interest has increased considerably in finding naturally occurring antioxidants
for use in foods or medicinal materials to replace synthetic antioxidants, which are being
restricted due to their carcinogenicity. There has been increasing interest in natural
antioxidants present in fruits, vegetables, cereals, herbs and beverages. Several studies
have suggested that intake of food rich in antioxidants is associated with a lower risk of
some chronic diseases. The protective action of fruits and vegetables has been attributed
to the presence of antioxidants, especially antioxidant vitamins including ascorbic acid,
tocopherol and B-carotene. Epidemiological data as well as in vitro studies strongly
suggest that foods containing phytochemicals with antioxidation potential have strong
protective effects against major disease risks including cancer and cardiovascular
diseases (Ponce ef al. 2004).

‘A major group of phytochemicals in foods are the phenolic compounds, which include
plant flavonoids like catechins, found in tea and red wine; polyphenols like camosol in

rosemary leaves, and curcumin in turmeric, curry and mustard. Phenolics are a large


group of naturally occurring organic compounds found in plants and is responsible for
several chemical reactions observed in the plant material. The browning phenomenon in

several fruits is attributed to the presence of phenolics in these fruits (Ponce et al. 2004).

Phenols

The term phenolic compounds embrace a wide range of compounds that possess an
aromatic ring bearing a hydroxyl substituent, including their functional derivatives.
Polyphenol compounds present in many plants are directly related to their characteristics
of foods such as taste, palatability, nutritional value, pharmacological and toxic effects
and their microbial decomposition (Hui 1992). Plants produce thousands of phenolic and
polyphenolic compounds as secondary metabolites that have a large variability in their
structure and occurrence (Frankel and Meyer 2000). Among the natural phenolic
compounds of which approximately 4000 are known to occur in plants, the flavonoids
and their derivatives form the largest group. Considerable numbers of simple monocyclic
phenols, phenolic quinones, lignans, xanthones and other groups are included. Polymeric
materials such as lignins, melanins and tannins are also important (Hui 1992).

Although not generally considered as nutrients, a growing body of evidence suggests
that dietary phenolics may contribute to chemoprevention of a variety of human diseases,
including coronary heart disease and certain cancers. The antioxidant activity of these
compounds is believed to account, in part, for their beneficial health effects (Smimoff

2005). Antioxidants are molecules that when present at low concentrations compared to


those of an oxidizable substrate significantly delay or prevent oxidation of that substrate.
Phenolic compounds are excellent antioxidants by virtue of the electron donating activity
of the ‘acidic’ phenolic hydroxyl group. Two properties of phenolic compounds account
for their radical scavenging properties. Firstly, the one-electron reduction potentials of
phenolic (phenoxyl) radicals are typically lower than those of oxygen radicals such as
superoxide, peroxyl, alkoxyl and hydroxyl radicals. Secondly, phenoxy! radicals are
generally less reactive than oxygen radical. Consequently, phenolic compounds can
directly scavenge harmful reactive oxygen intermediates and inactivate them without
promoting further oxidative reactions (Smimoff 2005).

The general breakdown of plant-based phenols is shown in Figure 7. (Novus

Research)


Flavenote

‘rut and vegetable
color

Genistein,

{ antrocyanine

Antioxidants _F:

_found in: Vegetables
Nona

_Flavonoides

Isoflavones {converted to phytoestrogens

\strong antioxidants
Blegic ecid __perries a good source
—_red and green tea

Tannic acie

satteic acid seuss, vegtables

chlorogenic acia
Hydroxycinnamic "=
feruic eid teuts, vegtables

acid deriviatives

become phytoestrogens
flax seed & other grains

_Lignans

Fig. 7. General break down of plant-based phenols (www.Novusres.com)

Flavonoids

Flavonoids belong to a class of plant secondary metabolites or yellow pigments
having a structure similar to that of flavones. Flavonoids are the most common group of
polyphenolic compounds in the human diet and are found ubiquitously in plants (Spencer
2008). There are > 5000 known flavonoids comprising 12 subclasses. The orange, red

and blue color in vegetables, fruits, flowers, and plant storage tissues are due to water-


soluble anthocyanins, which are reduced from the yellow flavonoids due to loss of
oxygen (Smimoff 2005).

From human nutrition perspective, flavonoids are known to act as antioxidants (Yan-
Hwa et. al 2000). Nevertheless, the antioxidant potency and specific effect of flavonoids
in promoting human health varies depending on the flavonoid type. Among the potent

antioxidant flavonoid types are quercitin, catechins and xanthohumol. Flavonoids might

induce mechanisms that affect cancer cells and inhibit tumor invasion. In preliminary
studies, cancer researchers proposed that smokers who ate foods containing certain
flavonoids, such as catechins found in strawberries and green and black teas, and
quercetin from beans, onions and apples, may have reduced risk of obtaining lung cancer.
They also inhibit low density lipoprotein (LDL) oxidation by free radicals. Flavonoids

have been reported to have negative correlation with incidence of coronary heart disease

(Cao et. al 2000; Verena, ef al, 2006).

Tannins

Tannin is an astringent, bitter plant polyphenolic compound that binds to and
precipitates proteins and various other organic compounds including amino acids and
alkaloids. However, the term "tannin" by extension is widely applied to any large
polyphenolic compound containing sufficient hydroxyls and other suitable groups (such
as carboxyls) to form strong complexes with proteins and other macromolecules. The

compounds are widely distributed in many species of plants, where they play a role in


protection from predation and also in growth regulation. Tannins have molecular weights
ranging from 500 to over 3,000 (gallic acid esters) and up to 20,000 (proanthocyanidins).
Tannins are incompatible with alkalis, gelatin, heavy metals, iron, lime water, metallic

salts, strong oxidizing agents and zinc sulfate, since they form complexes and preci

in aqueous solution (McGee 2004).

Tannins have traditionally been considered antinutritional but it is now known that
their beneficial or antinutritional properties depend upon their chemical structure and
dosage. Recent studies have demonstrated that products containing tannins at low
dosages (0.15—0.2 %) in the diet can be beneficial (Muller and McAlan 1992). Tannins
can also be effective in protecting the kidneys. When incubated with red grape juice and
red wines with a high content of condensed tannins, the poliovirus, herpes simplex virus,
and various enteric viruses are inactivated (Bajaj 1988). Tannins have shown potential
antiviral, antibacterial and antiparasitic effects. Foods rich in tannins can also be used in
the treatment of hereditary hemochromatosis, a hereditary disease characterized by
excessive absorption of dietary iron resulting in a pathological increase in total body iron
stores (Lu ef al. 2004).

Tannins in vascular plants occur as two types: the condensed and the hydrolysable
(Hermes ef al. 2001). Condensed tannins are also known as proanthocyanidins (PAs), the
oligomeric and polymeric flavan-3-ols, which are linked through C4-C8 or C4-C6
linkages. The diversity of condensed tannins is given by the structural variability of the
monomer units. The size of PA molecules can be described by their degrees of

polymerization (DPs). The molecules are water-soluble and can form complexes with


proteins and polysaccharides. PAs are of great interest in nutrition and medicine because
of their potent antioxidant capacity and possible protective effects on human health. They
have antioxidant properties related to their radical scavenging capacity and these
properties have been used against heart disease through reducing lipid oxidation. It was
hypothesized that the free radical scavenging properties of PAs may reduce the risk of
cardiovascular diseases, cancer and blood clotting, and certain types of trimeric PAs may
protect against urinary tract infections. However, tannins are diverse compounds with
great variation in structure and concentration within and among plant species. Therefore,
biomedical researches on the health benefits and risks of increased tannins consumption
are severely limited by lack of methods for rapid characterization and standardization

(Santos-Buelga and Scalbert 2000).

Saponins

The name saponin is derived from the Latin word ‘sapo’, which means the plant that
consists of frothing agent when diluted in aqueous solution. Saponins comprise
polycyclic aglycones. The sapogenin or the aglycone part is either a triterpene or steroid.
The combination of sapogenin the hydrophobic (fat-soluble), hydrophilic (water-soluble)
sugar part enhances the foaming ability of saponins. Some toxic saponins are called
sapotoxin (Cheeke, ef al. 2006)

Saponins are phytochemicals which can be found in most vegetables, beans and herbs.

The best known sources of saponins are peas, soybeans and some herbs with names that


indicate its foaming properties such as soapwort, soaproot, soapbark, and soapberry
(Cheeke, et al. 2006).

Saponins appear to cause ruminant bloat by inducing lysis of protozoa residing in the
rumen to release starch and protein. Prtozoal protein foams in the rumen, and starch
induces bacterial fermentation and gas production. In contrast to ruminants, soy saponins
(sponins that are present in soy) have not been reported to be toxic for humans, rats,
monkeys, or chicks (Carlson 2009).

Saponins are of interest to researchers due to their diverse activities and their potential
use in “functional foods”, i.e., foods that possess health promoting benefits beyond basic
nutrition. Described activities of saponins include their hypocholesterolemic effect in
humans and animals and proposed anticarcinogenic effect due to their antioxidant
activity, toxicity against cancer cells, and ability to regulate cell proliferation. Soy
saponins are the most intensively studied compounds in the class in terms of

epidemiology, animal and human experimental studies, and cultured cells (Carlson 2009).

Alkaloids

Alkaloid belongs to a class of organic compounds composed of carbon, hydrogen,
nitrogen and usually oxygen that are often derived from plants. It is a group of naturally
occurring chemical compounds which mostly contain basic nitrogen atoms. This group
also includes some related compounds which mostly contain basic nitrogen atoms. The

name alkaloids was chosen because these compounds are alkali-like (alkali is an older


term for basic substances) and react with strong acids to give water soluble salts (Manske
1965). Alkaloids are produced by a large variety of organisms, which includes bacteria,
fungi, plants and animals and are part of the group of natural products (also called
secondary metabolites). Many alkaloids can be purified from crude extracts by acid base
extraction. Many alkaloids are toxic to other organisms. Oftentimes, they have
pharmacological effects and are used as medications. For example, curarine, found in the
deadly extract curare, which is a powerful muscle relaxant; atropine is used to dilate
pupils of the eyes; and physostigimine is a specific for certain muscular diseases.
Narcotic alkaloids used in medicine include morphine and codeine for the relief of pain

and cocaine as a local anesthetic (Columbia Encyclopedia 2008).


Glycemic Index

All foods, drinks, nutrients, supplements, and anything else orally consumed by
humans elicits a metabolic response. As food goes into the mouth and gets processed, the
body has to decide what to do with the ingested food. There are two main pathways
taken; the first pathway is also to store the item ingested in adipose tissue fat cells and
second is to utilize the item as energy. The mechanism by which the two main pathways
are accessed depends on the glycemic index and glycemic load of the food. If the
consumed item has a high glycemic index and glycemic load, it will primarily take the
first pathway, on the other hand, if the food has a low glycemic index and glycemic load,
it will take the second pathway. Rapidly digested and metabolized foods possess the
highest glycemic indices while slowly digested foods discharge glucose progressively
into the bloodstream, therefore, typically has low glycemic index (Diaz 2013).

The glycemic index (GI) of foods was introduced to provide additional information
about foods and to classify them in terms of their glycemic response whether foods eaten
release glucose rapidly or in a slow and sustained fashion for a period of time (Jenkins er
al. 1981).The glycemic index of a food is measured by testing the how blood sugar reacts
to the pure carbohydrate of that food when it is eaten, when it is mixed with the protein,
fat and indigestible fiber in the food and the entire meal. If the pure carbohydrate portion
of a food has a high glyemic index, we consider the total amount of carbohydrate in that

food to measure the glycemic index (Mansfield 2006).


A high glycemic index food increases blood sugar concentrations and insulin levels
quickly, thus providing energy to the body in a short period of time. However, insulin is
released in response to this rise in blood sugar, which in turn, brings the blood sugar
down rapidly. This rapid decrease reduces the energy supply and triggers mild-to-intense
hunger, while low glycemic foods do not overly elevate blood glucose and insulin, and do
not stimulate lipoprotein lipase fat-storing mechanisms. The glycemic response of a food
also reflects the metabolic response to various percentages of protein, fat and
carbohydrates present in the food, which alter its glycemic response. Contrary to popular
opinion, pure protein, eaten without carbohydrates does elicit an insulin response,
particularly in diabetes (Diaz 2013).

The glycemic index is an excellent tool for controlling the blood sugar levels and
insulin response to foods. Foods with low to moderate glycemic index tend to have more
fiber and nutrients than the higher glycemic index foods (Diaz 2013).

More fiber in the food usually means a lower glycemic index. An unrefined grain has
its fiber intact and digests more slowly, so it will tend to have a lower glycemic index.
Legumes like kidney beans, lentils, and soy beans have low glycemic index partly
because of their fiber content and they are also good sources of protein. There is also an
inverse relationship between amylose and glycemic index, since the chemical bonds in
amylose are stronger than amylopectin, thus they are slower to break. Foods high in
amylose concentrations have low glycemic index response (Diaz 2013)

From a nutrition perspective, it is not particularly important to know the exact GI

value of every food as this will change depending on various factors. What is important is


to be able to identify which foods are absorbed over a longer period of time (low GI; GI
<55), which foods elicit a rapid surge of glucose (energy) into the bloodstream (high GI;
GI > 70), and which are in between (intermediate GI; GI 55-70). Consequently, foods
high in carbohydrates can thus be arranged into these broad categories to guide dietary

choices (Gibson 2010).

Glycemic Index and Health

A committee bought together in 1997 by the World Health Organization (WHO) and
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) endorsed the use of
the GI method for classifying carbohydrate rich foods and recommended that GI values,
together with other food composition data, be used in the guiding healthy food choices
(FAO/WHO 1998; Foster-Powell ef al. 2002).

The evidence shows that high glycemic foods are associated with weight gain and
obesity (Ludwig, et al. 1999; Ludwig, 2000; Liu, er al. 2000), and have been linked to an
increased risk of developing non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (NIDDM), certain
cardiovascular diseases and cancer (Gibson 2010). Gibson (2010) emphasized the
importance of using glycemic index as a tool when making carbohydrate-based dietary
choices, when they determined the effect of replacing saturated fats in the diet with
carbohydrates. They also found out that the glycemic index of the carbohydrate food
significantly influences the risk for myocardial infarctions. Replacing saturated fatty

acids in the diet with high glycemic index carbohydrate-based foods increased the risk for


myocardial infarction, while substituting saturated fatty acids with low glycemic index

foods decreased the risk.


Minerals

Tron

Tron has been recognized as an essential nutrient for more than a century (Mahan and
Escott-Stump 2004). It is a mineral which functions primarily as a carrier of oxygen in
the body, both as a part of hemoglobin in the blood and of myoglobin in muscles. Iron
also aids in the immune function, cognitive development, temperature regulation, energy
metabolism and work performance. About 90% of the iron in our body is conserved and
reused every day and the rest is excreted. Generally, men are able to store more iron than
women. In order to maintain iron balance in the body for men and women, dietary iron
must supply enough iron to meet the 10% gap that our body has excreted or else
deficiency will result. Because of its oxidation-reduction (redox) properties, iron has a
role in the in the blood and respiratory transport of oxygen and carbon dioxide and it is an
active component of the cytochromes involved in the process of cellular respiration and
energy (ATP) generation. Iron also seems to be involved in immune function and

cognitive performance (Mahan and Escott-Stump 2004).

Human Requirements for Iron

The greatest need for iron is during growth or periods of blood loss. Young children,

adolescents and pregnant women have increased needs because of the growth taking


place during these periods. Women of childbearing age have increased iron requirements
to replace losses of iron from menstruation and to provide sufficient iron stores to support
pregnancy. Among males, iron needs decrease after the adolescent growth spurt, whereas
the iron needs of their female counterparts continue to be high until menopausal
transition (Mahan and Escott-Stump 2004). Moreover, iron requirements are very high in
adolescents, particularly during period of rapid growth and there is a marked individual
variation in the growth rate between girls and boys. Girls usually have their growth spurt
before menarche but growth is not finished at that time. In boys, during puberty, there is a
marked increase in hemoglobin mass and concentration, further increasing iron
requirements to a level above the average iron requirements in menstruating women as

shown in Table 4 (FAO 1988).

Table 4. Dietary reference intakes for iron.


AGE TRON (mg/day)
Infants, mos
0-6 0.27
7-12 in
Children, yr
~ 7
48 10
Males, yr
9-13 8
14-18 it
19-30 8
31-50 8
51-70 8
>70 8
Females, yr
9-13 8
14-18 15
19-30 18
31-50 18
51-70 8
>70 8
Pregnant women
<18 27
19-30 21
31-50 27
Lactating women
<18 10
19-30 9
31-50 9

‘Source: FNB, 2010

On the other hand, in the Philippines, the iron requirement is based on the amount of

dietary iron needed to meet absorbed iron requirements. This corresponds to the amount

needed to cover basal losses plus growth for children and also the menstrual losses for

women of reproductive age, bioavailability and iron absorption rates in the average diets,


food consumption surveys and in-vitro studies on non-heme iron availability from rice-

based diets (RENI 2002) (Table 5).

Table 5. Recommended daily intakes for iron (RENI 2002).

AGE IRON (mg/day)
Infants, mos
Birth- <6 0.38
6-<12 10
Children, yr
1-3 8
4-6 9
19 itt
Males, yr
10-12 13
13-15 20
16-18 14
19-29 12
30-49 12
50-64 12
65+ 12
Females, yr
10-12 19
13-15 21
16-18 27
19-29 27
30-49 27
50-64 27
65+ 10
Pregnant women
Trimester
First 27
Second 34
Third 38
Lactating women
1°6 mos 27

2° 6 mos 30



Iron Deficiency

Tron deficiency is a state in which there is insufficient iron to maintain the normal
physiological function of tissues such as the blood, brain and muscles. The World Health
Organization (WHO) considers iron deficiency the number one nutritional disorder in the
world. As many as 80 % of the world’s population may be iron deficient, while 30% may
have iron deficiency anemia. Iron deficiency develops gradually and usually begins with
a negative iron balance or when iron intake does not meet the daily requirements for
dietary iron. This negative balance initially depletes the storage form of iron, while the
blood hemoglobin level, a marker of iron status remains normal. Iron deficiency anemia
is an advanced stage of iron depletion. It occurs when storage sites of iron are deficient
and blood levels of iron cannot meet daily needs. Blood hemoglobin levels are below
normal with iron deficiency anemia (WHO 2007).

If the diet is lacking in iron, the iron reserves in the body are used. Once this supply is
depleted, the formation of hemoglobin is affected. This means that the red blood cells
cannot carry oxygen needed by the cells. When this happens, iron deficiency occurs,
which may lead to anemia (WHO 2007). Iron deficiency anemia is defined as the a
condition wherein there is severe depletion of iron stores that results in low hemoglobin
and small, pale red blood cells (Whitney and Rolfes 2002). According to the World
Health Organization, iron deficiency anemia is one of the most common nutrient
deficiencies in the world. It can be caused by a low dietary intake of iron, poor iron
absorption or excessive blood loss. Signs of anemia include: short attention span,

constantly feeling weak and tired, irritability, decreased performance at work or school,


delayed cognitive development in infants and young children, decreased immune
function leading to increased illness, swollen and red tongue (glossitis), and difficulty
maintaining body temperature. Several groups that are at an increased risk for iron
deficiency includes children, adolescents, pregnant women, women of child-bearing age,

athletes and older adults (WHO 2007).


Zine

Zine is an essential trace element to all forms of life (RENI 2002) because of its
fundamental role in gene expression, cell development and replication (Hambridge,
2000). It is abundantly distributed throughout the human body and is second only to iron

among the trace elements (Mahan and Escott-Stump 2004). It is an essential mineral

required by the body for maintaining a sense of smell, keeping a healthy immune system,
building proteins, triggering enzymes, and creating DNA. Zinc also helps the cells in the
body to communicate by functioning as a neurotransmitter. It is an important structural
component of most proteins (Prasad 1991). Zinc is primarily an intracellular ion,
functioning in association with more than 300 different enzymes. It participates in
reactions involving either the synthesis or degradation of major metabolites-
carbohydrates, lipids, proteins- and nucleic acids. It also plays important structural roles
as components of several proteins and functions as an intracellular signal in brain cells.
Zine is also involved in the stabilization of protein and nucleic acid structure and the
integrity of subcellular organelles, as well as in transport processes, immune function,

and expression of genetic information (Mahan and Escott-Stump 2004),

Human Requirements for Zinc

Zinc absorption, i.e. the minimum amount of absorbed zinc needed to match the

total daily excretion of endogenous zinc, has been chosen as the principal indicator for


the estimated average requirement (EAR) for older children and adults (RENI 2002). The
FNB/IOM reviewed a large number of studies conducted at varying levels of intakes. The
reference body weights used by the WHO are based on the NCHS growth data, while the
FNB/IOM committee applied reference body weights that are suitable for the North
American population. The estimated of requirements derived by the committees are
different for these reasons. More recently, the International Zinc Nutrition Consultative
Group (IZiNCG) reviewed the methods adopted by these committees and revised the

estimates of zinc requirement and recommended dietary intake (Hotz and Brown 2004).


“pO0T “ANd :201n0g

(our
wb 21-9 '9-€
867 wone eT ‘28'€ ‘ZOD -0) YonE;ET 687 ~ wonesey]
(aarsaunay
zo's pif ‘put ‘sD
897 AoueuBarg = ‘Zp'b ‘TIP fouvuSaag aa - AoueuBarg
861 9s ASK 8I-pT woe Ls S44 SI-pT ST ss Aaa 8I-ST
wt 9 W S14 81-bT Lee 9 W S24 81-61 161 +9 WX gi-st
ssl 8b AK SE-TT
esl 8b Wt st-2r
gz Le Ak 7-01
esl 8e sah €1-6 tz or sak €1-6 al se W-47r-01
am sz sak 1-9
£80 IZ sak B-p rad <4 sak B-p 460 ul sak 9-€
£50 ral sad §-T LO €l sak €-1 €8°0 ral Ak eT
+80 6 ow 11-9 +80 6 owzt-L $8'0 6 owzi-9
Gepfuy &) (ep/auy yD (Gep/au) Gy)
juauraainbay aya quauaambay — 34310 quawasmnbay = 14a}am
Wojoishyg ——auauajay —sxas ‘By —aiBojorsdyg —_aouaiajay —xag ‘@By —_—aySojorsKyq —auaaJay—_xas ‘BY
SOZIN! WOVANA OHM

-xas pure dnoid o8e Aq outz 10j siuawroxinbas o18ojorsAyd parewnsg “9 21421

On the other hand, in the Philippines, the zinc requirement is based on the estimates
of zinc requirements on the values for a moderate (30 %) bioavailability diet, described

by the FAO/WHO (RENI 2002).

Table 7. Recommended daily intakes for zinc (RENI 2002).

AGE ZINC (mg)
Infants, mos
Birth- <6 14
6-<12 42
Children, yr
1-3 45
4-6 54
79 54
Males, yr
10-12 68
13-15 9.0
16-18 8.9
19-29 64
30-49 64
50-64 64
65+ 6.4
Females, yr
10-12 6.0
13-15 79
16-18 7.0
19-29 45
30-49 45
50-64 45
65+ 45
Pregnant women
Trimester
First 5.1
Second 6.6
Third 96
Lactating women
16 mos 115

2" 6 mos 11.5



Zine Deficiency

The essentiality of zinc in human nutrition was first documented in the early 1960s
(RENI 2002). Hypozincemia is usually a nutritional deficiency, but can also be associated
with diarrhea, malabsorption, acrodermatitis enteropathica, chronic liver disease, chronic
renal disease, sickle-cell disease, diabetes, malignancy and other chronic illnesses.
Although severe zinc deficiency is considered rare, mild-to- moderate zinc deficiency is
likely prevalent throughout the world today (Sandstead 1991). The clinical features of
zine deficiency in humans, beside growth retardation and delayed sexual maturity, are:
delayed skeletal maturation, development of orificial and acral dermatitis, diarrhea,
alopecia, failure of appetite, behavioral changes, and increased susceptibility to
infections, which reflect the development of defects in the immune system (RENI 2002).
The effects of marginal or mild zinc deficiency are less clear. A reduced growth rate and
impairments of immune defense are so far the only clearly demonstrated signs of mild
zine deficiency in humans. Other effects, such as impaired taste and wound healing,
which have been claimed to result from a low zinc intake, are less consistently observed
(Hambridge 2000).

Zinc deficiency is largely related to inadequate intake or absorption of zinc from the
diet, although excess losses of zinc during diarrhea, may also contribute. The distinction
between intake and absorption is important, because although some intakes of zinc may
be acceptable, the levels of inhibitors (i.e. fiber and phytates) in the diet may mean that

inadequate amounts of zine are absorbed. For this reason, zinc requirements for dietary


intake are adjusted upward for populations in which animal products, the best sources of
zinc, are limited, and in which plant sources of zinc are similarly high in phytates.
Because zinc is not well conserved in the body because of zinc deficiency is directly
related to zinc intake, an indirect approach to quantify the prevalence of zinc deficiency
would be to examine the diet in various regions throughout the world (Gibson 1994;
WHO 1996).

Dietary surveys are conducted in many countries, but few such surveys exist in
developing countries. Even when dietary intake data are available, incomplete
information on the content of zinc and its bioavailability in local foods has made
calculation of zine bioavailability problematic. Clearly, zine deficiency contributes to
increased risk of incidence for important childhood diseases that are predominant causes
of death among children. It is estimated that zinc deficiency in children aged <5 years
caused 176,000 diarrhea deaths, 406,000 pneumonia deaths, and 207,000 malaria deaths.
The associated DALYs attributable to zinc deficiency were more than 28 million. This
was because the risks of morbidity and mortality associated with zinc deficiency are
relatively high, and because available data suggest that zinc deficiency—as defined by
inadequate dietary zinc—is highly prevalent in many parts of the world, and particularly
in parts of the world where the majority of deaths due to diarrhea, pneumonia and malaria
occur. This places zinc deficiency as a key factor of mortality to young children, one that
is supposedly preventable through public health action (Gibson 1994; Parr 1992; WHO

1996).

MATERIALS AND METHODS.

Experimental Materials

Quality Protein Maize (IPB var. 6) and Sweet Potato (NSIC 31 variety) were obtained
from the Institute of Plant Breeding, College of Agriculture, University of the Philippines
Los Bafios, Laguna. Taro corms (NSIC V9 variety) were obtained from the Philippine
Root Crop Research and Training Center, Visayas State University (VSU), Visca,
Baybay City, Leyte. The samples were milled at the Institute of Food Science and
Technology (IFST), College of Agriculture, University of the Philippines, Los Bafios,
Laguna, to produce fine flour from taro and sweet potato using single-disc attrition
grinder, and the resulting powder was passed through an 80 mesh screen. The processing
of the flour into noodles and all chemical analyses, except for the protein analysis which
was done at the Student’s Laboratory of the IFST, were done at the Analytical Laboratory
and Bio-Assay Laboratory of the Institute of Human Nutrition and Food (IHNF) of the
College of Human Ecology (CHE) at the University of the Philippines Los Bajios

(UPLB).

Fig. 8. NSIC- V9 Taro and NSIC-31 Sweet potato

Preparation of taro and sweet potato flours

The fresh taro corms and sweet potato roots (Figure 8) were washed in running water
for two hours and then pared. The samples were diced into one cm size, washed again,
soaked in water overnight. Then, were then blanched for 5 minutes and were dried at 45°-
50°C for 24 hours (Figure 9a). The dried samples were milled (80 mesh) and packed in
polyethylene plastic bags.

It was analyzed for its proximate composition, minerals, antioxidant activity
phytochemical content and glycemic index contents before mixing with the corn flour to

make the noodles.


Raw Sample (taro, sweet potato)

Continuous Washing

Vv
Peeling & Dicing

Washing & Soaking in Water Overnight

w
Washing and Blanching for 5 minutes

v
Drying at 45°C for 24 hours

v
Grinding/Milling/Sieving (80 mesh)

Vv

Taro/sweet potato flour

Fig. 9a. Schematic diagram for the preparation of the taro and sweet potato flours.
Preparation of the taro-corn and sweet potato-corn noodles
The taro, sweet potato and IPB var. 6 white corn flours were used in the preparation of

the noodles. The recipes were standardized to determine the right proportion of the

ingredients that yielded the most acceptable product (Figure 9b).


Taro/sweet potato flour

Addition of IPB var. 6

Taro-corn and sweet potato -com
noodles

Sensory Evaluation

Most acceptable combination

Chemical Analysis
(Proximate analysis, mineral analysis, carbohydrate profile, total dietary fiber
content, antioxidant activity, phytochemical content, and in vitro glycemic
index)

Fig.9b. Schematic Diagram for the noodle preparation and analyses.

Selection of flour proportion for noodle production

Preliminary study was conducted to produce flat noodles from the different possible
combinations of the taro-com flour and sweet potato-com flour (100:0, 90:10,
80:20,70:30, 60:40, 50:50, 40:60, 30:70, 20:80, 10:90 and 0:100). The sample that was
most acceptable was further analyzed for its nutrient content and health properties (Figure

10).


Taro Flour, IPB Var.6 white corn flour, Sweet Potato Flour and Taro-Corn (70:30)
and Sweet Potato-Corn (70:30) Uncooked and Cooked Noodles

v

Nutrient Content Health Properties
Proximate analysis Antioxidant Activity
Moisture
Crude fat Phytochemical contents
Crude protein Phenols

Total ash Flavonoids
Alkaloids
Saponins

Mineral Content
Tron Total Dietary Fiber
Zine

Glycemic Inex

Results

Statistical Analysis

v

Interpretation of Data

Fig. 10. Protocol of sample analysis.


Chemical Analysis

Taro, sweet potato, IPB variety 6 white com flour and the 70:30 taro-com and 70:30
‘sweet potato-corn noodles were analyzed for their proximate composition, phytochemical
content, antioxidant activity, total dietary fiber content, starch content and amylose
content using the procedures described in AOAC (1990) and the glycemic index by Gofii

et al.(1997) (Figure 11).

Proximate Composition

Moisture analysis, Moisture content refers to the amount of water present in a sample.
The oven drying method was used in determining the moisture content. Ten (10) grams
of sample were accurately weighed, placed into a charred moisture dish. The sample is
then dried overnight at 45°C using an air oven. Samples are then dried overnight. After
drying, samples were removed from the oven and then placed in a dessicator, and allowed
to equilibrate to room temperature. The samples are weighed and percent moisture

content was calculated using the equation below:

Fresh Weight (g) — Dry Weight (g)

% Moisture=

Fresh Weight (g)

Crude fat. Crude fat is an estimation of the oil content and other pigments that are

removed by organic solvents. Crude fat was measured using the Soxhlet method. One


(1.0) gram of pre-dried sample was weighed, wrapped in a filter paper and placed into the
thimble. Hexane was poured into the round bottom flask and, the samples were refluxed
for 12-16 hours. After extraction, samples were placed in an oven for at least an hour at
45°C to remove adhering solvent and cooled in a dessicator then was weighed again. The

formula below was used to calculate the amount of fat.

Weight of fat (mg)

% Fat=

Weight of sample (mg)
where:
Weight of fat = (wt of thimble + sample before reflux) - (wt of thimble +
sample after drying)

weight of sample = (wt. of sample + thimble) — wt of thimble

Crude protein. Crude protein or total nitrogen content was determined using nitrogen
analysis by colorimetry. Fifty (50) milligram dry, defatted, ground sample was placed in
a 30 mL digestion flask into which were added 0.20 gram selenium catalyst mixture, and
2 mL concentrated HySO,. Samples were placed in a microdigestor for about 30 minutes
or until the solution was clear and then cooled to room temperature. The samples were
transferred quantitatively into an 18x100 mm test tube. The volume was diluted to 10 mL
using distilled water and a 10 pL aliquot was taken, into which were added 1.5 mL of
working buffer, 0.40 mL salicylate-nitroprusside reagent and then, was mixed well. Then
0.20 mL of 2.5 % hypochlorite solution was added and was incubated at room

temperature for 30 minutes for color development. It was diluted to a final volume of 10


mL with distilled water and was again mixed. The absorbance was read at 660 nm. Crude

protein was then calculated using the formula:

(Slope)sax (absorbance)sample

% Nitrogen =
Weight of sample(mg)

where:
Slopesa= yg Nitrogen/unit absorbance

Factor of 6.25 was used to convert nitrogen to protein.

Crude fiber. Crude fiber is the fraction of the sample that is not removed either by an
acid or a base hydrolysis. It is used as an index to determine the amount of the
indigestible matter and approximates the amount of the dietary fibers present in the food.

First, 100 mg dry, defatted sample was placed in a 100 mL Berzelius beaker into
which 50 mL of 2.5 % sulfuric acid was added and then refluxed for 30 minutes. The
sample was washed with hot distilled water until the washing was neutral with litmus
paper. Fifty (50) mL of 2.5 % sodium hydroxide was added and was refluxed for another
30 minutes and was washed again with hot distilled water until the washing was neutral
with pH pen. It was then placed in an oven and was dried overnight at 105°C. It was
cooled in a dessicator and the weight was recorded the following day. Then, it was
ignited in a furnace overnight at 550°C and was cooled in a dessicator and the weight was

recorded. The crude fiber content was calculated using the formula:


Weight of fiber (mg)

% Crude Fiber =

Weight of sample (mg)

Where: weight of fiber = (wt of crucible + sample after drying) - (wt of
crucible +sample after ignition)

Total ash content. Total ash content represents the mineral content of the sample. This
is usually in the form of silicates and sulfates and other trace elements. The method used
was direct ignition of the sample in a furnace to remove all the organic components of the
sample and the residue after ignition is the ash content of the sample. One hundred (100)
milligrams dried, ground samples were placed in a 30 mL porcelain crucible whose tarred
weight had been taken. The crucible with the sample was placed into the furnace and
ignited overnight at 650°C. The sample was cooled to a lower temperature and was
transferred into a dessicator, then, equilibrated at room temperature. The exact weight

was determined. Total ash content was calculated using the following equation:

Weight of ash (mg)

% Total Ash = -x 100

Weight of sample (mg)

Phytochemical Contents

Total phenolic content. Total phenolic was determined colorimetrically using Folin-

Ciocalteau reagent. Fifty (50.0) milligram powdered sample was weighed and was placed


in a 13 x 100 mm test tube, into which were added 5.0 mL of absolute methanol. Sample
was mixed thoroughly for 30 minutes in a vortex mixer then, centrifuged at 3000 rpm for
five (5) minutes. A 0.2 mL of the supernate was obtained where in 2.8 mL distilled water
1.0 mL of 0.2 mL of 0.2 M sodium carbonate and 0.2 mL Folin-Ciocalteus Phenol
reagent were added. The solution was mixed thoroughly and placed in a boiling water
bath for 15 minutes, and was allowed to cool at room temperature. The absorbance was

read at 710 nm. The total phenolic content was computed using the following formula:

(slopess)(absorbance sampie)

% Total phenols -- x 100

Weight of sample
where: weight of sample = (50 mg/5 mL) x (2.00 mL) = 20 mg

The concentrations are expressed as g of catechin equivalents per gram of dry weight
of the sample.

Tannins. Total tannin content was measured using the modified vanillin method. Fifty
(50) milligrams of sample were weighed and placed in a 13 x 100 mm test tube. Five
(5.0) milliliter methanol was added and was mixed for 20 minutes in a vortex mixer. The
solution was then centrifuged at 3000 rpm for 10 minutes. The supernates were then
decanted into a 13 x 100mm test tube. Extraction process was repeated. The supernates

were then combined and mixed well. An aliquot of one (1.0) milliliter was obtained then,

5.0 mL of the vanillin reagent was added. The solution was incubated for 20 minutes at

30°C and the absorbance was read at 500 nm.


Flavonoids. The total flavonoid concentration was measured using a colorimetric
assay developed by Zhishen et al. (1999). One (1.0) mL of diluted sample was added to a
10 mL volumetric flask containing 4.0 mL of dH20. At time zero, 0.3 mL of 5 % NaNO
was added to each volumetric flask; at 5 min, 0.3 mL of 10 % AICI3 was added; at 6 min,
2 mL of | M NaOH was added. Each reaction flask was immediately diluted with 2.4 mL
of dH20 and mixed. The absorbance of the mixtures upon the development of pink color,
was determined at 510 nm relative to a prepared blank. The total flavonoid contents of
the samples were expressed in milligrams gallic acid equivalent per gram sample.

Saponins Five hundred (500) mg ground sample was mixed with five (5.0) mL of 80
% ethanol. The mixture was heated to 50°C temperature with intermittent shaking for 15
minutes. After cooling the mixture, it was centrifuged at 3000 rpm for ten minutes. The
extraction was repeated twice and the supernatant was pooled then the volume was
adjusted to a total of 15 ml with 80 % ethanol. The superanate was passed through a
PVPP mini column that was hydrated overnight. About 2.0 mL eluant was collected
wherin, 0.10 mL aliquot was obtained. The sample was then pre-treated with 0.5mL
glacial acetic acid and shaken, then 3.0 mL of freshly prepared Lieberman-Buchard
reagent was added. The test tubes were then heated in a 90- 100°C water bath for 30
minutes. The absorbance was read at 450 nm against the standard saponins from
gysophylla (Hostettman and Marsto 1995).

Alkaloids. One (1.0) gram of dried ground sample was placed into a 125 mL
erlenmeyer flask after which 10.0 mL of 0.10 N HCl was added and was placed on a

steam bath for 30 minutes and was filtered using a coarse filter paper. An aliquot of 0.25


mL was obtained and equal volume of the Dragendorff reagent was added. The turbidity

was observed and recorded as plus (+) or minus (-) based on the following rating:

Rating Observation in solution
(negative clear

(+) positive turbid

(+4) highly positive gel-like precipitate
(+++) with precipitation solid precipitate

Antioxidant activity. Fifty (50.0) milligram powdered sample was weighed, placed in
a 18 x 100 mm test tube, into which was added five (5.0) milliliters of 50 % methanol
solution. The solution was then mixed intermittently for ten (10) minutes in a vortex
mixer, It was then filtered into a clean vial. Then one (1.0) milliliter aliquot was obtained,
into which four (4.0) milliliter distilled water, and one (1.0) milliliter of freshly prepared
DPPH methanolic solution were added. The resulting solution was allowed to stand for
30 minutes and the absorbance was measured at 517 nm against a reagent blank.
Antioxidative activity is expressed as percent lipid peroxidation and is computed using

the following equation:

Absorbance (bank) — Absorbance (sample)

% lipid peroxidation =

Absorbance (nk)

The higher the percentage, the lower is the antioxidative activity (Leong and Shui

2002).


Carbohydrate Profile

Analysis of amylose content. Fifty (50.0) gram, defatted sample was weighed and
placed into an 18 x 150 mm test tube, and 0.5 mL of 95% ethanol and 9.5 mL 1 N NaOH
was added to the samples. The sample was then mixed thoroughly using a vortex mixer,
submerged in a hot water bath for 10 minutes, and then was cooled at room temperature.
An aliquot of 0.5 mL of each sample was transferred in a 16 x 160 mm test tube. Iodine —
potassium iodide solution (0.10 mL) was added and it was mixed thoroughly with 0.30
mL of 30% HCI solution. Distilled water was added to make up 5.0 mL volume, and the
mixture was allowed to stand for 30 minutes. The absorbance of the solution was read at
570 nm using a spectrophotometer.

Starch analysis. The samples were hydrolyzed using 10 mL of 5.0 % HySOq in a
boiling water bath for two hours. A 0.10 mL starch extract was place in an 18 x 150 mm
test tube and 2.0 mL 2.5% H2SOy acid was added. It was then placed in an ice-cold bath
and 2.0 mL anthrone reagent was added and mixed well, then boiled for 10 minutes in a
marble-covered test tubes. The test tubes were then placed immediately in an ice water
bath, and were let to cool at room temperature. Absorbance was read at 630 nm.

Amylopectin content is computed by subtracting the starch content from the amylose

content.


Total Dietary Fiber Analysis

Dried powdered samples were gelatinized with heat stable alpha-amylase in the
presence of a buffer and digested enzymatically by proteases after pH adjustment. This
was followed by digestion with amyloglucosidase in an acidic medium to effectively
remove the proteins and starches present in the sample. The soluble dietary fiber was
effectively precipitated using ethanol. The mixture was filtered, washed with acetone and
ethanol then dried. The dried residue was ignited in a furnace at 550°C and dietary fiber

was calculated using the equation shown below:

[(™1. residue (mg) - P-A-B)]

Wt.(mg) sample

where:
We. residue = average of weights (mg) for duplicate sample determination

P & A = weights (mg) of protein and ash, respectively in 1% and 2™ sample

residue
Wt. of sample = average of 2 sample weights (mg) taken

Mineral Content

Zine content. The analysis of zine content was done following the dry ashing
procedure. Five grams of powder was placed in a crucible and was dried at 135°C for two
hours and its dry weight was determined. It was transferred to a cool muffle furnace,

slowly raising the temperature to 450-500°C and was ashed overnight. When ash was


carbon-free, the ash was dissolved under watch glass using a minimum volume of HCI.
Twenty (20.0) milliliter of distilled water was added and was left to evaporate to near
dryness in a steam bath. Twenty (20.0) milliliters of 0.1N HCI was added and the heating
was continued for 5 minutes. The solution was then filtered through a pre-washed fast
filter paper into a 100 mL volumetric flask. The dish and the filter paper were washed
several times with 5 to 10 mL portions of 0.1N HCL, and were cooled. The volume of the
solution was then diluted with 0.1N HCl. One (1.0) milliliter aliquot of the sample was
obtained and transferred to a 5 mL volumetric flask, where 0.5 mL of buffer solution was
added. The zincon solution was added drop by drop until the red color was one drop in
excess. The solution was mixed well and was diluted to 5 mL with distilled or deionized
water. The absorbance was measure at 620 nm using a spectrophotometer.

Iron content. The analysis of iron content was done following the AOAC colorimetric
method (1980). One hundred (100) milligrams sample was weighed out into a crucible
and were ignited in a cool muffle furnace and the temperature was slowly raised to 550°C

and left overnight. One (1.0) milliliter of concentrated HCl was added and was gently

mixed using a stirring rod. Four (4.0) milliliters of distilled water was added and the
crucible was then heated on a hot plate at 100°C. The solution was left to evaporate to
about 2.0 mL. Two (2.0) milliliters of distilled water was then added and again was
heated to about 90°C. The solution was then filtered through ash less filter paper using a
volumetric flask as the receiver. The crucible and filter paper was rinsed several times

with distilled water until the volume of the solution was at 20.0 mL, then the solution was

mixed well. Then an aliquot of the ash solution was obtained and approximately 0.01g of


ascorbic acid crystals was added. Five (5.0) milliliters of sodium acetate trihydrate (pH
5.4 buffer solution) was then added, and mixed well. One (1.0) milliliter of 2°2 bipyridin
solution was then added. The solution was then diluted to 25 mL. After mixing, the
solution was allowed to stand for 1 hour, and the absorbance was read at $20 nm using a

spectrophotometer.

In vitro Kinetics of Starch Digestion (Glycemic Index)

Fifty (50) milligrams of the samples was placed in a 125 mL erlenmeyer flask then 10
mL of HCI-KC! buffer with pH 1.5 was added. A 0.2 mL of a solution containing 1.0 g of
pepsin in 10 mL of HCI-KCI buffer was added to each sample and incubated at 40°C for
an hour in a shaking water bath. Volume was them completed to 25 mL with Tris-
Maleate buffer at pH 6.9. Five (5.0) milliliter solution of a-amylase in Tris-Maleate
buffer containing 2.6 UI was added to each sample and the samples were then incubated
at 37°C in a shaking water bath. An aliquot of one (1.0) nL was then taken from each
tube every 30 minutes from 0 minute to 180 minutes. The aliquot was then placed in a
tube at 100°C and was vigorously shaken for 5 minutes to inactivate the enzyme and was
refrigerated until the end of the incubation time. One (1.0) milliliter of 0.4 M sodium
acetate buffer at pH 4.75 was added to each aliquot, and 30 pL of amyloglucosidase
(from Aspergillus niger) was also added to hydrolyze the digested starch into glucose
within 45 min at 60°C. Finally, the glucose concentration was measured using 3.0 mL

glucose oxidase-peroxidase (GOPOD) kit. The tubes were then incubated at 50°C for 20


minutes and the absorbance was measured at 510 nm against the reagent blank. The

glucose concentration from each sample was computed using the following formula:

Absorbance sampte

D-Glucose (1g/0.1mL) = - x 100

Absorbance p-Glucose standard (100g)
The glucose concentration was multiplied by 0.9 to get the equivalent starch
concentration.
The rate of starch digestion was expressed as the percentage of the total starch
hydrolyzed at different times of 30, 60, 90, 120 and 180 minutes .The digestion curve
was adjusted to the following non-linear equation established by Goni ef al (1997) to

describe the kinetics of starch hydrolysis:

C= Coo (1-e™)

is the percentage of starch hydrolyzed at time # (min)
is the equilibrium percentage of starch hydrolyzed after 180 minutes,
is the kinetic constant

From the digestion curves obtained during the starch hydrolysis, the area under the
hydrolysis curve (AUC) was calculated for each sample and each treatment using the
following equation:

AUC = Co (tr to) - 2) [-expl-k(tr—to)]}

Where: t= is the final time (180 min)
to= is the initial time (min)


The hydrolysis index (HI) was obtained by dividing the area under the hydrolysis
curve of each sample by the corresponding area of the reference sample (fresh white
bread, GI=100) obtained from Goni et al (1997).

Then, the estimated glycemic index (EGI) was predicted using the formula:

EGI= 39.71 + (0.549 x HI) (see appendix —for an example of the computation)

Computation of Nutritional Value

The contribution of the samples (% RENI) in meeting the recommended energy,

protein, zinc and iron intake was computed using the formula:

Nutrient content of food per 100g

% RENI=

RENI by age group

For a food to be considered a “source” of protein, it should be >10 % of Nutrient
Reference Values (NRV) per 100 grams, while it should be >20 % of NRV per 100
grams to be considered a “high source”. On the other hand, for a food to be considered a
“source” of minerals and energy, it should be >15 % of Nutrient Reference Values
(NRV) per 100 grams, while it should be >30% of NRV per 100 grams to be considered a
“high source” (Codex Alimentarius 2007). The Recommended Energy and Nutrient
Intake (RENI) that were used in this study represented the Nutrient Reference Values

(NRV) since it is the dietary standards used in the Philippines.


Statistical Analysis

All data that were gathered from the sensory evaluation were analyzed using non-
parametric Analysis of Variance (ANOVA). The data gathered from the chemical
analyses were also analyzed using ANOVA, and Fisher’s Least Significant Difference
(LSD). All the statistical tests were performed at 5 % level of significance. The results

were expressed as mean values + standard deviation.

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Preliminary Screening

Eleven (11) proportions from both the taro-corn (100:0, 90:10, 80:20, 70:30, 60:40,
50:50, 40:60, 30:70, 20:80, 10:90 and 0:100) and sweet potato-com (100:0, 90:10, 80:20,
70:30, 60:40, 50:50, 40:60, 30:70, 20:80, 10:90 and 0:100) flour mixture were made into
noodles. Out of the 11 proportions, only four proportions from taro-corn noodles (100:0,
90:10, 80:20 and 70:30), and four proportions from sweet potato-com noodles (90:10,
80:20, 70:30, and 60:40) have achieved the desired consistency for noodles and were
sensory evaluated. The other proportions tended to crumble when made into noodles.

Sensory attributes of the noodles were evaluated based on the color, aroma,
taste/flavor, texture and general acceptability. The results of the sensory evaluation
showed that the 70:30 taro-com noodles and the 70:30 sweet potato-corn noodles were
most acceptable as judged by 30 panelists composed of mothers, based on their texture,
flavor, and aroma (Tables 8 and 9). Noodles from these flour combinations (70:30 taro-
corn and 70:30 sweet potato-corm) were subjected to chemical analyses.

For the taro-corn noodles, there is no significant difference with respect to color
(Table 8). The panelists slightly liked the color of the noodles, because they perceived

that noodles should be of a white or of yellowish in color and not purple.


The 70:30 noodle proportion was the most acceptable in terms of aroma among the
four different noodle proportions. As more amount of IPB var. 6 white corn flour is being
incorporated in the mixture, the more pleasant odor is perceived by the evaluators.

For the texture, the 70:30 proportion was the most acceptable among the four different
noodle proportions. It is because the 70:30 proportion is the most tender among all the

different noodle proportions.

Table 8. Sensory characteristics and acceptability scores of taro-com noodles.

TARO- SENSORY ATTRIBUTES
CORN Color Aroma Texture Taste/Flavor General
NOODLE Acceptability
MIXTURE
100:0 4.800" 4.833° 4.366" 4.466" 4.866"
90:10 5.433* 4.600° 4.666° 4.2334 4.966°
80:20 5.066" 5.166° 5.366° 5.333? 5.133°
70:30 5.233"  5.500* 5.733* 5.600° 5.900°

Means having the same letter within columns are not significantly different at p (< 0.05)
Legend: 1- Extremely dislike 3- Dislike slightly 5- Slightly like 7- Extremely like
2- Dislike moderately 4- Neither like nor dislike 6- Moderately like

Flavor is an important attribute of food products which greatly determine their
acceptance or rejection (Gatchalian 1989). The 70:30 proportion was the most acceptable
in terms of flavor. The panelist also reported the absence of irritation in the mouth or
throat during or after the sensory evaluation. This implies that during the processing of
raw taro, the anti-nutrients which causes the irritation were decreased (Alcantara er al.

2013)


Table 9. Sensory characteristics and acceptability scores of sweet potato-com noodles.

SWEET ‘SENSORY ATTRIBUTES

POTATO- “Color Aroma Texture ‘Taste/Flavor General

CORN Acceptability

NOODLE

MIXTURE
90:10 4.000° —5.100* 5.366° 5.733” 5.633*
80:20 4.300° 5.233" 5.733 5.733” 5.800°
70:30 4.200" 5.300" 5.866* 6.100" 6.266"
60:40 4.766 5.000* 5.2334 4.900° 5.433¢

‘Means having the same letter within columns are not significantly different at p (< 0.05).
Legend: 1- Extremely dislike 3- Dislike slightly 5- Slightly like 7- Extremely like
2- Dislike moderately 4- Neither like nor dislike 6- Moderately like

Food quality or food acceptance (from the consumer viewpoint) is the most critical
aspect of food as measured in institutional settings and in home settings as well (Piggott,
1988). It indicates the degree of like or dislike for a given product. The expected response
is either rejection or acceptance in varying degrees (Gatchalian 1988).

In general, all the four taro-corn noodle proportions were acceptable, but the 70:30
‘was more acceptable in terms of flavor, texture and aroma which could have contributed
to its overall appeal.

Sensory evaluation revealed that the majority of the respondents (45 %) chose flavor
as their main reason in choosing their best sample, 30 % for the texture and 25 % for
aroma.

There is no significant difference in the color among the four sweet potato-corn

mixtures (Table 9). This is because the panelists perceived that like that of the taro-com.


noodle, there is no difference in the color of the noodles. There is also no significant
difference for the aroma of the different mixtures.

In general, all the four noodle proportions were acceptable in terms of taste and
texture. But the 70:30 proportion is the most acceptable.

For the sweet potato-corn noodles, the sensory evaluation revealed that 55 % of the
respondents chose flavor as their main reason in choosing their best sample, 20 % for the
aroma, 17 % for texture, and 8 % for color.

Sensory characteristics of the different taro-corn and sweet potato-com noodles were

generally significant from each other with decreasing amount of com.

Proximate Composition

Moisture Analysis

Among the three flours, the sweet potato flour has the highest moisture content at 2.98
%, while the IPB var. 6 white com flour has the lowest value at 2.00 %. The high
moisture content of the sweet potato flour as compared to the moisture content of taro
flour and the IPB var. 6 white corn flour could be attributed to the variety of the sweet
potato used, the genetic composition and also the agricultural practices. Also, as
compared to other tubers and root crops, the sweet potato has higher moisture content
(Rose and Vasanthakaalam 2011). Generally, there was an increase in the moisture

content of the uncooked noodles to the cooked noodles. The increase in the moisture


content in the cooked noodles was probably due to the gelatinization of starches.
Undamaged starch granules are insoluble in water at room temperature however it can
imbibe water reversibly. When the water is heated however, starch granules undergo the
process of gelatinization. This process involves the disruption of the molecular order
within the starch granule. This molecular disruption is indicated by irreversible granule
swelling. Total gelatinization occurs over a 100°C temperature range. With continued
increase in the temperature, more hydrogen bonds are disrupted and water penetrates into
the granule attaching itself to the liberated hydroxyl groups causing further swelling.
Noodles swell to twice their uncooked starch granules, and shape retention is imperative

(De Leon et al.1999).

Crude Fat

Crude fat content among the three flours showed significant difference from each
other, the IPB var. 6 white com flour exhibited highest crude fat content at 2.66 %
followed by the taro flour at 0.77 % and the sweet potato flour at 0.72%. The com flour
exhibited the highest crude fat content because according to Hartings er al. (2012), the
embryo of the com is mainly composed of lipids.

There was a decrease in the fat content from 6.18 % to 4.54% in the cooked taro-com
noodles, and from 8.88 % to 7.44 % in the cooked sweet potato-corn noodles. The
decrease in the fat content in the noodles could have been due to the cooking of the

noodles, which could have melted the fat in the boiling water thus causing the reduction


in the fat content. Also, heating triggers the polymerization, decomposition and oxidation

of fat contributing to its loss during drying, boiling and baking (Fenema 1976).

Crude Protein

The IPB var. 6 white corn flour has the highest crude protein content at 9.34 % among.
the three flours, followed by the taro flour and the sweet potato flour at 6.16 % and 4.58
% respectively. The taro-com noodles decreased its protein content significantly after
cooking, from 3.79 % to 2.83 %. The sweet potato-com noodles on the other hand,
increased its crude protein content insignificantly after cooking from 2.66 to 2.83 %. The
observed decrease in the protein content of the flours when made into noodles, and the
decrease in the protein content of the noodles after the boiling process could be due to the
denaturation of protein wherein the hydrogen bonds and the non-polar hydrophobic
interactions of the secondary and tertiary structures of proteins are disrupted by heat
(Olajide et al. 2011) and the soluble amino acids leached out into the cooking medium

(FAO 1990).


sa|poou paxo09 uno> — oyeiod 129mg — s2]poou DOS ‘S91POoU payoosun Wos-ore0d 12aKg ~ saIPOOU INDdS
sapoou wog-o18 -sa|poou 34, ‘s9|poou payoooun wio5-01e | - sa}poou INDI ‘aziey wloiodd Aitjend-snoy 9 4A Ga
“($0'0>) d ve awa1ayytp Kpueoipiudis you axe suUIN]oD UIYIA sOUN9] SUIS ay) aueYS TEM) SUD

pl OF SISL ebVOFLIT plZOFSOL «IVOF EST «QI F HL APB OFEL'II sa[poou JOdS
p8h'0 ¥ 89°SL LOO FETT _OOFRLT TOF 9NT «= OF BLE — OT 0 F8B'B sajpoou JNIdS
28°C F IPB pLOOFSTI QSOOFSET ILOF EST TOF HSH — IN F299 sajpoou DIL
298'0 ¥ $078 pO0OFZLT OF HZ OLOFEL'E 499 FBI'9 TO F8'E sejpoou SNOL
2610 F 85°78 LOO FLIO hOOFHE eIZOF PES  sPO0F9TT 3200 F007 anol 9 4A ddl
2€7'0 F S9'L8 OP OFIOT s100F LOT OE OF SSH HD. FZL'0 LOO FEZ © —AMOL OFRIOY Jam
9250 F 6'r8 BOOF06l lOOFETE Q2SOFIID _—BO'OFLLID —EO'O HET Anojd O48
(@aN) waa NIDLOU Iva
ALVUGAHOMAVD HSV EC) ganuo dani _ TANLSIOW a1dWwvs

(siseq {up 3001/8)

so]poou wioo-oye10d yams pue W09-018) PUB INO] WOD OITYM g FA qa] ‘oreIOd 19aMs ‘oxe) Jo UoHsoduIoD ayeUNIXOLd “OT PIGEL


Crude Fiber

The results showed that the crude fiber content of the samples were significantly
different from each other. The taro flour has the highest crude fiber content at 3.29 % and
decreased to 2.35 % when made into noodles. The same was observed for the crude fiber
content of the sweet potato-com noodle (Table 10). The high fiber content that was
observed among the three flours resulted from the removal of moisture during the drying
process which increased the concentration of the fiber (Agoreyo ef al. 2011). Processes
involving heat treatment may have affected the fiber content of foods in different ways
(FAO 1990). Since boiling require higher temperature (100°C), it is possible that this
caused the decrease in the fiber content of taro and sweet potato flour when used in
making noodles. According to Ajala (2009), boiling reduces the crude fiber content of

potatoes due to an increase in temperature that leads to the breakage of weak bonds

between polysaccharide chains and glycosi

ic linkages in the dietary fiber

polysaccharides.

Ash

The sweet potato flour has the highest ash content at 2.01 % among the three flours

and the IPB var. 6 white com flour has the lowest ash content at 0.17 %. The results

showed that there was a significant decrease in the ash content of the taro flour and the


IPB var. 6 white com flour. Also, there was a significant decrease between the ash
content of the uncooked and cooked noodles (Table 10).

The significant reduction in the ash content of the taro flour and sweet potato flour
into the noodles implies that the potential ability of the sweet potato and taro to supply
essential minerals has been reduced. This may be due to the water that was absorbed
during the boiling process leading to dilution (Lewu et al. 2010), or it may be due to
leaching of the mineral compounds into the boiling water (Ajala 2009). When organic
matter is heated, minerals present in both organic and inorganic combinations are
converted into inorganic compounds which compose the ash. As heating continued, some
of the mineral elements may be partly loss as volatile compounds contributing to the

reduction in the ash content (Jacobs 1972).

Nitrogen Free Extracts (Carbohydrates)

The sweet potato flour has the highest carbohydrate content at 87.65 %, followed by
the taro flour at 84.94 % and the IPB var. 6 white com flour at 82.58 %. The
carbohydrate content of flours (taro and sweet potato) decreased significantly when
processed into noodles (Table 10). The high level of carbohydrate content observed
agrees with the findings of FAO (1990) that the main nutrient supplied by taro, sweet
potato and com is the dietary energy provided by the carbohydrates. Moreover, the lower
carbohydrate content of the noodles as compared to the flours was due to the addition of

other ingredients such as eggs, and also due to leaching of nutrients in the boiling water.


According to FAO (1997), during wet treatment, as in blanching, boiling and canning of
fruits and vegetables, there is a considerable loss of low molecular weight carbohydrates,

(i.e. mono-and disaccharides) as well as micronutrients into the processing water.

Mineral Content

There were significant differences in the zinc and iron contents of the flours and the
noodles (Table 11). Among the three flours that were used, the IPB var. 6 white com
flour has the lowest iron and zinc content at 1.39 mg and 1.06 mg respectively, while the
differences in the iron content of taro and the sweet potato flour were not significant at
1.69 mg and 1.59 mg respectively.

There was a significant decrease in the zinc and iron contents when the taro flour and
the sweet potato flour were made into noodles, and further processing of the noodles
caused further decrease in the amount of the same minerals, from 0.51 mg to 0.32 mg
iron and 0.63 mg to 0.47 mg zinc in the cooked taro-corn noodles and 0.29 mg to 0.16 mg
iron and 0.78 mg to 0.47 mg in the cooked sweet potato-com noodles.

The high mineral levels obtained from the taro and sweet potato flours may be a result
of the available and exchangeable minerals from both the top-and sub-soils. The variation
in the mineral composition could also be attributed to genetic differences between the
samples, between the accessions in absorbing the minerals in the soil (Mwenye ef al.

2011),


Table 11. Iron and zinc content of taro, sweet potato, IPB Var. 6 white corn flour and
taro-com and sweet potato-corn noodles

SAMPLE IRON ZINC
(mg/100g) (mg/100g)

Taro Flour 1.69 £0.13" 1.70 + 0.03*
Sweet Potato Flour 1.59 + 0.06" 1.27 +0.06°
IPB var. 6 Flour 13940.11° 1.06 + 0.08°
TCUC noodles 0.51 +0.05° 0.63 + 0.05"
TCC noodles 0.32 + 0.05 0.47 +0.01°
SPCUC noodles 0.29 + 0.02% 0.78 + 0.02"
SPCC noodles 0.16 + 0.02 0.47 +0.05¢

Means that share the same letter within columns are not significantly different at p (<0.05)
IPB Var. 6-Quality Protein Maize; TCUC noodles - Taro-Com uncooked noodles

TCC noodles- Taro-Com noodles; SPCUC noodles — Sweet potato-com uncooked noodles
SPCC noodles — Sweet potato — com cooked noodles

Minerals are generally not sensitive to heat during processing, but are susceptible to
leaching into the processing or cooking water. In the study done by Lewu ef al (2010),
there was a general decrease in the mean mineral contents of taro noodles. Also in the
study done by Abong ef al. (2009), the levels of zinc in boiled potato decreased
significantly as compared to the raw sample. Another study done by Fubara ef al. (2011)
on maize and groundnut showed that the effect of boiling significantly reduced the
amount of minerals. This may be due to the water absorption during boiling of the
noodles leading to dilution or it may be due to the leaching of the mineral compounds

into the boiling water, and hence low amount of ash and mineral content (Ajala 2009).


Moreover, as heating continued, some of the mineral elements such as zinc and iron may
be partly loss as volatile compounds contributing to the reduction in the mineral content

(acobs 1972).

Carbohydrate Profile

The taro flour has the highest starch content at 75.22 % followed by the sweet potato
flour at 71.45 % and the IPB var. 6 white com flour at 70.98 %. As for the noodles, the
sweet potato-com uncooked noodles have higher starch content at 65.32 % as compared
to the uncooked taro-corn noodles at 52.79 %. There was a significant decrease in the
starch content when the noodles were cooked, from 52.79 % starch content of the
uncooked taro-com noodles to 30.91 % in the cooked taro-corn noodles, as well as in the
sweet potato-com noodles at 65.32 % for the uncooked noodles to 55.42 % in the cooked
noodles (Table 12).

The taro flour has the highest amylose content at 39.75 % followed by the IPB var. 6
white com flour at 30.45 % and the sweet potato flour at 18.57 %. For the noodles, there
was a significant increase in the amylose content after cooking, from 33.52 to 36.27 % in
the taro-com noodles and from 39.05 % amylose content in the uncooked sweet potato-
com noodles to 45.14 % after cooking. Also, the amylopectin content was measured. The
sweet potato flour has the highest amylopectin content at 40.53 % followed by the IPB

var. 6 white corn flour and the taro flour at 40.53 and 35.47 % respectively. For the


noodles, there was also a significant decrease in the amylopectin content after cooking
from 19.27 to 10.53% in the taro-com noodles and from 26.27 to 10.28 % in the sweet
potato-com noodles (Table 12).

The amylose content in starch is one of the important factors influencing starch pasting
and the strength of starch gel due to its quick retrogradation, association and interaction
to lipids, and amylopectin form helical complex giving strong gel structures. Starches
with high amylose content were desired for manufacture of starch noodles (Thao 2011).
Taro has a smooth-textured gel, which would be suitable for noodle processing, which
requires a smooth mouth feel and avoidance of grainy texture. Also, past studies have
shown that sweet potato flour may potentially be used in noodle processing and bread
production (Aprianita ef al. 2009). However, it was also reported that high amylose com
starch was not suitable for noodle making because it was not sufficiently gelatinized at
atmosphere condition, leading to almost no amylose molecules released to participate into
the noodle structure formation (Thao, 2011). As what was observed in the preliminary
study wherein the 100% corn flour cannot be formed into noodles. However, if mixed
into starches with high amount of protein, lipid and ash, which can reduce the clarity of
starch paste and hinder the swelling of the starch granule because of the high rate
formation of amylose-lipid complex. Nevertheless, the protein and lipid played important
role in retention of amylose in starch noodles during cooking, resulting in minimizing

cooking loss (Thao 2011).

95,

Table 12. Starch, amylose and amylopectin content of taro, sweet potato, IPB Var. 6
flour and taro-corn and sweet potato-com noodles.

SAMPLE STARCH ‘AMYLOSE AMYLOPECT:
(Ch) (hr) (%)
Taro Flour 75.22 + 1.30" 39.75 £2.33" 35.47 £3.32"
Sweet Potato Flour 71.45 +2.24° 18.57+0.21' 52.88 +2.03*
IPB Var. 6 Flour 70.98 + 0.62” 30.45 +0.21° 40.53 + 0.59”
TCUC noodles 52.79 + 0.768 33.52 + 0.58" 19.27 + 1.32°
TCC noodles 46.80 + 0.91° 36.27 + 1.07° 10.53 + 1.73°
SPCUC noodles 65.32 + 1.96° 39.05 + 1.15" 26.27 + 2.68°
SPCC noodles 55.42 + 1.82! 45.14+2.21° 10.28 + 3.36"

Means that share the same letter within columns are not significantly different at p (<0.05).

Waxy (0-5% amylose); very low (5-12% amylose); low (12-20%); intermediate (20-25%); high (25-33%)
IPB Var . 6 Flour-Quality Protein Maize; TCUC noodles ~ Taro-Corn uncooked noodles

TCC noodles- Taro-Corn noodles; SPCUC noodles — Sweet potato-corn uncooked noodles

SPCC noodles — Sweet potato — corm cooked noodles

Total Dietary Fiber

Dietary Fiber is a form of complex carbohydrates that is being scrutinized as a factor
in the etiology of common non-infective diseases of the colon, such as constipation,
diverticulosis, cancer, hyperlipoproteinemia, and diabetes (Nagares 2007).

Among the three flours, the sweet potato flour has the highest total dietary fiber
content at 4.74 %, followed by the IPB Var.6 white com flour and the taro flour at 2.71 %
and 2.63 % respectively. The total dietary fiber content of the cooked noodles increased

from, 5.02 % to 5.36 % in the cooked taro-corn noodles while the uncooked sweet potato-


corn noodles also increased from 7.21 % to 10.17 % in the cooked sweet potato-com

noodles (Table 13). This could have been due to the fact that an increase in temperature

Table13. Total dietary fiber content of taro, sweet potato, IPB Var. 6 white com flour
and taro-com and sweet potato-com noodles.

SAMPLE TOTAL DIETARY FIBER
Taro Flour SEX oa
Sweet Potato Flour 4.74 + 0.59"
IPB var 6 Flour 2.71+0.21°
TCUC noodles 5.02 + 0.24°
TCC noodles 5.36 + 0.68
SPCUC noodles 7.21 +0.86°
SPCC noodles 10.17 + 0.68"

‘Means that share the same letter within columns are not significantly different at p (<0.05)
IPB var 6 flour-Quality Protein Maize; TCUC noodles — Taro-Corn uncooked noodles
TCC noodles- Taro-Com noodles; SPCUC noodles — Sweet potato-com uncooked noodles
SPCC noodles ~ Sweet potato ~ corm cooked noodles

leads to a breakage of weak bonds between polysaccharide chains. Also, glycosidic
linkages in the dietary fiber polysaccharides may be broken (FAO 1997). According to
Dhingra et al. (2012), grinding may affect the hydration properties, in particular, the
kinetics of water uptake as the result of the increase of surface area, the fiber hydrates
more rapidly. Heating generally changes the ratio of the soluble to insoluble fiber. Simple

processes, such as soaking and cooking tend to modify the composition and availability


of nutrients. This may also modify the plant cell wall material that may have
physiological effects. In a study done in wheat bran, it has been found out that thermal
treatment, such as boiling, cooking or roasting- originate an increase of total fiber that is
not due to new synthesis but rather to the formation of fiber-protein complexes that are
resistant to heating and are qualified as dietary fiber. According to Pushparaj and Urooj
(2011) changes in dietary fiber composition of processed cereal and pulses have been
reported where increase in the total dietary fiber content could be due to formation of
resistant starch.

The amount of total dietary fiber is important because of its influence on glucose

absorption, post-prandial glucose levels, and glycemic index (Allen et al. 2012).

Antioxidant Activity and Phytochemical Components

Plants contain several hundred different phytochemicals (Mohammed ef al. 2007).
The phytochemicals in freshly harvested foods may be destroyed or removed by
processing techniques, including cooking. For this reason, processed foods are likely to
contain fewer phytochemicals (Liu 2004). Also, phytochemicals have been associated
with health protective effects. Different phytochemicals have been found to possess a
range of activities that may help in protecting against chronic disease (Nguyen 2011). In
this study, selected phytochemical components were analyzed namely, antioxidants,

phenols, tannins, flavonoids, saponins and alkaloids. Taro flour has the highest


antioxidant activity value at 89.72 % lipid peroxidation, while the cooked sweet potato-
com noodles has the lowest at 82.64 % lipid peroxidation. The higher the lipid
peroxidation, the lower is the antioxidant activity. Therefore, the taro flour has the lowest
antioxidant activity. On the other hand, IPB var. 6 white corn flour (0.0019 mg/100 g
expressed as catechin equivalent per gram) has the highest total phenolic content
followed by the taro flour which has 0.0013 mg/100 g expressed as catechin equivalent
per gram. On the other hand, the cooked sweet potato-corn noodles have the lowest total
phenolic content at 0.0003 mg/100 g expressed as catechin equivalent per gram. The
tannin content was highest in the taro and sweet potato flour and the uncooked taro
noodles at 0.13 mg/100 g expressed as vanillin equivalent per gram, while IPB Var. 6
white com flour and the sweet potato-corn noodles exhibited the lowest tannin content at
0.11 mg/100 g expressed as vanillin equivalent per gram. For the flavonoids content, all
the samples have the same flavonoid content at 0.02 mg/100 g expressed as gallic acid
equivalent per gram. The saponins content was highest in the sweet potato flour at
0.0004 mg/100 g saponins. Lastly, alkaloids were not present in all the samples (Table
14).

The results showed that all the mean values for antioxidant activity and phenols
significantly differed from the flours to the noodles, while the tannins, flavonoids and
saponins were not significantly different (Table 14). When the phenol content decreases,
the tannins, flavonoids and saponins also decrease, because all of these compounds are
heat labile, and also these are all phenolic compounds, thus a decrease in the total phenol

content would also decrease these compounds (Amin and Lee 2005).


Generally, the phytochemical contents of the taro and the sweet potato flours
decreased when made into noodles. It is well known that heat processing can destroy the
quality attributes, such as color, texture, nutrients and phytochemicals that are beneficial
to health. The natural antioxidants contained in foods can be lost to a significant degree
during processing such as boiling, drying, or handling such as peeling and slicing, as well
as during storage, because most bioactive compounds are relatively unstable when
subjected to heat (Alcantara ef al. 2013). Processing of plant foods may have a
prominent impact on their antioxidant activity (Makris and Rossiter 2001), but the
accurate effect of processing on the overall antioxidant activity potential cannot be
predicted. This is due to the fact that, during processing, loss of antioxidant or formation
of compounds with prooxidant action may lower the antioxidant capacity. On the other
hand, alterations to the structure of the existing antioxidant activity, as well as the
formation of novel antioxidant components may enhance the initial antioxidant status
(Makris and Rossiter 2001). Thus, the influence of processing may be positive, negative
or none.

When taro-com noodles and sweet potato-com noodles were boiled, there was a
reduction in the phytochemical components, although the decrease in the phytochemical
components, i.e. tannins, flavonoids and saponins, were not statistically different from
each other. This may be due to the heat processing treatment i.e. blanching, boiling and
steaming that the samples had undergone, or the reaction of polyphenol oxidase present
in the plant. Polyphenol oxidase (PPO) is a copper containing enzyme which can either

be latent or active in many plants. It actively degrades phenolic compounds in plants


(Tomas-Barberan and Espin 2001). The decrease in the total antioxidant activity and in
other phytochemicals may also be due to the leaching out of the water soluble
antioxidants. Also, thermal processing tends to degrade certain compounds, such as
phenols, flavonoids, tannins and saponins with antioxidant properties (Amin and Lee
2005). Most losses are due to the leaching of antioxidant compounds the vegetables into
the cooking water during the prolonged exposure to water and heat (Chipurura 2010).
Additionally, the phenolic compounds and other reductones in vegetables contribute
to their antioxidant activities; thus, processes that affect the total phenolic content will
also affect the antioxidant activity (Chipurara 2010). Specifically, tannins and flavonoids
are water soluble phenolic compounds (Verena ef al. 2006). Boiling may reduce these
compounds in food due to leaching out into the water. According to the study by Lewu ef
al. (2010), there was a significant reduction of the tannin content when the taro was
boiled. Boiling produces enzymes that break down complexes to release free tannins,
The observed decrease in the tannin content of the noodles, although statistically
insignificant, may be due to the leaching out of hydrolysable tannin in the cooking water

(Soetan and Oyewole 2009).


wioo-oreod 1amg — sa]poou DNAS ! SeIPooU WO3-o1e -Sa1POOU DD, ‘Sa1POoU paxooouN wWo)-ose | - SoIPOOU INL

seqpoou paxoo9 uui09 — oyeiod 129mg — sa]poou 3DdS ‘saIpoou payxoooun

te uraroad Aupend-sno]J 9.46, Gd

(o>) d ve masayyip Atueoyruds tou ase suuunjoo uIyiiN s91.9| sues a4p BJEYS 1eYI SUED

AALLISOd ,00°0 F Z000°0 000 FLbZ0'0 pCO; F ITO 100°0 ¥ €000°0 3365°0 FP9'78  S9]poou dS
FALLISOd
ATHOIH —,00°0 FZ000°0 000 F L6100 = gO F 110 2300°0 ¥ 000° pbT0 FES'P8 SA1POOU INDAS
FALVOIN ,00°0F 10000 OOF SIZOO =O F ZI 200°0 ¥ $0000 pOOT FECES Sapoou DOL
AALLVOIN 000 FZ000°0 OOO FLLIOO = .ZOOF ETO —_—,,00°0 F L000°0 9890 ¥ 06°98 SPEC’ IND
AALLISOd _ _ _ _
ATHOIH —,00°0 ¥2000°0 00:0 F 86100» gO F IT'0 22000 F 61000 aap ZF SES AMO 9.4EA GT
AALLISOd _ _ _ _ _ ano
ATHOIH ,00°0F 40000 — ,00'0F E0z0'0_ AOU F ETO 000 F 70000 ang SSF L9'SB —OBIO JOOMS,
AALLVOAN _.00°0F 10000 00.0 F FIZOO _—neIOOF ETO 200°0 ¥ £100°0 xC60FTL'68 ANON OAR
Ga pre ayjeS —(Byba uypuea —(B/ba uypayea/8. = (uonEpIxozag
(suyuodes Sut se passaadxa —_se passaadxa se passaadxa pidry %)
(Guyes) 8001/8m) 8o01/au) 3o01/8u) B001/au) ALIALLOV
SQIOTVNIV___SNINOdVS__SGIONOAV1d SNINNVL STONAHd _.LNVGIXOLLNV ad Wwvs

"sa]poou wWios-o1ej0d yaaMs PU WIOd-012} PUR MO] WO aIYM 9 “IeA qd] ‘orwelod yoams ‘ose} Jo syuauodutod jeotwayooUdyd “P1142.


According to Hakkinen and Torroren (2000); Mustapha and Ghalem (2007), the
polyphenol oxidase could have been denatured at high temperature which may have
prevented the oxidation of phenolic compounds. Given that the taro-com and sweet
potato-com noodles were boiled at 100°C for more 10-15 minutes, the high temperature
and longer cooking time promotes further cell decompartmentalization of phenolic
compounds and the denaturation of the polyphenol oxidase. The denaturation of
polyphenol oxidase could have occurred immediately upon its release and have prevented
any activation.

However, other causes of the reduction in the antioxidant content could also be due to
operations such as peeling, cutting and slicing which were done to the raw taro and sweet
potato before they were dried, as they induce a rapid enzymatic oxidation of natural
antioxidants (Oboh ef al. 2009). Shanthakumari ef a/. (2008) further confirmed that the
decrease in saponins, tannins, flavonoids and phenolics during soaking may be due to
leaching out of these substances in the soaking medium under the influence of a
concentration gradient. Generally, these processes-drying, boiling, soaking, peeling, and
slicing may cause negative attribute to the final product as evident in the decreased

phytochemical contents of the taro-comn and sweet potato-corn noodles.


Glycemic Index

The carbohydrates in food we consume break down during digestion, releasing sugar
(glucose) into the blood stream. This establishes the fact that the amount of carbohydrates
in the foods we eat determines the amount of blood sugar in the body (Trinidad et al.
2013).

The classification of foods based on their glycemic index has dispelled the repeatedly
suggested dietary notion that carbohydrate-rich foods have deleterious health effects, and
as such, consumption should be limited. In fact, there are numerous evidence-based
studies which dismiss the negative view of carbohydrate-rich foods and clearly
demonstrate that “not all carbohydrates are created equal”. Furthermore, variations in the
physicochemical properties of complex carbohydrates have been shown to elicit
dissimilar physiological effects when consumed. Also, some complex carbohydrate-rich
foods are undeniably beneficial and do not cause blood glucose levels to spike any
greater than simple sugars. However, food preparation is important and should be
considered, as the method of cooking can alter the structure and the nature of the starches
(Bahado-Singh ef al. 2011).

Enzyme hydrolysis of starch molecules to produce glucose is important to provide
energy for plant metabolism, food, feeds and ethanol production. The starch granules are
hydrolyzed at a slower rate by enzymes than the gelatinized, amorphous starch
molecules. The susceptibility of the starch granules depends on the granular size, the

structure of the amylopectin, the amylose content, the lipid content, and the reaction


pattern of the enzyme. Generally, the larger the starch granule, are normally digested at a
slower rate than the smaller starch granules because the larger granules have a smaller
relative surface area for enzyme hydrolysis (Tester et al. 2004).

White bread, used as reference in this study, showed a digestion value of 75.3 % at
180 minutes (Figure 11), which resembles that reported by Gofii ef al. (1997), but
previous works, such as the one done by Grandfelt ef al. (1994) as reported by Tovar ef
al. (2002) have found that white bread showed a digestion value of 50 %. This could be
explained, according to Gofii ef al. (1997), due to the different methodologies that were
used, such as the inclusion of pepsin in the hydrolysis and the use of an unrestricted
system.

Among the flours, the IPB Var. 6 white com flour has the lowest total starch
hydrolysis rate at 29.13 % and the sweet potato flour has the highest rate at 51.66 % as
compared to that of the white bread. The cooked taro-corn and sweet potato-corn noodles
also showed a high starch hydrolysis rate of 67.05 % and 62.22 % respectively (Figure
1).

The course of hydrolysis differed greatly among various samples, being markedly
slow in the case of IPB Var. 6 white corn flour, sweet potato flour, taro flour and the
uncooked taro-corn noodles and sweet potato-corn noodles, but much more rapid in the
case of white bread and that of the cooked taro-com and sweet potato-com noodles,
which showed higher hydrolysis index. However, it should be kept in mind that
ingredients included in the noodle formulation might have also affected starch

digestibility (Tovar et al. 2002).


SSS

S
X60
2 taro
250 sp
3 ~te-qpm
Bao
= Se teue
330 Sete
= —espuc
$20
& spec

10 white bread

o

0 30 60 90 120 150 180

Time (min)
Fig. 11. Average hydrolysis curves of starch in taro flour, sweet potato flour, IPB var.6

white com flour (QPM), and cooked and uncooked taro-comn and sweet potato
com noodles.

The rate of starch hydrolysis in the samples varied widely suggesting that other factors
other than hydrolytic enzyme activity (Snow and O’Dea 1981). It can be observed that
the cooked noodles hydrolyzed more rapidly as compared to the uncooked noodles. This
is because cooking greatly increased the rate at which starch can be hydrolyzed by
gelatinizing the starch and making it more readily available for enzymatic attack (Snow
and O’Dea 1981). The degree of starch gelatinization is not the only factor that affects
susceptibility of starch to enzyme action (Siller 2006). The digestibility of starch can be

affected by several factors including the composition and physical form of the starch,


protein-starch interactions, the physical form of the food, the integrity of the starch-
containing cells, and presence of antinutritional factors (Siller 2006), while the lower
levels of starch hydrolysis that were observed in the taro, sweet potato and IPB var 6
white com flour, may be attributed to the presence of cell wall and other components
such as the dietary fiber and mucilage(Mbofung ef al. 2006) as what was observed by
Bordoloi ef. al (2012) in the starch of cooked potatoes.

Table 15 shows that the reference sample, white bread has an estimated glycemic
index of 94.61. For the flour samples, the sweet potato flour has the highest glycemic
index at 77.20, followed by the taro flour and the IPB Var 6 white corn flour at 65.46 and
60.79 respectively. For the noodles, cooking showed a decrease in the glycemic index of
the taro-corn and sweet potato-corn noodles at 84.92 for the uncooked taro-com noodles
to 72.24 for the cooked taro-corn noodles, and the uncooked sweet potato-corn noodles at
88.43 to 74.45 for the cooked sweet potato-com noodles. Table 16 shows the GI
classification of the samples as compared to white bread. Taro flour and IPB var. 6 white
com flour is classified as intermediate, while the sweet potato flour and the cooked and

uncooked noodles are classified as high.


Table 15, Starch hydrolysis and estimated glycemic index of taro, sweet potato and IPB
var. 6 white corn flour and the uncooked and uncooked taro-corn and sweet
potato-com noodles.

SAMPLE Hoo Coo k HI EGI
White Bread 75.30 + 1.19% 79.29% 0.03 100 + 0.00* 94.61 + 0.00°

Taro Flour 35.91 + 3.41" 39.34" 0.03 46.91+6.11™ 65.46 + 3.35
Sweet Potato 51.66+1.99° 55.46" 0.03 68.28 43.80" 77.20 + 2.08
IPB ao 29.1345.134 32.319 0.03 38.38+6.719 60.79 + 3.70°
TCUC noodles 62.22 + 1.85 66.04 0.03 82.34+0.95° 84.92 +0.52
TCC noodles 44.88 +0.82 48.43" 0.03 59.25+2.01™ 72.24 + 1.10"
spcuc 67.05 +4.12" 70.93" 0.03 88.74+4.58° 88.43 + 2.528

noodles
SPCC noodles _47.89+2.69" 51.52" 0.03 _63.27+4.25" _74.45+2.33"

Means that share the same letter within columns are not significantly different at p (<0.5)
GI Classification: Low GI <55; intermediate 55-70; High >70

IPB var. 6 Flour-Quality Protein Maize; TCUC noodles ~ Taro-Com uncooked noodles
TCC noodles- Taro-Corn noodles; SPCUC noodles — Sweet potato-corn uncooked noodles
SPCC noodles ~ Sweet potato - corm cooked noodles

Table 16. GI classification of the samples as compared to white bread (GI= 100)

SAMPLE EGI CLASSIFICATION

Taro Flour 65.46 + 3.35% Intermediate
Sweet Potato Flour 77.20 + 2.08" High

IPB Var. 6 flour 60.79 + 3.70% Intermediate
TCUC noodles 84.92 +0.52° High
TCC noodles 72.24 + 1.10" High
SPCUC noodles 88.43 + 2.528 High
SPCC noodles 74.45 + 2.33" High

‘Means that share the same letter within colurnns are not significantly different at p (<0.5)
GI Classification: Low GI <55; intermediate 55-70; High >70.

IPB var. 6 Flour-Quality Protein Maize; TCUC noodles — Taro-Corn uncooked noodles
TCC noodles- Taro-Corn noodles;SPCUC noodles — Sweet potato-corn uncooked noodles
SPCC noodles ~ Sweet potato — corm cooked noodles


The sweet potato flour exhibit the highest GI value among the three flours at 77.20
and also the lowest amylose content at 18.57 %, while the taro flour and the IPB var. 6
exhibited an intermediate GI value at 65.46 and 60.79 respectively, and also exhibited a
higher amylose content than that of the sweet potato flour at 39.75 and 30.45 % for taro
and IPB var. 6 white corn flour respectively. When the flours are made into noodles, it
resulted in higher amylose content for the sweet potato-corn uncooked and cooked
noodles at 39.05 to 45.14 % respectively. As for the taro-corn noodles, when the noodles
were cooked it resulted in a higher amylose content at 33.52 % for the uncooked noodles
to 36.27 % for the cooked noodles. When the noodles are cooked, the amylose content
increases, but the GI value decreased, from the GI value of 84.92 to 72.24 for the taro-
com noodles and the GI value of 88.43 to 74.45 for the sweet potato-com noodles (Figure
13). Bahado-Singh ef al. (2011) reported that rice with high amylose content was
accompanied by a lower metabolic response to and lower GI values. Also, according to
Bahado-Singh et al. (2011), boiling lowers GI values. This may be link to the chemical
structure of starches - that is the amylose-amylopectin ratio (Bjork er al. 1994).The
amylose content is known to be negatively correlated with the starch susceptibility to
amylase hydrolysis (Hasjim 2009). Juliano (1992) suggested the classification of
amylose content in rice as waxy (0-5 %), very low (5-12 %), low (12-20 %), intermediate
(20-25 %) and high (25-33 %). Waxy starch granules are more susceptible to enzyme
hydrolysis than intermediate starch granules, and the intermediate starch granules are
more susceptible to enzyme hydrolysis than high-amylose starch granules (Fuwa ef al,

1977, Jane et al. 2003). Concomitantly, greater amounts of resistant starches may have


been retained in the boiled foods. Furthermore, as these foods cool, the possibility of
forming resistant starches increases. This occurs as the starches undergo recrystallization
due to the formation of the intermolecular hydrogen bonds. Also, these resistant starches,
after the leaching of free sugars during the boiling process also play a role in retarding the
enzymatic degradation of the starches, thus reducing the glycemic response (Bahado-

Singh et al. 2011).

= Glycemic index
| = Amylose
| © Dietary fiber
of
©
SS gf © &

o a
SS

Concentration
88s 8 8s 8B

& ws 6
ege *
Ss

Samples

Fig. 12. Comparison between the glycemic index, amylose content and total dietary fiber
for each sample.


Also, apart from the amylose content, high dietary fiber was believed to reduce the
blood glucose response, and thus lower the GI value of a food (Barakam et al. 2005).
Dietary fiber influences the starch digestibility by changing the microstructure of foods,
which decreases the susceptibility of starch to amylolytic attack, and by limiting water
availability, which restricts starch gelatinization (Kim and White 2013).

The sweet potato flour has the highest total dietary fiber content and the highest GI
value among the three flours, followed by the taro and the IPB Var. 6 QPM white com
flour (Figure 13). This was because grinding has an effect on the gross matrix structure of
the flour. The grinding process increases the glycemic response and glycemic index of
the flours (Brouns ef al. 2005). The uncooked sweet potato-com noodles has a lower
dietary fiber content but have a higher GI value as compared to the cooked sweet potato-
corn noodles. The same can be observed in the taro-corn noodles wherein there was an.
increase in the dietary fiber content and a decrease in the GI value after cooking. This
might be due to the higher amylose content of the cooked noodles as compared to the
uncooked noodles. This is due to high amylose slowed the digestion rate. There is greater
hydrogen bonding between glucose units in amylose molecule than the amylopectin
molecule, thus less exposure to enzymatic digestion (Shanita et al. 2011).

Wolever (1990), studied naturally present fiber contents in foods and their subsequent
glycemic response, and revealed that the total dietary fiber was significantly related to the
glycemic index of foods. This was supported by the study done by Brouns ef al. (2005),
Riccardi ef al. (2008) and Allen er al. (2012), that stated that foods that are rich in fiber

generally have a low glycemic index, although not all foods with a low glycemic index

Wt

necessarily have high fiber content, as what have been observed between the glycemic
index values and the total dietary fiber values of the uncooked and cooked noodles.

Thus, the presence of amylose and dietary fiber in the different samples used affects
its glycemic index. The combined effect of amylose and dietary fiber contributed in the

low glycemic index value in the cooked taro-com and sweet potato-com noodles.

Nutritional Value

The nutritional value of taro, sweet potato, and IPB var. 6 white corn flour and the
cooked noodles were presented in Tables 17 and 18, and was computed for its
contribution for energy, protein, iron and zinc in meeting the RENI (Recommended
Energy and Nutrient Intakes). According to Codex (2007), for a food to be considered a
“source” of protein, it should be >10 % of Nutrient Reference Values (NRV) per 100
grams, while for the food to be considered as a “high source” it should be >20% of NRV
per 100 grams. On the other hand, for a food to be considered as a “source” of minerals
and energy, it should be >15% of Nutrient Reference Values (NRV) per 100 grams, while
it should be >30% of NRV per 100 grams for it to be considered as a “high source”. The
Nutrient Reference Values (NRV) used was the RENI, since this is the dietary standards

used in the Philippines.


Among the three flours, the IPB var.6 white corn flour has the highest calories from
fat at 23.97 kcal/ 100g, which was followed by the taro flour and the sweet potato flour at
6.96 kcal/100 g and 6.51 kcal/ 100 g. For the noodles, the uncooked sweet potato-com
noodles have higher calories from fat as compared to the uncooked taro-com noodles at
66.96 kcal/100 g and 55.65 kcal/100 g. When the noodles were cooked, the sweet potato-
com noodles still has a higher fat content at 66.96 kcal/100 g as compared to the taro-
corn noodles at 40.86 kcal/100 g. As for the protein content of the three flours, the IPB
var. 6 white com flour exhibited the highest calories from protein at 37.37 kcal/100 g,
followed by the taro flour at 24.65 kcal/100 g and the sweet potato flour at 18.31
kcal/100g. The protein content from the taro-com noodles decreased from 15.17 kcal/
100 g to 11.33 kcal/100 g when it was cooked. Also, the protein in the sweet potato-com
noodles also increased insignificantly after cooking from 10.63 kcal/100 g to 11.33
kcal/100 g in the uncooked to the cooked noodles. For the calories obtained from
carbohydrates of the three flours, the IPB var.6 white corn flour has the highest
carbohydrate content at 352 kcal/ 100 g, followed by the sweet potato flour and the taro
flour at 350.57 kcal/100 g and 339.76 kcal/100 g. For the noodles, the carbohydrate
content decreased after cooking, but not to a significant degree, from 332.01 kcal/100 g
to 325.81 kcal/ 100 g for the uncooked to cooked taro-com noodles respectively, and
from 302.72 kcal/100 g to 300.60 kcal/100 g in the uncooked to cooked sweet potato-

corn noodles (Table 17).


sa1poou paxo02 w1i09 — oreiod 1aamg - sa1poou DOdS ‘s91PooU payoosun wios-o1e10d 19mg - $9]PO0U INDUS
so|poou to3-018 | -S9]poou JD, !SaIpooU paxoosun W9D-oT| ~ so1poou JDL, ‘ez1eW\ WlavO4g Aulend- 9 “IPA Gal
(s0'0>) d ve warayytp dpuestuds you aze suumnyos uum 1ana} aes ay) azeYs Tey SUED

998° ¥ 09'00€ POF ECTL 3186°6 ¥ 96°99 saypoou Jods
9261 ¥ ZL'20E 2980 FE90I al OF 66°8L so[poou ONOdS
289° F 18'SZE avOF vel oh0'l ¥ 98°07 sapoou OL
3082 F 1OZEE OC F LIST 26'S F S9'SS sapoou NOL
9660 ¥ OO'7SE OTF LELE (670 ¥ LOEZ Inoly 9 TA ddl
9260  LSOSE alZ'1# 1€81 2280 F 159 ano] o1e10g aM
180'2 ¥ 9L'6EE 00° F S9'bz 20'0 ¥ 969 ano Ome]
ALVUGAHOMYVD NIDLOUA Ivi
ATdNVS

(3 001/184) LNALNOD ADYINA

sa[poou wio9-oye)od yoams pue wi09-078) pur INO] 9 “seA qd] ‘oVeI0d oaMs ‘o7e} ay} Jo UOHsodwiod Ausuop B10Ug “LT A14EL


The IPB var. 6 white com flour has the highest energy content at 413 kcal/100 g,
while the taro flour has the lowest energy content at 371 kcal/100 g. The uncooked taro-
com noodles have higher energy content at 402 kcal/100 g as compared to the uncooked
sweet potato-com noodles at 392 kcal/100 g. For the cooked noodles, the taro-com
noodles has a slightly higher energy content at 379 kcal/100 g as compared to the sweet
potato-corn noodles at 378 keal/100 g (Table 18).

Table 18, Energy content of the taro flour, sweet potato flour, and the uncooked and
cooked noodles.

SAMPLE ENERGY CONTENT (keal)
Taro flour 371.37 + 0.68"
Sweet potato flour 375.39 + 1.61%
IPB var 6 flour 413.344 151°
TCUC Noodles 402.83 + 3.56"
TCC Noodles 379.15 + 2.389
SPCUC Noodles 392.34 + 0.95"
SPCC Noodles 378.89 + 8.14°

Means that share the same letter within columns are not significantly different at p (<0.05)
IPB Var. 6 -Quality Protein Maize; TCUC noodles ~ Taro-Comn uncooked noodles

‘TCC noodles- Taro-Corn noodles; SPCUC noodles — Sweet potato-corn uncooked noodles
SPCC noodles - Sweet potato — corm cooked noodles

Taro flour, sweet potato flour and the IPB var.6 white corn flour are high sources of
energy for children 1 to 2 years of age based on RENI (2014). The taro flour remains to

be a high source of energy until adulthood for females, while for males, the taro flour can

11S

be considered as a source of energy from 3 years of age to 12 years of age and at 30 to $9
years of age, and becomes a high source of energy for ages 60 and above. As for the
sweet potato flour, it is considered to be a source of energy for males, ages 3 years to 12
years and from 30 years old and above. It is not considered as a source of energy during
the teenage years, maybe because during this stage, there is an increased caloric
requirement to support the growth spurt. For females, the sweet potato flour remains to be
a source of energy from 3 years of age and above. The IPB var. 6 white com flour also
remains to be a high source of energy from 3 years to 5 years of age for both sexes. It
becomes a source of energy for females aged 6 years and above, and also as a source of
energy for males from 6 years to 15 years of age and from 19 years old and above (Table
19).

The taro flour can be a high source of protein for children 1 to 2 years old, and as a
source of protein for males, 3 years to 12 years of age, and for females, 3 years to 18
years of age. As for the sweet potato flour, it can be considered as a source of protein for
children 1 year of age to 9 years of age. The IPB var. 6 white com flour, having the
highest protein content among the three flours is considered as a high source of protein
from 1 year to 9 years of age and can be considered as a source of protein from 10 years
of age and above for both males and females (Table 19).

The taro-com and the sweet potato-com uncooked noodles can be considered as a
high source of energy and protein from 1 to2 years of age for both the males and females.
The taro-com uncooked noodles can be considered as a source of energy for males aged 3

years to 12 years, and from 19 years old and above. For females, the taro-com uncooked


noodles can be considered as a high source of energy from 1 year old to 5 years old, and
as a source of energy for 6 years old and above. The uncooked taro-com noodles can be
considered as a high source of protein for both sexes from 1 year to 12 years of age for
males and up to 9 years of age, and as a source of protein for the following years (13
years old and above for males and 10 years old and above for females). Moreover, the
uncooked sweet potato-com noodles also, can be considered as a high source of energy

for males 1 year to 2 years of age for males and 1 year to 5 years of age for females.


201005 YBIeg

201n0$,
sony 107 ‘INTU*
90ST wSTEL C89C oL0IZ OfL SHO uSEPT E61 66 898 4607 +ef681 79 IZ OPSI 0961 OL
1901 ASIEL uSO'ST -HOE'EL «GEL SH9— HOTETHZSLI 6G 8N'BwePO'ET wabELI 79 IL O19I ObIZ 69-09
190'S1 aSTEL 607 HLO'LE «GEL SH'9—HSO'OZ H0S'S1 166 BNR wabB'GI LEST 79 IL OLBI OZ —6S-0S
490°S1 -ASI'EL 960°7Z LOLI. GEL SH SOOT HOS'ST 6G BNR wabBSI HEESI 79 IL OLBI OZ © GF-OE
s90S1 aSTEL sOPIZ aZE9T GEL SHO aE VEL THT HGR weZL'G1 991 79 IL OFT OFS Ger6E
NPV
wIES1 SPL ITBE | WLEL ISL IV'9 SHO OHTE «-AOV'OL.««IZBwalZ 91 CTI «19. SL O8ZZ OLDE BI-9T
6C91 POEL EOL HOE'ST «O'R H8'DHBTLI GEL «= wIB'OL © 61S SS wxONLTHL'EL «LS LO OLIZ 00LZ STET
+8981 A96LL 49807 SOOT «91'S, +PO'BI «OTR CET «wSB'IT aabl'81 10°81 0S ZS 0861 090 ZI-OF
wabT'ST exSEET o01'8Z IB'ST HBETL «ASHI aIS'SZ ebhET «#S9'9L-SOP'ST wabZ'ST #6I'EZ LE OF OLbI 0091 69
an61'67 wal PLZ ¥BL'ZE ws6S0E IE Pl «LPEL 49L°6Z BLT #STOI TIBI we bV'6T BLE TE PE O9ZI OSEI SE
el9Oh ee9ELE 2068'bh asOCP 1661 4ZEBI a49L'OF 4H0SLE 448/97 aeb9PT se€COh *e0I'LE EZ SZ 026 0001 TT
Auasp [iy
a i Ww a Ww a Ww a Ww a Ww dW 4d W
(%) (%) (%) (%) @) (1204)
wad MBuoug uyavorg ABroug ward Muoug ujoig _ ABioug
UNOTA 9 “38A adI UNO OLVLOd LAIMS UNOTA OUVL +AN TVA INTU aay

“INSTA ayn Buneour

ur swrei3 99] sad mnoy wos arym 9 “3A Gd] Pue Moy cIeIOd aoMs ‘Moy ore) Jo wWlajoad pue AB19U9 JOJ UONNgUIUOD °6 [9192L


It can also be considered as a source of energy for males 3 years to 12 years of age and
from 19 years old and above, while it can also be considered as a source of energy for
females 6 years old and above. As for the protein content, the uncooked sweet potato-
com noodles can be considered as a high source from 1 year to 12 years of age and as a
source of protein for 13 years of age and above for both males and females (Table 20).
Based on its contribution in meeting the RENI, the cooked taro-comn and sweet potato-
com noodles can be considered as a high source of energy for children 1 year to 2 years
of age for both sexes, while it continued to be a high source of energy for females 3 years
to 5 years of age. For females, both the taro-com and the sweet potato- corn noodles can
be considered as a source of energy for 13 years and above, as for the males, the noodles
can also be considered a source of energy from 3 years to 9 years old and from 19 years
old and above. Moreover, the taro-corn noodles can be considered a high source of
protein for all ages and for both sexes, while the sweet potato- com noodles can be
considered as a high source of protein for 1 year to 12 years of age and as a source of

protein from 13 years old and above (Table 21).


204N0S UB
0un0S
Somjen bLOT “INTL +

Oth SLE SEPT «EVEL «IT's HE'S GOT HEHBI DIL OOPST_ (096 sawad L<
6th «SLE HOTET SLT IDES POET HELI. 79 ILS. ObIZ_— SAK 69-09
67h SLE SOOT HOSS «LT HE'S BOT «LEST «79 IL OLBT_ OZ = SRA GS-05
6%h SLE —-#S0'0Z_- OS'S IT'D HE'S BOT LEST «79 LL OLBT_OZhZ—SaRAA Gh-OE
6th SLE E61 TBHL CU's HES TOL ODL 7D LL_—COEGT EST S4BAK G7-6T
amp
9 SSE SHOT «HTL «ITO. SOS LOT EETI «CID SL OBZZ_—COLE. «SBA BT-OT
Lo = LOE #BTLT SEL «S'S HOTT. = PL'EL «LS LO. OLIZ™~—«OOLT_=—=sSABAAST-ET
eS TUS whG'BT OTT BSL TL wL'BT. IORI 0S «= SS 8GT 0907 == Saba ZI-OT
GUL S99 wISST bh ET ebTOL «BPH PT'STHOI'ET LE OH OLI_— (0091 savas 6-9
Te8 BL =e 9L'OT BLT PSL «STIL bV'6% BLT TE PE ONTOS sawak ¢-¢
4LS IL POOL ea9L'OP ax0SLE 48H91 DIST xe€€O axOILE EZ SZ 0%H_—000 savad 2-1
a W a Ww a Ww a Wd Ww ad WwW
(%) (%) (%) (%) @ (Teo)
ura}04g B100q uyajoag ABsaug ujorg Bug
SATGOON ONds SATAOON OND +AN1VA INTA a3y
“INSU

‘au Buneaus ur suzex8 99] Jod so]poou wio9-oye10d yams pue WIO9-o1e} paxoooun Jo urajoad pue AB19U9 10 YONG “OZ A142.


01nos Yt,
sainos,
sanqen pLOz ‘INSU +

6th SLE SPST 4000 SH = HHE IIHT PEST «7D «LOST 96 SutaA QUE
6th SLE SET TERI «OSH HE wPSEZ ILLI «79 —IL_~—COIT OZ BABAK G9-09
6th SLE -e9GHOZ HOTT «= OSH HE = wLTOZ 99ST 7 IL = OLBT.-—«OZHZ_~—SUBAA GS-OS
6th SLE -4960Z 40791 SH = OHE LOZ 99ST 7 _—L_=—OLBT. OH SUBOK GP-O
6th «SLE sTEOZ «s6P'ST «= OSD = OHE 9ST BO'HI. «7_—TL_~—COEET «(EST (SABA GZ-GT
ampy
9b SSE SHT'LT COPEL «9H LLE ZIT STI «19. SL OBZZ_~—COLOE. «SABA BI-9T
Lop = LOE 90'KT SPL HH = TH wk HLI POL «LS LO OLIZ=—SOOLT_=«SHBAA ST-ET
ES TI'S OBST EOE §=— 99'S HS = #PI'6L = s0F'81. 0S «ZS (OBGT_=— 090 SHEAA ZI-OT
6IL $99 eL'9Z HOST STL BOL «BLS H69'ET LE Oh = COLHT. «(ONT aR AK G9
Te8 ZBL ea IE PO'6Z = BB TER eeBOOE HL0'BZ TE FE O9TI —OSET «= SHBA SE
STL eh OL ae 9'Zh ee0Z6E OCT —ZETL a07 Ih 4s06LE €Z SZ 0%H__—OOOL_— SPA TT
a Ww a Ww a Ww a wi W a Ww
(%) %) (%) %) @ (e>9) a8y
uyqo1g AB100q uyajoag AB100y upsyo1d Brug,
SAIQOON D0dS SATAOON DOL +onjea INTA

“NTA a Sunsow ur suzex8 QQ] 10d so]poou wo9-oyeI0d yoOMs pure WOd-o1e} pY009 Jo ura}o1d pue £BsdUe JOJ UOIINUNUOD “17 aI4BL


Based on its RENI contribution, the taro flour, sweet potato flour and IPB Var. 6
white com flour are considered as sources of iron for infants 6 months to 11 months of
age and from 10 years old and above. Moreover, it is considered as a high source of iron
from | year old to 9 years of age. Additionally, the taro flour, sweet potato flour, and IPB
Var. 6 white com flour can be considered as a high source of zinc for children 6 months
to 9 years of age for both the taro flour and the sweet potato flour, and from 6 months to
2 years of age for the IPB Var. 6 white com flour. Because the taro flour has the highest
zinc content among the three flours, it continues to be a source of zinc from 10 years old
and above for both sexes. The sweet potato flour on the other hand, can be considered as
a source of zinc for males aged 10 tol2 years, but for the females it is considered as a
source of zinc from 10 years old and above. For the IPB Var. 6 white corn flour, it can be
considered as a source of zinc from 3 years old up to 12 years old for males, and from 3
years old and above for females (Table 22).

For the uncooked noodles, the taro-corn noodles can be considered as sources of zinc
for children aged 6 months to 9 years old for both the males and females, and as a source
of iron for females aged 1 to 2 years of age. On the other hand, the uncooked sweet
potato-com noodles can be considered as high sources of zinc for children 6 months to 2
years of age and as a source of zinc for children aged 3 years old to 9 years old (Table
23). Moreover, for the cooked noodles, both the taro-corn and the sweet potato-com

noodles are considered as sources of zinc from 6 months to 2 years of age (Table 24).


301N0S YBa

20uN0$
sanjea p 107 ‘INU +
«9ST ell 4BL7 4TET Ll BI sel aeS IE S97 40ST +181 eeBEE 4787 89 FE OS 09 saad QL=
49S1 ell +BLZ TET LBL a aeB lL S97 +0°S7 sI'81 68°C 478Z 89 F'6 O'S 019 SUBaK 69-09
49S1 ell aBLZ  4TET l'81 sel BIE «SOT 0ST sV81 eB EE 4787 89 FG O'S 0'9 « SUBAaK GS-OS
49S ell aTLL eTET LB Sel +961 «S97 0ST «81 +607 +787 89 6 18 09 sHE2X GF-OE
e9SL CML TLL TET LBL SEL GLITZ MST BT HOT TET 8D HE «18 09 SUBaKGT-6I
aumpy
49S a9L1 ol 81 +L 81 Sel «1 07 «907 #0°ST «I 81 av IZ +617 89 76 GL LL saved gi-or
aS tl sz e9LL ol 81 aW Ll orl «107 4907 afET 40°07 a 17 +617 €L SB OL LL savadsi-er
aVSE VSL eb PT VET BT «P81 ¥6LZ 4697 af07 afb 4967 s98Z OL OL LS 6S s1BakZI-O1
HST SOT aeG'EE anO'EL aS IC aaS' TE e48'8E anB'BE aeS'ZP aaS'h asl aeZly Ob OF Th Ty  sHeakeg
ASOT ASOT weGLE HHO EE weS 1E waS 1 eeBBE eeS BE aS TD aS Th weZ lp aeT lb OF Ob Th IP sawak S-¢
aD Th ae Th ee € OP ee EOP 4480S 4e8'OS  enO' ES 440 ES 44089 44089 eef9S 4469S ST ST EC £ savak 7-1
i Ww i Ww i im a Ww a Ww i Ww 4 W da W
(%) (%) (%) (%) (%) (%) (ur) (Bu)
uz, uod] om uody uz, uoay ourz, uoay a8y
NOTA 918A Gd NOTA OLVLOd LAIMS yNOTd OAV +9N TVA INU

INA 9u} SuNIaUI UT INO|] WOD aiTUM 9 “IEA Ad] PUR INOT] OVBIOd Jooms “MOT Ore} JO DUIZ pure UOI! JOJ UONINGIIUOD “ZZ 319eL.


201005 YBa
unos,
sonjea plOZ INAY +

Sil £8 ss sy £6 “go rant 8 89 v6 os 09 sawak QL<
Sl £8 ss sr c6 “go ZOL 8 89 v6 os 09 saead 69-09
Sil £8 ss sr C6 “go TOL 8 89 v6 os 09 savak 65-0
Sl £8 of sr €6 “go £9 $8 89 v6 rs 09 sawat 6p-0F
Stl £8 of sb €6 “go £9 s8 89 v6 18 09 savak 67-61
apy
Stl 8 Le se £6 Lo $9 99 89 v6 6L LL sawad QI-9T
Lol v6 Le ge 98 vL so 99 el $8 6L LL savak ST-€1
TH vi Vs or 06 06 68 98 oL OL “s 6s savad 71-01

S61 S61 TLL aB'ST BST UL ZL OHO Vp Ty Stak 6-9
S61 S61 LVL aBSL BST TL ZL OOO Vy Ty saeak se
eeTIEweZIE L6G SZ sTSZ_—OLN LT SS ste Oe sueak eT

a Ww i Ww a Ww a Ww a WwW a Ww
(%) (%) (%) (%) (wu) (u)
aur, uoay aug, wos] omy wos] aBy
SA TQOON OMas SATQOON ONL +AN1VA INTA

INAY au BuNaaw ur sapoou wios-oyejod yams pure w09-01e} payYOOoUN Jo DUIZ puE WOU 40J UOHINGUIUOD “EZ aI4eL


unos YB,
aoun0s,,
samen P07 INTY +

69 os ve Lt 69 os v9 es 89 v6 os 09 savak QL<
69 os we L7 69 os 9 es 89 v6 os 09 savad 69-09
69 os ve x4 69 os 9 es 89 v6 os 09 savad 65-05
69 os 07 L7 69 os or es 89 v6 18 09 savad 6b-0€
69 os 07 L@ 69 os Or es 89 v6 18 09 savak 67-61
anpy
69 os 4 17 69 os Ty tr 89 v6 6L LL savat 81-91
v9 ss 4 1% v9 ss Ty rad el 8 6L LL savak ST-€T
Lo “9 87 £7 “go “9 os vs OL OL “us 6s savad 71-01
SIL SIL 6E 6f sl Sl SL SL or or Vp Up savat 6-9
SIL SIL ot of Sil Sil SL BL or or Ty Vp savad $-€
«8°81 «8°81 es es 48°81 +881 Lol Lol st st oe of savad 7-1
El Ww A Ww 4d WwW 4d WwW a W a WwW
(%) (%) (%) (%) (uw) (3w)
OUIZ ol] ‘OUIZ ‘ody ouIZ uoly aay
SATGOON DDdS SATGOON DOL +AN TVA INAM

SSS

INA 24 Bunsaw WI so[poou wWod-o1wiod 1o9MS Pure WIOD-01e) px009 Jo DUIZ PUR UOs! Joy UONNGIIUOD “bZ A192L


The decrease in the mineral content (iron and zinc) from the flour to the mixture might be
due to the leaching of these minerals into the boiling water during the cooking process.
This implies that the taro, sweet potato and IPB Var. 6 white corn flour can be made into
snack foods as they are sources of energy, protein iron and zine which are important for
growth and development. It can also be used as a substitute for wheat flours in making
breads and noodles. The taro-corn and sweet potato-corn noodles can also be a healthy
alternative snack because of its high energy and protein content.

Moreover, the utilization of the taro, sweet potato and IPB var. 6 flours as an
ingredient can help in the alleviation of protein energy malnutrition, and micronutrient
deficiencies, specifically iron and zine deficiencies to address stunting, as it is a high
source of energy, protein iron and zinc.

Aside from its high nutrient content, the taro, sweet potato and IPB var. 6 white
com flours can be utilized as an ingredient in making snack food items because of its
dietary fiber content, which could be beneficial for persons with high blood cholesterol
levels, and for persons with gastro-intestinal problems. The taro-corn and sweet potato-
com noodles can also be an alternative snack to meet the dietary requirements for fiber
intake because of its high fiber content.

As for the glycemic index, the taro and the IPB var. 6 flours are classified as
intermediate, while the noodles are classified as high. Because of this, the utilization of
the taro and IPB var. 6 white com flours can help persons with high blood glucose levels

to control the elevation of their blood glucose levels. While the noodles, can also be an


alternative snack food for diabetics because of its lower GI value as compared to white

bread.

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION

In the study, the acceptability, nutrient content and health properties of taro flour, IPB
var. 6 white corn flour, sweet potato flour and the taro-corn and sweet potato-com
noodles was determined, the noodles being in its uncooked and cooked stages. The
acceptability of the different proportions of the taro-com and sweet potato-com noodles
was also presented.

The results of the study revealed that the taro flour, IPB var. 6 white com flour, and
sweet potato flour are sources of energy, protein, zinc and iron, and the taro-corn and
sweet potato-com noodles are sources of energy and protein, but were reduced when the
noodles were cooked. Also, the study showed that the sweet potato flour has the highest
GI value among the three flour and that the GI value of the noodles decreased after
cooking, but was still classified as High GI. Specifically, the study showed the following:

1) The 70:30 taro-com and 70:30 sweet potato-com noodle combination was the
most acceptable noodle combination in terms of its aroma, texture, taste/flavor
and were acceptable.


Proximate composition, mineral content, and phytochemical contents of the taro,
sweet potato, IPB Var. 6 white com flour, taro-com and sweet potato-com
noodles significantly decreased after cooking, while the dietary fiber and the
carbohydrate profile (starch and amylose) increased after cooking.

x

Glycemic index of taro and the IPB Var. 6 white com flour are classified as

intermediate and that the sweet potato flour and the uncooked and cooked taro-

4)


corn and sweet potato-com noodles are classified as high. GI values of the taro-
com and sweet potato-com noodles were affected by its amylose and dietary fiber
content.

Based on their nutritional contribution (% RENI), the taro flour, sweet potato
flour and IPB Var. 6 white com flour are sources of energy, protein, zinc and
iron. The noodles (taro-corn and sweet potato-com) are also sources of energy

and protein.

RECOMMENDATION

The study has provided information on the nutritional content, phytochemical
components, carbohydrate profile, total dietary fiber content and the glycemic index of
taro flour, sweet potato flour, IPB Var. 6 white corn flour and the taro-com and sweet
potato-com noodles. The utilization of these flours in making noodles appeared to be
favorable from nutritional value, quality and acceptability as a snack food. However,
there are still a lot of factors that needs to be studied to be able to fully utilize the
potential of the flours as follows:

1) _ study about its other mineral content, such as calcium and phosphorus,

2) shelf life and the effect of storage temperature to the flour and as well as their

products, like the noodles;

3) use of taro-based and sweet potato-based food products in feeding programs, to

know if it can help improve nutritional status, thus preventing malnutrition; and

4) a study regarding the cost analysis/ profitability in production of the flours and its

products, like the noodles.

All these recommendation could offer a means to further improve the consumption of

taro, sweet potato and IPB Var. 6 white com flour and for food manufacturers to see the

benefits of utilizing these indigenous crops for a possible market that could help in
promoting another source of energy due to its high carbohydrate content. By informing

and educating the public about its benefits, and by conducting continuous studies on the

production, processing, nutrition and health benefits of taro, sweet potato and IPB Var. 6


white com flour, it will soon be as important as the other crops or might be an alternative

staple,

LITERATURE CITED

- Maize. <http://www.fao.org> . Accessed on 29 December 2012.

[AACC] AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF CEREAL CHEMIST. 2001. The Definition
of Dietary Fiber. Cereal Foods World. Vol 46, No 3:112-126

ABONG GO, OKOTH MW, KARURI EG, KABIRA JW, MATHOOKO FM.
2009. Nutrient contents of raw and processed products from Kenyan potato
cultivars. J.Appl.Biosci. <Available at http://www, biosciences.clewa.org>.
Accessed on 26 September 2014.

AJALA L. 2009. The effect of boiling on the nutrients and anti-nutrients in two non
conventional vegetables. Pakistan Journal of Nutrition. 8: 1430-1433.

ALCANTARA RM. 2012. The Nutritional Value, Phytochemical Components, and
Acceptability of Taro (Colocasia esculenta (L) Schott) Powder and its Selected
Processed Foods. Master’s Thesis. University of the Philippines Los Banos. P
13-50.

ALCANTARA RM, HURTADA WA, DIZON EI. 2013. The Nutritional value and
phytochemical components of taro (Colocasia esculenta (L.) Schott) powder
and its selected processed foods. J Nutr Food Sci 3:3.

ALLEN JC, CORBITT AD, MALONEY KP, MS BUTT, TRUONG VD.2012. Glycemic
index of sweet potato as affected by cooking methods. The Open Nutrition
Journal 6, 1-11.

AMIN I, LEE WY. 2005. Effect of different blanching times on antioxidant properties in
selected cruciferous vegetables. Journal of the Science of Food and Agriculture.
85: 2314-2320.

[AOAC] ASSOCIATION OF OFFICIAL ANALYTICAL CHEMISTS. 1990. Official
Methods of Analysis. 13th ed. Washington, DC. 304 p.

ANDERSON JW, BAIRD P, DAVIS RH Jr, FERRERI S, KNUDSTON M, KORAYAM.
A, WATERS V, WILLIAMS CL. 2009. Health benefits of Dietary Fiber.
Nutrition Reviews Vol 67 (4):188-205.


APRIANATA A, PURWANDARI U, WATSON B, VASILJEVIC T. 2009. Physico-
chemical properties of flours and starches from selected commercial tubers
available in Australia. International Food Research Journal. 16: 507-520.

BAHADO-SINGH PS, RILEY CK, WHEATTEY AO, LOWE HIC. 2011. Relationship
between processing method and the glycemic indices of ten sweet potato
(pomoea batatas) cultivars commonly consumed in Jamaica. J Nutr Metab.
2011 :584832

BAJAJ Y. 1988. Medicinal and Aromatic plants. Biotechnology in Agriculture and
Forestry. Berlin: Springer-Verlag.

BJORK I, GRANDFELT Y, LILJEBERG H, TOVAR J, ASP NG. 1994. Food Properties
Affecting the Digestion and Absorption of Carbohydrates. Am J clin Nutr.
593).

BLASE M. 2011. Controlling Acridity in Tannia (Xanthosoma sagittifolium (L) Schott ev
White and Purple) Tubers using Various Processing Treatments. PhD
Dissertation. University of the Philippines Los Bafios. (Unpublished).

BORDOLOI A, JASPREET S, KAUR L. 2012. In vitro digestibility of starch in cooked
potatoes as affected by guar gum: microstructural and rheological
characteristics. Food chemistry 133 (2012);1206-1213.

BROUNS F, BJORCK I, FRAYN KN, GIBBS AL, LANG V SLAMA G, WOLEVER
TMS. 2005. Glycaemic index methodology. Nutrition Research Reviews. 18,
145-171.

BURGE RM, DUENSING WJ. 1989. Processing and Dietary Fiber ingredient
applications of com bran. Cereal Foods World, 34:535-538.

CAO, G, SOFIC E, PRIOR RL. 1996. Antioxidant Capacity of Ten and Common
Vegetables. J Agric Food Chem. 44:3426-34,

CARAGAY AB. 1992. Cancer- Preventive foods and Ingredients. Food Technol.
46(4):65

CARLSON E. 2009. Saponins: Bioactivity and Potential Impact on Intestinal Health.
Master’s Thesis. The Ohio State University. Available at <http://upetd.up.ac.za>
Accessed on 5 May, 2013.

CHEEKE P, OLESZEK W, PIACENTE S. 2006. Anti-inflammatory and anti-arthritic
effects of yucca schidigera: A Review. Journal of Inflammation. 3: 6-12.


CHIPURURA B, MUCHUWETIM, MANDITSERAA F. 2010. Effects of thermal
treatment on the phenolic content and antioxidant activity of some
vegetables.Asian Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 2: 93-100.

CIMMYT (International Maize and Wheat Improvement Center) 2000. Invest in
CIMMYT, Invest in the future. Mexico p.17.

CODEX ALIMENTARIUS. 2007. Food Labeling. Sth ed. Rome: WHO.

DARRAH LL, MCCULLEN MD, ZUBER MS. 2003. Breeding, Genetics, and Seed
Com Production, Chapter 2. In: PJ White, LA Johson, eds. Com: Chemistry and
Technology. 2" Edition. American Association of Cereal Chemists, Inc. St.
Paul, Minesota, USA. 25-68p.

DE LEON SY, CHAVEZ LL, CLAUDIO VS, GUZMAN MP. 1999. Basic Foods for
Filipinos, 3" ed. Manila, Philippines: Merriam Webstore Bookstore Inc. p 7, 78.

DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE, FORESTRY AND FISHERIES, REPUBLIC OF
SOUTH AFRICA. 2011. Sweet Potato (/pomoea batatas L) Production Guide.
<www.nda.agric.za>. Accessed on 29 January 2013.

DIAZ, MM. 2013. Carbohydrates Profile of Normal Maize (Zea mays L), Quality Protein
Maize and Wheat (Triticum spp) Flour Blends for “Pan De Sal” Preparation. BS
Thesis. University of the Philippines Los Bafios (Unpublished).

DINGHRA D, MICHAEL M, RAJPUT H and PATIL RT. 2012. Dietary foods:
A review. J Food Sci Technol. 49 (3):255-266.

EDMOND JB. 1971. Sweet Potatoes: Production, Processing, and Marketing.
Connecticut. The AVI Publishing Co, Inc. 334 p.

ENGLBERGER L, AALBERSBERG W, RAVI P, BONNIN E, MARKS GC,
FITZGERALD MH, ELYMORE J. 2003. Further analyses on Micronesian
banana, taro, breadfruit and other foods for provitamin A carotenoids and
minerals.Journal of Food Composition and Analysis.16: 219-236.

FAO. 1992. Maize in Human Nutrition. Rome: WHO.

FAO. 1992. Sweet Potato. Rome: WHO.

FAO. 1990. Roots, tubers, plantains and bananas in human nutrition. Rome: WHO.

FAO. 1997. Carbohydrates in Human Nutrition. Agriculture and Consumer Protection.
Rome: WHO.


FENNEMA O. 1976. Principles of Food Science. New York: Marcel Dekker, Inc. p.792.

FRANKEL, EN. and A.. MEYER. 2000. The Problems of Using One Dimensional
Methods to Evaluate Multifunctional Food and Biological Antioxidants. J. Agric
Food Chem. 80:1925-1941.

FOSTER-POWELL K, HOLT SH, BRAND MILLER JC. 2002. International table of
glycemic index and glycemic load values:2002. AM J Clin Nutr. Jul; 76(1):5-56.

FUBARAA EP, EKPO BO, EKPETE OA. 2011. Evaluation of the effects of
processing on the mineral contents of maize (Zea mays) and groundnut (Arachus
hypogaea). Libyan Agriculture Research Center Journal Intemational. 2(3):133-
137.

FUWA H, NAKAJIMA M, HAMADA A, GLOVER DV. 1977. Comparative
Susceptibility to Amylases of Starches from Different Plant Species and Several
Single Endosperm Mutants and their Double-Mutant Combinations with Opaque-
2 Inbred Oh43 Maize. Cereal Chem. 54:230-237.

GATCHALIAN, M.M. 1989. Sensory Evaluation of Foods for Quality Assessment and
Development. College of Home Economics, UP Diliman. Pp 5, 26-51, 237.

GAZZANI G, PAPETTI A, MASSOLINI G , DAGLIA M . 1998. Anti-and Prooxidant
Activity of Water Soluble Components of Some Common Diet Vegetable and
Effect of Thermal Treatment. J Agric Food Chem. 46:4118-4122.

GIBBON BC, BRIAN L. 2005. Molecular Genetic Approaches to Developing Quality
Protein Maize. Trends in Genetics Vol. 21. Department of Plant Sciences,
University of Arizona, Tucson AZ 85721, USA.

GIBSON, N. 2010. Development of a Rapid Assessment Method for the Glycaemic
Index. Master’s Thesis. University of Pretoria.

GODDARD MS, YOUNG G, MARCUS R. 1984. The Effect of Amylose Content on
Insulin and Glucose Responses to Ingested Rice. Am J clin Nutr. 39(3): 338-392.

GONI I, GARCIA-ALONSO A, SAURA-CALIXTO F. 1997. A starch hydrolysis
procedure to estimate glycemmic index. Nutrition Research. Vol17, No.3 :427-
437.

GRANDFELT Y. 1994. Food Factors Affecting Metabolic Responses to Cereal Products.
PhD Dissertation. University of Lund: Sweden.


HAKKINEN SH, TORROREN AR. 2000. Content of flavonols and selected phenolic
acids in strawberries and Vaccinium species: influence of cultivar, cultivation
site and technique. Food Res Int. 33:517-24.

HAMBRIDGE KM. 2000. Human zinc deficiency. Journal of Nutrition. 130: $1344
1349.

HARTINGS H, FRACASSETTI M AND MOTTO M. 2012. Genetic Enhancement of
Grain Quality Related Traits in Maize. CRA-Unita di Ricera per la Maiscoltura,
Bergamo, Italy.

HASJIM J. 2009. Enzyme Digestibility of Starch and Methods to Produce Enzyme-
Resistant Starch to Improve Human Health. PhD Thesis. Iowa State University.
Available at <http://lib.dr.iastate.edwetd>. Accessed on 12 November 2014.

HERNES P, BENNER R, COWIE G, GONI M, BERGAMASCHI B, HEDGES A. 2001.
Tannin diagenesis in mangrove leaves from a tropical estuary: a novel molecular
approach. Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta. 65(18): 3109-3122.

HOTZ C, BROWN KH. 2004. Assessment of the risk of zinc deficiency in populations
and options for its control. Food Nutr Bull. 25: 99 S.

HUANG C, CHEN W, WANG C. 2007. Comparison of Taiwan paddy- and upland-
cultivated taro (Colocasia esculenta L.) cultivars for nutritive values. Food
Chemistry. 102: 250-256.

HUI YH. 1992. Encyclopedia of Food Science and Technology. Volume 3. USA: John
Wiley & Sons, Inc. p.213.

IKPEME CA, OKOI J, OSUCHUKWU NC. 2009. Functional, anti-nutritional and
sensory acceptability of taro and soybean based weaning food. African Journal
of Food Science. 3: 372-377.

INTEGRATED CROP MANAGEMENT. 2004. Com: Module and Manual. Department
of Agriculture-Bureau of Agricultural Research, Los Banos, Laguna.

JACOBS MB. 1972. The Chemistry and Technology of Food and Food Products. 2nd
ed. New York: Interscience Publishers, Inc. 1760 p.

JANE J, AO Z, DUVICK SA, WIKLUND M, YOO SH, WONG KS, GARDENER C.
2003. Structures of Amylopectin and Starch Granules: How are they synthesized.
J Appl Glycosci. 50:167-172.


JOSE-CUNILLERAS E, TAYLOR LE, HINCHCLIFF KW. 2004. Glycemic Index
of Cracked Corn, Oats Groats and Rolled Barley in Horses. The Ohio State
University, Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences, Columbus 43210; and
Otterbein College, Department of Equine Science, Westerville, OH 43081.

JENKINS DJA, THOMAS DM, WOLEVER TMS. 1981. Glycemic Index of Foods: A
Physiological Basis for Carbohydrate Exchange. Am J Clin Nutr. 34: 362-366.

JULIANO BO. 1992. Grain Quality of Philippine Rice. Mufioz Nueva Ecija, Philippines:
70pp Philipp Rice Res Inst.

KAYS SI, KAYS SE. 1998. Sweetpotato chemistry in relation to health. pp. 231-

272. In:Sweet potato Production Systems toward the a" Century. Kyushu
National Agri. Expt. Sta., Miyakonojo, Miyazaki, Japan.

KAYS SJ. 1998. Sweet Potato. The University of Georgia, Department of
Horticulture. Athens, GA.

KIM HJ, WHITE PJ. 2012. In vitro digestion rate and estimated glycemic index of
oat flours from typical and high B-glucan oat lines. J Agric Food Chem. 60. 5237-
5242.

KRIVANEK AF, H DE GROOTE, NS GUNARATNA, AO DIALLO, D FRIESEN.
2006.Breeding and disseminating quality protein maize (QPM) for Africa.

LEE W. 1999. Taro (Colocasia esculenta). Ethnobiological Leaflets:
<opensiuc.lib.siu.edu>. Accessed on 29 January 2013.

LEWU MN, PO ADEBOLA, AJ AFOLAYAN. 2010. Effect of cooking on the mineral
contents and anti-nutritional factors in seven accessions of Colocasia
esculenta(L.) Schott growing in South Africa. Journal of Food Composition and
Analysis. 23: 389-393.

LIU RH. 2004. Potential synergy of phytochemicals in cancer prevention: mechanism of
action. The Journal of Nutrition. 134(12): 3479S-3485S.

LIU Q, DONNER E, YIN Y, HUANG RL, FAN MZ. 2006 .The physicochemical
properties and in vitro digestibility of selected cereals, tubers, and legumes
grown in China. Food Chemistry 99: 470-477.

LU L, LIU S, JIANG S, WU S. 2004. Tannin inhibits HIV-1 entry by targeting GP41.
Acta Pharmacol. Sin. 25: 213-8.


LUDWIG, DS. 2007. Clinical Update: The- low- glycaemic-index diet. Comment. The
Lancet, 369. 890-892.

MAGPANTAY, RB. 2013. Lysine, Tryptophan and Amino Acid Profile of Normal
Maize (Zea mays L), Quality Protein Maize and Wheat (Triticum spp.) Flour
and Blends for “Pan De Sal” Making. BS Thesis. University of the Philippines
Los Bafios (Unpublished).

MAHAN LK, ESCOTT-STUMP S. 2004. Krause‘s Food, Nutrition & Diet Therapy.
USA: Elsevier.

MAINA GW. 1992. Evaluation of Nutritional and Sensory Quality Attributes of Sweet
Potato Chips. Master’s Thesis. University of the Philippines Los Banos
(Unpublished).

MANNER HI, TAYLOR M. 2001. Farm and Forestry Production and Marketing Profile
for Taro (Colocasia esculenta). Specialty Crops for Pacific Island Agroforestry
<http://agroforestry.net/scps>. Accessed on 10 January 2013.

MANSKE R. 1965. The Alkaloids. Chemistry and Physiology. Volume VIII. New York:
Academic Press. p.673.

MARCIANO, V.B. 2005. Processing Effects on the Total Antioxidant Activity and Total
Phenolic Contents of Saluyot Leaves. Graduate Thesis, UP at Los Bafios
(Unpublished).

MASCIO P, MURPHY ME, HELMUT S. 1991. Antioxidant Defense Systems: The Role
of Carotenoids, Tocopherols and Thiols. Am J Clin Nutr. 53:194S-200S.

MATELJAN G. 2006. World’s Healthiest Food. George Mateljan Foundation Website.

MBOFUNG CMF, ABOUBAKAR YN, NJINTANG A, ABDOU B, BAALAM F. 2006.
Physicochemical and Functional Properties of Six Varieties of Taro (Colocasia
esculenta (L.) Schoot) Flour. J. Food Tech. 4(2): 135-142.

McGEE H. 2004. On Food and Cooking: The Science and Lore of the Kitchen. New
York: Scribner. p.714.

MEPBA HD, EBOH L, BANIGO DEB. 2007. Effects of processing treatments on the
nutritive composition and consumer acceptance of some Nigerian edible leafy
vegetables. African Joumal of Food Agriculture, Nutrition and Development
HI): 1-16


MERTZ ET, BATES LS, NELSON OE. 1964. Mutant Gene that changes protein
composition and increases lysinecontent of maize endosperm. Science. 145.
279-280.

MIKO S, VALENCIA JA, FALAKI AM, 2001. Maize for Better Nutrition. Proceedings
of the National Quality Protein Maize Production Workshop. Ahmadu Bello
University. Zaria.

MILLER JB, PANG E, BRAMALL L. 1992. Rice: A high or low glycemic index food?
‘Am J Clin Nutr. 56 (6): 1034-1036.

MOHAMED R, PINEDA M, AGUILAR M. 2007. Antioxidant Capacity of Extracts
from Wild and Crop Plants of the Mediterranean Region. Journal of Food
Science. Vol 72, Nr. 1.

MORRIS A, BARNETT A, BURROWS 0. 2004. Effect of Processing on Nutrient
Content of Foods. <http://www.paho.org/English/CFNU/cfni-caj37No304-art-
3.pdf>. Accessed on 29 January 2013.

MULLER H, McALLAN A. 1992. Tannins: their biochemistry and nutritional properties.
Adv. Plant Cell Biochem. And Biotechnol. 1: 151-217.

MUSTAPHA K and GHALEM S. 2007. Effect of heat treatment on polyphenol oxidase
and peroxidase activities in Algerian stored dates. African Journal of
Biotechnology. Vol. 6 (6) 790-794.

MWENYE OJ, LABUSCHAGNE MT, HERSELMAN L, BENESI IRM. 2011. Mineral
Composition of Malawian Cocoyam (Colocassia esculenta and Xanthosoma
sagittifolium) Genotypes. J. Biol. Sci. 11 (4):331-335.

NABUBUYA A, NAMUTEBI A, BYARUHANGA Y, NARVHUS J and WICKLUND
T. 2012. Potential Use of Sweet Potato (Ipomoea batatas Lam) Varieties as
Defind by Chemical and Flour Pasting Characteristics. Food and Nutrition
Sciences. 3: 889-896. Available at <http:/www.SciRP.org/journals/fns.>
Accessed on 5 February 2013.

NAGARES NDC. 2007. Nutritional Value, Physicochemical Properties and
Acceptability of Rice (Oryza sativa L.) Composite. Master’s Thesis. University
of the Philippines Los Baiios.

NAGARES NDC, WA HURTADA, FM RODRIGUEZ, EI DIZON. 2011. Nutritional
value, physic-chemical properties and acceptability of rice (Oryza sativa L)-
com (Zea mays L.) composites. Asia Life Sciences 20 (1):199-214.


NELSON SC, ELEVITCH C. Farm and Forestry Production and Marketing Profile for
Sweet Potato (Ipomoea batatas). Specialty Crops for Pacific Island
Agroforestry <http://agroforestry.ne/scps>. 10 January 2013.

NOVUS Research, Gilbert, Arizona. <http://www.novusres.com> .Accessed 7 July 2013.

NGUYEN MER. 2011. Nutritional Value, Functional Components and Sensory Qualities
of Sweet Potato (Ipomoea batatas L.)-Com (Zea mays L.) Blends as Instant
Complementary Food. Master’s Thesis. University of the Philippines Los Bafios
(Unpublished).

NIP W, SMITH D, CASH J, HUI Y. 1994. Taro. Process Veg Sci Tech. 12: 355-87.
NOVUS Research, Gilbert, Arizona. <http://www.Novusres.com.> 25 April 2014.

OBOH G, AKINDAHUNSI A, ADEMILUYI A. 2009. Changes in polyphenols
distribution and antioxidant activity during fermentation of some underutilized
legumes. Food Sci. Technol. Int. 15: 41-46.

OLAJIDE R, AKINSOYINU AO, BABAYEMI OJ, OMOJOLA AB, ABU AO,
AFOLABI KD. 2011. Effect of processing on energy values, nutrient and anti-
nutrient components of wild Cocoyam [Colocasia esculenta (L.) Schott] Corm.
Pakistan Journal of Nutrition. 10(1): 29-34.

OJINAKA M, AKOBUNDU ENT, IWE MO. 2009. Cocoyam starch modification effects
on functional, sensory and cookies qualities. Pakistan Journal of Nutrition. 8
(5): 558-567.

OMAGE JJ, AGUBOSI OCP, BAWA GS, ONIMISI PA. 2009. Evaluation of the
Nutritive Value of Quality Protein Maize on the Growth Performance and
Carcass Characteristics of Weaner Rabbits. Pakistan Journal of Nutrition. 8(2):
106-111.

ONWUENE, IC. 1978. The tropical tuber crops. New York. John Wiley and Sons. P144-
147.

ONWUEME I. 1999. Taro Cultivation in Asia and the Pacific. Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations Publications. Bangkok, Thailand.

OXFORD DICTIONARIES. Oxford University Press.
PARR RM. 1992. Human elements: dietary intakes of trace a global literature survey

mainly for the period 1970-1991: data listing and references. International
Atomic Energy Agency, IAEA-NAHRES, Vienna.


PAYNE JH, LEY GJ, AKAU G. 1941. Processing and chemical investigations of Taro.
University of Hawaii Bulletin. 86.

PEACOCK M. 2010. Calcium metabolism in health and disease. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol.
5: $23-S30.

POLK M. 1996. Feast on Phytochemicals. AICR Newletter. Issue 51.

PONCE MA, JM SCERVINO, ERRA-BALSELLS R, OCAMPO JA, ODEAS M. 2004.
Flavonoids from shoots and roots of Trifolium repens (white clover) grown in
presence or absence of the arbuscular mychorthizal fungus Glomus
intraradices. Phtochemistry. 65(13):1925-1930.

PRASAD AS. 1991. Discovery of zine deficiency and studies in an experimental human
model. American Joumal of Clinical Nutrition. 53: 403-412.

PRASANNA BM, BASAL SK, KASSAHUN B and SINGH NN. 2001. Quality Protein
Maize. Current Science, Vol 81, No. 10.

PRIOR RL, CAO G. 2000. Antioxidant Phyotchemicals in Fruits and Vegetables: Diet
and Health Implications. HortScience, vol 35 (4).

PURSEGLOVE JW. 1968. Dicotyledons. New York: John Wiley and Sons. p.79.

PURSEGLOVE JW. 1972. Tropical Crops: Monocotyledonss. Longman Scientific and
Technical New York.

PUSHPARAJ FS, UROOJ A. 2011. Influence of processing on dietary fiber, tannin, and
in vitro protein digestibility of pearl millet. Food and Nutrition Sciences. 2:895-
900.

RECOMMENDED ENERGY and NUTRIENT INTAKES. 2002. Food and Nutrition
Research Institute, Department of Science and Technology (FNRI-DOST).
Manila, Philippines.

RECOMMENDED ENERGY and NUTRIENT INTAKES. 2014. Food and Nutrition
Research Institute, Department of Science and Technology (FNRI-DOST)
Manila, Philippines.


RECUENCO, MC. 2007. Antioxidant Activity, Total Phenolics and Total Flavonoids of
Selected Tropical Fruits. Master’s Thesis. University of the Philippines Los
Bajios.

RICCARDI G, RIVELLESE AA, GIACCO R. 2008. Role of glycemic index and
glycemic load in the healthy state, in prediabetes, and in diabetes. Am. J. Clin
Nutr. Vol. 87 no. 1 269S- 2748.

RODRIGUEZ F, MENDOZA E. 1997. Methods of Analysis for Screening Crops of
Appropriate Qualities, Vol 2, Institute of Plant Breeding (IPB), Analytical
Services Laboratory Manual. IPB-University of the Philippines Los Banos.

ROSE IM and VASANTHAKAALAM H. 2011. Comparison of the Nutrient
Composition of Four Sweet Potato Varieties Cultivated in Rwanda. Am J. Food.
Nutr. 1 (1) 34:38.

SANDSTEAD HH. 1991. Zinc deficiency: a public health problem?. American Journal
of Diseases of Children. 145: 853-859.

SANFUL RE. 2011. Organoleptic and nutritional analysis of Taro and Wheat flour
composite bread. World Journal of Dairy & Food Sciences. 6(2): 175-179.

SANTOS, A.G. 2010. Sensory Characteristics and Acceptability of Corn (Zea mays)-
Squash (Cucurbita moschata) Noodle. HNF 152 Manuscript. University of the
Philippines, Los Banos (Unpublished).

SANTOS-BUELGA C, SCALBERT A. 2000. Proanthocyanidins and tannin-like
compounds: nature, occurrence dietary intake and effects on nutrition and health.
Journal of the Science of Food and Agriculture. 80(7):1094-1117.

SHANITA SN, HASNAH H, KHOO CW. 2011. Amylose and Amylopectin in Selected
Malaysian Foods and its Relationship to Glycemic Index. Sains Malaysiana. 40
(8): 865-870.

SILLER ADCP. In Vitro Starch Digestibility and Estimated Glycemic Index of Sorghum
Products. Master's Thesis. Texas A & M_ University. Available at
<http://repository.tamu.edu>. Accessed 13 November 2014.

SMIRNOFF N. 2005. Antioxidants and Reactive Oxygen Species in Plants. Oxford, UK:
Blackwell Publishing. p.723-724.

SNOW P, O’DEA K. 1981. Factors Affecting the Rate of Hydrolysis of Starch in Food.
Am J Clin Nutr. 34:2721-2727.


SOUDY ID, DELATOUR P, GRANCHER D. 2010. Effects of traditional soaking on the
nutritional profile of taro flour (Colocasia esculenta L. Schott) produced in
Chad. Revue Méd. Vét. 161: 37-42.

SUJAK A, KOTLARZ A and STROBEL W. 2006. Composition and nutritional
evaluation of several lupin seeds. Food Chemistry. 98: 711-719.

TEKLE A. 2009. The Effect of Blend Proportion and Baking Condition on the Quality of
Cookie Made from Taro and Wheat Flour Blend. Master's Thesis. Addis Ababa
University.

TESTER RF, KARKALAS J, QI X. 2004, Starch Structure and digestibility Enzyme-
Substrate Relationship. World’s Poult Sci J. 60:185-195.

THAO HM, NOOMHORM A. 2011. Physicochemical properties of sweet potato and
mungbean starch and their blends for noodle production. J Food Process
Technol 2011, 2:1.

The Philippines Recommends for Corn. 1976. Philippine Council for Agriculture and
Resources Research. 6-7p.

TILAHUN A. 2009. Effect of Processing on some Physicochemical and Antinutritional
Factors of Taro (Colocasia esculenta (L.) Schott) Cultivars grown in Ethiopia.
Master's Thesis. Addis Ababa University.

TRINIDAD TP, MALLILLIN AC, ENCABO RR, SAGUM RS, FELIX ADR,
JULIANO BO. 2013.The Effect of Apparent Amylose Content and Dietary
Fibre on Glycemic Response of Different Varieties of Cooked and Milled
Brown Rice. Intl J Food Sci Nutr. 64 (1): 89-93.

TOVAR J, SAYAGO-AYERDI SG, PENALVER C, PAREDES-LOPEZ O and BELLO-
PEREZ LA. 2002. In vitro starch hydrolysis index and predicted glycemic index
of com tortilla, black beans (Phaseolus vulgaris L.) and Mexican “taco”. Cereal
Chem, 80 (5): 533-535.

VERENA S. 2006. The Role of Tea and Tea Flavonoids in Cardiovascular Health. Mol.
Nutri. Food res. 50:218-228.

VIVEK BS, KRIVANEK AF, PALACIOS-ROJAS N, TWUMASI-AFRIYIE S, and
DIALLO AO. 2008. Breeding Quality Protein Maize (QPM): Protocola for
Developing QPM Cultivars, Mexico, D.F. CIMMYT.

VON LOESECKE HW. 1955. Drying and Dehydration of Foods. 2™ Edition. New York,
Reinhold Publishing Corp. p15.


WEAVER CM, PEACOCK M. 2011. Calcium. Adv. Nutr. 2: 290-292.

WILSON JE, SIEMONSMA JS. 1996. Colocasia esculenta (L.) Schott In: Flach, M. &
Runaways, F. (Editors). Plant Resources of South-East Asia No. 9: Plants
yielding non seed carbohydrates. Netherlands: Backhuys Publisher. pp. 69-72.

WOLEVER TMS. 1990. Relationship between dietary fiber content and composition in
foods and the glycemic index. Am J Clin Nutr. 51:72-5.

WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION. 2007. Iron Deficiency Anemia: Assessment,
Prevention, and Control for Programme Managers. <http://whqlibdoc.who.int>
22 May 2013.

WHITNEY E, ROLFES SR. 2005. Understanding Nutrition. 10th ed. Singapore:
Wadsworth. p. 58.

WHO. 1996. Zine. In: Trace elements in human nutrition and health. World Health
Organization,Geneva.

WHO. 2007. Assessing the iron status of populations. 2nd ed. Geneva Switzerland: WHO
Press.

YAN-HWA CHU, CHAO-LIN CHANG and HSIA-FEN HSU. 2000. Flavonoid content
of several vegetables and their antioxidant activity, J Sci Food Agric 80: 561-566.

YU, GF. 2007. Phytochemicals and Nutrient Composition of Rattan Limuran (Calamus
ornatus BLUME) shoot consumed by Kanawan Aytas in Morong, Bataan
Philippines. Phd Thesis, Univeristy of the Philippines Los Banos.
