Antibacterial Activity and Pharmacodynamic Modelling of the Crude and Semi-Purified Fractions of Psidium guajava Ethanolic Leaf Extracts against Biofilm-Forming Staphylococcus epidermidis (ATCC 12228)

Leeland Anthony L. dela Luna

University of the Philippines Manila

Masters of Science in Pharmacology

July 2024

ABSTRACT

Background: Catheter related bloodstream infection (CRBSI) is considered to be
the most common cause of nosocomial bacteremia and is the third leading cause
of hospital acquired infections. Sixty-four percent (64%) of documented cases of
catheter-related bloodstream infections (CRBSI) were attributed to the presence
of coagulase-negative Staphylococcus epidermidis, which colonized the catheter.
Numerous herbal sources exhibit antimicrobial properties, including Psidium
guajava, whose leaves have been traditionally used by healers for addressing
diverse skin infections. Research has evidenced the antibacterial efficacy of crude
leaf extracts against a broad spectrum of gram-positive bacteria. Despite
substantial supportive evidence from numerous studies, no pharmaceutical
formulation based on this plant has been introduced to the market. Thus, exploring its development as a potential plant-derived antimicrobial is warranted.
Objectives: This study aimed to determine the antibacterial activity and
pharmacodynamic functions of the crude and semi-purified fractions of the
ethanolic leaf extracts of Psidium guajava on biofilm-forming Staphylococcus epidermidis (ATCC 12228).
Methods: Minimum Inhibitory Concentration (MIC) and the Minimum Bactericidal
Concentration (MBC) were determined using the agar dilution method. Time-kill
curves were determined using the time-kill assay. Pharmacodynamic functions,
specifically the maximal bacterial growth rate in the absence of antimicrobial (Ψ max), minimal bacterial growth rate at high concentrations of antimicrobial (Ψ min), hill coefficient (κ) and pharmacodynamic MIC (zMIC) were determined using the
pharmacodynamic model proposed by Regoes. Lastly, Minimum Biofilm
Eradication Concentration (MBEC) and the Minimum Biofilm Inhibitory
Concentration (MBIC) were determined using the crystal violet biomass staining assay.
Results: The Minimum Inhibitory Concentration (MIC) against S. epidermidis
(ATCC 12228) was found to be 2500 μg/mL for both the crude and the three semi-
purified fractions. The Minimum Bactericidal Concentration (MBC) was determined
for the crude and semi-purified alkaloid fraction to be 5000 μg/mL, whereas for the
semi-purified flavonoid and phenolic fraction, it is the same with its MIC, which is
2500 μg/mL. In a 24-hour time-kill assay, the crude and semi-purified alkaloid
fraction exhibited 93% inhibition of bacterial density at 1250 μg/mL, compared to
the semi-purified flavonoid and phenolic fraction, which required a concentration
of 2500 μg/mL to achieve the same level of % inhibition of bacterial density. The
crude and the three semi-purified PGELE fractions all exhibited inhibition of
bacterial density even at sub-MIC concentrations after 24-hours incubation. At MIC
concentrations and above, there was no significant difference in the rate at which
the crude and the three semi-purified PGELE fractions decreased the growth rate
of S. epidermidis during its exponential phase. Time-kill curves revealed
bacteriostatic activities for the crude and PGELE fractions, indicating a time-
dependent bacterial inhibitory effect rather than concentration-dependent against
S. epidermidis. For the pharmacodynamic functions, the growth rate of S. epidermidis in the absence of any of the treatments (Ψ  max) was determined to be 0.2557 hr-1 + 0.002. The minimal bacterial growth rate at high concentrations (Ψ
min) values of the crude and the three semi-purified PGELE fractions showed no
significant difference between them. The analysis of the Hill coefficient (κ) for the
crude and three semi-purified fractions indicated that a 1 log unit increase in their
concentration at the MIC is associated with a 6-7% reduction in the growth rate of
S. epidermidis. The pharmacodynamic MIC (zMIC) values were determined to be
3,633 g/mL for the crude and 5,740 μg/mL for the semi-purified alkaloid fraction,
closer to their respective MBC values. However, the semi-purified flavonoids and
phenolics did not reach a Ψ value of 0, making computation of their zZMIC not
possible. The dose-response curve of the crude and semi-purified PGELE
fractions exhibited a linear pattern rather than a sigmoidal one, indicating that an
increase in PGELE concentration proportionally decreased the growth rate of S.
epidermidis. Furthermore, the crude and the three semi-purified PGELE fractions
demonstrated the ability to inhibit biofilm formation at 625 μg/mL, which was four
times lower than their MIC. However, all the extracts did not possess biofilm-eradicating properties.
Conclusion: The crude and semi-purified alkaloid, flavonoid and phenolic
fractions of PGELE showed antibacterial activity. Time-kill curves revealed
bacteriostatic activities for the crude and the three PGELE fractions, indicating a
time-dependent bacterial inhibitory effect rather than concentration- dependent
effect against S. epidermidis. The dose-response curve of the crude and semi-
purified PGELE fractions exhibited a linear pattern rather than a sigmoidal one, indicating that an increase in PGELE concentration proportionally decreased the growth rate of S. epidermidis. Furthermore, the crude and semi-purified PGELE
fractions demonstrated the ability to inhibit biofilm formation but did not show biofilm- eradicating properties.

Keywords: Psidium guajava, Catheter related infections, Anti-bacterial agent,

Staphylococcus epidermidis

CHAPTER I
Introduction

Background of the Study

In the past decades, antimicrobial resistance (AMR) has become a major
issue to public health causing health crisis and persistence of diseases. AMR has
been declared as one of the top 10 global public health threats facing humanity
today. Antibiotics are steadily becoming ineffective as antimicrobial resistance
spreads worldwide leading to more difficult to treat infections and higher mortality
from said infections (WHO-Antimicrobial Resistance, 2021). The cost of AMR has
been shown to be as high as $55 billion per year overall: $20 billion in excess for
direct healthcare costs, with additional society costs for lost productivity as high as
$35 billion a year (CDC, 2013). In the Philippines, AMR is a critical, yet most often
an overlooked threat to public health. Many Filipinos have misconceptions about
the indication, use and side effects associated with antibiotic use (Robredo et.al,
2022). These misconceptions can lead to the misuse and overuse of antimicrobial
drugs, which have been identified by WHO as the main driver of the development
and spread of drug-resistant pathogens. In 2022, there was a 24.1% increase in
reported resistant isolates as compared to the 2021 report (DOH — AMR
Surveillance Program, 2022). Philippines is considered to be a low to middle
income country where patients are resource-constrained, thus significantly
affected by the high health burden caused by AMR (Robredo et.al, 2022; Ayobami

et.al, 2022).

One of the most affected areas of AMR is in Health Care Facilities, more
prominently, in hospitals (Ayobami et.al, 2022). Healthcare Acquired Infections
(HAls) have been associated with devices used in medical procedures such as
catheters or ventilators, and among the different types of HAls, one of the most
common and significant HA! would be the Catheter Related Bloodstream Infection
(CRBS!) (CDC-Types of Healthcare Acquired Infections, 2014). CRBSI is
considered to be the most common cause of nosocomial bacteremia which is often
lethal and costly. A meta-analytical study done at the John Hopkins University
stated that blood stream infections are the third leading cause of hospital acquired
infections and has an attributable mortality rate of 12% to 25%. 60% of reported
CRBSI cases were caused by microorganisms from the patient's skin that
transferred to their catheter (Soufir, 1999, Gahlot et.al, 2014, Pitiriga et.al, 2020).

Coagulase-negative staphylococci, particularly Staphylococcus epidermidis
is part of the normal microbiota of human skin and mucosa, and is one of the main
pathogens in catheter-related bloodstream infections (Becker et.al, 2007). Many
evidences support that nosocomial genotypes of S. epidermidis can colonize
medical devices and cause a substantial proportion of health care-associated
infections (Kahl et.al, 2016; Baddour et.al, 2015; Rosenthal et.al, 2012). A major
challenge in managing S. epidermidis is due to its ability to adhere and create
biofilms on indwelling medical devices, giving it resistance to available antibiotics
(Becker et.al, 2014). When compared to methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus
aureus (MRSA), little is known about the epidemiology and transmission of S.

epidermidis in healthcare settings mainly because of the lack of studies and

attention given to this pathogen (Widerstrém, 2016). In the Philippines, the top
leading reported resistant isolate found in the blood is Staphylococcus, which is
often S. epidermidis followed by Staphylococcus aureus, and third would be
Klebsiella pneumoniae (DOH — AMR Surveillance Program, 2022).

It has been reported that one of the best measures that could be used to
prevent CRBSIs is the effective use of cutaneous anti-sepsis, and preventive
strategies based on inhibiting microorganisms originating from the skin or catheter
hub from adhering to the catheter (Surapat et.al, 2020). There is no single
identified process to stop the spread of AMR. It needs to be approached in
multifaceted way, in multiple discipline due to its complex nature (Prestinaci et.al,
2015). Information dissemination and improving awareness among people is one
way to address the issue (Robredo, 2022). Another is developing new antibiotics.

Many parts of the world, especially in developing countries, believe in herbal
medicines. 70-95% of people continue to depend on plants as a source of
medicine, especially in underserved communities (Vandebroek, 2013; RBG and
Willis, 2017). Many Filipinos seek first line treatment from traditional healers, who
provides them with herbal treatments (Mallah et.al, 2021). Leading the way in the
field of herbal medicine, the National Integrated Research Program of the
Philippines (NIRPROMP), conducted initial studies on 10 scientifically validated
medicinal plant, also known as the sampung halamang gamot, which the Philippine
Department of Health fully endorsed in the 90s. Among these 10 medicinal plants,
one is shown to possess antimicrobial properties; and that is the Philippine variety

of Psidium guajava, more commonly known as “bayabas”. The leaves of Psidium

guajava is often used as an oral or skin antiseptic and has been proven in many
countries, as well as in the Philippines to possess antimicrobial properties against
a wide array of pathogens (Patel et.al, 2019; Biswas et.al, 2013; Oncho et.al, 2021;
Raj, 2020; Penecilla et.al, 2011). Presence of bioactive compounds such as
terpenoids (phenolic compounds), tannins, flavonoids, glycosides and alkaloids
have been found in the leaves of Psidium guajava, which is well known to possess
antimicrobial properties (Naseer et.al, 2018; Raj et.al, 2020, Oncho et.al, 2021).
The complex mixtures of bioactive compounds in plants can act in synergy, further
enhancing their medicinal property (Gilbert and Alves, 2003). Most often than not,
plant extracts lose their activity once they are fractionated (Inui et al., 2012; Abreu
et al., 2017).

There are many medicinal plants with antimicrobial properties, yet there are
no herbal preparations out in the market intended to be marketed as an
antimicrobial agent. With the advent of AMR and the emergence of pathogens
resistant to available antibiotics, it is imperative to find new sources of antibiotics
that are sustainable and effective. The Philippine variety of Psidium guajava may
prove to be a good source of a new antimicrobial agent that could help address
the growing threat of AMR.

In most cases, when developing rational antibiotic treatment regimens, only
the Minimum Inhibitory Concentration (MIC) is used as a pharmacodynamic
parameter to determine the effectiveness of an antibiotic against certain pathogens
(Barclay et.al, 2001). However, the quantitative relationship between the

concentration of an antimicrobial agent and the growth or death rates of bacteria

is complex. Antibiotics with similar MIC may vary greatly in terms of their
pharmacodynamic function. The pharmacodynamics of antibiotics are often
studied in vitro by using time-kill kinetics, where an exponentially growing bacteria
is exposed to varying concentrations of an antibiotic. The changes in the optical
density of viable microbial cells will then be monitored over time, thus generating
the time-kill curve (Bosswell et.al, 1999). The data generated from the time-kill
kinetics can be further used to determine the growth or death rates of bacteria at
different concentrations of the antibiotic, thus making it possible to estimate the
pharmacodynamic relationship between antibiotic concentration and bacterial
growth or death rates. Regoes et.al, 2004 developed a mathematical model based
on a Hill function - which is referred to by the author as the pharmacodynamic
function and which is also related to published Emax models - to describe the
relationship between the bacterial net growth rates and the concentrations of
antibiotics. The differences in pharmacodynamic parameters, such as the
steepness of the Hill function and the minimum bacterial net growth rate attained
at high antibiotic concentrations can be profound, thus showing the differences in
the microbiological efficacy of antibiotics with identical MICs.

Determining the pharmacodynamic function of a medicinal plants with
antimicrobial property, using a pharmacodynamic model based on Hill function, is
novel and will further describe the antimicrobial property of the said medicinal plant
in a much more comprehensive way. Thus, when determining antimicrobial
efficacy of certain agents, it would be ideal to determine not only the MIC but other

pharmacodynamic function as well.

Catheter-related bloodstream infections are the most common cause of
nosocomial bacteremia and rank as the third leading cause of hospital-acquired
infections. Given that numerous herbal sources, including Psidium guajava, exhibit
antimicrobial properties, investigating its potential as a plant-derived antimicrobial
against biofilm-forming Staphylococcus epidermidis is warranted.

Therefore, this study aimed to assess the antibacterial activity of the crude
and semi-purified fractions of the ethanolic leaf extracts of Psidium guajava against
biofilm-forming Staphylococcus epidermidis (ATCC 12228). Specifically, we
determined the minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC), minimum bactericidal
concentration (MBC), time-kill curves, and pharmacodynamic parameters such as
the maximal bacterial growth rate in the absence of antimicrobial (yw max), minimal
bacterial growth rate at high antimicrobial concentrations (wy min), Hill coefficient
(k), and pharmacodynamic MIC (zMIC). Additionally, the minimum biofilm
eradication concentration (MBEC) and minimum biofilm inhibitory concentration
(MBIC) were also evaluated. This research is part of the Psidium guajava Product
Development Project led by Dr. Cecilia C. Maramba of the Institute of Herbal

Medicine.

Statement of the Problem

Numerous studies have stated that AMR is a global threat to public health
and that despite the numerous actions done to help curb down its upward trend, it
shows no signs of decreasing anytime soon. One of the most affected areas of

AMR is in Health Care Facilities, leading to Healthcare Acquired Infections (HAI).

Emergence of AMR in HAI complicates treatment of patients and prolongs hospital
stay. Catheter Related Blood Infections (CRBSIs), which is often caused by
Staphylococcus epidermidis is considered to be the most common HAI which

causes nosocomial bacteremia. It is often lethal and costly.

There is no single identified process to stop the spread of AMR. It needs to
be approached in multifaceted way, in multiple discipline due to its complex nature.
As mentioned by WHO, one of the ways we can address AMR is by identifying and
developing new antimicrobials with novel mechanism of action. There are many
medicinal plants with antimicrobial properties, yet there are no herbal preparations
out in the market intended to be marketed as an antimicrobial agent. Many
literatures support that the Philippine variety of Psidium guajava has antimicrobial
properties and has been used traditionally for skin problems. It contains various
secondary metabolites that have been identified to possess antimicrobial
properties. These secondary metabolites may be working synergistically, leading
to its antibacterial activity. Findings of this research may be a stepping stone,
providing a foundational data in the development of a drug product from Psidium

guajava that could address CRBSIs.

Research Question
What is the antibacterial activity and pharmacodynamic functions of the
crude and semi purified fractions of the Philippine variety of Psidium guajava

Ethanolic Leaf Extracts (PGELE) compared to Vancomycin on Biofilm-Forming

Staphylococcus epidermidis (ATCC 12228) after 24 hours of growth incubation in

an in vitro experimental design?

Objectives of the Study

The general objective of this study is to determine the antibacterial activity
and pharmacodynamic functions of the crude and semi-purified Fractions of
PGELE against Biofilm-Forming Staphylococcus epidermidis (ATCC 12228).

Specifically, the study aims to:

1. Determine the Minimum Inhibitory Concentration (MIC) and the
Minimum Bactericidal Concentration (MBC) of the crude and semi-
purified Fractions of PGELE.

2. Determine the time-kill curves of the crude and semi-purified Fractions
of PGELE using time-kill assay.

3. Determine the pharmacodynamic functions of the crude and semi-
purified Fractions of PGELE using the Pharmacodynamic model
proposed by Regoes with the following parameters:

a. Maximal bacterial growth rate in the absence of antimicrobial (w
max) — hr?

b. Minimal bacterial growth rate at high concentrations of
antimicrobial (y min) - hr’

c. Hill coefficient (k)

d. Pharmacodynamic MIC (zMIC) — ug/mL

4. Determine the Minimum Biofilm Eradication Concentration (MBEC) and
the Minimum Biofilm Inhibitory Concentration (MBIC) of the crude and
semi-purified PGELE against S. epidermidis using crystal violet biomass

staining assay.

Significance of the Study

The findings of this research could prove to be significant for drug product
development (i.e. an antiseptic to be applied to the skin prior to IV insertion) of an
antimicrobial agent from PGELE, specifically addressing the prevention and
management of catheter-related bloodstream infections caused by biofilm-forming
S. epidermidis. Determining the pharmacodynamic functions of a medicinal plant
with antimicrobial property is still novel. The findings of this research can serve as
a basis for future researches wanting to comprehensively determine the
antimicrobial property of medicinal plants or when developing rational antibiotic
treatment regimens.

The use of endemic plants as an alternative source of medication gives
people a source of accessible, safe and affordable medicines. Not only that, it
empowers people in a community and give them self-reliance in managing their
illness. The use of herbal plants in the synthesis of antibiotics can help address
the growing threat of AMR since herbal medicines contain many phytochemicals,
which can mostly possess antibacterial property. Because of this, the various

phytochemicals may work synergistically with each other in killing bacteria, and the

bacteria will have difficulties in developing resistance against the various

phytochemicals that are in herbal plants.

10

CHAPTER Il
Theoretical Background
A comprehensive reading on related literature regarding antimicrobial
resistance, Catheter-related bloodstream infection (CRBSI), Staphylococcus
epidermidis, plant products as antimicrobial agents, Psidium guajava, time-kill
assay, and pharmacodynamic modelling were gathered to meet the objectives of

this research study.

Review of Related Literatures
Antimicrobial Resistance

The World Health Organization have reported how much of a global threat
AMR is to health and requires an urgent multisectoral action to help achieve the
sustainable development goals. The World Health Organization (WHO) has
identified AMR as one of the top 10 global public health treat that humanity is
facing. Drug resistant pathogens are emerging and spreading to the point where
existing antimicrobial medicines could no longer be used to treat it. The WHO has
identified that misuse and overuse of antimicrobial are the main cause and driver
in the development of drug resistant pathogen. In 2019, the WHO identified 32
antibiotics in clinical development that address the WHO list of priority pathogens,
of which only six were classified as innovative. Without effective antimicrobials, the
successful treatment of infections would be at risk (WHO — Antimicrobial
Resistance, 2019). As shown in this report, we can see how much of a problem

antimicrobial resistance truly is. Emergence of resistant strains of bacteria leads

11

to major threats to public health to the point where common infections are
becoming harder to treat, despite the fact that actions have been taken to help stop
the emergence of AMR. The search for newer antibiotics has been difficult. There
is a need to look for new sources of antibiotics.

The public health cost of AMR is difficult to estimate given that there are
only few studies addressing this issue. However, CDC conservatively estimated
that in the US, about 2 million people are affected by AMR each year and at least
23,000 die due to the infection. The European Center for Disease Prevention and
control stated in 2013 that the crude economic burden of AMR was estimated to
be at least 1.5 billion euros with more than 900 million euros corresponding to
hospital costs. Productivity loss due to absence from work or death from infection
accounted for 40% of the total estimated cost. The US CDC on the other hand in
2013 estimated the cost of AMR as $55 billion per year overall: $20 billion in excess
for direct healthcare costs, with additional society costs for lost productivity as high
as $35 billion a year. These numbers simply show how costly it is for the economy
on a global scale AMR is and should be addressed. The review also highlighted
the four antibiotic-resistant pathogens of global concern, namely: Staphylococcus
aureus, Klebsiella pneumoniae, non-typhoidal Salmonella (NTS) and
Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Resistance among these bacteria have been shown
to be significant should be addressed. Also, as reported in the review, one of the
most common causes of nosocomial infections where AMR is prominent is with
Staphylococcus infections, namely Methicillin Resistant Staphylococcus aureus

(MRSA). On a Global scale, MRSA proportions exceed 20% in all WHO regions,

12

and in some countries exceed 80% (Prestinaci et.al, 2015). The review shows how
much of a burden AMR can be to healthcare in terms of cost and how detrimental
it is to the health of people in terms of the productivity lost and lives. It is very
evident that steps must be made in order to mitigate the impact of AMR.

Dadgostar, 2019 showed that globally, issues arising from AMR and its
cause varies from country to country and is complex in nature. As to the impact of
AMR, it can be divided into 3 levels, namely impact on the patient, the healthcare
and the economy. Despite the many programs and steps being done to understand
and address AMR, there are still major gaps in knowledge and there is no clearly
understood progress to put an end to the persistent trends of AMR. This review
helps support the claims of Prestinaci, 2015 in terms of the burden of AMR to
patients, the healthcare system and the economy. It could also be noted based on
the review that there is no single identified process to stop the spread of AMR. It
needs to be approached in multifaceted way, in multiple discipline because AMR
is a very complex issue.

AMR is a problem worldwide. The next step is to determine the situation
here in the Philippines in terms of the burden AMR is causing and what are the
teported organisms causing AMR.

In the Philippines, AMR is a critical, yet most often an overlooked threat to
public health. Filipinos have cultural misconceptions and inadequate regulation
and enforcement of antibiotic use has led to the spread of AMR. According to
Barbara et.al, 2017, 31-66% of Filipinos self-medicate, especially with antibiotics.

Mallah et.al, 2021 noted that many Filipinos seek first line treatment from traditional

13

healers, who provides them with unknown herbal treatments containing suboptimal
levels of antibiotics. This in turn may enhance pathogen resistance. Lastly, 29-95%
of Filipinos have misconceptions about the indication, use and side effects
associated with antibiotic use. Thus, educating the public is a must (Robredo et.al,
2022). Many Filipinos do not understand the full impact of AMR and fail to realize
the role of the improper use of antibiotics in the emergence of AMR. Due to lack of
data, we cannot have a clear overview of the situation of AMR in the Philippines.
One thing to note on the report is that many Filipinos believe in herbal medicines.
Thus, it can be inferred that majority of Filipinos still believe in herbal treatments.
Based on the Antimicrobial Resistance Surveillance Program - Annual
Report Summary 2021, 70,951 isolates were reported and analyzed for 2021. This
is a 15.32% increase as compared to the reported 61,527 isolates in 2020. Finding
showed that among the resistant isolates, Klebsiella pneumoniae isolates had the
highest number of reports (10876 isolates). 56.57% of the K. pneumoniae isolates
were from respiratory, 14.4% from urine and 12.59% were from wounds. 59.72%
of the cases were community acquired infections. E.coli (7404 isolates),
Pseudomonas aeruginosa (6271 isolates) and Acinetobacter baumannii (4672
isolates) were the other most reported isolates. With the given data, it must be
noted that all of the reported resistant isolates can all equally be a threat to public
health. As stated in the limitations of the report, it must be noted that there may be
unreported cases of resistant isolates, thus reducing the total number of reports
for the said isolates. The report contained many information regarding the current

trends of AMR here in the Philippines. | will be referring to this article continually

14

as a source of information for this literature review when it comes to determining
the situation of AMR here in the Philippines.

It is crucial to identify in which sector of the healthcare system is most
affected by AMR and who are at risk.

One of the areas where AMR is very significant would be in health care
facilities, specifically hospitals. And the burden of AMR greatly affects healthcare-
acquired infections (HAIs). The burden of AMR in HAls is further compounded in
Low Middle-Income countries due to a lack of resources. The review reported that
pooled resistance proportions for Gram-negative pathogens were higher in low to
middle income countries than regional and national estimates from high income
countries. As stated, patients in resource-constrained regions are particularly
affected by AMR (Ayobami et.al, 2022). With the data provided, it can be
concluded that a major area of concern when it comes to AMR are infections
acquired in hospitals since it is a significant cause of mortality and morbidity, and
can have a large financial impact on the patient and the health care system. If the
pathogen causing HAls become resistant, then it becomes harder to treat and
further compounds the burden it imposes. Thus, addressing AMR in HAIs
significant. Another thing worth noting is that the Philippines is considered to be a
low to middle income country, thus it can be assumed that the health burden of
HAls caused by resistant strains is high in the Philippines.

CDC defines healthcare-acquired infections as nosocomial acquired
infections that develop upon receiving treatment at a healthcare facility such as a

hospital. It usually manifests 48 hours after admission to a hospital. HAls can be

15

associated with the devices used in medical procedures such as catheters or
ventilators. These healthcare-associated infections (HAlIs) include central
line/catheter-related bloodstream infections, catheter-associated urinary tract
infections, and ventilator-associated pneumonia. Infections may also occur at
surgery sites, known as surgical site infections (CDC - Types of Healthcare-
associated Infections, 2014). Among the different type of HAls, one of the most
common and significant HAI would most likely be the Catheter Related
Bloodstream Infection (CRBSI) since people who are hospitalized often are given
intravenous lines as an access when giving most medications (mostly peripheral
IV lines). Urinary catheters, ventilators, or surgery are utilized for specific

conditions.

Catheter-related bloodstream infection (CRBSI)

Catheter-related bloodstream infection (CRBSI) is defined as the presence
of bacteremia originating from an intravenous catheter. Based on this review, it is
considered to be the most common cause of nosocomial bacteremia which is often
lethal and costly. CRBS! accounts for 10%-20% of HAI in the UK and is associated
with increased ICU stay and mortality. It usually arises as a complication with
central venous catheterization. The use of IV catheters is often integral in the
practice of modern medicine since is used for administering fluids, nutrition, blood
products, and so on. Compared to other medical devices, Intravascular catheters
pose a greater risk for infection. The review highlighted a meta-analytical study

done at the John Hopkins University regarding blood stream infection. It stated that

16

blood stream infections are the third leading cause of hospital acquired infections
and has an attributable mortality rate of 12% to 25%. Another research mentioned
in this review stated that 60% of CRBSIs were caused by microorganisms from the
patient's skin (Soufir, 1999). CRBSIs are more common in central venous
catheters compared to peripheral venous catheter. The relative risk for bacteremia
increases by 64 times when central venous catheter is used. In preventing CRBSI,
the review showed many measures that could be used, such as: use of maximal
barrier, precautions during catheter insertion, effective cutaneous anti-sepsis, and
preventive strategies based on inhibiting micro-organisms originating from the skin
or catheter hub from adhering to the catheter (Gahlot, 2014). As seen in the review,
CRBSIs accounts for a large portion of HAls that causes high rates of mortality
and high cost of treatment. And the use of IV catheters in hospitals cannot be
avoided. It must also be noted that majority of the CRBSls are due to the use of
central venous catheter as compared to peripheral catheters. However, there are
still risks associated with the use of peripheral catheters in causing CRBSIs. One
such risk is phlebitis caused by peripheral IV catheter infection, which could
progress to CRBSI. It was also noted in the review that duration of use of peripheral
IV catheter is another major risk for CRBSIs, therefore it is advised that peripheral
IV catheters should be replaced every 72 to 96 hours (Mulugeta, 2021). Another
thing to take note of in the review is that CRBSIs are commonly caused by bacteria
found in the skin. As for the prevention of CRBSls, one thing that caught my
attention was the recommendation of effective cutaneous anti-sepsis, and

preventive strategies based on inhibiting micro-organisms originating from the skin

17

or catheter hub from adhering to the catheter. This means that an antimicrobial
agent that is effective at killing microorganism whose flora is in the skin and
microorganisms that can adhere to IV catheters is indeed needed, just as what
WHO recommended in their annual report regarding AMR; that there is a need to
develop new sources of antibiotics.

Phlebitis is a problem often associated with the use of peripheral IV
catheter, and that CRBSls is a recognized complication of phlebitis. The findings
of the research showed that developing phlebitis were twofold higher in patients
with catheter-in situ >96 hours as compared to those with catheter dwell time < 72
hours (Lulie et.al, 2021). The results of this study further strengthen the findings of
Gahlot, et.al, 2014 that showed that peripheral IV catheter can be a risk to having
CRBSI, but not as much as central IV catheters. Another thing to note is that the
length of time of IV catheter use is a risk factor for having phlebitis.

The most common pathogen identified to cause CRBSI were Pseudomonas
aeruginosa (22.0%), Klebsiella pneumoniae (16.7%), and Stenotrophomonas
maltophilia (13.4%). Catheter retention was the only risk factor identified to be
strongly associated with relapse. It was also stated in the study that in the past,
the most common pathogens of CRBSI were gram postive bacteria (coagulase-
negative staphylococci and Staphylococcus aureus). However, more recent global
data shows a shift towards gram negative bacteria such as Pseudomonas
aeruginosa, Klebsiella spp., or Acinetobacter spp. as the causative pathogen
(Surapat, 2020). It can be noted from the study that the causative agents for CRBS!

are generally gram-negative bacteria. However, the main causative agents may

18

still vary in terms of geographical location. The findings of the study were done in
Thailand. Based on the findings of the Antimicrobial Resistance Surveillance
Program - Annual Report Summary 2021 here in the Philippines, Staphylococcus,
coagulase negative, Staphylococcus aureus and Klebsiella pneumoniae ss.
pneumoniae are the top 3 most common isolates in the blood.

Based on the findings of Gahlot et.al 2014, Surapat et.al, 2020 the major
cause of CRBSIs are gram negative bacteria and staphylococcus sp. found in the
skin. Global trends show that most CRBSI are caused by gram negative bacteria.
However, the 2021 Antimicrobial Resistance Surveillance Program of the
Department of Health here in the Philippines stated that the top leading reported
resistant isolate found in the blood is still Staphylococcus, coagulase negative,
followed by Staphylococcus aureus, and third would be Klebsiella pneumoniae ss.

pneumoniae.

Staphylococcus epidermidis

Coagulase-negative staphylococci, particularly Staphylococcus
epidermidis, have been recognized as an important cause of health care-
associated infections. It is a part of the normal microbiota of human skin and
mucosa, and can become virulent once inside its host. However, many evidences
support that nosocomial genotypes of S. epidermidis can colonize patients,
medical devices and health care personnel and cause a substantial proportion of
health care-associated infections (Becker et.al, 2007). Kahl et.al, 2016, Baddour

et.al, 2015, and Rosenthal et.al, 2012 have reported that S. epidermidis is one of

19

the main pathogens in catheter-related bloodstream infections and early-onset
neonatal sepsis and is also a frequent cause of prosthetic joint infections,
prosthetic valve endocarditis, and other biomedical device-related infections. A
major challenge in managing S. epidermidis is its ability to become resistant to
antibiotic treatment. The type of infections it causes are chronic in nature, due to
its ability to adhere and create biofilms on indwelling medical devices (Becker et.al,
2014). When compared to methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA),
little is known about the epidemiology and transmission of S. epidermidis in
healthcare settings mainly because of the lack of studies and attention given to
this pathogen (Widerstrém, 2016). As stated in the article, S. epidermidis is one of
the main pathogen causing CRBSIs due to the fact that it can adhere in indwelling
medical devices like IV catheters. Its ability to become resistant through biofilm
formation makes it more difficult to manage. Despite being recognized as a
significant nosocomial pathogen for over 30 years, most attention is given to MRSA
infections.

Based on the ATCC website, Staphylococcus epidermidis (ATCC 12228) is
a freeze-dried bacteria with a strain designation of FDA strain PCI 1200. The strain
is a whole-genome sequence bacterial strain that was deposited by FDA. The
culture has applications in bioinformatics, food testing, media testing, and quality
control, and it is a microbiome standard component. It is usually stored in a
refrigerator at 2-8 degrees Celsius. Its biosafety level is 1 and it is often used as a

test system for searching for anti-biofilm agents.

20

Biofilms are produced by bacteria capable of producing polymer matrix,
which is mostly composed of polysaccharides, secreted proteins and extracellular
DNA. Ina healthcare setting, biofilms are seen to persist in the surfaces of medical
devices such as catheters, prosthetic heart valves, breast implants, pacemakers,
cerebrospinal fluid shunts, contact lenses, etc. and on patient's tissues leading to
chronic infections which prolongs the stay of patients in hospitals (Dongari-
Bagtzoglou, 2008; Percival et al., 2015). Biofilms can complicate the treatment of
certain microorganisms since biofilms protect the bacteria against the host's
immune system, increasing their virulence as well as their resistance to certain
antibiotics. The review also reports that most frequently reported strain of bacteria
that develops biofilms on the surfaces of medical devices causing healthcare issue
are Staphylococcus aureus, Staphylococcus epidermidis and Pseudomonas
aeruginosa (Hall-Stoodley et al., 2004; Shokouhfard et al., 2015; Khatoon et al.,
2018; Pakharukova et al., 2018), and about two-thirds of in-dwelling devices
related infections are caused by Staphylococcal infections (Khatoon et al., 2018).
This supports the claim that S. epidermidis is a microorganism that must be given

attention.

21

Plant Products as Antimicrobial Agents

Since ancient times, plants have always been used as a source of medicine.
Traditional healers have long used plants to treat various conditions and western
medicine is trying to duplicate their success. Despite the fact that 25-50% of
pharmaceuticals are derived from plants, none are used as antimicrobials despite
the fact that so many studies have been done on the antimicrobial properties of
various plants. Many plants have multiple secondary metabolites that have been
found in vitro to have antimicrobial properties. Example of these secondary
metabolites are tannins, terpenoids, alkaloids, phenolics, essential oils, lectins,
polyacetylenes and flavonoids (Cowan, 1999). The use of plants as a source of
antibiotics seems very practical due to the fact that many plants produce
secondary metabolites that possess antimicrobial property. Yet despite of this
knowledge, no plant based antimicrobial product is available currently in our
market. Another thing to consider here is the attitude of people towards plant
based medicinal products. As mentioned by Robredo et.al, 2022, many Filipinos
prefer and believe in the healing effects of herbal, plant-based medicines. By
having a plant based antimicrobial product, which will most likely be cheaper than
western medicine, many Filipinos might patronize such products.

Many parts of the world, especially in developing countries that have
integrated traditional plant-based medicines, believe in herbal medicines. 70-95%
of people continue to depend on plants as a source of medicine, especially in

underserved communities (Vandebroek, 2013; RBG and Willis, 2017). This further

22

supports the need for us to explore more on plant-based medicines and make them
part of the main stream treatment of certain condition.

Lamiaceae, Fabaceae and Asteraceae were the plant families that were
most represented in the various antimicrobial studies, while Cinnamomum verum,
Rosmarinus vulgaris and Thymus vulgaris were the most studied species. The
most widely used extraction method was crude extraction using methanol and
leaves were the mostly used plant tissues. The most targeted pathogen in the
reviewed studies were S.aureus. It was also noted in the review that complex
mixtures of bioactive compounds in plants can act in synergy, further enhancing
their medicinal property. It is believed that due to the diversity of compounds in
plants, they can target multiple receptors, facilitating transport to a target,
protection from degradation and modification of resistance (Gilbert and Alves,
2003). Most often than not, plant extracts lose their activity once they are
fractionated (Inui et al., 2012; Abreu et al., 2017). It was also recommended in the
review that studies regarding the interaction of plant extracts in combination with
existing antibiotics should also be studied to see if a synergistic effect will also be
observed (Chassagne et.al, 2021). Things to take note of in the review was that
the most widely use solvent for extraction of plant sample is methanol. It stands to
reason that methanol is widely used because this type of solvent is ideal when
isolating specific compounds in plants. However, methanol is toxic and thus great
precaution is needed when handling this solvent. For biological assay or for animal
studies, ethanol is more preferred as the extracting solvent for plant samples due

to the fact that it is safer than methanol and have comparable extracting property

23

(Do et.al, 2014). Leaves were often used for antimicrobial studies. Using leaves as
a source of active constituents is more sustainable than using the roots or stems
of plants since leaves can be harvested in large quantities and it can grow back
after harvesting it.

Republic Act 8423 - Traditional and Alternative Medicine Act of 1997 was
enacted to create the Philippine Institute of Traditional and Alternative Health Care
(PITAHC) in order to accelerate the development of traditional and alternative
healthcare in the Philippines. It was through this Act that the Philippine Department
of Health presented 10 scientifically validated medicinal plant, also known as the
sampung halamang gamot. They are as follows: Lagundi (Vitex negundo),
Sambong (Blumea balsamifera L.), Ampalaya (Momordica charantia L.), Garlic
(Allium sativum), Guava (Psidium guajava), Tsaang-gubat (Carmona cetusa),
Yerba-Buena (Mentha arvensis), Niyug-niyogan (Quisaualis indica), Acapulco
(Cassia alata) and Ulasimang-bato (Peperomia pellucida). Among the 10
scientifically validated medicinal plants, only guava (Psidium guajava) has been
shown to possess antimicrobial property. Often it is used as an oral or skin

antiseptic.

Psidium quajava

Psidium guajava is a plant that grows in the tropics and is widely cultivated
for its fruits. It is an evergreen shrub like tree which reaches to the height of 6 to
25 feet. It belongs to phylum Magnoliophyta, class Magnoliopsida and Myrtaceae
family (Dakappa et.al, 2013). All parts of Psidium guajava has been studied and

24

used for its medicinal property (Nwinyi et.al, 2008). This review article mentioned
many of the medicinal uses of guava, however, for the purpose of this study, | will
be focusing more on the antibacterial property of guava. Guava leaf extracts have
shown to possess antimicrobial properties. Its activity is high against gram positive
bacteria, such as S. aureus, and moderate against gram negative bacteria. Plant
leaves and bark extracted using methanol have shown to possess significantly
higher antimicrobial activity as compared to other extracting solvent as it can also
inhibit species of Bacillus and Salmonella (Joseph et.al, 2011). Aqueous and
ethanol guava leaf extracts have shown to have lower antimicrobial property when
compared to methanolic extracts (Nair 2007).

Patel et.al, 2019 tried to determine the method of extraction that will yield
better antimicrobial activity for the guava leaf extracts. Both water as well as the
hydroalcoholic extract of guava leaves could attenuate virulence of all the test
pathogens (except S. pyogenes) towards C. elegans. Hydroalcoholic extract
exhibited 10-15% better antimicrobial activity against S. aureus than the water
extract. The research further proved the traditional use of guava as a medicinal
plant. The findings of the study made sure highlighted the importance of choosing
the most appropriate extraction method and solvent in the preparation of bioactive
compounds in guava leaf extracts. Based on the findings, hydroalcoholic extracts
yielded better results as compared to aqueous extracts.

According to Biswas et.al, 2013, both the methanol and ethanolic extracts
of guava leaves showed inhibitory properties against gram positive bacteria

(Staphylococcus aureus and Bacillus cereus) but not on gram negative bacteria

25

(Escherichia coli and Salmonella enteritidis). The research also showed that
methanolic extracts have better inhibiting property than ethanolic extracts. With the
this in mind, it would seem that using methanol as an extracting solvent would yield
better results than ethanol when it comes to the antimicrobial property of guava
leaf extracts.

Based on the reviews, it can be concluded that methanolic extracts of the
guava leaves seem to produce better antimicrobial property as compared to
aqueous and ethanolic extracts, as supported by Biswas et.al, 2013. However, as
pointed out by Do et.al, 2014, ethanolic extracts are safer for human consumption
than methanolic extracts. If the future goal is for the leaf extracts to be used on a
commercial level and be utilized by humans, then it only stands to reason that
ethanolic extracts be used during the start of experimentations.

Phytochemical analysis helps in identifying the presence of various
bioactive compounds such as alkaloids, flavonoids, phenolic compounds,
terpenoids, and others in plant extracts (Mujeeb, 2014). Phytochemical analysis of
Psidium guajava showed presence of terpenoids, tannins, steroids, flavonoids,
saponins, alkaloids and highest amount of phytocompounds was seen with
methanol, ethanol and acetone extract. Total phenolic and flavonoid content was
found to be highest in acetone extract (256.32 + 4.56 mg/g GAE) and n-butanol
extract (198.64 + 1.23 mg/g RE) respectively (Raj et.al, 2020). Here we can see
that guava leaves contains terpenoids (phenolic compounds), tannins, flavonoids
and alkaloids which according to Cowan, 1999 are secondary metabolites well

known to possess antimicrobial properties.

26

Oncho et.al, 2021 showed that guava leaves from different locations may
possess different secondary metabolites. Qualitative phytochemical analysis
showed the presence of alkaloids, saponin, steroids and tannin, but the absence
of flavonoid and phlobatannin in all Babile and Gursum leaf and bark extracts
according to their findings. The research concluded that guava extracts from
different locations may vary in composition and content but still prove to be a good
source of antimicrobial agents. This study simply proves that the composition of
the same plant may vary from the geographical location they were cultivated in.
Depending where the plant will be sourced, it is important as well to first determine
their composition.

The following medicinal plants were shown to possess highly positive
activity against S. aureus, E. coli, and P. aeruginosa: Psidium guajava (guava),
Eucalyptus globulus, Mangifera indica (\ndian mango), Nasturtium officinale
(Watercress), Pterygospermum oleiferum (Moringa), Carmona retusa (Wild tea),
Citrus aurantifolia (Lemon), Citrus sinensis (Orange), Allium sativum (garlic), and
Allium cepa (onion). As for their phytochemical screening, it revealed the presence
of flavonoids, tannins, alkaloids, glucosides, saponins and steroids/terpenes in all
of the medicinal plants which all have antimicrobial properties and validates the
ethno-medicinal use of these plants. It was also noted on the study that many of
these plants have varying activities depending on certain conditions (Penecilla
et.al, 2011). This research supports the claim that in the Philippines, guava has
been used for their medicinal property and there are many studies supporting this

claim, both local and international. One thing that | noticed in this is that during the

27

preliminary phytochemical screening, the guava shoots/leaves contain all of the
secondary metabolites with antimicrobial property (flavonoids, glycosides, tannins,
terpenoids and saponins), except alkaloids. It should also be noted that the plants
used in this study came from various places in lloilo City and Province, Philippines
during the period June to September 2010.

Based on the findings of the research of Arollado et.al, 2017, it has been
shown that bioactives such as glycosides, reducing substances, flavonoids and
alkaloids found in the ethanolic extracts of five plants with known antimicrobial
activities (Psidium guajava, Premna odorata, Mimosa pudica, Allium sativum and
Zingiber officinale) can indeed inhibit the growth of microorganisms like
Escherichia coli and Staphylococcus aureus. These plants can be an alternative
source of preservative with antimicrobial and antioxidant properties. This study on
the other hand, showed that upon phytochemical screening of guava leaves from
the grounds of Fine Arts Building, University of the Philippines Diliman, it showed
the presence of glycosides, reducing substances, saponins, flavones, flavonoids
and alkaloids. There were no detected alkaloids in the guava leaves derived from
the lloilo province (Penecilla et.al, 2011). This simply supports the claim of Oncho
et.al, 2021 regarding the differences in secondary metabolites produced the same

plant in different geographical locations.

28

62

70 SaUeTOAU JED

“AE
ojueBbowjed-nue
(sue6oujed oF

pesXe
2012 yyw sed Ye)
yseubiy ey) ssessod
©} Puno} eM 3719
‘aijoyoojequpéy eu
*Apnis stu) ut pauodes

ieIK uoRDeWxe
somo} oun evidseq

snaune 's jsue6e
‘Aungpe seN64 %S1
0} PavqyKe ese
2y}oyeoieorp Ay

eu ng

“euewed elqndeosns
ie isuebe

‘fovouje olusbowjed

“foroye
djueBoujed-nue sy
BuyAyepun suisiueyoow

$} J9A9| ewiojduosueN,
2j04M un Je

Buejeg o1UeB0y}ed UO
yoye s.379 Supseber
‘uopebjsenul seyung

‘Aunoew
(Guisues wosond)
(erep Buvepun SO leusped 8
Lyeserea ‘Z eunBid) | Wim exepeyut 0) Ange
sueBol@ '9 SpJeMo} ‘AINR BAHDAIU
(seus6ofd 's | -que s)! sexo y) YoU sueBoje snipqewoused
vdeoxe) | Bros swsiueysow $804 epojewau yA
sueGowed ise} ou Ie ‘@)aissod ain jo eu ur sneune snoooo0fyders
‘sjse66ns pue sesodind euewed 21Ve60med
JPUP|peW Jo} sene9} nIpqeyOUeD seuowopnesd jsule6e peed ysurebe
enen6 jo pesxe | enen6 jo esn jeuonipen neooo0IAydeIS fesse ‘Auntpe enpayur nue sonea| "7 enefen’
H0YooIBOUpAY OU 2\y ayepiren pms ue esouiGnuse | lepow sueBele snipqeyoueed Lu} senea) erefenb wnipised Ont te | wniprse jo koeowe | ozoz
sejemsesejem og | _ ywaseud ain jo siinsex ‘seuoWiopnes wom epojeweu | (a0) Aisuep ied | jo swenxe seem evedwod | yeweuuedxa | 1 "d ‘ieled enewurauy | JW
‘enyoadsa
‘wel s'9 pue 'g ‘91 J0
(SOIWW) SuogesueoUCD
(Aynppe jevepeqque | Aoyqiyu! wn yr (ye00L
peHAIUXe suOUIPISd | — 'SG} ow sneWBoUS 201%) | pereifozueq-o jo Ssewonueus
wnue—egooAW 9g} Zw spewbews (21) Jo suled am) peyejos}
ue ‘sipruepide unuepeqookn Aynipe jeuepeqnue
snoodooyfydelg ‘seine pue (ezzzb voRReLIIp ABIX pur saneo}
iam sououeney | sroocoo|Aydeis isuee | 90.) sipUepIde 'S ‘Aunqoe jeuepeqque enefen6 whips
pajeifozueq ‘Aunyoe jeuepeqque “(ezesz Jo uoneaueauco equejod euluuelep pus ogu-u | (e 9 ‘wr yosjuemasucs | 1z0z
-9 ouawonueUe 2104 ¥Semo!) OW | _UORBIOS! UEIMIySUOD Weld feoIWeUuDd

Poliqiyxe euoUIpIsg

‘sunsow

Qo.) snaune'S

___ureisks ys04

enefenB wnipisd jo Ayedoid jerqosoiwjue ay} uo saipnys yo Avewwins }'Z a1qeL

oe

qwén
‘sque/d joupjpew euiddiiud
a
enro Wye pnd E
onnmiposww | — Bujiyy own puB J0 sopingoe jevepeqque ony-ut fe | jovewge jo soname | st0z
(ezz6z 99.1¥) snaines | waa ‘poyew uolssryp xsiG_| _enmeA DEW ‘SIN. ain eyeyseauion | tewowuedcs | 10 "0 'sIA weuepeqguy | unr
[wr o00F
enoge ennoeu}
ue “w/6rl
005 0} 0004 wo
Bem “w/6rl
001 01 005 wow,
eyBiopow “jw/6r
00} mo1eg
(ecvee DO4¥) snuugos oe
Jo-Dy-us-44-uyos pus snaooo\dang senjen SIN UY
“euaulies-g ‘@prKo Pus (9gS01 991) 006 peeprsuoo
‘euespuepewioue siuinduss snaocooidang (0q ue AyAROR
‘ouainwny ‘(@sv8 994v) (9002 leqoow ue
=P ‘euajAydokies 00z = DIW) SAI ‘spluu snadcoojdans: 1S 79) seveidoxojw j18m-96 ‘aun ‘(Z00z)
“dup | swt 00z=9IN) | (64157 DOL¥) sueMW | U1 poYreW! LoNNIPARIU Nog 1 Z9)0H
jodwoo |  susinw snaocoo\dans ‘sraccoo\dens © Bulpiocow,
sujeb_ Awe “61652 991¥) OnA-Ul e a10z
snuenies srancooidans | jenuesse jo srsfveue je2) ‘IW pepeanue fpnig | _veweuvedxs | yo “a ‘eau 22W
veunyeu renuejod
8 5} BAeNG OI
(s19y) sprouoney “eUBIQWIEW 1160 @4) JO
‘soneo| BAeN6 pos pue | uoNoUTy pue eunns
4719 @VUM J0 1UETUCD ‘ig Aansep 01sen | “(261 201) SeueBokd
ue uonisodwoo ey) | evepeq ennebouwer6
Ur seousieyp ©
20 punoy Apmis,
yBnou peshjeus
wWaroyp aiom EXE wsiveyoew! ievereqaue ai
pee ul apisoued vvonouny pue sueoseoiew eneLies
uneoenb pue eunpnas euequew ue “yeaniro peusey pal (wed 09
episoxeu-uneovenb 180 eum uondrusip | (eg9z DOL) wnEoBIOW 8 40 spBUXe plouoney jee| “enafend wnpsd)
JO yueiUco pus fq sem sneune iunvepeqowous PVE I Senjer esoy) ‘aené ouWA
uowodaid eg ing | “s pue 00 "3 U0 410M jo sulens jueisises 40 Uosyedusoo etn pus sosyed weep
‘seprsoofiB-unecienb | jo wsiveysow ein pue Srupninw 6upnpasd JBAg|TO BARNS psusuepew
quemie speaxe | — ‘AyNTDe oneisoueneg esewrper-eieq eno teuepeqque
any} Jo swueuodwico O08 pemous ‘ ‘O7dH Pue SW/SW-IS3-O71dH own pue ont ue spunodwioo | 910z
sprouoney eenig iy | snesne snoocoorAydeis ‘28W ‘OI spiovarey en Aynuep! | ewewuedes | “iM youoreis | 0
sje ueeq see
sey spenxe @an2e019
jouoneeded


TE

~WneuB ysupeBe Auo NG —T
UH “a ueWn JeBuoNs
ueREQ onnisod-weL6
eu suje6e LOE "urpey Ayunusw0s
‘ALoqiyul peounouad 0) suonED]IdWu
Pepexe easfend ‘annans snipeg ‘sneane seyiy Boudng
‘d ‘swsiueBiooju srooeoo}Aydeis se yons ue ensfonB
1801 48 e4f 0} vORIINU eyepeq Jno} suleBe SLIY wnypfse ‘siueid
Jo seauBop (er seuowopnesd eiqioudng pus enefend feupypow eurdduiud
pepexe sued om out “yoo eyoueuss3 unppssd Jo speaXe eprD ‘om Jo spesKe
30 SpesXe BpnD oun ‘sgans snioeg onIgIUt Teopuouedns jo A\Ane 1818 | _piny reamouedns jo
Jew pemous sunsey | _‘snaune sroocdoudeIS powgewi 2810 eded Jel ssoerBep | reiqo.ouwnue eu) eujuuerep ‘w'eunse | Ame wiganwauy | ero
‘semedad
Weoi6ojooeueud
Je\jo eye6yseauy pue
Burpuersuepun oynuens
sopiaoud Apmis SILL
quobe jeiqaziwque
pue snaveo g jsue6e
ww 0'F) PUB 11°940
Uvoniqiyut jo euoz Ueew
ey ese joueyNeW!
eu, ‘spBNXE WEAIOS
919 18 0} uRystses exe
‘uej2eq eaneBou-wes8
eueped enlysod-Wes8 Om)
ue ( BUOUIES eePpeG eANIsod
oueLps3) “ures pue eaneOon
nen ain jo speaKe eue}eq exneGau-wel6 URI Om UO (7
ousyje pus jousyiew omy jsuleBe siregxe Jeo} enefen6 whips)
eg ‘Aesse jevepeqnue (enofend wnyprs) even exeng Jo spe
ein jo S6uipuy 40 (BQuatod jeiqa.o1WAUE ee 4207 )0 sonIADY | LOZ
‘tn 01 Bulpyocoy 019 ULE OL ‘g'semsia reigoniwaury | Aine


ce

TOMI Menmpedser ‘ehaine erascoo nudes
“wy6 s'z pue 0 Sev9}08) IU queysisou
iwy6n zg 6q 0) punoy seyosd | (Yaw) weisisex Brupninw Srupninw jo sejej0s!
‘sem sjoesX@ snoenbe epndedAiod jeio. ysuie6e sorvey encfond eolUIp U0 ENE
pue sjjouewjeus Buyyosd WhIpB Jo SPegXe 2U8810 yee) uur eae/end
‘epndedijod pio, /e6eq SOS enung, ue snoenbe jo AyAnoe ‘OnU-U re WAP ESd Jo KAO
SUIUUB) pIOUOARL Su fesse uy ewit | 4. 98W/OIN. Teuepeqnue eienieng | ‘Iuownedes | 10H 'seuy | reemeqHuE CNA UI | dt 4
Et
‘ows wpiyn ‘suuuR) pue
‘spI0.0}s ‘sprouoney
‘88 uns spunodwioo
 envfenB
WnIp Sd Jo EIKO
FR9{ Doueyjew
‘OaJA Ul puB UORISodWCS OnA-U 118 go upe | 1402
powgew uojsnyip osip seded owes en euwexo 0) | eweuweda | “y vewuia | iigopunueagAU | JW

wos Aq peyodes se

oye Buiseaounejeieid

se upns onye

Jewjo su
Jeuyry haw Apnis ino
Ut pejensuowep BUY

upIUm joojueydwesolyp
‘onoiqque psepuEis

84 UWA pareduico
ays eve}eg eAnisod
-wei6 ysulebe eye
lepoyepeq JeGuans
pemous pesxe erelen’
‘d‘seyuny ‘sepeds
Gury pue engeBou
-weu6 ysuebe Peyo

uepDeq eANIsod


€€

UB SZ1 ‘00S=SOIN)
ssneune sna0000/AydeIS.
Buapeg anpssod-wesb
‘ouy isuje6e anne asm

easfen’

Wipes 10 SOMUATOR
Jans snyKOe ogn-u reie'N feyepeqnue

“ez6sz D9.v) sneune’s Apes UONTIIDOOIN, DIN | fevepeqque ey erenjena | ‘ieweweds | ‘seipueS J0 vogesnjens uy

souediewy ‘prouonels

Borg

Ye UoAe sisjoweey
Jo eoussqe pemous
‘esse onijoweey peseq

0ib0p yBiu © 0
39Vvd-Sas Aq
reue}eq jo

184) poyeeaau Aesse
thew 9608 Aq ures
WOW J0 UUnaL6 OLN
eniqiquy uoRBsjuEoUeD
leppyemeg whwjuw
1B PEM sHoUELNEW
‘Aexnpadses juy6w
SZ} pus sz't sem
‘speaxe snoenbe pue
‘syoUeyIeus Jo} papi0oe) eyev0y (uo1Be: seqeIeW)
(OgW) vonemuscuco weypou uy se1ds04 sneune
leppuened. woy pepeiicn suless sneoooorkyders


ve

pase

Bye}8q OUN IP 405
‘@nROBUI SEM JaLOISOIS-a
‘wy6W $z 40 SIN UR
sneune 's Uo AINE
006 pamous esnpaw
Plouonel, “(iasersous
-@) joueis pue (uukwe
-d pue -e) seuedien.a
“eunpnus plouoney
Sujpioye uonevomexs
popinB-Aesseoiq

8 UI AydesBoyewosp
wusnjoo 168


Quality Control of Bacteria

Precise characterization of test microorganisms is essential for upholding
the integrity, reproducibility, safety, and relevance of experimental investigations
within the domain of microbiology and associated fields prior to starting an
experiment (Microbiological Analysis of Food and Water, 1998). The CLSI
guideline used to do quality control on obtained bacteria is CLS| Document M100:
Performance Standards for Antimicrobial Susceptibility Testing. While primarily
focused on antimicrobial susceptibility testing, this document includes standards
for quality control and identification of bacteria to ensure accurate and reliable

testing.

MIC / MBC

The agar dilution method was used to determine both MIC and MBC. This
was the preferred method for determining the MIC and MBC of an extract that
could mask the detection of microbial growth in a liquid medium with its coloring
(Balouiri et al., 2015). PGELE produced a strong green color, hence the broth
dilution method was not advisable. Not only that, the PGELE had insoluble
particles that could interfere with spectrophotometric reading, hence the use of

agar dilution method.

Time-kill Assay
The determination of Minimum Inhibitory Concentration (MIC) and Minimum

Bactericidal Concentration (MBC) for antimicrobial agents holds theoretical

35

significance and has proven to be a valuable tool in research settings (CLSI, 1998).
However, this process is strongly influenced by numerous biological,
methodological, and technical variables, which can introduce complexities and
potential biases into the obtained results, thereby complicating their interpretation.
Consequently, evaluating the clinical applicability of MBC determination has posed
considerable challenges (Pfaller et.al, 2004). Relying solely on MIC and MBC
assessments may insufficiently characterize the antibacterial effectiveness of an
antimicrobial agent and its potential relevance in clinical contexts.

The Time-Kill Assay (TKA) has been extensively used in assessing novel
antimicrobial agents, enabling the differentiation between concentration-
dependent killing (where higher drug concentrations result in increased killing) and
time-dependent killing (where killing only continues when drug concentrations
exceed the MIC). It also offers insights into the rate and extent of bacterial
eradication over time, enabling researchers to evaluate both the bactericidal
(lethal) and bacteriostatic (growth inhibitory) effects of antimicrobial agents (CLSI,
1998). It is also a strong tool for obtaining information about the dynamic

interaction between the antimicrobial agent and the microbial strain (Pfaller, 2004).

Percent inhibition using time-kill assay
Calculating the percentage inhibition using a time-kill assay provides
valuable insights into the effectiveness of antimicrobial agents in inhibiting bacterial

growth over time. This metric allows researchers to quantitatively assess the ability

36

of the antimicrobial agent to control bacterial proliferation and determine the extent

of its inhibitory effect (Hossain, 2024).

Pharmacodynamic Modelling

While the time-kill assay provides insight into the efficacy of antimicrobial
agents by assessing their impact on microbial populations over time, their stand-
alone usefulness in predicting pathogen dynamics is limited. This limitation arises
from the non-linear correlation between bacterial killing and drug concentration
(Nielsen et al., 2013). Consequently, pharmacodynamic (PD) models are used in
conjunction with time-kill assays to characterize the sigmoidal relationship
between the (effective) drug concentration and the net growth rate of the pathogen
population (Regoes et.al, 2004).

In most cases, when developing rational antibiotic treatment regimens, only
the Minimum Inhibitory Concentration (MIC) is used as a pharmacodynamic
parameter to determine the effectiveness of an antibiotic against certain pathogens
(Barclay et.al, 2001). However, the quantitative relationship between the
concentration of an antimicrobial agent and the growth or death rates of bacteria
is complex. Antibiotics with similar MIC may vary greatly in terms of their
pharmacodynamic function. The pharmacodynamics of antibiotics are often
studied in vitro by using time-kill kinetics, where an exponentially growing bacteria
is exposed to varying concentrations of an antibiotic. The changes in the optical
density of viable microbial cells will then be monitored over time, thus generating

the time-kill curve (Bosswell et.al, 1999). The data generated from the time-kill

37

kinetics can be further used to determine the growth or death rates of bacteria at
different concentrations of the antibiotic, thus making it possible to estimate the
pharmacodynamic relationship between antibiotic concentration and bacterial
growth or death rates. Regoes et.al, 2004 developed a mathematical model based
on a Hill function - which is referred to by the author as the pharmacodynamic
function and which is also related to published Emax models - to describe the
relationship between the bacterial net growth rates and the concentrations of
antibiotics. The differences in pharmacodynamic parameters, such as the
steepness of the Hill function and the minimum bacterial net growth rate attained
at high antibiotic concentrations can be profound, thus showing the differences in

the microbiological efficacy of antibiotics with identical MICs.

MBIC / MBEC

MBIC and MBEC assays provide essential information about the
susceptibility of biofilms to antimicrobial agents. Biofilms are notoriously resistant
to traditional antibiotic treatments, and determining the minimum concentrations of
antimicrobial agents needed to inhibit biofilm formation or eradicate preformed
biofilms is critical for developing effective therapeutic strategies (Khan et.al, 2023).
A common method of assessing both MBIC and MBEC is through a crystal violet
assay. Crystal violet, a dye capable of staining both microbial cells and
extracellular matrix, was utilized as a biomarker. Its staining capacity facilitated the
assessment of biomass within biofilms. The quantification of total biofilm mass

relied on the ability of CV dye to bind to extracellular polymeric substances (EPS)

38

present in both live and dead bacterial cells. Based on literatures, the MBIC and
MBEC of a compound depends on the strain of bacteria it targets. Both the MBIC.
and MBEC can be lower or higher than the MIC of the antibacterial compound

(Seddiki et.al, 2015; Kart et.al, 2021; Cruz et.al, 2018).

Conceptual Framework

==>

SAPONINS

Figure 2.1 Conceptual framework of the study

The graphic shows that the antibacterial activity of the crude PGELE and
the semi-purified PGELE fractions are due to the bioactive compounds they
possess and is significantly influenced by the concentration of the treatment and

the length of exposure the S. epidermidis receives from these treatments.

39

Operational Definition of Terms

Psidium_gquajava Leaf Ethanolic Extracts (PGELE) — The ethanolic leaf

extracts contain the crude components of the guava leaves in a more concentrated
form.

Minimum Inhibitory Concentration (MIC) - the lowest concentration of the

crude and semi-purified fractions of PGELE which prevents visible growth of a
bacterium or bacteria after 24 hours of incubation at 37°C. Determining this is
necessary to establish the concentrations to be used for the other antibacterial
activity assays.

Minimum Bactericidal Concentration (MBC) - the lowest concentration of
the crude and semi-purified fractions of PGELE required to kill 99.9% of S.
epidermidis.

Time-Kill Kinetics Assay - assay that will be used to study the activity of the
crude and semi-purified fractions of PGELE against S. epidermidis to determine
whether or not the treatments possess bactericidal or bacteriostatic activity over
time. The assay will determine the change in the number of bacteria (in terms of
CFU/mL) and the growth (or death rate) of the bacteria in a given treatment
concentration at varying time points during 24 hours of incubation at 37°C.

Pharmacodynamic Model - it is a mathematical model based on a Hill
function developed by Regoes. For this study, it will be used to describe the
relationship between the bacterial net growth rates of S. epidermidis and the
concentrations of the crude and semi-purified fractions of PGELE. There are 4

pharmacodynamic parameters/functions that can be derived from this model:

40

Maximal bacterial growth rate (w max) — refers to the growth rate of S.

epidermidis in the absence of any of the treatments with antibacterial properties.
This will be determined using the (-) control. The unit to be used will be hr’.

Minimal bacterial growth rate (w min) — refers to the growth (or death) rate

of S. epidermidis in the presence of the highest concentration of the treatments.
The unit to be used will be hr’. The equation N(t) = No x e “ will be used to
determine both maximal and minimal bacterial growth rates.

Hill coefficient (k) - denotes the Hill slope, which describes the steepness of
the sigmoid relationship between bacterial growth and antimicrobial concentration.

Pharmacodynamic MIC (zMIC) — refers to the concentration where the
bacterial growth rate is equal to zero. The unit to be used will be g/mL.

Pharmacodynamic functions - it refers to the functional relationship between
bacterial growth (or death) and the concentration of the antibiotic. For this study,
the pharmacodynamic function of the crude and semi-purified fractions of PGELE
will be used in combination with the time-kill kinetic data to investigate its efficacy
as an antibiotic treatment. The equation that will be used to show the relationship

of the 4 pharmacodynamic function is:
K
Ch max — min) (arc)
a_\* ymin
(aac) ~ (Gmax)

Minimum Biofilm Eradication Concentration (MBEC) - is an in vitro estimate

pa) = pmax —

of the lowest antimicrobial concentrations of the crude and semi-purified fractions
of PGELE that will kill 99.9% of the S. epidermidis entrapped in a biofilm after 24

hours of incubation at 37°C.

41

Minimum Biofilm Inhibitory Concentration (MBIC) - is an in vitro estimate of

the lowest concentration of the crude and semi-purified fractions of PGELE
required to inhibit the formation of biofilms after 24 hours of incubation at 37°C.

Time-dependent Killing - refers to a characteristic where the efficacy of the
crude and semi-purified fractions of PGELE is primarily dependent on the duration
of time that the drug concentration remains above the minimum inhibitory
concentration (MIC) of S. epidermidis. For time-dependent antimicrobials, the
extent of bacterial killing is maximized when the drug concentration exceeds the
MIC for an extended period, rather than the peak concentration achieved.

Concentration-dependent_killing - refers to a characteristic where the

efficacy of the crude and semi-purified fractions of PGELE in killing or inhibiting the
growth of microorganisms is primarily influenced by the peak concentration of the
drug in the body rather than the duration of exposure.

Percent Inhibition - refers to the percentage reduction in the growth of S.
epidermidis in the presence of crude and semi-purified PGELE fractions compared
to the negative control (untreated) over a 24-hour period. It quantifies the
effectiveness of the PGELE in inhibiting S. epidermidis growth.

Bactericidal activity — refers to the ability of the crude and semi-purified
fractions of PGELE to kill bacteria. This activity is quantitatively defined as the
ability of an agent to reduce the bacterial population by 299.9% (a 3-log10
reduction) within a specified period, typically 24 hours, when compared to the initial

inoculum.

42

Bacteriostatic activity - refers to the ability of the crude and semi-purified
fractions of PGELE to inhibit the growth and replication of bacteria without
necessarily killing them. This activity is typically indicated by a substantial
reduction in the growth rate of bacteria, maintaining the bacterial population at a

steady state, but does not achieve a 299.9% reduction in viable bacterial count.

43

CHAPTER III
Methodology
Study Design
This study is an experimental, in vitro evaluation of the antibacterial activity
and pharmacodynamic functions of five dose levels of the crude and semi-purified
fractions of PGELE against Biofilm-Forming Staphylococcus epidermidis (ATCC
12228). Specifically, the minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC), the Minimum
Bactericidal Concentration (MBC), the time-kill curves, the pharmacodynamic
functions (maximal bacterial growth rate in the absence of antimicrobial (wy max),
minimal bacterial growth rate at high concentrations of antimicrobial (wy min), hill
coefficient (k) and pharmacodynamic MIC), the Minimum Biofilm Eradication
Concentration (MBEC) and the Minimum Biofilm Inhibitory Concentration (MBIC)
of the crude and semi-purified PGELE was determined against Biofilm-Forming

Staphylococcus epidermidis (ATCC 12228).

Institutional Reviews

This research was registered with the University of the Philippines — Manila
(UPM) Research Grants Administration Office (RGAO) (code RGAO-2022-0954)
and underwent review and approval process by the UPM Institutional Biosafety
and Biosecurity Committee (IBBC) with protocol number 2023-013. The biosafety
precautions followed can be seen in the appendix (Pathogen safety data sheet of

S. epidermidis). The research was submitted for ethical review by the UP-Manila

44

Review Ethics Board and was granted Exemption from Ethical Review with code

UPMREB 2023-0089-EX.

Study Site

Sample preparation (extraction) and microbiological assays were done at
the Bioanalytical & Toxicology Laboratory - 3rd floor, Salcedo Hall, Department of
Pharmacology & Toxicology, College of Medicine, University of the Philippines

Manila.

Biosafety Considerations

The Risk Group classification of S. epidermidis in both humans and animals
is Risk Group 1 (RG1), indicating that it poses the lowest risk to individuals and the
environment. It is a microorganism that is unlikely to cause disease. The
tesearcher made sure to wear lab coat, face mask and gloves at all times while
handling the S. epidermidis. All procedures that could have produced aerosols, or
involved high concentrations or large volumes, were conducted in a biological
safety cabinet (BSC). In cases where a spill could have occurred, the researcher
first allowed aerosols to settle. While wearing protective clothing, the spill was
gently covered with absorbent paper towel and applied with suitable disinfectant
(1% sodium hypochlorite), starting at the perimeter and working towards the
center. Sufficient contact time with the disinfectant was given before cleanup. All
wastes that contained or had come in contact with S. epidermidis were
decontaminated by autoclave (moist heat at 121°C, 15 psi for 30 minutes).

45

The S. epidermidis was stored in appropriately labeled leak-proof, impact-
resistant containers and was kept either in locked storage equipment or within an
area with limited access. During the conduct of the experiments, the researcher
was under the supervision of a qualified microbiologist. The researcher also
attended a short course on biosafety and biosecurity and skill enhancement with
a microbiologist. The laboratory setting needed for RG1 organisms like S.
epidermidis typically consisted of research taking place on benches without the
use of special contaminant equipment (Containment level 1 - CL1). A Biosafety
Level (BSL)-1 lab was used for this study. All of the following standard microbial
practices were done in the laboratory: (1) Mechanical pipetting only (no mouth
pipetting allowed), (2) Safe sharps handling, (3) Avoidance of splashes or
aerosols, (4) Daily decontamination of all work surfaces when work is complete,
(5) Hand washing, (6) Prohibition of food, drink, and smoking materials in the lab
setting, (7) Personal protective equipment, such as eye protection, gloves, and a
lab coat or gown, (8) Biohazard signs, and (9) Immediate decontamination after

spills.

Equipment and Materials

The following equipment and materials were used in this study: For
chemicals and reagents, Mueller Hinton agar and broth, crystal violet, USP grade
vancomycin standard, distilled water, analytical grade ethanol and normal saline
solution (NSS) was procured from a local supplier. The Staphylococcus

epidermidis ATCC 12228 was procured from CBC Link of Manila, Incorporated.

46

The bacteria arrived in two KWIK-STIK formats (with lot number 371-459-4), each
containing lyophilized S. epidermidis (ATCC 12228) pellet, ampoule of hydrating
fluid and inoculating swab. Standard laboratory equipment such as
spectrophotometer (Thermo Scientific GENESYS UV-Vis Spectrophotometer),
absorbance microplate reader (BioTek 800 TS), rotary evaporator (DLAB RE100-
Pro), incubator (Lab Companion) and autoclave (Lab Companion) was used in the
conduct of the experiment. Laboratory wares such as beakers, erlenmeyer flask,
culture plates/petri dish, amber bottles, filter paper, inoculator, Eppendorf tubes,
micropipettes, 96 well microdilution plate and test tubes were secured and was

available in the Bioanalytical & Toxicology Laboratory.

Plant Collection

Fresh Psidium guajava leaves, specifically the Philippine variety, collected
and harvested during the month of November 2023 were provided by the Institute
of Herbal Medicine (IHM). The powdered Psidium guajava leaves were obtained
from the IHM/National Integrated Research Program on Medicinal Plants
(NIRPROMP) farm at the University of the Philippines-Los Bafios with a lot number
of 231026-LB-BaC. It was stored in the laboratory at the Department of
Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of the Philippines, Manila. A sample was
brought to UP Diliman for authentication. The plant samples were washed with tap
water and air-dried for 3 days. The leaves were stored at room temperature,
shaded from sunlight. The leaves were ground to gather fine powders for extraction

and further stored in an oven at 50 degrees Celsius for 2 days to prevent molds,

47

bacteria or fungal growth in the dried leaves. The powdered leaves were then

stored in air-tight plastic bags until use.

Plant Quality Control
Organoleptic Test and Macroscopic Description

The aroma of the obtained Philippine variety of Psidium guajava leaves was
typically mild and slightly aromatic. The Psidium guajava leaves obtained showed
simple, opposite, and ovate to elliptic in shape. The leaves have a smooth texture
with slightly wavy margins and a glossy surface and typically 5-15 cm in length and
3-7 cm in width. The upper surface of the leaves was dark green, while the lower
surface was lighter green and had prominent veins. Leaf venation was pinnate,
with prominent midribs and secondary veins branching off toward the margins. The
leaves had a characteristic aroma when crushed, releasing volatile compounds

that contributed to its distinct scent.

Moisture Content

Before pulverization of the dry leaves, some of the dried samples was tested
using the Infrared moisture analyzer to determine if the sample will fit to the
specification that the average of three moisture analysis trial of the leaves must

not be more than 12%. All trials showed a moisture content of less than 10%.

48

Preparation of Crude Extract

The powdered Psidium guajava leaves were weighed and soaked in 95%
ethanol for 24 hours at room temperature, ensuring that all of the powdered leaves
were completely submerged. The solvent-to-sample ratio was 4:1. The mixture
was then filtered using Whatman filter paper, with the aid of a vacuum flask, and
the filtrates were subjected to a rotary evaporator at 50 °C to remove the ethanol.
The obtained crude extract was further subjected to water bath at 50°C until the
extract dried to insipient dryness. Further drying was done by placing the crude
extract inside a desiccator until a powdered form of the extract was recovered. The
gathered crude ethanolic extracts were referred to as Psidium guajava ethanolic
leaf extract (PGELE). The resulting powder were then stored at -18°C until further

analysis.

Preparation of the semi-purified fractions of Psidium guajava
The semi-purified fractions that were utilized in this study were phenolic
compounds, flavonoids and alkaloids and were prepared as follows:

Preparation of the semi-purified phenolic fraction from PGELE

Powdered Psidium guajava leaves were macerated using a mixture of
ethanol and water (50:50 v/v) as the solvent, in a 4:1 solvent-to-sample ratio for 24
hours. Afterwards, the extracts were filtered using Whatman filter paper No. 4, and
then the filtrates were concentrated using a rotary evaporator at 50°C. The
resulting filtrates were then dried using a freeze drier and stored at -18°C until

further analysis (Seo et al., 2014; Wakeel et al., 2019).

49

Preparation of the semi-purified flavonoid fraction from PGELE

Powdered Psidium guajava leaves were macerated using a mixture of
ethanol and water (10:90 v/v) as the solvent, in a 4:1 solvent-to-sample ratio for 24
hours. Afterwards, the extracts were filtered using Whatman filter paper No. 4, and
then the filtrates were concentrated using a rotary evaporator at 50°C. The
resulting filtrates were then dried using a freeze drier and stored at -18°C until
further analysis (Seo et al., 2014; Wakeel et al., 2019).

Preparation of the semi-purified alkaloid fraction from PGELE

Powdered Psidium guajava leaves were macerated using a mixture of
ethanol and water (90:10 v/v) as the solvent, in a 4:1 solvent-to-sample ratio for 24
hours. Afterwards, the extracts were filtered using Whatman filter paper No. 4, and
then the filtrates were concentrated using a rotary evaporator at 50°C. The
obtained semi-purified alkaloid fraction from the rotavap was further subjected to
water bath at 50°C until the semi-purified fraction dried to insipient dryness. Further
drying was done by placing the semi-purified alkaloid fraction inside a desiccator
until a powdered form of the semi-purified fraction was recovered. The resulting
powder were then stored at -18°C until further analysis (Seo et al., 2014; Wakeel

et al., 2019).

50

Figure 3.1 Flow diagram of the PGELE extraction and semi-purification

Plant Constituent Identification

A sample of the crude and semi-purified fractions of PGELE was sent to the
Terrestrial Natural Products Laboratory of the Institute of Chemistry, College of
Science, UP Diliman, Quezon City for Phytochemical Analysis. Thin layer
chromatography (TLC) was used to separate and analyze the mixtures of bioactive
compounds in the crude and semi-purified PGELE fractions. Thin Layer
Chromatography was done at the Research and Analytical Services Laboratory
(Natural Products and Peptidomics Laboratory) - GAB 202, 2nd floor, Gusaling
Andres Bonifacio, College of Arts and Sciences, University of the Philippines

Manila.

51

Quality Control

In this study, the S. epidermidis strain (ATCC 12228) underwent a series of
examinations to verify the characteristics and purity of the obtained S. epidermidis.
It was carried out using the specifications and recommended tests issued by CLSI
M100 - Performance Standards for Antimicrobial Susceptibility Testing, 34th
Edition, 2024. The tests used were gram staining, catalase test, coagulase test
and biochemical test. The growth curve of the S. epidermidis was also constructed
to establish fundamental growth parameters, enable comparative analysis, ensure
methodological integrity, and identify any irregularities in the bacteria obtained. To
teplicate the known MIC of vancomycin against S. epidermidis, the MIC was also
determined prior to use of vancomycin and S. epidermidis for subsequent assays.
Sterility controls were implemented to check for contamination. The tests were
performed in triplicate to confirm reproducibility. A negative control was included
to validate the test. The procedure used in determining the MIC was based on the

CLSI guideline and for the zMIC, the procedures used by Regoes, et.al was used.

Determination of the MIC and MBC

Preparation of stock solutions and working concentrations of the PGELE and
semi-purified fractions

Based on literature, the MIC of Psidium guajava against common gram-
Positive bacteria ranged from 625 yg/mL to 5000 yg/mL. Thus, five (5)
concentrations were prepared for the crude and the 3 semi-purified fractions
(phenolic compounds, flavonoids, and alkaloids) of PGELE using serial two-fold

$2

dilutions: 5000 pg/mL, 2500 pg/mL, 1250 pg/mL, 625 pg/mL, and 312.5 pg/mL. All
stock and working concentrations of the extracts were tested for pH and showed
a pH of 5-7. The standard treatment for S. epidermidis is usually vancomycin, with
an MIC of 1 ug/mL - 2 pg/mL (de la Maria et al., 2015; Lee et al., 2022). Hence,
the use of the positive control for this study was vancomycin at a concentration of
2 yg/mL. For the negative/vehicle/growth control, sterile water was used. To check
for microbial contamination in the crude and semi-purified fractions of PGELE, a
plant control! was utilized. Plant control was prepared at 5000 pg/mL of the crude
and the 3 semi-purified fractions, incorporated into the agar medium and incubated
without inoculum.
Preparing the inoculum

The S. epidermidis (ATCC 12228) used in the study was supplied in Kwik-
Stik formats, which included a lyophilized bacterial pellet, a hydrating fluid
reservoir, and a swab. The internal ampoule was activated to release the hydrating
fluid, saturating the lyophilized S. epidermidis pellet. The Kwik-Stik was gently
shaken to ensure thorough mixing and then left at room temperature for 15 to 30
minutes to fully rehydrate the bacterial pellet. Following rehydration, the moistened
swab was used to streak a prepared sterile nutrient agar plate to promote the
formation of isolated colonies, which were then incubated for 24 hours. After
incubation, a single colony was selected and transferred to a prepared Mueller-
Hinton broth (MHB), which was subsequently incubated for another 24 hours. This
culture served as the stock for preparing fresh, actively growing inoculums for the

microbiological assays.

53

The fresh inoculum was prepared by transferring biofilm-forming
Staphylococcus epidermidis (ATCC 12228) from the stock culture to a prepared
Mueller Hinton broth (MHB). The turbidity of the inoculum was adjusted to 0.1
©D600, which was equal to approximately 1 x 108 CFU/mL; a standard number of
bacteria for microbial testing (CLSI, 2024). The turbidity of the inoculum was
adjusted by adding more S. epidermidis (ATCC 12228) to the MHB to increase
turbidity, or further diluting the MHB by adding more MHB to reduce the turbidity.
A spectrophotometer set at 600 nm absorbance (OD600) was used to achieve an
OD600 reading of 0.1.

Determination of the MIC

The varying concentrations of the crude and 3 semi-purified fractions of
PGELE were incorporated into 20 mL of molten Mueller Hinton agar
(approximately 50°C in temperature) prior to placing the agar in petri dishes. After
the plates containing the various concentrations of PGELE cooled down, the
prepared inoculum was then streaked on each plate and incubated for 24 hours at
37 °C. The MIC endpoint was recorded as the lowest concentration of the crude
and the 3 semi-purified fractions of PGELE where no colonies of the bacteria grew
on the agar plates. All concentrations of the crude and 3 semi-purified fractions of
PGELE were replicated three (3) times.

Determination of the MBC

After determining the MIC, the plates with the MIC for the crude and 3 semi-

purified fractions of PGELE, as well as the plates with concentrations higher than

the MIC, were swabbed using a sterile single-use inoculating loop and streaked

54

onto fresh Mueller Hinton agar plates. The plates were then incubated for 24 hours
at 37 °C. The MBC endpoint was recorded as the lowest concentration of the crude
and the 3 semi-purified fractions of PGELE where no colonies of the bacteria grew

on the agar plates.

Time-Kill Assay

Five (5) concentrations were prepared for the crude and the 3 semi-purified
fractions (phenolic compounds, flavonoids, and phenols) of PGELE using serial
two-fold dilutions based on the determined MIC: 0.25 x MIC, 0.5 x MIC, MIC, 2 x
MIC, and 4 x MIC. The positive control was vancomycin at a concentration of 0.5
ug/mL (0.25 x MIC), 1 yg/mL (0.5 x MIC), 2 g/mL (MIC), 4 yg/mL (2 x MIC), and
8 ug/mL (4 x MIC). The derived pharmacodynamic functions for vancomycin, the
crude and the other 3 semi-purified fractions (phenolic compounds, flavonoids, and
alkaloids) of PGELE were then compared. For the negative/vehicle control, MHB
was used. All treatments were done in triplicates.
Determination of the % inhibition and time-kill curve

The time-kill assay was conducted using the BioTek 800 TS Microplate
reader. The assay was performed with the following settings: the temperature was
set to 37°C, and the absorbance readings were taken at a wavelength of 600 nm
(full plate reading). The assay runtime was set to 24 hours, with readings taken at
15-minute intervals, resulting in a total of 97 readouts. The plate was subjected to
constant shaking, with a frequency of 567 cycles per minute (3 mm). The

experimental setup followed a predefined plate layout as shown in figure 3.2.

55

PGELEt | PGELE1 | PGeLe1 | PGELE1 | PGELE1 | PGELES | PGELES | PGELES | PGELES | PGELES | POS BLK
625 1250 2500 5000 | 10000 625 1250 2500 5000 [40000 5 aim

woime | porme | pome | wom | ome | gmt | poimt_| nomi _|_ugimt_|_pg/mt

| pceve: | pcever | pceLer | pceLe1 | PGeLe: | PGELEs | PGELEs | PGELES | PGELEs | PGELES | Pos BLK

625 1250 2500 5000 | 10000 5 1250 2500 5000 [10000 | § vom

vom | pom. | yom | wom | gmt _| gmt | gmt _| gmt | pgimt | pgimt

| pceter | pceve | poeLer | PoeLE: | PceLe1 | PGeLes | PGELEs | PGELES | PGELES | PGELES | Pos BLK

625 4250 | 2500 5000 | 10000 | 625 1250 2500 5000 [10000 15 pam

vom | pom | pom | wom | oii | pom | git | pgimt_|pgimt_| _po/mt

PGELE2 | PGELE2 | PGELE2 | PGELE2 | PGELE2 | PGELE4 | PGELE4 | PGELE4 | PGELES | PGELES | GRT NEG
65 7250 | 2500 5000 | 10000 | 625 7250 2500 5000 | 10000

pom | yom. | wom | wom | gmt} g/m | oi} yo/mt | g/mL g/ml

PGELE2 | PGELE2 | PGELE2 | PGELE2 | PGELE2 | PGELE4 | PGELE4 | PGELE4 | PGELES | PGELES | GRT NEG
625 7250 | 2500 5000 | 10000 | 625 7250 | 2500 5000 | 10000

voime | pot | pom | pom | gmt | aime | gmt | pom | pgimt | pgimt

PGELE2 | PGELE2 | PGELE2 | PGELE2 | PGELE2 | PGELE4 | PGELE4 | PGELE4 | PGELES | PGELES | GRT NEG
625 4250 | 2500 5000 | 10000 | 625 1250 | 2500 5000 [10000

wom | yom | yom | pom | yoimt | pom | ygimt_| om | _poymt | ya/mt.

Pos Pos Pos POs POs Pos Pos POs Pos Pos Pos Pos
ne os OS fF tuaimt | tygime | tpoime | 2 ume | 2ugime | 2poime | 4yome | 4 ygime | 4 ygimt
pa/mt. pg/mL g/ml Le La Li M M us us ws

spipct | spLpci | spLpG1 | spLPG2 | sPLPG2 | sPLPG2 | sPLPG3 | sPLPG3 | sPLPG3 | SPLPG4 | SPLPG4 | SPLPG4
10000 | 10000 | 10000 | 10000 | 10000 } +0000 | 10000 | 10000 | 10000 | 10000 | 10000 | 10000

Figure 3.2 Time-Kill Assay plate layout with labels

In figure 3.2, the labels correspond to specific samples and controls utilized

in the experiment. PGELE1 denotes the crude extract, while PGELE2, PGELE3,

and PGELE4 represent the semi-purified alkaloid, flavonoid, and phenolic

fractions, respectively. POS designates the positive control (vancomycin), while

NEG denotes the negative control. GRT serves as the growth control. Additionally,

SPLPG labels are utilized for sterility controls associated with the semi-purified

PGELE fractions, where SPLPG1 corresponds to the crude extract, SPLPG2 to

the semi-purified alkaloid fraction, SPLPG3 to the semi-purified flavonoid fraction,

and SPLPG4 to the semi-purified phenolic fraction.

56

A volume of 100 uL of the freshly prepared inoculum, adjusted to 0.1
©D600, was dispensed into each designated well. Concurrently, 100 pL of the
treatment concentrations prepared in MHB was dispensed into their respective
assigned wells. Following the preparation of the 96-well plate, it was placed inside
the absorbance microplate reader and initiated according to the predetermined
experimental parameters. To generate the time-kill curve, the growth rates of S.
epidermidis post-exposure to varying treatment concentrations were monitored at
identified time points spanning from 0 to 24 hours. These data points were
subsequently plotted on a semi-logarithmic scale using Microsoft Excel. The
CFU/mL readings of S. epidermidis were plotted on the ordinate (Y axis) in a
logarithmic scale, while the corresponding time intervals were plotted on the
abscissa (X axis) in an arithmetic scale.

Percent inhibition was determined by comparing the growth of S.
epidermidis treated with the crude and semi-purified PGELE fractions and
vancomycin to the untreated (negative control) samples every 15 minutes. At each
time point, the formula used was:

CFU/mL in treated sample
% Inhibition = 1 — ————_—___—___
AE ase CFU/ml in untreated sample Ea

The percent inhibition values were then plotted against time to visualize the
antimicrobial activity of the crude and semi-purified PGELE fractions over the
duration of the assay.

Growth or mortality rates were quantified via linear regression analysis to
determine the slope of the growth curve at the log phase of the bacterial growth.

Bactericidal activity was operationally defined as achieving a reduction of 299.9%

57

in the initial bacterial population, corresponding to a 3-log10-unit decrease in
colony-forming units per milliliter (CFU/mL). Conversely, bacteriostatic activity was
interpreted as a reduction of less than 99.9% in the initial bacterial population.
Furthermore, the time-kill assay served to discriminate between concentration-
dependent killing, characterized by enhanced lethality at higher drug
concentrations, and time-dependent killing, where continued bacterial suppression
occurred only when drug concentrations exceeded the minimum inhibitory
concentration (MIC) threshold (CLSI, 1998).

The time kill assay enabled the determination of growth parameters (lag
time, log phase duration, stationary phase) and decline phase of the S. epidermidis
using the growth control. This analysis facilitated the monitoring of the activity of
the various concentrations of semi-purified PGELE fractions on S. epidermidis

growth stages (lag, exponential, stationary phase).

Conversion of OD600 to Colony Forming Units (CFUs)

The conversion of OD600 to colony forming units (CFUs) was adapted from
Rutten, 2019 and was used to convert OD600 readings to CFU/mL, which are
known to be directly relatable to cell concentration of the culture (viable cell counts
per mL). This procedure assumes that 1 bacterial cell can give rise to 1 colony.
The OD600 readings in the time-kill kinetics were converted to CFU/mL using this

conversion protocol.

58

Inoculum Preparation

Twenty-five microliter (25 wL) of freshly prepared biofilm-forming
Staphylococcus epidermidis (ATCC 12228) was added to 175 uL of Mueller Hinton
broth (MHB). It was placed in a 96-well plate and done in triplicate. It was labeled
as A1 to A3. Additionally, blank media was prepared in triplicate by adding 200 pL
to the 96-well plate, labeled as B1 to B3. The A1 to A3 samples were diluted to an
OD600 = 0.1 in 1 mL of MHB. To calculate the dilutions, the formula C1V1 = C2V2
was used, where C1 is the starting OD600, C2 is the target OD600 (which is 0.1),
V1 is the unknown volume in wL, and V2 is the final volume (1000 uL). When
calculating C1, the OD600 reading of A1 to A3 had to be subtracted by the average
OD600 of the blank (B1 to B3), then multiplied by the dilution factor (8 in this case).
After obtaining C1, the data was substituted into the formula C1V1 = C2V2 to
obtain V1, which is the volume of the culture to be used and should be diluted with
MHB to make 1000 yL. The OD600 of the prepared sample was checked to be
0.1. This served as the "starting sample."

Dilution Series of the prepared inoculum

Serial dilutions were executed for the triplicate starting samples previously
prepared. The starting sample underwent successive dilutions until achieving a
dilution factor of 8 x 10°. Throughout the dilution process, the Eppendorf tube was
subjected to agitation for 5 seconds to ensure uniform distribution of the bacterial
suspension within the Mueller Hinton Broth (MHB) medium.

Subsequently, the final three dilutions were inoculated onto Mueller Hinton

Agar plates. Specifically, 100 \L of each of the final three dilutions was aseptically

59

spread onto petri dishes containing 12 mL of Mueller Hinton Agar. These plates
were then subjected to incubation at 37 °C for a duration of 24 hours to facilitate

bacterial growth.

StartingSample Dilution 1 Dilution 2 Dilution 3 Dilution 4 Dilution 5
t ,
| MHB MHB MHB MHB MHB MHB
10 dilution f ilution
Final Dilution Factor: | 8x 104 8x 105 8x 10°
Mueller Hinton Agar Plates

Figure 3.3 Dilution sequence for the conversion of OD600 to CFU/mL
OD600 to CFU/mL Calculation

After incubating the plates, the number of colonies that formed in plates
containing fewer than 300 colonies was counted. The number of colonies counted
was then multiplied by the reciprocal of the final dilution factor on each plate to
obtain the CFU/mL. This resulting value represented the CFU/mL for every 0.1
OD600. Consequently, for every OD600 determined, the CFU/mL could also be
determined using ratio and proportion, as both OD600 and CFU/mL are directly

proportional.

60

Estimating Bacterial Growth Rates

The bacterial growth rates were calculated based on changes in viable
bacteria density (CFU/mL) during the log phase of the time-kill tests. It is assumed
that bacterial populations grow and die at a constant pace, resulting in an
exponential increase or decrease in bacterial density:

N(t)=Noxet
Where: N is bacterial density (CFU/mL)
w is bacterial growth rate (hr')
t is time (hr).

The growth rate was computed using the logarithm of the colony counts as
the coefficient of a linear regression. To accommodate for the censored data,
maximum likelihood estimation will be used (values below the limit of detection).
The geometric mean of all measurements at zero hours will be utilized as the first
data point for a given treatment. The bacterial doubling time can be determined
using the growth rate:

T (1/2) "2

The bacterial growth/death rate was determined during the exponential (log)
phase of the S. epidermidis. Two identified bacterial density (CFU/mL) points in
the log phase was used to determine the wy. The bacterial density (CFU/mL) in the
3rd and 10th hour was used since it falls within the log phase of the S. epidermidis.
Using the model proposed by Regoes, the equation used was:

_ In(X1) - In(X2)
~ t2—-t1

61

Where X71 is the first identified bacterial density in the log phase, X2 is the
2nd bacterial concentration in the log phase and t2 and t1 are the time points for
each bacterial density. A positive w indicates bacterial growth, while a negative

indicates bacterial death, which also means that growth is being inhibited.

Pharmacodynamic Modelling

For this study, the pharmacodynamic model designed by Regoes, et.al,
which is equivalent to an Emax model was used. It was used to estimate the
parameters of the pharmacodynamic function of the crude and semi-purified
PGELE fractions against S. epidermidis (ATCC 12228).

The growth/death rate (slope of the logarithm of the bacterial density as a
function of time) for every concentration of the crude and semi-purified PGELE
fraction was estimated using data from the time-kill curve, and the functional
telationship between bacterial growth (or death) and the concentration of the
antibiotic can thereby be determined. Regoes, et.al refer to this relationship as the
pharmacodynamic function. The pharmacodynamic function can then be used in
combination with time-kill data to investigate the efficacy of antibiotic treatment.

For the various treatments in this study, Microsoft Excel was used to
estimate the parameters of the pharmacodynamic model where the equation of the

line can be derived.

62

Determination of the MBIC and MBEC

MBIC and MBEC assays were performed using the broth microdilution
method in a 96-well flat bottom microplate format, adapted from the Clinical &
Laboratory Standards Institute (CLSI) guidelines. The determination of both the
MBEC and MBIC was carried out using the Crystal Violet (CV) assay.

For the MBIC and MBEC, five (5) concentrations were prepared using MHB
as diluent for the crude and the semi-purified fractions (phenolic compounds,
flavonoids and alkaloids) of PGELE using serial two-fold dilutions: 0.25 x MIC, 0.5
x MIC, MIC, 2 x MIC and 4 x MIC. The positive control used for the MBIC and
MBEC was vancomycin at 10 wg/mL (LaPlante et.al, 2009). For the
negative/vehicle control, MHB was used. All treatments were done in triplicates.
Preparing the inoculum

Fresh inoculum was prepared by transferring _ biofilm-forming
Staphylococcus epidermidis (ATCC 12228) from the stock culture to a prepared
Mueller Hinton broth. The turbidity of the inoculum was adjusted to 0.1 OD600.
Determination of the MBIC

The MBIC assay utilized the same setting used in the time-kill assay since
it also used the same spectrophotometric analysis. The MBIC assay also used the
same plate lay out with the time-kill assay, but reduced the number of wells for
vancomycin since only 1 concentration was used for the positive control (10
pg/mL).

One hundred (100) uL of the prepared inoculum (adjusted to 0.1 OD600)

was placed in each of the wells. Additionally, 100 wl of the treatment

63

concentrations in MHB was added to their respective assigned wells containing
the inoculum. The bacterial suspension and treatments were thoroughly mixed
within the plate and then incubated for 24 hours at 37 °C to facilitate biofilm
formation inside the wells. Following incubation, the bacterial culture was removed
by overturning the plate and shaking out the liquid. The wells were subsequently
washed three times with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS, pH = 7.4) to eliminate
any remaining planktonic cells. The formed biofilm in the wells was then stained
with 200 uL of 1% (w/v) crystal violet solution, and the stain was allowed to set at
toom temperature for 20 minutes. Afterward, the wells were washed three to four
times with PBS to remove excess dye. The microtiter plate was inverted and left
to air dry for several hours. Once dried, 125 uL of a 30% acetic acid solution was
added to each well to solubilize the crystal violet dye, followed by incubation for 10
minutes at room temperature to elute the stain. The absorbance of each well (de-
stained acetic acid solution) was then measured on a spectrophotometer at 600
nm using a microplate reader, with 30% acetic acid solution serving as the blank.
The optical density of the de-staining solution reflected the biofilm mass.

The mean absorbance (OD600) of the sample was calculated, and the
tesults were expressed as percentage inhibition using the equation:

OD negative control — OD s. I
Percent (%)Inhibition = ( e ~ ample) x 100
OD negative control

The crude and semi-purified PGELE fractions demonstrating % inhibition
exceeding 50% were interpreted as exhibiting strong antibiofilm (ABF) activity (++),
while those showing % inhibition between 0 and 50% were interpreted as indicating

moderate ABF activity (+). Values less than 0 (-) were interpreted as reflecting no

64

inhibition. The MBIC was identified as the minimum concentration resulting in 0%
inhibition, representing the lowest concentration effectively hindering biofilm
formation (Olawuwu et.al, 2022).
Determination of the MBEC

The step-by-step process used in determining the MBIC was also utilized
for MBEC determination. The only variation lay in allowing biofilms to develop
initially after transferring 100 pL of the prepared inoculum into each well. Plates
were then incubated at 37 °C for 24 hours before applying the various treatments.
Subsequent to incubation and biofilm formation along the well sides, the bacterial
culture was removed by overturning the plate and shaking out the liquid. Wells
were subsequently washed three times with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS, pH
= 7.4) to eliminate any remaining planktonic cells. Treatments were then dispensed
into their designated wells in the microplate to expose the biofilm, followed by
another 24-hour incubation at 37 °C. The staining procedure utilized crystal violet.
The MBEC was defined as the lowest concentration of each treatment resulting in
a 0% inhibition. It represents the lowest concentration effectively eradicating

formed biofilms.

65

—_—

Prepare
bacteria
culture

Read
absorbance

Crystal violet staining

Rinse wells to
remove
planktonic cells

—_— —_——_—>
Dispense ~ Expose
bacteria in penabate pe ) biofilm to test
microplate acter eee solution
Wash and
Wash and let dry
let dry un
_— _——
Destain with ) Stain biofilm with
acetic acid “5 erystal violet

Figure 3.4 Diagram for MBEC and MBIC determination using crystal violet assay

Statistical Analysis

One-way ANOVA was applied to analyze the significance of difference of

percent inhibition and growth rates at various time intervals, as well as the hill

slope. Post hoc Scheffe test was used to determine the pairwise significance of

difference in the means if the differences across the time intervals were statistically

significant. All the analyses were carried out using Statext version 1.8 and the

statistical significance was tested at a 1% level.

66

CHAPTER IV

Results

The MIC and MBC, the MBIC and MBEC, as well as the pharmacodynamic
function of the crude and semi-purified PGELE fractions against Staphylococcus
epidermidis (ATCC 12228) were determined in this study. Preliminary procedures
such as quality control of microorganism and quality control of the plant material

were also tested and presented.

Preliminary Testing
Thin Layer Chromatography

Based on the TLC plate observations, Psidium guajava ethanolic leaf
extract (PGELE), both the crude and semi-purified fractions displayed similar spot
characteristics (including shape, color, and Rf values), albeit with varying degrees
of intensity. The results of the TLC of the crude and semi-purified PGELE fractions

can be seen in Appendix D.

Phytochemical Analysis

Consistent with the TLC findings, the results of the phytochemical screening
indicate that the crude and semi-purified fractions of Psidium guajava ethanolic
leaf extract (PGELE) contain identical bioactive compounds, namely tannins,

terpenoids, flavonoids, cardiac glycosides and phenolic compounds (Appendix C).

67

Quality Control

The Staphylococcus epidermidis (ATCC 12228) exhibited characteristics
consistent with a gram-positive bacterium, displaying a purple hue when observed
under the microscope. Moreover, colonies are in clusters, adopting configurations
reminiscent of grape-like arrangements. The microorganism had positive results in
catalase test, and negative results in both coagulase and biochemical test. These
characteristics are consistent with S. epidermidis. The determined MIC of
vancomycin against S. epidermidis ATCC 12228 was 2 ug/mL. For the zMIC, it
was determined to be 1.79 yg/mL, which is close to the established MIC of
vancomycin against S. epidermidis. Thus, establishing the conformance of the
positive control (vancomycin) used in this study against established QC ranges of

vancomycin against S. epidermidis.

OD600 to CFU/mL Results

The determined number of colonies was 256 colonies in the plate with a
dilution factor of 20°5 (5th plate in the dilution series). It was determined that for
every 0.130 OD600 reading of the S. epidermidis, the bacterial concentration is

equal to 1.6384 x 101° CFU/mL.

Growth Control Curve
The growth curve of S. epidermidis was constructed to establish

fundamental growth parameters, enable comparative analysis, ensure

68

methodological integrity, and identify any irregularities. Figure 4.1 shows the

growth characteristics of S. epidermidis.

1800

eel

1350

900

% CFU/mL

450

Time (hours)

Figure 4.1 Staphylococcus epidermidis (ATCC12228) Growth Curve

The lag phase, during which bacterial cells undergo maturation without
active division, persisted for approximately 1-2 hour. Subsequently, the log
(exponential) phase, marked by rapid and exponential proliferation of the bacterial
culture, spanned approximately 8-10 hours, followed by the stationary phase,
where the rates of bacterial growth and death reach equilibrium, until the
completion of the experiment. In the case of the aforementioned S. epidermidis
strain, the computed growth rate is 0.2663/hr + 0.0005, corresponding to a

doubling time of 2.6 hours + 0.006.

69

Determination of MIC and MBC

Minimum Inhibitory Concentration (MIC) and Minimum Bactericidal
Concentration (MBC) of the crude and semi-purified fractions of PGELE against S.
epidermidis using 2-fold agar dilution method, ranging between 312.5 g/mL to

5000 pg/mL showed the following results (Table 4.1).

Table 4.1 MIC and MBC of the crude and semi-purified PGELE fractions against

S. epidermidis

PGELE Fraction MIC MBC MBC/MIC Ratio | Interpretation
Crude 2500 pg/mL 5000 pg/mL 2 Bactericidal
Alkaloid 2500 pg/mL 5000 pg/mL. 2 Bactericidal
Flavonoid 2500 pg/mL 2500 pg/mL i Bactericidal
Phenolics 2500 pg/mL. 2500 pg/mL. 1 Bactericidal

The Minimum Inhibitory Concentration (MIC) for the crude and semi-purified
fractions of PGELE is observed to be 2500 g/mL, showing their ability to inhibit
the growth of S. epidermidis at this concentration.

The Minimum Bactericidal Concentration (MBC) for the crude and semi-
purified alkaloid fraction was found to be 5000 yg/mL, whereas for the semi-
purified flavonoid and phenolic fractions, it was 2500 pg/mL. This suggests that
the crude and semi-purified alkaloid fractions are capable of achieving a 299.9%
reduction in the bacterial population of S. epidermidis at a concentration of 5000
g/mL after 24-hours incubation. The semi-purified flavonoid and phenolic fraction
require a concentration of 2500 yg/mL, which is equivalent to its Minimum

Inhibitory Concentration (MIC), to achieve the same bactericidal effect.

70

As illustrated in table 4.1, the crude and semi-purified PGELE fractions
exhibited bactericidal properties, with the semi-purified flavonoid and phenolic

fraction displaying the lowest MBC/MIC ratio.

71

Time-Kill Assay
Figure 4.2 shows the % inhibition of the crude and semi-purified PGELE

fractions and that of the positive control (vancomycin) against S. epidermidis

plotted against time.

Crude PGELE

| Semi-purified Flavonoid Fraction Semi-purified Phenolic Fraction

Vancomycin

Tine hours)

Figure 4.2 Percent inhibition of the crude and semi-purified PGELE Fractions

against S. epidermidis

72

Table 4.2 shows the % inhibition of the various concentrations of the crude
and semi-purified PGELE fractions, as well as the positive control - vancomycin

against S. epidermidis (ATCC 12228) after the 24-hour assay.

Table 4.2 Percent inhibition of the crude and semi-purified PGELE fractions
against S. epidermidis after 24-hour assay

Crude Alkaloid Flavonoid Phenolic
Concentration | PGELE PGELE PGELE poeiE | (") controls
. . . a ancomycin
Fraction Fraction Fraction Fraction
81.49% + | 85.03%+ | 86.00%+ | 88.97%+ | -297%+
ESL US 4.98 4.07 2.50 0.05 714
93.09% + | 9329%+ | 9085%+ | 9159%>
SLL 0.83 0.58 0.85 0.13 RO ea
a 94.56%+ | 9456%+ | 9347%+ | 93.84%+ | 9734%4
| 0.29 0.78 0.04 0.27 0.03
PAT 95.53%+ | 9443%+ | 9366%+ | 94.04%+ | 97.32%+
1.12 0.12 0.03 0.51 0.34
Fara 96.01% + | 97.38%+ | 93.34%+ | 94.33%+4 | 97.10%+
2.63 0.55 0.14 1.23 0.80

* MIC of PGELE fractions is 2500 pg/mL. MIC for vancomycin is 2 ugimL.

Even at the lowest tested concentration of the crude and semi-purified
PGELE fractions, they all inhibited the growth of S. epidermidis significantly, as
compared to vancomycin. The maximum % inhibition of the crude and semi-
purified PGELE fractions, regardless of the concentration, peaked at around 4 to
6 hours, and remained relatively constant throughout the 24-hour assay period.
Vancomycin showed its inhibiting action on S. epidermidis at MIC (2 pg/mL) and
above its MIC (2 x MIC and 4 x MIC). The crude and alkaloid fractions showed
inhibition of S. epidermidis growth at a concentration of 1250 pg/mL (0.5 x MIC),
which is 2-fold lower than the determined MIC from the agar dilution method. On
the other hand, the semi-purified flavonoid and phenolic fractions showed inhibition

of S. epidermidis growth starting at concentrations of 2500 g/mL (MIC) and higher

73

(2 x MIC and 4 x MIC), consistent with the determined MIC from the agar dilution
method.

Statistical analysis revealed that there was no significant difference in the
% inhibition of S. epidermidis growth after 24 hours incubation between the crude
and semi-purified fractions of PGELE at 0.25 x MIC (p = .067), at MIC (p = .352),
at 2 x MIC (p = .030), and at 4 x MIC (p = .042). However, at 0.5 x MIC, the crude
and semi-purified alkaloid fractions significantly inhibited S. epidermidis growth
after 24 hours incubation compared to the semi-purified flavonoid fraction (p =
.005). Additionally, at 0.5 x MIC, no significant differences were observed in the %
inhibition between the crude and semi-purified phenolic fractions (p = .131),
between the semi-purified alkaloid and phenolic fractions (p = .081), and between
the semi-purified flavonoid and phenolic fractions (p = .612) after 24 hours
incubation.

When the crude and semi-purified PGELE fractions were compared to the
positive control vancomycin, the following was observed: the crude and semi-
purified PGELE fractions significantly inhibited the growth of S. epidermidis
compared to vancomycin at 0.25 x MIC (p < .001) and 0.5 x MIC (p < .001) after
24 hours incubation. However, vancomycin significantly inhibited the growth of S.
epidermidis compared to the crude and semi-purified PGELE fractions at MIC (p <
.001) after 24 hours incubation. At 2 x MIC, vancomycin significantly inhibited S.
epidermidis growth after 24 hours incubation compared to the semi-purified
alkaloid, flavonoid, and phenolic PGELE fractions (p < .001). However, there was

no significant difference in the % inhibition between vancomycin and the crude

74

PGELE fraction at 2 x MIC (p = .044) after 24 hours incubation. At 4 x MIC, there
was no significant difference in the % inhibition between vancomycin and the crude

and semi-purified PGELE fractions (p = .019) after 24 hours incubation.

Time Kill Curve
Figure 4.3 illustrates the time-kill curves of the crude and semi-purified
PGELE fractions against S. epidermidis (ATCC 12228) using 2-fold dilution of the

concentrations of the crude and semi-purified PGELE fractions.

Figure 4.3 Time-kill curves of the crude and semi-purified PGELE Fractions

against S. epidermidis.

75

The black line represents the growth curve of the negative control (i.e.
microbial growth in the absence of antimicrobial agents), while the red line signifies
the time-kill curve of the MIC of the crude and semi-purified PGELE fractions, and
the orange line represents the time-kill curve of the MIC of vancomycin (2 g/mL).
Notably, the crude and semi-purified PGELE fractions hindered/slowed down the
growth of S. epidermidis during its lag phase, even at the lowest concentration
tested (625 jig/mL). Complete inhibition of growth was observed at a concentration
of 2500 g/mL for the crude and semi-purified PGELE fraction, consistent with the
MIC determined via agar dilution. It is noteworthy that the time-kill curves for the
semi-purified flavonoid and phenolic PGELE fractions at MIC exhibited no change
in initial bacterial concentration (CFU/mL) after 24 hours, even at concentrations
exceeding 2 times and 4 times the MIC (5000 wg/mL and 10000 yg/mL,
respectively). This indicates a time-dependent killing mechanism for both fractions.
Conversely, the crude and semi-purified alkaloid fractions of PGELE exhibited a
decline in bacterial concentration proportional to increasing concentrations,
indicative of a potential concentration-dependent killing mechanism for these
fractions.

In this study, the bacterial growth/death rate was determined during the
exponential (log) phase of the S. epidermidis. Table 4.3 show the effect of the
various concentrations of the crude and semi-purified PGELE extracts, as well as
the positive control-vancomycin against the growth rate of S. epidermidis at its log

phase of growth.

76

Table 4.3 Growth / death rate of S. epidermidis during its log phase after

exposure to the crude and semi-purified PGELE fractions

Crude Alkaloid Flavonoid Phenolic
Concentration} PGELE PGELE PGELE PcELE | {*) Control -
5 5 A ycin
Fraction Fraction Fraction Fraction
0.25 x MIC 0.0507/hr 0.0513/hr 0.0502/hr 0.0459/hr 0.2812/hr
: + 0.02 +0.00 + 0.00 +0.00 +0.01
0.5x MIC 0.0129/hr 0.0133/hr 0.0242/hr 0.0250/hr 0.2219/hr
: +0.01 + 0.00 + 0.00 + 0.00 + 0.02
mic 0.0035/hr 0,.0078/hr 0.0077 0.0068/hr -0.0427/hr
+ 0.00 + 0.00 + 0.00 + 0.00 +0.01
2x MIC -0.0030/hr 0.0052/hr 0.0082/hr 0.0149/hr -0.0364/hr
+0.01 + 0.00 + 0.00 +0.02 + 0.00
4x Mic -0.0168/hr -0.0214/hr 0.0124/hr 0.0098/hr -0.0324/hr
+0.05 + 0.01 + 0.00 + 0.01 + 0.01

It can be observed from the table (as well as in figure 4.3) that as the
concentration of the crude and semi-purified PGELE fractions increases, the
growth rate of the S. epidermidis starts to slow down. Statistical analysis showed
that there was no significant difference in the reduction of the growth rate of S.
epidermidis during its log phase after exposure to the crude and semi-purified
PGELE fractions at 0.25 x MIC (p = .932), 0.5 x MIC (p = .014), MIC (p = .273), 2

x MIC (p = .275) and at 4 x MIC (p = .217).

When the crude and semi-purified PGELE fractions were compared to the
positive control vancomycin, the following was observed: the crude and semi-
purified PGELE fractions significantly reduced the growth rate of S. epidermidis
during its log phase as compared to vancomycin at 0.25 x MIC (p < .007) and at
0.5 x MIC (p < .007). However, at MIC, vancomycin significantly reduced the
growth rate of S. epidermidis during its log phase as compared to the crude and
semi-purified PGELE fractions (p < .001). At 2 x MIC, vancomycin significantly

reduced the growth rate of S. epidermidis during its log phase as compared to the

77

semi-purified alkaloid, flavonoid and phenolic PGELE fractions (p <.007), but there
was no significant difference between the crude PGELE fraction and vancomycin
at 2 x MIC (p = .036). At 4 x MIC, there was no significant difference in the growth
rate reduction of S. epidermidis during its log phase when exposed to the crude

and semi-purified PGELE fractions and vancomycin (p = .122).

78

Pharmacodynamic Modelling

Using the data derived from the time-kill assay (growth and death rate), the
pharmacodynamic function was then fitted to the estimated bacterial net growth
tates shown in Figure 4.4, and estimates of the four parameters: y max (growth
rate of the bacterial population in the absence of antibacterial agent), y min (growth
tate of the bacterial population at high antibacterial concentrations), « (Hill
coefficient), and ZMIC (Pharmacodynamic MIC) were obtained as shown on table

4.4.

Figure 4.4 Dose-response curve of the crude and semi-purified PGELE fractions

79

Table 4.4 Estimated parameters of pharmacodynamic functions of the crude and

semi-purified PGELE fractions against S. epidermidis

Treatment w max ymin kK zMIC MIc*
Crude 0.2557 hr?+ | -0.0168 hr?+ -0.0679 + 3633.03 2500
Fraction 0.002 0.051 0.019 g/mL pg/mL
Alkaloid 0.2557 hr?+ | -0.0214 hr?+ -0.0688 + 5739.65 2500
Fraction 0.002 0.013 0.554 pg/mL. g/mL
Flavonoid | 0.2557 hr?+ | 0.0124 hr’ + -0.0607 + : 2500
Fraction 0.002 0.001 0.001 undetermined | aim
Phenolic | 0.2557hr’+ | 0.0098 hr?+ -0.0627 + : 2500
Fraction 0.002 | 0.007 0.002 undetermined | aim
| 0.2557 hr'+ | -0.0324 hr'+ -0.9702 + 2
Vancomycin 0.002 0.009 0.041 1.79 pgImML | aim

MIC* is the MIC derived from the 2-fold agar dilution method

The w max, which is the growth rate of S. epidermidis in the absence of any
of the treatments was determined to be 0.2557 hr’ + 0.002. The w min on the other
hand represents the minimal bacterial growth rate observed at high antimicrobial
concentrations, which is 4 x MIC for this study. Statistical analysis revealed no
significant differences in the inhibition of bacterial growth rates at the highest
treatment concentration (4 x MIC) among the crude extract and the semi-purified
PGELE fractions against S. epidermidis (p = .218). When compared to
vancomycin, it showed that there were no significant differences in the inhibition
rates of bacterial growth at the highest treatment concentration (4 x MIC) among
the crude extract, the semi-purified PGELE fractions and vancomycin against S.
epidermidis (p = .123).

The Hill coefficient k is a measure of how strongly the death rate changes
in response to changes in the concentration of the antibiotic around the MIC.
Statistical analysis showed that there was no significant difference in the x of the

crude and semi-purified PGELE fractions (p = 0.5154) indicating that the change

80

in the death rate of S. epidermidis as the crude and semi-purified PGELE fractions’
concentration increases is similar. However, when the x of the crude and semi-
purified PGELE fractions was compared to the k of vancomycin, significant
difference was observed (p < .007), indicating a significantly stronger change in
the death rate of S. epidermidis as vancomycin concentration increases as
compared to the crude and semi-purified PGELE fractions. By using the k values
of the crude and semi-purified PGELE fractions, it becomes possible to ascertain
the percentage reduction in bacterial growth per 1 log unit increase in their
concentration at the MIC. Regarding the semi-purified flavonoid and phenolic
fractions, it is deducible that with every 1 log unit rise in their concentration at the
MIC, there is a corresponding decrease in S. epidermidis growth rate by 6.07%
and 6.27% per hour, respectively. Similarly, in the case of the crude and semi-
purified alkaloid fractions, each 1 log unit augmentation in their concentration at
the MIC correlates with a reduction in S. epidermidis growth rate by 6.79% and
6.88% per hour, respectively. For the positive control, each 1 log unit augmentation
in its concentration at the MIC correlates with a reduction in S. epidermidis growth
rate by 97.02 %.

As seen in figure 4.4, the dose-response relationship between the log
concentration and rate of bacterial growth for the crude and semi-purified PGELE
fraction appears to be linear, while for vancomycin, it appears to be sigmoidal.

The ZMIC is the concentration in which the bacterial growth rate is 0 (w =
0). Among the crude and semi-purified PGELE fractions, the crude fraction had the

lowest zMIC of 3633.03 pg/mL, followed by the semi-purified alkaloid fraction

81

which is 5739.65 yg/mL. For the semi-purified flavonoid and phenolic fraction, the
ZMIC could not be determined since the bacterial growth rate (wy) did not reach 0
for both of them. The computed ZMIC of vancomycin (1.79 g/mL) is similar to the
claimed MIC (2 g/mL) of vancomycin against S. epidermidis. This therefore

confirmed that the vancomycin used in this study is of good quality.

82

Determination of MBIC and MBEC

Minimum Biofilm Inhibitory Concentration (MBIC)

Table 4.5 shows the percent Biofilm Inhibition of the crude and semi-purified
PGELE fractions, as well as the positive control-vancomycin. As shown in table
4.5, even at sub-MIC concentrations (4-fold below MIC), the crude and semi-
purified PGELE fractions inhibited the formation of biofilm. Among the semi-
purified PGELE fraction, the semi-purified phenolic fraction yielded a strong
antibiofilm activity, while the semi-purified alkaloid fraction yielded a strong

antibiofilm activity at MIC and 2 x MIC.

Table 4.5 Percent biofilm Inhibition of the crude and semi-purified PGELE

fractions against S. epidermidis after 24-hour exposure

Crude Alkaloid Flavonoid Phenolic Positive
Concentration PGELE PGELE PGELE PGELE Control —
Fraction Fraction Fraction | Fraction Vancomycin
35.03%+ | 49.26%+ | 35.37%+ | 5245%+
0.25 x MIC 11.5 11 6.8 1.8 NIA
(+) (+) (+) (a)
45.20 %+ 44.00 %+ 39.54 % + 56.40 % +
0.5 x MIC 8.8 15.2 44 1.4 NIA
(+) (+) (+) +4
34.23%+ | 5069%+ | 35.14%+ | 50.00%+ 39.31 %+
MIC 44 2.0 5.4 13.1 11.4
(+) (++) (+) (++) (+)
36.97 %+ 53.31 %+ 35.37 % + 55.25 % +
2x MIC 47 3.1 16.6 0.9 N/A
(+) (++) (+) {__(+#)
34.00 % + 51.03 % + 33.94 % + 43.49 %+
4x MIC 2.8 3.2 5.0 3.7 NIA
(+) (iad) (+) (+)

* MIC of PGELE fractions is 2500 pg/mL. MIC for vancomycin in inhibiting biofilm formation is 10 pg/mL.

83

Minimum Biofilm Eradication Concentration (MBEC)

Table 4.6 shows the result of the percent biofilm eradication of the crude
and semi-purified PGELE fractions, as well as the positive control-vancomycin. As
shown in table 4.6, only the positive control vancomycin has biofilm eradicating
property among the treatments. None of the crude and semi-purified PGELE

fraction elicited biofilm eradicating property.

Table 4.6 Percent biofilm eradication of the crude and semi-purified PGELE

fractions against S. epidermidis after 24-hour exposure

Crude Alkaloid Flavonoid Phenolic Positive
Concentration PGELE PGELE PGELE PGELE Control —
Fraction Fraction Fraction Fraction Vancomycin
42.80% + | -18.03%+ | -23.21%+ | -869%+
0.25 x MIC 7.5 8.3 5.7 4.0 N/A
) z () z © () 7
“17.89% + | -22.05%+ “24.12 % +
0.5 x MIC 94 85 6.04% 47.2 24 NIA
Qo Q_ a :
-35.41 %+ -55.38 % + -23.09 % + -35.80 % +
MIC 76 8.4 5.4 46 pa ee
(-) () () ()
-21.27 %+ -81.97 %+ 43.58 % + 69.78 %+
2xMiICc 13.7 36.2 74 10.7 NIA
() © () (-)
-54.35 % + -244 % + -99.87 %+ -159 % +
4xMiIc 14.1 24.4 68 55.2 N/A
(-) () (-)

* MIC of PGELE fractions is 2500 g/mL. MIC for vancomycin in eradicating biofilm formation is 10 pg/mL.

The result of this study showed that the crude, alkaloid, flavonoid and
phenolic fractions of PGELE showed antibacterial activity with an MIC of 2,500
ug/mL and MBC of 5,000 for crude and alkaloid g/mL and 2,500 g/mL for
flavonoid and phenolic fractions. Time-kill curves revealed bacteriostatic activities
for the crude and PGELE fractions. The dose-response curve of the crude and

84

semi-purified PGELE fractions exhibited a linear pattern rather than a sigmoidal
one. Furthermore, the crude and semi-purified PGELE fractions demonstrated the
ability to inhibit biofilm formation at 625 g/mL, however, all the PGELE extracts

did not possess biofilm- eradicating properties

85

CHAPTER V

Discussion

The Philippine variety of Psidium guajava is a promising candidate for
antibiotic development due to its rich bioactive compounds, such as tannins,
terpenoids, flavonoids, and phenolic compounds, which can inhibit antimicrobial
resistance by targeting multiple pathways. The intricate mixtures of bioactive
compounds in guava leaves may exhibit synergistic effects, further enhancing their
medicinal properties. It is believed that the diversity of compounds in plants
enables them to target multiple receptors, facilitate transport to specific targets,
protect from degradation, and modify microbial resistance mechanisms (Gilbert

and Alves, 2003).

MIC and MBC Findings

The MIC for the crude and semi-purified PGELE fractions is 2500 yg/mL
(Table 4.1). This finding is consistent with previous studies investigating the MIC
of Psidium guajava against Staphylococcus bacteria, which have reported values
ranging from 625 pg/mL to 7500 pg/mL (Yabes et al., 2023; Pereira et al., 2023;
Anas et al., 2008). It is important to highlight that despite semi-purification using
various ratio of water and ethanol as solvent, the semi-purified fractions retained
the presence of the bioactive constituents found in the crude extract, albeit in
varying intensities as revealed by the phytochemical assay and Thin-layer

chromatography (TLC). This could possibly explain the uniformity observed in the

86

Minimum Inhibitory Concentration (MIC) across the crude and semi-purified
fractions.

The determination of Minimum Inhibitory Concentration (MIC) and Minimum
Bactericidal Concentration (MBC) for antimicrobial agents holds theoretical
significance and has proven to be a valuable tool in research settings (CLSI, 1998).
However, this process is strongly influenced by numerous biological,
methodological, and technical variables, which can introduce complexities and
potential biases into the obtained results, thereby complicating their interpretation.
Consequently, evaluating the clinical applicability of MBC determination has posed
considerable challenges (Pfaller et.al, 2004). Relying solely on MIC and MBC
assessments may insufficiently characterize the antibacterial effectiveness of an
antimicrobial agent and its potential relevance in clinical contexts.

To determine the bactericidal potential of the crude and semi-purified
PGELE fractions relative to its inhibitory effects, the ratio between the Minimum
Bactericidal Concentration (MBC) and Minimum Inhibitory Concentration (MIC) of
each fraction against S. epidermidis was calculated. It is postulated that an
MBCI/MIC ratio <4 signifies bactericidal activity, whereas an MBC/MIC ratio >4
indicates bacteriostatic effects (Pitucha et al., 2016; CLSI, 2024). Based on the
MBC/MIC ratio, the crude and semi-purified PGELE fractions can be interpreted to
exhibit bactericidal properties, with the crude and semi-purified alkaloid fraction
showing and MBC/MIC ratio of 2, while the semi-purified flavonoid and phenolic
fraction showed an MBC/MIC ratio of 1. However, based on the findings of the

time-kill assay, specifically on the % inhibition, the crude and semi-purified PGELE

87

fractions are bacteriostatic. The bacteriostatic property of Psidium guajava
reported in this study is consistent with other published literatures stating that
Psidium guajava possesses bacteriostatic properties based on time-kill assays
(Shetty et.al, 2021; Biswas et.al, 2013; Pereira et.al, 2023). An antimicrobial might
have a low MIC/MBC ratio indicating bactericidal activity, but the time-kill assay
could reveal that it kills bacteria very slowly. If the 3-log reduction (99.9% kill)
criterion is not met within 24 hours, TKA might categorize it as bacteriostatic
despite MIC/MBC results suggesting it is bactericidal. While MIC/MBC and time-
kill assays are generally complementary, they can occasionally yield different
tesults due to their differing methodologies and what they measure. MIC/MBC
tests provide essential information about inhibitory and bactericidal concentrations,
but TKA provides a more detailed picture of the antimicrobial's activity over time,

including the rate of kill and potential for regrowth.

Percent Inhibition of S. epidermidis growth

Even at the lowest tested concentration of the crude and semi-purified
PGELE fractions, they all inhibited the growth of S. epidermidis compared to
vancomycin (Figure 4.2). This indicates that at sub-MIC levels, the crude and semi-
purified PGELE fractions inhibits the growth of S. epidermidis compared to the sub-
MIC levels of vancomycin.

The crude and alkaloid fractions still exhibited inhibition of S. epidermidis
growth at a concentration of 1250 g/mL, which is 2-fold lower than the determined

MIC from the agar dilution method. This means that at a concentration of 1250

88

ug/mL, both the crude and semi-purified alkaloid fractions already inhibited S.
epidermidis growth. In contrast, the semi-purified flavonoid and phenolic fractions
demonstrated inhibition of S. epidermidis growth, starting at concentrations of 2500
g/mL. This is consistent with the determined MIC from the agar dilution method.

Based on these findings, the crude and semi-purified alkaloid fraction is
more potent in inhibiting the growth of S. epidermidis (ATCC 12228) after the 24-
hour incubation, achieving 93% inhibition at a concentration of 1250 g/mL,
compared to the semi-purified flavonoid and phenolic fraction, which achieves the
same level of inhibition (93%) at a higher concentration of 2500 yg/mL. Also, at
sub-MIC levels, PGELE had more activity than the sub-MIC % inhibition of
vancomycin.

In this study, the crude and semi-purified PGELE fractions are bacteriostatic
against S. epidermidis (ATCC 12228). This finding coincides with other published
literatures stating that Psidium guajava possesses bacteriostatic properties based
on time-kill assays (Shetty et.al, 2021; Biswas et.al, 2013; Pereira et.al, 2023).

As observed with the PGELE fractions, all of them inhibited the growth of S.
epidermidis even at sub-MIC concentrations without causing the bacteria to regrow
within the 24-hour assay period. This effect can significantly reduce the risk of
resistance development, and enhances overall infection control. This also means
that it is possible that even after the PGELE concentration drops below the MIC, it
can continue to suppress bacterial growth and prevent the resurgence of resistant
strains. One of the main problems with exposing bacteria at sub-MIC

concentrations of an antibiotics is that sub-MIC levels of antibiotics can exert a

89

selective pressure on bacterial populations. This can lead to the selection of
resistant mutants, as bacteria with even slight resistance mechanisms can survive
these low concentrations. It can induce the expression of certain resistance
mechanisms, such as efflux pumps, which actively remove the antibiotic from the
bacterial cell, or biofilm formation, which provides a protective environment for
bacteria. Exposure to sub-MIC levels may lead to heteroresistance, where a
subpopulation of bacteria exhibits resistance while the rest of the population
femains susceptible. This can complicate the treatment as the resistant
subpopulation can expand under antibiotic pressure (Flores-Vargas. 2023; Chow,

2021, Spiegelman, 2006).

Time-Kill Curve

The determined growth / death rates of the various concentrations of the
crude and semi-purified PGELE fractions, as well as the positive control-
vancomycin supports the findings in the % inhibition that at concentrations below
the MIC, the crude and semi-purified PGELE fractions prevented the growth of S.
epidermidis compared to the sub-MIC concentrations of vancomycin. This finding
implies that even at concentrations 4-folds lower than the MIC, the crude and semi-
purified PGELE fractions can inhibit the growth of S. epidermidis (ATCC 12228).
This supports the initial finding in the TLC and phytochemical assay that the crude
and semi-purified PGELE fractions contained similar bioactive compounds, hence
similar results.

The findings of the time-kill assay showed that as the concentrations of both

the crude and semi-purified PGELE fractions increase, the growth rate of S.

90

epidermidis decreases. However, once the MIC (2500 pg/mL) is reached, further
increases in concentration do not significantly affect the growth rate of S.
epidermidis. This indicates that the inhibitory effect of the crude and semi-purified
PGELE fractions on S. epidermidis growth is time-dependent rather than
concentration-dependent. For time-dependent antibiotics, maintaining drug
concentrations above the MIC for an extended period is crucial. This often
necessitates more frequent dosing intervals to ensure continuous bacterial
suppression (Levison, 2009). Therefore, if a drug product is made from PGELE, it
should be administered more frequently to ensure continuous bacterial
suppression. Also, continuous suppression of bacterial growth minimizes the
opportunities for bacteria to develop resistance mechanisms, therefore ultimately
preventing AMR.

The findings of the time-kill assay have some clinical implications on the
possible use of PGELE as an antimicrobial agent. Having a time-dependent killing
mechanism would mean that if PGELE is used as an antibiotic, it is less likely to
tequire extremely high peak concentrations, reducing the risk of dose-related
toxicity. As long as the drug concentration is maintained above the MIC, the

PGELE will be effective.

91

Pharmacodynamic Functions

The differences in pharmacodynamic parameters, such as the steepness of
the Hill function and the minimum bacterial net growth rate at high antibiotic
concentrations (wy min), can be significant, indicating variations in the
microbiological efficacy of antibiotics with identical MICs (Regoes et al., 2004).

The wy min values of the crude, semi-purified PGELE fractions and
vancomycin are identical, indicating they produce the same effect at high
concentrations. However, the x values differ. Vancomycin has a significantly higher
k than the crude and semi-purified PGELE fractions. This means vancomycin more
effectively inhibits the growth rate of S. epidermidis around its MIC (k = -0.97)
compared to the crude and semi-purified PGELE fractions (k = -0.06). The
similarity in the « of the crude and semi-purified PGELE fractions could be due to
the fact that all the crude and semi-purified PGELE fractions still have the same
bioactives and did not undergo complete purification. However, looking at the
zMIC, only the crude and semi-purified alkaloid was able to reach a y min <0, and
the crude PGELE gave the least ZMIC among the fractions.

The relationship between the logarithm of concentration and bacterial
growth rate adheres to a linear model for the crude and semi-purified PGELE
fractions, while for vancomycin, it conforms to a sigmoidal pattern, thus aligning
with a sigmoid curve model (Figure 4.4). The linear characteristic of the dose-
response curve for the crude and semi-purified PGELE fractions facilitates a more
straightforward interpretation of PGELE efficacy. With increasing concentration,

the extent of bacterial inhibition rises steadily, aiding in the determination of the

92

optimal concentration to achieve the desired effect, rendering it more predictable.
The linear dose-response curve contributes to the interpretation of the "linear, non-
threshold" hypothesis (Bond et al., 1995). In contrast, with a sigmoidal dose-
response relationship, the response initially increases slowly at low doses, then
rapidly at moderate doses, and eventually levels off at high doses. This indicates
a threshold effect, where there is a minimum effective dose required to elicit a
fesponse, and a maximum response that is reached beyond a certain dose.
However, it's important to note that many biological systems inherently exhibit
sigmoidal dose-response curves due to mechanisms such as receptor binding
saturation and allosteric effects. Sigmoidal curves often provide a more accurate
representation of the underlying biology, capturing phenomena like the threshold
effect and maximum efficacy, which are not depicted by linear models (Calabrese

et.al, 1999).

MBIC and MBEC Findings

Even at the lowest concentration, the crude and semi-purified PGELE
fractions can prevent the formation of biofilms made by S. epidermidis. This
property of the crude and semi-purified PGELE fractions may be of relevance in
managing chronic wounds, such as diabetic ulcers and pressure sores, which are
often complicated by biofilm formation of local skin bacteria (i.e. S. epidermidis),
which can impede wound healing and increase the risk of secondary infections
(Alfonso et.al, 2021). Topical applications of the crude and semi-purified PGELE

can aid in the management of chronic wounds by preventing biofilm development

93

and promoting wound healing. A topical application of the crude and semi-purified
PGELE can also aid in addressing central catheter site hygiene, thus reducing the
tisk of catheter related bloodstream infections (CRBSIs) by preventing microbial
colonization and biofilm formation in the catheter site.

However, the PGELE did not show any biofilm eradicating property. There
are several reasons that could explain why PGELE can inhibit the formation of
biofilms, but not eradicate formed biofilms. One reason may be because PGELE
may target specific pathways or processes involved in biofilm formation, such as
microbial adhesion, initial attachment, or biofilm matrix production. By interfering
with these early stages of biofilm development, the PGELE can prevent biofilm
formation without affecting established biofilms, which may have different
metabolic and physiological characteristics (Kalia et.al, 2022). Another could be
that PGELE may have limited ability to penetrate the dense extracellular matrix of
mature biofilms, making it difficult to reach and effectively target the microbial cells
within the biofilm structure. As a result, while the PGELE may inhibit biofilm
formation by acting on surface-attached or planktonic cells, it may not be able to
teach and eradicate the cells within mature biofilms (Asma et.al, 2022). Future
directions in understanding the antibiofilm activity of PGELE should focus on
determining its mechanism of action.

In this study, we demonstrated that the Philippine variety of Psidium guajava
exhibits antimicrobial activity against Staphylococcus epidermidis (ATCC 12228).
Often, plant extracts lose their efficacy upon fractionation (Inui et al., 2012; Abreu

et al., 2017). Consistent with the findings of this study, the use of crude Psidium

94

guajava leaf extract (PGELE) is more advantageous than the semi-purified
extracts as shown in the zMIC and the % inhibition. Psidium guajava could serve
as an affordable and widely accepted alternative antimicrobial source in countries
like the Philippines, where traditional herbal remedies are commonly used
(Robredo et al., 2022; Vandebroek, 2013). Moreover, it has the potential to be
developed into an effective topical antiseptic to prevent microbial adhesion and
biofilm formation on the skin or catheter hubs, which is crucial in reducing the risk

of catheter-related bloodstream infections (Surapat et al., 2020).

Study Limitations

A comprehensive analysis of the thin layer chromatography (TLC) plates
was not feasible due to the absence of a reference library containing the retention
factor (Rf) values for the bioactive compounds present in the semi-purified PGELE
sample and lack of reference standards at the Research and Analytical Services
Laboratory (Natural Products and Peptidomics Laboratory).

In a time-kill curve, presenting CFU/mL as a percentage of CFU/mL is not
a conventional practice. Typically, CFU/mL values are expressed as absolute
counts rather than percentages. This is because CFU/mL represents the actual
number of colony-forming units per milliliter of sample, providing direct information
about the bacterial population's density at specific time points during the assay
(CLSI, 1998). The rationale behind normalizing the CFU/mL values to the initial
bacterial population at time zero and subsequently expressing values as a

percentage of that initial population is rooted in the research objective of

95

determining and comparing the relative changes in bacterial density over time
across the crude and semi-purified PGELE fractions using time-kill curves. Utilizing
percentage values facilitates a better and clearer visual interpretation of changes
in bacterial population density through graphical representation, as it establishes
a consistent reference point for the crude and semi-purified fractions—the initial
bacterial population. This approach enables straightforward comparison of the
relative changes in bacterial density over time.

Furthermore, it is important to acknowledge the presence of insoluble
PGELE extract in each well, particularly at higher crude and semi-purified PGELE
fraction concentrations, which may influence the OD600 reading. Throughout the
research, it was revealed that there is a direct association 83 between the
antibacterial efficacy of PGELE and the presence of insoluble particles suspended
in PGELE extracts. Removing the particles through filtration diminishes the
antibacterial property of the PGELE, hence in this study, the particles were
included. Higher crude and semi-purified PGELE fraction concentrations yielded
higher OD600 readings, given the fact that they had more insoluble particles
suspended in them. This may potentially lead to the misperception that the semi-
purified fractions with higher concentrations possess higher initial bacterial
densities compared to those with lower concentrations. Normalizing the CFU/mL
values using the initial OD600 reading mitigates this effect, allowing for a clearer
assessment of the relative changes in bacterial density over time.

It is worth mentioning that based on the findings of the time-kill assay, even

with the escalation in the concentration of the crude and semi-purified PGELE

96

extracts and the (+) control vancomycin, a noticeable decrease in the rate of
bacterial population decline, along with an unchanging percent inhibition, becomes
apparent upon reaching the minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC). This is
despite vancomycin's established bactericidal efficacy against S. epidermidis at
concentrations above MIC (Pinheiro et.al, 2014). One possible explanation for this
phenomenon is derived from the findings of Regoes et al. during their
pharmacodynamic modeling utilizing time-kill curve data. They observed that once
the minimal net growth rate (wy min) is reached, the influence of increasing drug
concentration on bacterial growth diminishes. This characteristic is observable in
time-kill curves determined via OD600 measurements, where quantification of y
min <0 poses challenges. Another explanation for this is that spectrophotometric
analysis is based on turbidity and indirectly measures all bacteria (cell biomass),
dead and alive (Lewis et.al, 2014). Meaning, a spectrophotometer does not
discriminate living and dead cells. You may have a reading that does not change
throughout the entirety of the assay, but the number of viable cells may already be
zero at the end of the assay. On the other hand, studies using plating assays,
which entail exposing the bacteria in various concentrations of an antibacterial
agent and then transferring bacteria onto agar plates at specified intervals and
quantifying resultant colonies, have demonstrated considerable variability in y min
among different antimicrobials (Regoes et al., 2004).

Getting an accurate ZMIC, especially if the w min did not reach 0 (since
determining ZMIC requires a y min < 0), may prove to be difficult. As such, this

may be a limitation of the zMIC determination of this study. As suggested in the

97

time kill assay, using plating assays might be a better choice than OD600-based
assays, especially if you're trying to find a w min <0 or determine the exact rate of
bacterial death beyond the minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC). But it's worth
noting that OD600-based time-kill assays offer more detailed time-kill curves, are

less work, and use fewer resources compared to plating assays.

98

CHAPTER VI
Conclusion and Recommendations

Summary

The Minimum Inhibitory Concentration (MIC) of the crude and the three
semi-purified PGELE fractions (alkaloids, flavonoids and phenolics) against S.
epidermidis (ATCC 12228) is 2500 yg/mL. The Minimum Bactericidal
Concentration (MBC) is 5000 yg/mL for the crude and semi-purified alkaloid
fraction, whereas for the semi-purified flavonoid and phenolic fraction, it is 2500

yg/mL.

In the time-kill assay, the crude and semi-purified alkaloid fraction
demonstrated inhibition of the growth of S. epidermidis (ATCC 12228), achieving
a 93% reduction in bacterial density at a concentration of 1250 g/mL. The semi-
purified flavonoid and phenolic fraction achieved a comparable level of inhibition
(93%) but required a higher concentration of 2500 g/mL. Furthermore, at sub-
MIC levels, PGELE exhibited better activity in inhibiting the growth of S.
epidermidis compared to the sub-MIC inhibition of vancomycin. Upon assessing
the % inhibition of growth after 24 hours, it was observed that neither the crude nor
the semi-purified fractions attained a % inhibition exceeding 99.9%, even at the
highest tested concentration (10000 g/mL), indicating the bacteriostatic property
of the PGELE extracts. Moreover, analysis of the time-kill curve revealed that as
the concentrations of both the crude and semi-purified PGELE fractions increased,
the growth rate of S. epidermidis decreased. However, upon reaching the MIC

(2500 pg/mL), further increases in concentration did not significantly decrease the

99

growth rate of S. epidermidis. This suggests that the inhibitory effect of the crude
and semi-purified PGELE fractions on S. epidermidis growth is time-dependent

rather than concentration-dependent.

The growth rate of S. epidermidis in the absence of PGELE (y max) was
calculated to be 0.2557/hr. Understanding this parameter is crucial for assessing
the extent of reduction in bacterial growth rate in the presence of crude and semi-

purified PGELE fractions at different concentrations.

At MIC concentrations and above, there was no significant difference in the
tate at which the crude and semi-purified PGELE fraction decreased the growth
tate of S. epidermidis at high concentrations (wy min) during its exponential phase.
The crude and semi-purified alkaloid fractions decreased the growth rate of S.
epidermidis by approximately 2% per hour, whereas the semi-purified flavonoids

and phenols decreased it by around 1% per hour.

Utilizing the hill coefficient (k) values of the semi-purified flavonoid and
phenolic fractions allows us to infer that for every 1 log unit increase in their
concentration near the MIC, there is an associated decrease in the growth rate of
S. epidermidis by approximately 6.07% and 6.27% per hour, respectively.
Similarly, for the crude and semi-purified alkaloid fractions, each 1 log unit increase
in their concentration near the MIC is linked with a reduction in the growth rate of
S. epidermidis by about 6.79% and 6.88% per hour, respectively. The dose-

response curve of the crude and semi-purified PGELE fractions exhibited a linear

100

pattern rather than a sigmoidal one, indicating that an increase in PGELE

concentration proportionally decreased the growth rate of S. epidermidis.

The zMIC values, indicating the concentration at which bacterial growth rate
is zero, were found to be 3633 g/mL for the crude and 5740 g/mL for the semi-
purified alkaloid fraction, aligning closely with their respective MBC values.
However, the semi-purified flavonoids and phenolics failed to attain a y value of 0,

rendering the computation of their ZMIC impractical.

The crude and semi-purified PGELE fractions exhibited the capacity to
prevent biofilm formation at a concentration of 625 g/mL, which was four times
lower than their MIC. Nonetheless, they did not demonstrate biofilm-eradicating

properties.

Conclusion

Based on the findings of this study, it can be concluded that overall, both
the crude and semi-purified fractions exhibit antimicrobial activity, as well as biofilm
inhibiting property. The crude, semi-purified alkaloid, flavonoid and phenolic
fractions of PGELE showed antibacterial activity with an MIC of 2,500 pg/mL and
MBC of 5,000 g/mL for crude and semi-purified alkaloid and 2,500 yg/mL for
semi-purified flavonoid and phenolic fractions. Time-kill curves revealed
bacteriostatic activities for the crude and PGELE fractions, indicating a time-
dependent bacterial inhibitory effect rather than concentration- dependent against
S. epidermidis. The dose-response curve of the crude and semi-purified PGELE

fractions exhibited a linear pattern rather than a sigmoidal one, indicating that an

101

increase in PGELE concentration proportionally decreased the growth rate of S.
epidermidis. Furthermore, the crude and semi-purified PGELE fractions
demonstrated the ability to inhibit biofilm formation at 625 g/mL, which was four
times lower than their MIC. However, all the extracts did not show biofilm-

eradicating properties.

Recommendations

1. As seen in the time-kill assay, at sub-MIC concentrations, the PGELE inhibited
the growth of S. epidermidis while vancomycin at sub-MIC levels did not. It is
worth studying for how long can PGELE inhibit the growth of S. epidermidis
and compare it with a positive control (i.e. vancomycin).

2. In future researches, utilizing plating assays may be favored over OD600-
based assays, particularly when aiming to achieve a y min <0 or to ascertain
a more precise rate of bacterial death beyond the minimum inhibitory
concentration (MIC). However, it is important to acknowledge that time-kill
assays utilizing OD600 readings afford more detailed time-kill curves compared
to plating assays, less labor intensive and utilizes lesser resources. Ultimately,
the selection between OD600 readings and plating assays for time-kill curves
depends on the specific research objectives.

3. A 10-fold dilution series in the concentration of PGELE may offer enhanced
resolution compared to a 2-fold dilution series, facilitating precise determination
of the dose-response relationship and the detection of subtle variations in

antimicrobial activity across a broad concentration spectrum.

102

4. Given the complex mixtures of bioactive compounds present in Psidium
guajava leaves, it is possible that they may potentiate the effects or synergize
with a wide range of commercially available antibiotics. Therefore, it is
imperative to conduct studies examining the interactions between plant
extracts and existing antibiotics to determine if a synergistic effect can be

achieved.

103

REFERENCES

Anas, K., Jayasree, P. R., Vijayakumar, T., & Manish Kumar, P. R. (2008). In
vitro antibacterial activity of Psidium guajava Linn. leaf extract on clinical
isolates of multidrug resistant Staphylococcus aureus. Indian journal of
experimental biology, 46(1), 41-46.

Andrews J. M. (2001). Determination of minimum inhibitory concentrations. The
Journal of antimicrobial chemotherapy, 48 Suppl 1, 5-16.
https://doi.org/10.1093/jac/48.suppl_1.5

Afonso AC, Oliveira D, Saavedra MJ, Borges A, Simées M. Biofilms in Diabetic
Foot Ulcers: Impact, Risk Factors and Control Strategies. Int J Mol Sci.
2021 Jul 31;22(15):8278. doi: 10.3390/ijms22158278. PMID: 34361044;
PMCID: PMC8347492.

Antimicrobial Resistance Surveillance Program Annual Report 2023. Manila,
Philippines. Antimicrobial Resistance Surveillance Reference Laboratory
2024

Arollado, E., Bucog, L., Manalo, R. A., Sampang, I.-L., & Cariscal, J. J. (n.d.).
Selected Philippine Plant Extracts as Alternative Preservatives for a
Pharmaceutical Liquid Preparation. DOST. Retrieved September 5, 2022,
from https://philjournalsci.dost.gov.ph/home-1/52-vol-146-no-1-march-
2017/635-selected-philippine-plant-extracts-as-alternative-preservatives-
for-a-pharmaceutical-liquid-preparation

Asma ST, Imre K, Morar A, Herman V, Acaroz U, Mukhtar H, Arslan-Acaroz D,

Shah SRA, Gerlach R. An Overview of Biofilm Formation-Combating

104

Strategies and Mechanisms of Action of Antibiofilm Agents. Life (Basel).
2022 Jul 23;12(8):1110. doi: 10.3390/life12081110. PMID: 35892912;
PMCID: PMC9394423.

Ayobami, O., Brinkwirth, S., Eckmanns, T., & Markwart, R. (2022). Antibiotic
resistance in hospital-acquired Eskape-e infections in low- and lower-
middle-income countries: A systematic review and meta-analysis.
Emerging Microbes & Infections, 11(1), 443-451.
https://doi.org/10.1080/22221751.2022.2030196

Baddour, L. M., Wilson, W. R., Bayer, A. S., Fowler, V. G., Jr, Tleyjeh, |. M.,
Rybak, M. J., Barsic, B., Lockhart, P. B., Gewitz, M. H., Levison, M. E.,
Bolger, A. F., Steckelberg, J. M., Baltimore, R. S., Fink, A. M., O'Gara, P.,
Taubert, K. A., & American Heart Association Committee on Rheumatic
Fever, Endocarditis, and Kawasaki Disease of the Council on
Cardiovascular Disease in the Young, Council on Clinical Cardiology,
Council on Cardiovascular Surgery and Anesthesia, and Stroke Council
(2015). Infective Endocarditis in Adults: Diagnosis, Antimicrobial Therapy,
and Management of Complications: A Scientific Statement for Healthcare
Professionals From the American Heart Association. Circulation, 132(15),
1435-1486. https://doi.org/10.1161/CIR.0000000000000296

Becker, K., Heilmann, C., & Peters, G. (2014). Coagulase-negative
staphylococci. Clinical microbiology reviews, 27(4), 870-926.

https://doi.org/10.1128/CMR.00109-13

10S

Ben-David, A., Davidson, C.E. (2014) Estimation Method for Serial Dilution
Experiments. Journal of Microbiological Methods 107:214-221.

Biswas, B., Rogers, K., McLaughlin, F., Daniels, D., & Yadav, A. (2013).
Antimicrobial activities of leaf extracts of guava (Psidium guajava L.) on
two gram-negative and gram-positive bacteria. International Journal of
Microbiology, 2013, 1-7. https://doi.org/10.1155/2013/746165

Bremmer DN, Bauer KA, Pouch SM, Thomas K, Smith D, Goff DA, Pancholi P,
Balada-Llasat JM. Correlation of Checkerboard Synergy Testing with
Time-Kill Analysis and Clinical Outcomes of Extensively Drug-Resistant
Acinetobacter baumannii Respiratory Infections. Antimicrob Agents
Chemother. 2016 Oct 21;60(11):6892-6895. doi: 10.1128/AAC.00981-16.
PMID: 27527089; PMCID: PMC5075101.

Case C, Funke B, Tortora G (2010). Microbiology An Introduction (Tenth ed.).
ISBN 978-0-321-55007-1.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2014, March 26). Types of
healthcare-associated infections. Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention. Retrieved September 5, 2022, from
https:/www.cdc.gov/hai/infectiontypes. htm!

Chassagne, F., Samarakoon, T., Porras, G., Lyles, J. T., Dettweiler, M.,
Marquez, L., Salam, A. M., Shabih, S., Farrokhi, D. R., & Quave, C. L.
(2021). A systematic review of plants with antibacterial activities: A
taxonomic and phylogenetic perspective. Frontiers in Pharmacology, 11.

https://doi.org/10.3389/fphar.2020.586548

106

Chow, L. K. M., Ghaly, T. M., and Gillings, M. R. (2021). A survey of sub-
inhibitory concentrations of antibiotics in the environment. J. Environ. Sci.
99, 21-27. doi: 10.1016/j.jes.2020.05.030

Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute (CLS!) M100 - Performance
Standards for Antimicrobial Susceptibility Testing, 34th Edition, 2024.

CLSI, Methods for Determining Bactericidal Activity of Antimicrobial Agents.
Approved Guideline, CLSI document M26-A. Clinical and Laboratory
Standards Institute, 950 West Valley Roadn Suite 2500,Wayne,
Pennsylvania 19087, USA, 1998.

Cowan, M. M. (1999). Plant products as antimicrobial agents. Clinical
Microbiology Reviews, 12(4), 564-582.
https://doi.org/10.1128/cmr.12.4.564

Cruz, C. D., Shah, S., & Tammela, P. (2018, November 3). Defining conditions
for biofilm inhibition and eradication assays for gram-positive clinical
reference strains - BMC Microbiology. BioMed Central. Retrieved
September 5, 2022, from
https://bmemicrobiol.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12866-018-
1321-6

Dadgostar, P. (2019). antimicrobial resistance: Implications and costs. Infection
and Drug Resistance, Volume 12, 3903-3910.
https://doi.org/10.2147/idr.s234610

De La Maria, C. G., Cervera, C., Pericas, J. M., Castafieda, X., Armero, Y., Soy,

D., Almela, M., Ninot, S., Falces, C., Mestres, C. A., Gatell, J. M., Moreno,

107

A., Marco, F., & Mird, J. M. (2015). Epidemiology and Prognosis of
Coagulase-Negative Staphylococcal Endocarditis: Impact of Vancomycin
minimum inhibitory concentration. PloS One, 10(5), 0125818.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0125818

Davies, J., Spiegelman, G. B., and Yim, G. (2006). The world of subinhibitory
antibiotic concentrations. Curr. Opin. Microbiol. 9, 445-453. doi:
10.1016/j.mib.2006.08.006

Flores-Vargas, G., Korber, D. R., & Bergsveinson, J. (2023). Sub-MIC antibiotics
influence the microbiome, resistome and structure of riverine biofilm
communities. Frontiers in Microbiology, 14.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2023.1194952

Foerster, S., Unemo, M., Hathaway, L.J. et al. Time-kill curve analysis and
pharmacodynamic modelling for in vitro evaluation of antimicrobials
against Neisseria gonorrhoeae . BMC Microbiol 16, 216 (2016).
https://doi.org/10.1186/s12866-016-0838-9

Gahlot, R., Nigam, C., Kumar, V., Yadav, G., & Anupurba, S. (2014). Catheter-
related bloodstream infections. International Journal of Critical Illness and
Injury Science, 4(2), 161. https://doi.org/10.4103/2229-5151.134184

Garcia de la Maria, C., Cervera, C., Pericas, J. M., Castafieda, X., Armero, Y.,
Soy, D., Almela, M., Ninot, S., Falces, C., Mestres, C. A., Gatell, J. M.,
Moreno, A., Marco, F., & Miro, J. M. (2015). Epidemiology and prognosis

of coagulase-negative staphylococcal endocarditis: Impact of vancomycin

108

minimum inhibitory concentration. PLOS ONE, 10(5).
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0125818

Gilbert, B., & Alves, L. F. (2003). Synergy in plant medicines. Current medicinal
chemistry, 10(1), 13-20. https://doi.org/10.2174/0929867033368583

Gottenbos, B., van der Mei, H. C., & Busscher, H. J. (2000). Initial adhesion and
surface growth of Staphylococcus epidermidis and Pseudomonas
aeruginosa on biomedical polymers. Journal of biomedical materials
research, 50(2), 208-214. https://doi.org/10.1002/(sici)1097-
4636(200005)50:2<208::aid-jbm16>3.0.co;2-d

Hossain, T. J. (2024). Methods for screening and evaluation of antimicrobial
activity: A review of protocols, advantages, and limitations. European
Journal of Microbiology & Immunology.
https://doi.org/10.1556/1886.2024.00035

Kalia, V. C., Patel, S., & Lee, J. (2023). Bacterial biofilm inhibitors: An overview.
Ecotoxicology and Environmental Safety, 264, 115389.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoenv.2023.115389

Kart, D., Regber, T., Nemutlu, E., & Sagiroglu, M. (2021). Sub-inhibitory
concentrations of ciprofloxacin alone and combinations with plant-derived
compounds against P. aeruginosa biofilms and their effects on the
metabolomic profile of P. Aeruginosa biofilms. Antibiotics, 10(4), 414.
https://doi.org/10.3390/antibiotics10040414

Kahl, B. C., Becker, K., & Léffler, B. (2016). Clinical Significance and

Pathogenesis of Staphylococcal Small Colony Variants in Persistent

109

Infections. Clinical microbiology reviews, 29(2), 401-427.
https://doi.org/10.1128/CMR.00069-15

Khan MA, Celik |, Khan HM, Shahid M, Shahzad A, Kumar S, Ahmed B.
Antibiofilm and anti-quorum sensing activity of Psidium guajava L. leaf
extract: In vitro and in silico approach. PLoS One. 2023 Dec
19;18(12):e0295524. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0295524. PMID:
38113217; PMCID: PMC10729950.

Lee, E., & Anjum, F. (n.d.). Staphylococcus epidermidis - statpearls - NCBI
bookshelf. NCBI. Retrieved September 4, 2022, from
https:/Awww.ncbi.nim.nih.gov/books/NBK563240/

Lewis CL, Craig CC, Senecal AG. Mass and density measurements of live and
dead Gram-negative and Gram-positive bacterial populations. Appl
Environ Microbiol. 2014 Jun;80(12):3622-31. doi: 10.1128/AEM.00117-14.
PMID: 24705320; PMCID: PMC4054131.

Levison ME, Levison JH. Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of
antibacterial agents. Infect Dis Clin North Am. 2009 Dec;23(4):791-815,
vii. doi: 10.1016/j.idc.2009.06.008. PMID: 19909885; PMCID:
PMC3675903.

LaPlante KL, Mermel LA. In vitro activities of telavancin and vancomycin against
biofilm-producing Staphylococcus aureus, S. epidermidis, and
Enterococcus faecalis strains. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2009
Jul;53(7):3166-9. doi: 10.1128/AAC.01642-08. Epub 2009 May 18. PMID:

19451302; PMCID: PMC2704672.

110

Lulie, M., Tadesse, A., Tsegaye, T., Yesuf, T., & Silamsaw, M. (2021). Incidence
of peripheral intravenous catheter phlebitis and its associated factors
among patients admitted to University of Gondar Hospital, Northwest
Ethiopia: A prospective, observational study. Thrombosis Journal, 19(1).
https://doi.org/10.1186/s12959-021-00301-x

Manglicmot-Yabes, Ailyn & Ramos, Monica. (2023). Metabolic perturbations in
methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus induced by Psidium guajava
ethanolic leaf extract. Life Sciences, Medicine and Biomedicine. 7.
10.28916/Ismb.7.1.2023.118.

Masood, S., Saleem, I., Smith, D., & Chu, W. K. (2020). Growth Pattern of
Magnetic Field-Treated Bacteria. Current microbiology, 77(2), 194-203.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00284-019-01820-7

Microbiological analysis of food and water. (1998). In Elsevier eBooks.
https://doi.org/10.1016/b978-0-444-8291 1-5.x5016-4

Muhammad, M. H., Idris, A. L., Fan, X., Guo, Y., Yu, Y., Jin, X., Qiu, J., Guan, X.,
& Huang, T. (2020). Beyond risk: Bacterial biofilms and their regulating
approaches. Frontiers in Microbiology, 11.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2020.00928

Mujeeb F, Bajpai P, Pathak N. Phytochemical evaluation, antimicrobial activity,
and determination of bioactive components from leaves of Aegle
marmelos. Biomed Res Int. 2014;2014:497606. doi:
10.1155/2014/497606. Epub 2014 May 11. PMID: 24900969; PMCID:
PMC4037574.

111

National Committee for Clinical Laboratory Standards. 1998. Methods for
determining bactericidal activity of antimicrobial agents. Approved
guideline M26-A. National Committee for Clinical Laboratory Standards,
Wayne, Pa.

Naseer, S., Hussain, S., Naeem, N., Pervaiz, M., & Rahman, M. (2018,
December 12). The phytochemistry and medicinal value of Psidium
guajava (guava) - clinical phytoscience. SpringerOpen. Retrieved
September 5, 2022, from
https://clinphytoscience.springeropen.com/articles/10.1186/s40816-018-
0093-8

Nielsen El, Friberg LE. Pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamic modeling of
antibacterial drugs. Pharmacol Rev. 2013;65:1053-—1090. doi:
10.1124/pr.111.005769.

Oncho, D. A., Ejigu, M. C., & Urgessa, O. E. (2021, April 12). Phytochemical
constituent and antimicrobial properties of guava extracts of East
Hararghe of Oromia, Ethiopia - clinical phytoscience. SpringerOpen.
Retrieved September 5, 2022, from
https://clinphytoscience.springeropen.com/articles/10.1186/s40816-021-
00268-2

Olawuwo, O. S., Famuyide, |. M., & McGaw, L. J. (2022). Antibacterial and
antibiofilm activity of selected medicinal plant leaf extracts against
pathogens implicated in poultry diseases. Frontiers in Veterinary Science,

9. https://doi.org/10.3389/fvets.2022.820304

112

Patel, P., Joshi, C., Birdi, T., & Kothari, V. (2019). Anti-infective efficacy of
Psidium guajava L. leaves against certain pathogenic bacteria.
F1000Research, 8, 12. https://doi.org/10.12688/f1 000research.17500.2

Pelletier LL Jr. Lack of reproducibility of macrodilution MBCs for Staphylococcus
aureus. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 1984 Dec;26(6):815-8. doi:
10.1128/AAC.26.6.815. PMID: 6570083; PMCID: PMC 180030.

Penecilla, G., & Magno, C. (n.d.). Antibacterial activity of extracts of twelve
common medicinal plants ... Retrieved September 4, 2022, from
https://academicjournals.org/article/article1380713010_Penecilla%20and
%20Magno.pdf

Pereira GA, Chaves DSdA, Silva TMe, Motta REdA, Silva ABRd, Patricio TCdC,
Fernandes AJB, Coelho SdMdO, Ozarowski M, Cid YP, et al.
Antimicrobial Activity of Psidium guajava Aqueous Extract against
Sensitive and Resistant Bacterial Strains. Microorganisms. 2023;
11(7):1784. https://doi.org/10.3390/microorganisms1 1071784

Peterson, L. R., and C. J. Shanholtzer. 1992. Tests for bacteridical effects of
antimicrobial agents: technical performance and clinical relevance. Clin.
Microbiol. Rev. 5:420-432.

Pfaller MA, Sheehan DJ, Rex JH. Determination of fungicidal activities against
yeasts and molds: lessons learned from bactericidal testing and the need
for standardization. Clin Microbiol Rev. 2004 Apr;17(2):268-80. doi:
10.1128/CMR.17.2.268-280.2004. PMID: 15084501; PMCID:

PMC387411.

113

Pitiriga, V., Kanellopoulos, P., Bakalis, |., Kampos, E., Sagris, |., Saroglou, G., &
Tsakris, A. (2020, December 1). Central venous catheter-related
bloodstream infection and colonization: The impact of insertion site and
distribution of multidrug-resistant pathogens - antimicrobial resistance &
infection control. BioMed Central. Retrieved September 5, 2022, from
https://aricjournal.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s13756-020-00851-
1

Pinheiro L, Brito Cl, Pereira VC, Oliveira Ad, Camargo CH, Cunha Mde L.
Reduced susceptibility to vancomycin and biofilm formation in methicillin-
resistant Staphylococcus epidermidis isolated from blood cultures. Mem
Inst Oswaldo Cruz. 2014 Nov;109(7):871-8. doi: 10.1590/0074-
0276140120. Epub 2014 Oct 21. PMID: 25410990; PMCID: PMC4296491.

Pitucha, M.; Wos, M.; Miazga-Karska, M.; Klimek, K.; Mirostaw, B.; Pachuta-
Stec, A.; Gtadysz, A.; Ginalska, G. Synthesis, antibacterial and
antiproliferative potential of some new 1-pyridinecarbonyl-4-substituted
thiosemicarbazide derivatives. Med. Chem. Res. 2016, 25.
doi:10.1007/s00044-016-1599-6.

Prestinaci, F., Pezzotti, P., & Pantosti, A. (2015). Antimicrobial resistance: A
global multifaceted phenomenon. Pathogens and Global Health, 109(7),
309-318. https://doi.org/10.1179/2047773215y.0000000030

Raj, A., Menon, V., & Sharma, N. (2020, September 2). Phytochemical
screening, antimicrobial, antioxidant and cytotoxic potential of different

extracts of Psidium guajava leaves - vegetos. SpringerLink. Retrieved

114

September 5, 2022, from https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s42535-
020-00151-4

Regoes RR, Wiuff C, Zappala RM, Garner KN, Baquero F, et al.
Pharmacodynamic functions: a multiparameter approach to the design of
antibiotic treatment regimens. Antimicrob Agents Chemother.
2004;48:3670-3676. doi: 10.1128/AAC.48.10.3670-3676.2004.

Robredo, J. P., Eala, M. A., Paguio, J. A., Salamat, M. S., & Celi, L. A. (2022).
The challenges of combatting antimicrobial resistance in the Philippines.
The Lancet Microbe, 3(4). https://doi.org/10.1016/s2666-5247(22)00029-5

Rolfe MD, Rice CJ, Lucchini S, Pin C, Thompson A, Cameron AD, Alston M,
Stringer MF, Betts RP, Baranyi J, Peck MW, Hinton JC. Lag phase is a
distinct growth phase that prepares bacteria for exponential growth and
involves transient metal accumulation. J Bacteriol. 2012 Feb;194(3):686-
701. doi: 10.1128/JB.06112-11. Epub 2011 Dec 2. PMID: 22139505;
PMCID: PMC3264077.

Rosenthal, V. D., Rodriguez-Calderén, M. E., Rodriguez-Ferrer, M., Singhal, T.,
Pawar, M., Sobreyra-Oropeza, M., Barkat, A., Atencio-Espinoza, T.,
Berba, R., Navoa-Ng, J. A., Duefas, L., Ben-Jaballah, N., Ozdemir, D.,
Ersoz, G., & Aygun, C. (2012). Findings of the International Nosocomial
Infection Control Consortium (INICC), Part Il: Impact of a multidimensional
strategy to reduce ventilator-associated pneumonia in neonatal intensive
care units in 10 developing countries. Infection control and hospital

epidemiology, 33(7), 704—710. https://doi.org/10.1086/666342

115

Rybak MJ. Pharmacodynamics: relation to antimicrobial resistance. Am J Infect
Control. 2006;34(5 Suppl 1):s38-45. [discussion: s64—73]

Shetty S, Shetty RM, Rahman B, Reddy MS, Shetty SR, Vannala V, Desai V,
Halkai R. Comparison of Time-kill Assay to Evaluate the Antimicrobial
Efficacy of Garlic (Allium sativum) and Guava (Psidium guajava) Extracts
on Periodontal Pathogens. Contemp Clin Dent. 2021 Oct-Dec;12(4):389-
395. doi: 10.4103/ccd.ccd_731_20. Epub 2021 Dec 21. PMID: 35068838;
PMCID: PMC8740802.

Soufir, L., Timsit, J. F., Mahe, C., Carlet, J., Regnier, B., & Chevret, S. (1999).
Attributable morbidity and mortality of catheter-related septicemia in
critically ill patients: a matched, risk-adjusted, cohort study. Infection
control and hospital epidemiology, 20(6), 396-401.
https://doi.org/10.1086/501639

Surapat, B., Montakantikul, P., Malathum, K., Kiertiburanakul, S., Santanirand,
P., & Chindavijak, B. (2020). Microbial Epidemiology and risk factors for
relapse in gram-negative bacteria catheter-related bloodstream infection
with a pilot prospective study in patients with catheter removal receiving
short-duration of antibiotic therapy. BMC Infectious Diseases, 20(1).
https://doi.org/10.1186/s12879-020-05312-z

Vandebroek |. (2013). Intercultural health and ethnobotany: how to improve
healthcare for underserved and minority communities. Journal of
ethnopharmacology, 148(3), 746-754.

https://doi.org/10.1016/.jep.2013.05.039

116

Wayne PA. “Methods for Dilution Antimicrobial Susceptibility Tests for Bacteria
That Grow Aerobically”. Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute
Approved Standard-Ninth Edition, M07-A9 (2012).

Widerstrém, M. (2016). Commentary: Significance of Staphylococcus epidermidis
in health care-associated infections, from contaminant to clinically relevant
pathogen: This is a wake-up call! Journal of Clinical Microbiology, 54(7),
1679-1681. https://doi.org/10.1128/jcm.00743-16

Willis K. J. (2017). State of the World’s plants, 2017. Kew, London: England:
Royal Botanic Gardens.

World Health Organization. (n.d.). Antimicrobial resistance. World Health
Organization. Retrieved September 5, 2022, from
https:/www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/antimicrobial-
resistance#:~:text=Antimicrobial%20Resistance%20(AMR)%20o0ccurs%20

when,spread%2C %20severe%20iliness%20and%20death.
