In silico Screening of Annona muricata L. Leaf Constituents and Derivatives Towards Selected Targets of Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus

David John T. Jarillo, RPh

University of the Philippines Manila

Master of Science in Pharmacy (Pharmaceutical Chemistry)

August 2022

ABSTRACT

Type 2 diabetes mellitus, or T2DM, is one of the world's most severe health problems that
is linked to numerous deaths and high health care expenses. Novel enzymes involved in its
complex pathogenesis have been identified, including 11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase
type 1 (11β-HSD1), protein-tyrosine phosphatase 1B (PTP1B), and mono-ADP-ribosyl
transferase sirtuin-6 (SIRT6). In the Philippines, Annona muricata or Guyabano is a
commonly used natural remedy for several illnesses, including type 2 diabetes mellitus.
However, most of these traditional claims have received few molecular evaluations. This
study investigated the phytoconstituents and derivatives of the leaves of A. muricata by
evaluating their binding profiles towards selected novel T2DM-related protein targets
through in silico methods. Among the 36 parent compounds of Guyabano, rutin,
kaempferol 3-O-rutinoside, quercetin, epicatechin, isolaureline, kaempferol, coreximine,
and chlorogenic acid exhibited comparable binding affinities with the respective control
ligands in all models of the 3 protein targets. A total of 672 derivatives were designed,
tested, and compared against the controls and parent compounds in each protein. As a
result, 280 derivatives exhibited more negative binding energies than the controls.
ACMO021, ACMO14, and BCM008 exhibited the highest affinities with 11β-HSD1, PTP1B,
and SIRT6, respectively. Among the potential ligands for each target, ASMO021 is the top
ligand for 11β-HSD1 in terms of pharmacokinetic and physicochemical profiles, while
HCMO004 is for PTPIB and DSMO008 is for SIRT6. The designed derivatives can be
synthesized and further investigated for potential biological effects towards 11β-HSD1,
PTP1B, and SIRT6 through in vitro and in vivo studies.

Keywords: Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus, Annona muricata, In silico methods, Alkaloids, Phenolic compounds

CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTION

Background of the Study

Diabetes mellitus (DM) is a chronic disease where the blood glucose concentration
of a patient is consistently high. The elevated blood glucose levels can either be due to the
inability of the body to produce any or enough of the hormone insulin (Type 1) or its failure
to effectively use the insulin it produces (Type 2) (IDF Diabetes Atlas, 2021). DM is one
of the most severe health problems of the twenty-first century, having more than tripled in
the last two decades, and is associated with significant morbidity, death, and health care
expenses throughout the world (Alzaid et al., 2020).

The number of patients with diabetes mellitus has increased in the past years. In
2011, there were 366 million people with diabetes mellitus, with a projected 50.7%
increase in the worldwide number of patients with diabetes by 2030 (Whiting et al., 2011).
Moreover, recent data from the International Diabetes Federation (IDF) shows that diabetes
mellitus (DM) affects more than 537 million adults worldwide and is estimated to grow to
643 million by 2030 and up to 783 million by 2045 (IDF Diabetes Atlas, 2021). According
to the Philippine Statistics Authority (2021), the Philippines is currently home to 3.9
million patients with diabetes mellitus, and it is considered the fourth leading cause of
death in the country. It has steadily risen over the years, making it a highly silent and
chronic disease.

Among the types of DM, type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) is the most significant
contributor to the burden of diabetes globally, accounting for up to 90% of people with
diabetes worldwide (IDF Diabetes Atlas, 2021). People living with diabetes are at risk of

developing several serious and life-threatening complications, leading to an increased need

for medical care and reduced quality of life. Type 2 diabetes mellitus is primarily
characterized by defective insulin secretion and the inability of insulin-sensitive tissues to
respond appropriately to insulin (Galicia-Garcia et al., 2020). Due to the complexity of its
pathogenesis, several enzymes have been identified as involved in T2DM. Some of these
are 11B-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type I (11B-HSD1), Protein-tyrosine phosphatase
1B (PTP1B), and Sirtuin-6 or Mono-ADP ribosyltransferase-sirtuin-6 (SIRT6), which are
on the list for finding potential therapeutic drugs for these novel targets (Henquin, 2004;
Nguyen & Le, 2012).

The general goals of treatment in type 2 diabetes mellitus are to keep the blood
sugar levels within normal limits, prevent late-stage complications, and decrease mortality
rates. Currently, in the clinical setting, the beneficial effects of standard medicines for Type
2 diabetes mellitus on glycemic levels are well documented, including insulin,
sulfonylureas, meglitinides, biguanides, thiazolidinediones, alpha-glucosidase inhibitors,
and other synthetic drugs (White, 2014). These pharmacological agents work by different
mechanisms, including targeting proteins, mainly enzymes, receptors, and transport
proteins (Choudhury et al., 2018). However, several of these drugs are also associated with
known side effects such as hypoglycemia, weight gain, and other severe complications
(White, 2014). The activities of these medications against the progressive nature of
diabetes and its complications were modest but not consistently effective (Marin-Pefialver
et al., 2016). Thus, developing newer agents with better pharmacological profiles provides
an opportunity for treating type 2 diabetes mellitus efficiently in the future (Belete, 2020).

Traditional healers have continuously used medicinal plants to cure various

diseases, including diabetes mellitus (Fiscal, 2017). Plant extracts have diverse biologically

active compounds against different diseases (Choudhury et al., 2018). A wide variety of
plant-derived active principles representing numerous classes of chemical compounds have
shown potential for the treatment of diabetes. These include flavonoids, alkaloids, tannins,
and terpenoids. There is an increasing number of classes of phytochemical constituents
being added to have potential pharmacological activity. Among plant parts, the leaves are
the most selected in medicinal preparations because of their abundance (Kooti et al., 2016).

Annona muricata is a plant that belongs to the family Annonaceae. It is commonly
known as Guyabano in the Philippines. Its English names are graviola, soursop, and prickly
custard apple (Mina & Mina, 2017). It is a commonly used medicinal plant as a natural
remedy for several illnesses. A variety of foreign and local studies have demonstrated
that Annona muricata leaves offer several potential pharmacological activities such as
hypoglycemic effects (Vasquez, 1990; Adewole & Caxton-Martins, 2009), antibacterial
(Takahashi et al., 2006), anti-fungal (Heinrich et al., 1992), anti-malarial (Boyom et al.,
2011), anti-mutagenic (Moghadamtousi et al., 2015), anti-convulsant (N’gouemo, 1997),
sedative (Souza et al., 2018) and insecticidal (Badrie & Schauss, 2009). It is also believed
to be a uterine stimulant, emetic, digestive stimulant, antiviral, cardiotonic, febrifuge,
nerviness, vermifuge, pediculicide, and analgesic (Adeyemi et al., 2009; Coria-Téllez et
al., 2016). In Laguna, Philippines, one of the most consumed medicinal plants is Annona
muricata, where the leaves were prepared by the method of decoction and taken as a tea
for several illnesses, including diabetes mellitus (Fiscal, 2017). In Tarlac, Annona
muricatais also one of the topmost consumed herbal plants for diabetes mellitus

comprising one-day dosing of its leaves prepared by decoction (Mina & Mina, 2017).

The phytochemical constituents of Annona muricata, the most widely grown
among the 70 species of the Annona genus, have been extensively studied. The main
secondary compounds of the leaves of Annona muricata are acetogenins, phenolic
compounds, alkaloids, and tannins (Gajalakshmi et al., 2012). Furthermore, previous
studies have reported the potential hypoglycemic effects of Annona muricata. Its ethanolic
leaf extract improved the beta cells of animals damaged by STZ (streptozotocin) induction,
and it controlled the blood glucose to achieve normal limits (Adeyemi et al., 2009). While
Annona muricata is a popular and one of the most conventionally used medicinal plants to
treat type 2 diabetes mellitus, the mechanism at the molecular level of the phytochemical
constituents of the medicinal plant is still unexplained. This study will focus on that gap.

Due to the numerous secondary metabolites of traditionally used medicinal plants,
selection of the candidate compounds is crucial in the drug discovery pipeline (Yi et al.,
2018). As the conventional methods of discovering drugs from natural products, such as
extraction, qualitative and quantitative identification, are risky and time-consuming
processes, in silico approach, comprised of computational techniques, assists the process
of drug discovery by making the analysis worthwhile and efficient (Andleeb et al., 2020).
It reduces the number of chemical compounds that must be evaluated through in
vitro and in vivo experiments for pharmacological activity confirmation (Shaker et al.,
2021). One of the in silico methods that are widely used is molecular docking. The principle
of this technique is to predict the ability of a compound as a ligand to bind with a target
protein, usually an enzyme or receptor, to form a stable complex (Abirami & Arulmozhi,

2017).

Several known compounds from the leaves of Annona muricata were virtually
tested against selected proteins targets that have been documented to play a vital role in the
pathogenesis of type 2 diabetes mellitus through in silico methods. This study screened the
potential lead compounds from the leaves of Annona muricata by evaluating the binding
energies of the parent compounds and derivatives with the targets compared to the native
ligands and known substrates through molecular docking simulations. Additionally,
pharmacokinetic, physicochemical properties, and binding interactions were also assessed

using several software programs and online databases.

Objectives of the Study
This study aimed to investigate the binding profiles of Annona muricata Leaf
Constituents against selected proteins related to Type 2 diabetes mellitus through in silico
methods.
Specifically, this study aimed to:
1. Screen the potential lead compounds from the leaves of A. muricata through
molecular docking simulation;
2. Compare the binding energies of designed in silico derivatives with those of the
parent compounds and co-crystallized ligands;
3. Evaluate the binding interactions of the parent compounds and derivatives of A.
muricata with the selected protein targets; and
4. Assess the pharmacokinetic and physicochemical properties of phytochemicals and

the corresponding derivatives of A. muricata using online web tools.

Statement of the Problem

Type 2 diabetes mellitus is tremendously affecting the world constituting a
significant contribution to the enormous rise in the rate of non-communicable diseases
affecting developed and developing countries. Despite significant developments over the
last decades in preventing type 2 diabetes mellitus, no curative agents responsible for
reducing the risk of type 2 diabetes have emerged. Its high prevalence, variable
pathogenesis, progressive process, and complications highlight the urgent need for
effective treatments, thus necessitating the search for new potent antidiabetic agents with
better pharmacological profiles.

The use of plants as medicines has a long history in the treatment of several
diseases, including T2DM. The variety of phytoconstituent classes and the vast differences
in the molecular structure suggest the possibility of different mechanisms of action in
lowering blood glucose. However, more research is needed to evaluate the working
mechanism of potential compounds to analyze their curative properties.

Annona muricata is claimed to possess hypoglycemic properties. Most of these
traditional claims are anecdotal and have received few molecular evaluations. Literature
suggests that the different parts of Annona muricata, specifically the leaves, have potential
pharmacological activities such as hypoglycemic effects. Therefore, there is a need to
support the current knowledge about Annona muricata phytoconstituents and to highlight
the molecular structures and their interactions with selected proteins implicated in the

pathogenesis of type 2 diabetes mellitus.

Significance of the Study

The results of this in silico analysis may provide a future perspective about Annona
muricata on its phytochemical properties as this plant has limited published studies on its
constituents and medical uses at the molecular level. This study will also provide additional
scientific data about the plant and its potential antidiabetic activity by employing
preliminary screening through computational methods. The results of this study may also
be beneficial as a starting point in considering a novel treatment for type 2 diabetes mellitus
as a significant health challenge, constituting one of the leading causes of death worldwide.

Moreover, this study may also provide a direction to future researchers for
investigating the potential lead compounds from the leaves of Annona muricata that will

aid in selecting the bioactive compounds for performing preclinical and clinical testing.

Chapter 2: THEORETICAL BACKGROUND

Review of Related Literature
Annona muricata

Annona muricata L. (Annonaceae) is a medicinal plant that is extensively studied
for its medicinal properties (Coria-Téllez et al., 2016; Alwan et al., 2020). Thorough
investigations have been carried out on the leaves of A. muricata, as the leaves are the most
employed parts used for a wide array of ethnomedicinal uses. Extensive phytochemical
evaluations revealed the presence of various phytoconstituents, including alkaloids,
megastigmanes, flavonol triglycosides, phenolics, cyclopeptides, and essential oils.
Moreover, annonaceous acetogenin compounds are abundantly present in the leaves
(Moghadamtousi et al., 2015).

The phytochemical constituents of Annona muricata have demonstrated significant
antidiabetic results in various experiments. Based on the ethnopharmacological application
of A. muricata leaves against diabetes mellitus, several in vitro and in vivo studies about
the antihyperglycemic property of the phytochemical constituents from the leaves of
Annona muricata have been conducted (Alwan et al., 2020). However, evaluating the
potential of these bioactive compounds as a treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus at a
molecular level has not been explored.

In addition, streptozotocin is a naturally occurring broad-spectrum antibiotic that is
the most frequently used chemical in experimental studies to induce insulin-dependent
diabetes mellitus in test animals due to its toxicity to islet cells (Ward et al., 2001).
Streptozotocin (STZ)-induced diabetic rat models were the most commonly used to study

the antidiabetic effects of Annona muricata. Alloxan-induced diabetic, clozapine-induced

diabetic, and glucose-preloaded models were also used (Alwan et al., 2020). A study
conducted by Adeyemi et al., (2009) and Florence et al., (2014) indicated that the
methanolic leaf extracts in various doses were found to significantly decrease blood
glucose levels, increase body weight, and regenerate the pancreatic beta cells. Aqueous
extracts of Annona muricata leaves in several doses were also found to affect the lipid
serum profile by decreasing total cholesterol (TC), triglycerides (TGs), low density
lipoprotein cholesterol (LDC-C), and very low density lipoprotein cholesterol (VLDL-C)
in rats; the extracts have also increased the levels of high-density lipoprotein-cholesterol
(HDL-C) and the percentage of the anti-atherogenic index (AAI) in the subjects. It also
altered and increased the activity of the antioxidant enzymes such as glutathione,
superoxide dismutase (SOD), and catalase which also have a significant role in the
pathogenesis of type 2 diabetes mellitus in streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats in different
timeframes (Adewole & Ojewole, 2008; Adewole & Caxton-Martins, 2009; Florence et
al., 2014). The researchers have suggested that Annona muricata may contain bioactive
compounds that act as a hypoglycemic agent by stimulating and augmenting insulin
secretion and action.s

Majority of in vitro studies have demonstrated significant effects of various parts
of Annona muricata, demonstrating the plant's antioxidant properties through inhibition of
a-amylase and a-glucosidase. Alpha-amylase converts polysaccharides such as starch to
oligosaccharides such as sucrose, maltose, and lactose through hydrolysis. Further
degradation of these oligosaccharides results in the formation of absorbable
monosaccharides like glucose, fructose, or galactose by a-glucosidase in the intestine

(Hanhineva et al., 2010). Thus, inhibiting these enzymes will eventually result in the

suppression of postprandial hyperglycemia by delaying the absorption of glucose into the
blood circulation (Kim et al., 2000). A study conducted by Berawi et al. (2017) on the leaf
of Annona muricata demonstrated potential inhibitory activity of the methanol extract
towards a-amylase and a-glucosidase in a concentration-dependent manner while the
aqueous extract showed a high total phenolic content. The same finding was reported by
Hardoko et al. (2015) on the aqueous extract of the leaves in suppressing a-glucosidase
activity. In another study, Justino et al. (2018) reported that the ethanolic extract of Annona
muricata leaves contained ethyl acetate and n-butanol fractions had potent antioxidant
capacity. It suppressed the activities of a-amylase, a-glucosidase, and pancreatic lipase and
inhibited the formation of advanced glycation end products. The researchers suggest the
promising use of the Annona muricata leaf, particularly its polyphenol-enriched fractions,
as a therapy for treating diabetes (Justino et al., 2018).

Moreover, one in silico study has been carried out on A. muricata phytochemicals
as ligands on metabolic parameters related to diabetes mellitus. Damayanti et al., (2017)
studied the effect of selected A. muricata active compounds such as rutin, anonaine,
muricatocin A, isolaureline, xylopine, and kaempferol 3-O-rutinoside on the inhibition of
the Forkhead Box O1 (FoxOl) protein, which regulates hepatic gluconeogenesis and
glycogenolysis in response to an insulin signal in the blood and plays a crucial role in the
proliferation process of pancreatic B-cells. According to the researchers, Annona
muricata leaves had comparable or lower free binding energy than the control compound.
Muricatocin A and rutin had an identical binding ability to 66 percent of amino acid

residues, whereas the other four active compounds had the same binding ability to 33

percent of amino acid residues compared to the control with hydrogen bonds (Damayanti

et al., 2017).

Diabetes Mellitus and Potential Targets

Diabetes mellitus has reached epidemic magnitudes and continues to be a major
burden on a global scale (Tabish, 2007). Along with this are the continuously increasing
number of patients diagnosed with type 2 diabetes mellitus. According to the World Health
Organization (2021), the proportion of adults living with diabetes is expected to increase,
and the prevalence has been rising more rapidly in low- and middle-income countries than
in high-income countries. So far, there is no cure for diabetes mellitus, but with healthy
eating, physical exercise, and pharmacological therapy, it can be treated and controlled.

Besides insulin, there are many oral hypoglycemic agents available which exert
clinical effects via different mechanisms. Some of the major groups include Biguanides
such as metformin which is the first-line pharmacotherapy for type 2 diabetes mellitus. It
reduces gluconeogenesis in the liver and kidney through activation of AMP kinase. It also
has an insulin-sensitizing effect with multiple actions on tissues like the adipose tissue,
endothelium, liver, skeletal muscle, and ovary. Insulin secretagogues such as sulfonylureas
stimulate the pancreas to secrete insulin by acting in the potassium ion channels. Moreover,
insulin sensitizers such as thiazolidinediones improve the sensitivity of peripheral tissues
to insulin and include regulation of gene expression by binding to the Peroxisome
Proliferator-Activated Receptors such as PPAR-gamma and PPAR-alpha (Katzung, 2017).

Despite the availability of these major classes of antidiabetic medication, effective

treatment choices, newer diagnostic devices, stricter glycemic goals, improved treatment

guidelines, and increased awareness of the disease, baseline glycosylated hemoglobin
remains relatively high in subjects diagnosed and treated with type 2 diabetes mellitus
(Patnaik & Vaz, 2012). Moreover, mono-target therapy often fails to manage blood glucose
levels and other comorbidities; therefore, therapeutic management of type 2 diabetes
mellitus is often achieved by combining therapy with drugs that act with a different
mechanism of action. However, this strategy may be affected by problems such as several
side effects, toxicity, and unwanted drug-drug interactions. Nevertheless, the benefit of
these combinational therapies is often compromised by low patient compliance, which
could be improved by developing single drugs with multiple targets (Artasensi et al., 2020).

Traditionally, drug design aims to achieve selectivity by using a single biological
entity to avoid other interactions that could result in undesirable side effects. However, this
approach is now considered obsolete, and in recent years, the majority of efforts in drug
design have been directed toward developing compounds with multiple physiological
actions, particularly for diseases with complex etiologies such as diabetes mellitus
(Artasensi et al., 2020).

For potential drug design for type 2 diabetes mellitus, six major potential sites of
stimulus-secretion coupling, and several novel proteins have been reported (Henquin,
2004; Nguyen & Le, 2012). These include:

1. Increase of cell calcium by blockade of potassium ATP channels

2. Increase of calcium by action at sites other than potassium ATP channels

3. Stimulation of amplifying pathways in cells

4. Action on cell membrane receptors

5. Action on cell nuclear receptors.

Many novel targets have been identified related to the complex pathogenesis of
T2DM. This study will focus on three novel targets: 11B-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase
type I, protein tyrosine phosphatase, and Sirtuin-6 or Mono-ADP ribosyltransferase-
sirtuin-6.

First is 11B-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type I (11B-HSD1), a nicotinamide
adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH)-dependent that is vastly expressed in human
tissues, specifically in fat and liver tissues, and is thus responsible for the reduction of
cortisone to its active form, cortisol, which is essential for homeostasis regulation (Gregory
et al., 2020). The circulation of cortisol is centrally controlled by hypothalamic-pituitary—
adrenal (HPA) axis, it certain follows a cascade wherein in stressful situations, the
activation of HPA axis begins with the secretion of corticotropin releasing hormone (CRH)
followed by the release of adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) by the anterior pituitary
gland, which in turn circulates through the bloodstream to adrenal cortex which stimulates
adrenal gland to produce cortisol (Rodriguez et al., 2015). Although the HPA axis regulates
the circulation of cortisol, the glucocorticoids action in tissues is primarily regulated by
two 11B-HSD isoforms, types | and 2, which catalyze the interconversion of cortisol as
active steroid, and cortisone as inactive metabolite (Wang M, 2011).

These hormones are converted into their metabolites in the liver, which are rapidly
excreted through the urine (Liu et al., 2013). Sa- and 5B-reductases convert cortisol to allo-
tetrahydrocortisol (allo-THF) and tetrahydrocortisol (THF), while 5B-reductases convert
cortisone to tetrahydrocortisone (THE). Typically, these metabolites account for more than

fifty percent of the total GC in urine. The ratio of these cortisol metabolites (allo-THF +

THF) to the cortisone metabolite (THE) is similar to the ratio of cortisol and cortisone
levels in the liver (Hoshiro et al., 2006). Consequently, this ratio is frequently used as an
indirect measure of 11B-HSDI activity as a whole (Freude et al., 2016). Moreover,
glucocorticoids such as cortisol oppose the primary effect of insulin, which is to increase
glucose uptake (Geer et al., 2014). Increased tissue activity of 11B-HSD1 may result in
increased intracellular cortisol levels, resulting in metabolic changes such as insulin
resistance, promoting gluconeogenesis, impaired insulin signaling, and increased hepatic
glucose (Figure 1). 11B-HSD1 inhibition is considered a better target for the treatment of
glucocorticoid-associated diseases, especially type 2 diabetes mellitus (Patel et al., 2018;
Almeida et al., 2021).

Several studies have been conducted for the potential inhibitors of 11B-HSD1
(Almeida et al., 2021; Gregory et al., 2020). Carbenoxolone, a glycyrrhetinic acid
derivative, was the first 11B-HSD1 inhibitor tested in humans. Even though it is not
selective, it has demonstrated the ability to increase insulin sensitivity (Andrews et al.,
2003). Gossypol, a polyphenol toxin produced from cotton plant seeds and root skin,
suppressed 11B-HSDI1 activity in the rat liver and human adrenal gland, indicating that it
may be utilized as an inhibitor, although it was later discovered to be a non-selective
inhibitor (Reidenberg, 2000).

Various chemical entities, such as 11B-HSD1 inhibitors from different
pharmaceutical firms are also in the early stages of clinical trials (Ge et al., 2010).
However, despite the high inhibitory and selectivity levels achieved with several molecules
and the demonstrated clinical efficacy in diabetes treatment, no phase III clinical trials have

yet been conducted (Almeida et al., 2021).

Increased
adipocyte
differentiatior

“Gortisone

Cortisol

H6PDH

Gop 6PGL
Figure |: Physiological pathways involving 11B-HSD1
(Tomlinson & Stewart, 2005)

Second is protein-tyrosine phosphatase 1B (PTP1B), an enzyme shown to be the
negative regulator of the insulin-signaling pathway, as shown in Figure 2, thus mediating
insulin resistance (Begum et al., 2021). The binding of insulin to the insulin receptor
triggers a cascade of intracellular events that govern many aspects of metabolic
homeostasis. It triggers autophosphorylation at tyrosine residues, which leads to the
recruitment of insulin receptor substrates (IRS), followed by subsequent activation of
Protein Kinase B (AKT) by phosphorylation leading to glucose uptake and homeostasis.
PTP1B regulates this process by dephosphorylating phospho-tyrosine residues in the tissue
insulin receptor kinase, halting the entire insulin action process. PTP1B is also expressed

in the brain, where it is involved in energy regulation by interfering with the leptin receptor,

thereby affecting body weight status and contributing to obesity (Zou, 2016). Therefore,
inhibitors of this enzyme may be beneficial in the treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus.
Vanadium containing compounds were investigated as PTP1B inhibitors. However,
randomized clinical trials for the treatment of diabetes concluded that these drugs caused
GI distress, showed low efficacy among diabetic patients, and showed large patient-to-
patient variability (Irving & Stoker, 2017). Salicylic acid-based selective inhibitors of
PTPIB were also identified, showing significant interactions with the significant amino
acid residues of the protein (Szczepankiewicz et al., 2003). Triaryl-sulfonamides were
reported to form hydrogen bonding interactions with critical residues of PTP1B (Patel et
al., 2012). However, these potential compounds faced the limitation of poor cell membrane

permeability (Priefer, 2020).

Insulin

Leptin

Energy expenditure

Glucose homeostasis

Figure 2: Physiological pathways involving PTP1B
(Zou, 2016)

16

Lastly, Sirtuin-6 or Mono-ADP ribosyltransferase-sirtuin-6 (SIRT6) is a stress-
responsive protein deacetylase, and mono-ADP ribosyl transferase enzyme encoded by
the SIRT6 gene. Its function in multiple molecular pathways are related to aging,
including DNA repair, telomere maintenance, glycolysis, and glucose metabolism.
SIRT6 has been shown to play a critical role as the principal regulator of glucose
homeostasis. It participates in the expression of gluconeogenesis genes, specifically in the
liver (Khan et al., 2018). SIRT6 is expressed ubiquitously in various tissues, and its
expression at higher levels has been implicated in the regulation of insulin secretion in beta
cells (Moynihan et al., 2005; Luu et al., 2013), suggesting SIRT6 is likely to play an
essential function in pancreatic insulin secretion. Moreover, subsequent studies found that
SIRT6 affects both glucose production and metabolism and regulates pancreatic B-cell
function. Figure 3 shows the critical role of SIRT6 in glucose production and metabolism.
SIRT6 prevents hypoxia-inducible factor 1-alpha (HIF-1a) recruitment to its target gene
promoters, increases mitochondrial respiration, and inhibits glycolysis. SIRT6 binds to and
activates general control non-repressed protein 5 (GCN5), inhibiting the Peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor-gamma coactivator (PGC-1a) and decreasing the expression
of gluconeogenic genes. SIRT6 has also been shown to interact specifically with FoxO1,
decreasing its acetylation and phosphorylation levels, and inhibiting the interaction
between FoxO1 and its downstream gene promoters, thereby inhibiting the expression of
gluconeogenic genes. SIRT6 protects against B-cell dysfunction and apoptosis and
increases insulin secretion (Kuang et al., 2018). Another study investigated how a
SIRT6 enzyme affects blood glucose levels in mice, describing an experiment

demonstrating that blood sugar levels can be dramatically increased in mice lacking the

SIRT6 enzyme (Hasan et al., 2002). SIRT6 paved the way for a new understanding of how
this protein regulates glucose uptake. Therefore, making it a potential candidate to treat
type 2 diabetes mellitus.

Pharmacological modulation of SIRT6 has been the target of several compounds
directly related to future treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus (Bae, 2017; Khan et al.,
2018). Free fatty acids (FFA) such as oleic and linoleic acid can increase SIRT6 activity in
vitro. It acts as a fatty-acid sensor, amplifying metabolic signals into epigenetic responses
that alter essential homeostatic functions outside of metabolism (Feldman et al., 2013). The
flavonoids luteolin and quercetin were also evaluated as SIRT6 modulators and
demonstrated a dose-dependent role, whereby they exert inhibitory activity at low

concentrations and modulatory activity at high concentrations (Rahnasto-Rilla et al., 2018).

Acyl

on O © acetylation
6 6
@? phosphorylation

fit X Ane @
rsroW ©. x |
im srsow
mitochondrial respiration t Pell dai

Glycolysis Y

Ce x insalin secretion
,
y KL NX

{

gluconeogenesis }

Figure 3: Role of SIRT6 in glucose metabolism
(Kuang et al., 2018)

In silico Methods

In recent years, with an increasingly thorough understanding of the structure and
function of compounds, new technologies and approaches have been applied to the
development of medicinal plants. Natural products are a rich source of biologically active
compounds; many of the medicines available are either obtained directly from a natural
source or were developed from a lead compound initially obtained from a natural source.
In silico methods could be exploited for discovering the actions of uninvestigated
phytochemicals by identification of their molecular targets with the incorporation of
chemical informatics and bioinformatics along with systems biology approaches (Yi et al.,
2018).

On the other hand, molecular recognition is a critical occurrence in drug-protein
interactions. Many drugs interact with specific biomolecules before exerting their
medicinal effects. These interactions are specific between molecules and are strengthened
by non-covalent bonding such as hydrogen bonding, metal coordination, hydrophobic
forces, van der Waals forces, 1-1 interactions, halogen bonding, or resonant interaction
effects (Kitchen et al., 2004). A theory proposed by Emil Fischer in 1894, the lock and key
model, suggested that the specificity of an enzyme towards its substrate is based on the two
components displaying complementary geometric shapes that fit perfectly like a "key ina
lock". In this system, the substrate in the analogy of ‘key’ fits appropriately into the keyhole
or the active site of the binding pocket of the 'lock' of an enzyme or receptor to form
a productive biochemical reaction (Tripathi & Bankaitis, 2017). On the other hand, the
induced fit model, a modification of the Lock and Key model proposed by Daniel

Koshland, suggested that enzymes show conformational flexibility and are reshaped during

interactions with a small molecule (Koshland, 1994). These basic ideas of protein-substrate
interactions dominated the logical foundations of molecular docking approaches.

In addition, molecular docking simulation is an automatic computer algorithm that
finds out how ligands or the molecules in the library of interest will attach to their binding
site in a ligand-receptor complex structure (Alonso et al., 2006). It mainly gives predictions
about the ligand conformation and its orientation within the binding site of the target
receptor. Molecular docking has a variety of scoring standards to select the most natural
conformation of the compound and optimize its affinity to the target according to
theoretical analog molecular interactions. It can be used to predict the interaction between
a small molecule and a protein, allowing for the analysis of small molecules’ behavior in
target protein binding sites and the elucidation of fundamental biochemical processes
(McConkey et al., 2002). Examples of such freeware that allows performing molecular
docking are AutoDock (Morris et al., 2009) and AutoDock Vina (Trott & Olson, 2010)

AutoDock Vina is an open-source program that utilizes an efficient scoring function
that permits a faster search technique and gives reproducible outcomes to more
comprehensive frameworks with up to 20 flexible bonds. AutoDock Vina implements an
efficient scoring function optimization algorithm for estimating protein-ligand affinity and
a search algorithm for predicting the plausible binding modes. It repeats the calculations
several times with different randomization and can be performed in parallel with a
multicore machine (Trott & Olson, 2010). As a comparison, AutoDock Vina has a different
scoring function that applies the combination of empirical and knowledge-based, making
the time and memory more efficient. Since it automatically conforms to user input, unlike

AutoDock, points of confinement such as maximum grid map size, number of atoms, and

20

rotatable bonds, are being established. AutoDock Vina can further speed up the
implementation by taking advantage of multiple CPUs or CPU cores; therefore, it is
preferable in terms of speed and accuracy in predicting binding modes and energies. Hence,
AutoDock Vina is faster and more accurate. It calculates the grid charges internally and
sets up the docking much more accessible (Nguyen et al., 2020).

Molecular modifications of the functional or atomic groups of lead compounds aim
to carefully balance the potency or to improve relevant parameters such as in vivo stability,
oral absorption, membrane permeability, absorption, distribution, metabolism, and
excretion (ADME) (Hamada & Kiso, 2012). Bioisosteres are functional or atomic groups
with similar physicochemical properties to the parent atomic groups, and the compounds
with them exhibit similar biological properties and activities to the parent compounds. It is
indicated as the first choice in structural modifications of lead compounds (Hamada &
Kiso, 2012). Identifying the points of replacement and pairs of molecules can be done
computationally and by database searching. SwissBioisostere and MolOpt are free
compound databases that contain information on bioisosteric replacements and how they
work in biochemical assays from published data (Wirth et al., 2013).

Another approach of in silico methods is the prediction of pharmacokinetic
parameters such as absorption, distribution, metabolism, excretion and toxicity, and
physicochemical properties such as size, polarity, and solubility, which are also essential
to reduce the failure of drug candidates in the later stages of preclinical and clinical studies.
This prediction can also be performed using free web-based in silico tools such as

SwissADME and ADMETLab 2.0 online servers.

21

Conceptual Framework

. Ligands
Protein (parent
Targets compounds and

derivatives)

Protein-Ligand
Interaction

fie Profile Pharmacokinetic Physicochemical
meing energy Profile Profile

and interaction)

Figure 4: Conceptual framework of the study

Over the past decades, new molecular targets have significantly increased due to
emerging innovations and genome projects. Proteins and protein-ligand structures isolated
have been widely available and solved by different techniques such as purification,
crystallography, and nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy (Jhoti et al., 2007).
Moreover, the computational techniques for studying interactions of the protein-ligand
complex have also increased and continuously developed.

As a computational technique, molecular docking has become a powerful tool in

the rational drug design pipeline (Meng et al., 2011). It is used to analyze the conformation,

22

orientation, and molecular interactions of molecules being placed into the binding site of a
macromolecular target (Yi et al., 2018). It is also used to predict the relative binding
energies of ligands in protein-ligand complex using a scoring function. Hence, it will
distinguish potent ligands from moderately active and inactive ones.

The independent variables in this study are the Annona muricata phytochemicals
such as the parent compounds, analogues and metabolites that served as ligands and
selected targets related to type 2 diabetes mellitus as the macromolecular proteins. These
two variables were tested independently to form a protein-ligand complex using AutoDock
Vina as the docking program. The resulting binding profiles represented as Gibbs free

energy (AG), pharmacokinetic and physicochemical profiles were evaluated.

Operational Definition of Terms
A. Ligand is defined as any molecule that is capable of binding to a protein binding
site. In this study, these are the compounds that were investigated. These variables
include the Annona muricata leaf constituents and derivatives, native ligands and
known inhibitors through computational methods specifically, molecular docking
towards the selected protein targets hence will screen for its single or multi targeted
potential.

a. Derivatives refer to compounds derived from similar compounds that can
be imagined arising from designed or predicted modifications and chemical
reactions.

i. Structural Analogues are chemical compounds having structural

similarity to a reference compound. In this study, bioisosteres were

23

considered in designing in silico structural analogues. Bioisosteric
replacement was done by generating bioisosteres using the online
web tool SwissBioisostere and MolOpt and will undergo

modifications.

. Metabolites are the molecular substances produced during

metabolism. The metabolites of the potential lead compounds were
predicted and generated using the open-access software tools

Biotransformer 3.0, MetaTox, and SMARTCyp.

B. Protein target refers to any macromolecule by which ligands are being docked for

analysis of its complex system. In this study, the selected protein targets related to

type 2 diabetes mellitus are 11B-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type I or cortisone

reductase (11B-HSD1), Protein-tyrosine phosphatase 1B (PTP1B), and Sirtuin-6 or

Mono-ADP ribosyltransferase-sirtuin-6 (SIRT6).

Grid box values- refer to any numerical values representing the
grid's central position and size in the putative binding site embracing
the significant residues making the binding pocket. In this study, this
was done manually by redocking the co-crystallized ligand for each

protein target respectively.

. Root-mean-square deviation (RMSD)- is a common metric used to

assess the distance between the predicted pose and native pose of
the ligands in the protein binding site. The RMSD cutoff of 2
Angstroms (A) is often used as a criterion of the correct bound

structure prediction (Trott & Olson, 2010) and this was obtained

24

using AutoDock Tools 1.5.7 and Discovery Studio Visualizer. This
parameter was the basis for selecting the appropriate grid box values
based on RMSD. On the other hand, RMSD calculation can also be
applied in assessing the similarity of two three-dimensional
structures of the protein targets. Hence, this was also employed to
determine the structural similarities of each protein target's PDB and

AF2 models. The calculation of RMSD is as follows:

Where:
N= is the number of atoms in the ligand
d; = Euclidean distance between the ith pair of corresponding atoms
C. Binding profile is a collective term that refers to the binding energies,
conformations, and interactions of the ligands to the protein targets.

a. Gibbs free energy (AG)- represents the spontaneity of a system. It is used
primarily for the prediction of whether a ligand has an affinity to a given
receptor. If the binding energy was a negative value, the ligand was bound
spontaneously without consuming energy. The protein-ligand complex with
the lowest Gibbs free energy is considered the most stable. A difference of
2.85 kcal/mol is considered significant (Trott & Olson, 2010).

D. Protein-ligand interactions refer to the representation of the interaction of protein

and a ligand to form a stable complex. This variable was evaluated using software

25

such as AutoDock Vina for the generation of binding energies, LigPlot Plus, and
PyMol to assess interacting residues and possible molecular interactions present in
the protein-ligand complex.

. Pharmacokinetic profile refers to an outline that represents the characteristics of
an investigated compound in the course of drug absorption, distribution,
metabolism, excretion, and toxicity (ADMET). In this study, the in silico prediction
of the ADMET properties of potential ligands was done using an online web tool
SwissADME and ADMETLab 2.0. In addition to the assessment of
pharmacokinetic profile, filters such as Lipinski, Ghose, Veber, Egan, and Muegge
will also be evaluated for the drug-likeness potential of the ligands. These sets of
tules or filters were codified in order to help to define the drug-likeness chemical
space. Wherein each compound, violations of the different rules were evaluated as
a percentage of compliance.

. Physicochemical profile refers to an outline representing a chemical compound's
ability to elicit a therapeutic effect. These properties involve solubility, acid
dissociation constant, partition coefficient, and distribution coefficient. In this
study, the physicochemical properties such as the LogS and LogP of the potential
ligands were evaluated using SwissADME and ADMETIab 2.0.

. Pharmacophores are groups of electronic and steric features that are essential for
a compound to be recognized by a protein target (Wolber & Langer, 2005). In this
study, the pharmacophore models of the potential derivatives were analyzed using
LigandScout 4.4.8 to identify the similar and essential features for the optimal

binding with the protein targets.

26

Chapter 3: METHODOLOGY

36 Parent
compounds

modifications; Metabolite prediction)

Interaction and pharmacophore
analysis

Pharmacokinetic and physicochemical analysis
Data processing
and analysis

Figure 5: Overview of Methodology

3 Protein targets

27

Study Design

This study employs a quantitative non-experimental descriptive research design to
screen the binding profiles of Annona muricata phytochemicals and derivatives towards
selected protein targets. This design reports the potential activity and interaction of the
variables of interest without the application of manipulation or intervention, hence
concluding the potential lead compounds. This was done by comparing the binding profiles
of the parent compounds, derivatives of the phytochemical constituents of Annona
muricata from the native ligands and controls to the selected targets. Evaluation of
pharmacokinetic and physicochemical properties was also done to determine the safety and

drug-like properties of the promising compounds.

Study Setting and Materials

The study was carried out using various software and online web tools such as
OpenBabelGUI v.3.1.1, MarvinSketch 15.6.29, AutoDock Tools 1.5.7, AutoDock Vina
1.1.2, LigPlot Plus, PyMol (educational-use-only), Discovery Studio Visualizer
v.21.1.0.20298, SwissBioisostere, BioTransformer 3.0, SMARTCyp, MetaTox of
Way2Drug, SwissADME, ADMETIab 2.0, MolOpt, and LigandScout 4.4.8. All methods
were performed using a personal computer running on Windows 10 Home Single
Language, 64-bit operating system, Intel® Core™ i5-10300H CPU 2.50GHz processor
with an NVIDIA® GeForce® GTX 1650 ti graphics model, whereas docking simulations
were conducted at the computer laboratory of the University of the Philippines Manila,
College of Pharmacy using computers running on Windows 10 Home Single Language 64-

bit operating system with Intel® Core™ i5-8400 CPU 2.80GHz processor.

28

The summary of the software and online web servers used in this study and their

corresponding Uniform Resource Locators (URLs) can be found in Appendix G.

Population and Sampling Technique

This study implemented a probability simple random sampling technique. These
were based on literature search and computer-generated data. The proteins were selected
as the macromolecular targets based on their emerging roles in the pathogenesis of type 2
diabetes mellitus; hence, they have been proposed as new potential therapeutic targets
(Henquin, 2004; Nguyen & Le, 2012). The selection of proteins and ligands was based on
the criteria stated in the Study Limitations.

AutoDock Vina, with its Python script, has its own command for randomization.
The generation of orientations and conformation poses from ligand input were generated
in a randomized manner. It repeats the calculations several times with different random
seeds, and these runs can be performed concurrently using multithreading which allows

multiple simulations to run simultaneously (Trott & Olson, 2010).

Data Collection and Procedures

The data collection procedure was carried out following a series of steps which
include: the collection and preparation of protein and ligand molecules, grid box
optimization, docking simulations using AutoDock Vina, molecular interaction analysis
using PyMol and LigPlot Plus, generation of derivatives using SwissBioisostere, MolOpt,

SMARTCyp, MetaTox of Way2Drug, and BioTransformer 3.0. Pharmacokinetic and

29

physicochemical evaluation using SwissADME and ADMETIab 2.0, and pharmacophore

analysis using LigandScout 4.4.8.

Preparation of Protein Receptors

Two models for each protein target were selected in this study. The three-
dimensional (3D) structures of the selected protein targets were taken from Research
Collaboratory for Structural Bioinformatics Protein Data Bank (RCSB PDB) and from
AlphaFold Protein Structure Database as follows: 11B-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type
I (11B-HSD1), Protein-tyrosine phosphatase 1B (PTPIB) and, Sirtuin-6 or Mono-ADP
ribosyltransferase-sirtuin-6 (SIRT6).

The preparation of proteins was conducted as described by Amold et al., (2006),
Morris et al., (2009) and Huey et al., (2012). The .pdb files of each protein model were
processed using AutoDock Tools 1.5.7., water molecules and unwanted atoms were
removed, hydrogens were added, and the nonpolar ones were merged. Kollman charges as
electrostatic forces were added. Missing residues of the PDB models were assessed and

built using SWISS-MODEL and the builder’s tool of PyMol.

Preparation of Ligands

Through data mining, 36 parent compounds from the leaves of Annona
muricata were selected in this study. The 3D structures of the drug molecules with a
recorded compound identification (CID) listed and used by Damayanti et al., (2017) were
obtained from PubChem server, and the others were processed using MarvinSketch

15.6.29. The 2D structures of 36 ligands are illustrated in Appendix A.

30

The ligand preparation was conducted as described by Morris et al., (2009),
O’Boyle et al., (2011) and Huey et al., (2012). Each ligand was cleaned in 3D, prepared,
and minimized using the MMFF94 force field of MarvinSketch 15.6.29. The resulting .mol
files were converted to .mol2 file format using OpenBabelGUI v.3.1.1 and further
processed using AutoDock Tools 1.5.7. Non-polar hydrogen atoms were merged, Gasteiger
partial charges were added to the ligand atoms, and the torsion count or rotatable bonds
were checked with the default settings of AutoDock Tools 1.5.7. The resulting files were

saved in .pdbqt format and were subjected to molecular docking simulation.

Molecular Docking Simulations

AutoDock Vina was employed as the main docking program for binding affinity
measurement. All the docking calculations were performed with the set parameters by
using AutoDock Vina, an automated procedure for predicting the interaction of ligands
with macromolecular targets (Trott & Olson, 2010).

For the grid box optimization, protein targets were prepared and saved as .pdbqt
and processed in AutoDock tools 1.5.7, important residues were highlighted based on the
literature search and were enclosed in the grid box. Detection of other binding pockets was
also done by subjecting the protein models to Discovery Studio Visualizer v.21.1.0.20298.
Redocking of the co-crystallized ligands to the empty active binding site was done in PDB
models. To validate the redocking, the root-mean-square deviation (RMSD) of the resulting
ten docked conformations of bound native ligands compared to the original pose were

analyzed using AutoDock tools 1.5.7. The binding pockets of AF2 models were selected

31

based on the topmost site provided by the Discovery Studio Visualizer v.21.1.0.20298
compared with the searched significant amino acid residues.

On the other hand, the successfully identified grid box values were used for the
protein-ligand docking. The ligands were set to be flexible, while the protein models were
set to be rigid. In general, by default, the number of modes was set to nine, three kcal/mol
for the energy range, and eight for the exhaustiveness. Ten trials for each parent-
macromolecule pair were performed and reserved for the binding mode analysis (Boittier
et al., 2020). The molecular interactions of the representative conformation for each trial
were assessed and listed using LigPlot Plus. For derivatives, five trials were conducted in

observance of the consistency of the energies and orientations of each binding mode 1.

Interaction Analysis

LigPlot Plus was utilized to investigate protein-ligand interactions. The
representative conformation having the lowest average Gibbs free energy was selected and
evaluated for molecular interaction with their receptors. The protein-ligand complex of the
36 parent compounds and the topmost derivative per protein target was saved in .pdb
format using PyMol and used as the input file in LigPlot Plus. All the interacting residues,
the numbers, and types of bonds, including hydrogen bonding and hydrophobic

interactions were listed and evaluated.

Generation of Derivatives

After the initial docking simulation of the parent compounds of 36 ligands, the

topmost active parent compounds were subjected to further analysis. Derivatives for both

32

structural analogues and metabolites were considered in this study. For structural
analogues, all considerations for the MolOpt and SwissBioisostere-generated molecular
replacements were subjected to modifications based on synthetic accessibility. In the case
of metabolites, the sites of metabolism (SOMs) were predicted using SMARTCyp online
tool, and the phase 1 biotransformation products predicted by MetaTox and

BioTransformer 3.0 were chosen for this study.

Bioisosteric Replacement

SwissBioisostere and MolOpt are databases of molecular replacements for in silico
drug design. They provide information on molecular replacements by deep data mining
and how they perform in biochemical assays to give an idea of what bioisosteric
modifications can be made to a lead compound to optimize it (Wirth et al., 2013; Jinwen
et al., 2020).

Identification and assessment of the points of molecular substructural replacements
were made after the initial molecular docking simulation of the topmost parent compounds.
Each canonical Simplified Molecular Input Line Entry System (SMILES) of the active
compounds was entered in the SMILES search space reflecting the molecular structure on
sketcher 1 of SwissBioisostere, and the rules from data mining were selected as the method
in MolOpt, points of attachment were labeled as the -R group and queried against both the
database. All the identified biologically equivalent functional groups were filtered out
using the parameter of synthetic accessibility, modified, and exported through a copy-to-

clipboard function or CSV file. The modifications of the 3D structures of all the analogues

33

obtained were processed using MarvinSketch 15.6.29 and were prepared similarly to the

parent compounds and subjected to molecular docking simulations.

Metabolite Prediction

One of the objectives of metabolite characterization is to denote metabolic
pathways and to ascertain the presence of potentially reactive or less toxic metabolites that
are formed (Macherey & Dansette, 2015). The cytochrome P450 system is responsible for
the metabolism of the majority of drugs. These compounds are ideal for exerting a localized
effect without affecting the rest of the body. Phase | biotransformation reactions are
catalyzed by cytochrome P450 enzymes, including oxidation, reduction, and hydrolysis.
This metabolomic biotransformation primarily converts a parent drug to active polar
products and often creates active metabolites (Phang-Lyn & Llerena, 2021). In several
instances, parent compounds are bioactivated, resulting in the formation of additional toxic
metabolites or reactive intermediates (De Graaf et al., 2005).

The .sdf files of the topmost active parent compounds were submitted to
SMARTCyp, MetaTox and BioTransformer 3.0, these are open-access software tools used
to predict the most liable moieties to cytochrome P450 mediated metabolism and possible
metabolites (Rydberg et al., 2010; Rudik et al., 2018; Djoumbou-Feunang et al., 2019).
Phase I (CYP 450) metabolomic transformation was selected for the generation of primary
metabolites. The output results were collected, saved, and prepared the same as parent

compounds and were subjected to molecular docking analysis.

34

Pharmacophore analysis

The method requires a good choice of highly active molecules to ensure efficiency
and to generate the best pharmacophore (Schneidman-Duhovny et al., 2008).

Based on molecular docking results, the top 5 analogues per protein target model
were subjected to pharmacophore evaluation. This part was carried out using the
pharmacophore tool included in LigandScout 4.4.8 essential advance molecular design
software (Wolber & Langer, 2005). This software was utilized to display 2D and 3D
structures with the position and interaction of ligands in the receptor-binding pocket. From
these 2D figures, the types of bonds present were identified by colors and symbols. Four
features, namely hydrogen bond acceptor (HBA), hydrogen bond donor (HBD), negative
ionizable area (NIA), and hydrophobic interaction, were labeled, respectively. The
generated individual pharmacophore of the top 5 analogues per protein model was also
used to generate a shared feature pharmacophore using the alignment algorithm of
LigandScout 4.4.8. The alignment of all selected ligand pharmacophores was matched and
searched for valid feature overlap. Matching all the features, the shared pharmacophore of

each protein model was merged, providing a consensus for each protein target.

Prediction of Pharmacokinetic and Physicochemical Properties

Understanding the ADMET and physicochemical properties of molecules could
facilitate the drug discovery process and aid in the selection of drug-based compounds by
separating the drug from non-drug entities, resulting in a higher quality product (Butina et

al., 2002).

35

After the molecular docking results, all the ligands with improved binding energies
per protein target and their corresponding parent compounds were subjected to
pharmacokinetic and physicochemical assessment. The absorption of drugs depends on P-
glycoprotein (P-gp) substrate and inhibitor and Gastro-Intestinal absorption (GSI). The
drug distribution covers the blood-brain barrier (BBB) and plasma protein binding (PPB).
The metabolism was evaluated using CYP models, specifically CYP1A2, CYP2C19,
CYP2C9, CYP2D6, and CYP3A4, both as substrates and inhibitors. Finally, excretion
depends upon the renal clearance and half-life (T1/2). The ligands were also subjected to
Lipinski, Ghose, Veber, Egan, and Muegge binary rules filters and Quantitative Estimate
of Druglikeness (QED) to assess the favorability of becoming a hit.

The toxicological properties were evaluated for the risk of inhibition of the human
ether-a-go-go-related (hERG) gene, carcinogenicity, and hepatotoxicity. All these
parameters were evaluated using SwissADME and ADMETIab 2.0. The SMILES of the
ligands were used as input values and the CSV outputs were downloaded, listed, and

evaluated.

Data Processing and Analysis

All the ligands were analyzed based on binding energy values against the selected
protein targets. The average Gibbs free energy of the top and lowest values generated from
the trials was recorded and compared. The complex with the lowest average Gibbs free
energy was considered the representative conformation as it may have the most
spontaneous interaction with the protein and be considered the most stable. The standard

deviations of each trial were also checked to align with the 2.85 kcal/mol standard error of

36

AutoDock Vina. For docking reliability, all the docking poses of the top parent compounds
and derivatives were clustered together, and RMSD calculation was performed using
AutoDock Tools 1.5.7 and Discovery Studio Visualizer, from which the values should be

less than 2.0 A.

Study Limitations

This study focuses on the binding of small molecules as ligands towards three
selected protein targets namely 11B-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type I (11B-HSD1),
Protein-tyrosine phosphatase 1B (PTP1B), and Sirtuin-6 or Mono-ADP ribosyltransferase-
sirtuin-6 (SIRT6). Two models were used for each protein: one from RCSB PDB and
another one from the AlphaFold database. The selection of protein targets with their
corresponding PDB codes was based on the availability in the RCSB protein data bank,
resolution, PDB validation, source organism, and the mechanisms of disease and drug-
target interactions involved. As for ligands, the 36 phytochemical constituents of the leaves
of Annona muricata used were selected based on their availability in the PubChem
database provided by their compound identifier (CID). In the docking simulations
performed using AutoDock Vina, the receptors were treated as rigid while the ligands were
treated as flexible molecules. The docking software has its own empirical scoring function.
This study only investigates the potential binding of the 36 ligands and derivatives toward
the 3 selected protein targets; determining their biological effects is outside the scope of
this study. The software and online web tools that were used in this study were selected

due to their accessibility, free academic licensing, and ease of utilization.

37

CHAPTER 4: RESULTS

Grid Box Values

Prior to the docking of A. muricata constituents and derivatives, the co-crystallized
ligands from the PDB models were first redocked in order to establish the appropriate grid
box parameters. The grid box and docking parameters were considered valid by ensuring
that the average RMSD relative to the original pose is less than 2A. These were then used
as grid box parameters for the 36 ligands for each PDB model of the protein targets. For
the AF2 models, the values of binding attributes of site one provided by Discovery Studio
Visualizer were considered as this covers the reported significant residues of each protein
target, respectively. The results of grid box optimization are shown in Table |. The grid

points are spaced at 1A.

Table 1: Grid box values
11B-HSD1
PDB AF2 AF2 AF2
Center (coordinates)
x 51.462 6.531 47.127 1.451 -24.047 -0.853
Y 5.505 1.605 15.482 11.154 26.630 -0.327
-21.655 -7.245 4.526 -8.226 20.292 — -11.688

Dimension (number of points)

Parameters

Z
x 2 28 20 25 20 25
Y 25 25 20 25 20 25
Z 24 25 20 25 20 25

The reported amino acid residues listed in Table 2 were checked and matched in
both PDB and AF2 models. The highlighted residues in both models were superimposed

to visualize the alignment. The RMSD of PDB and AF2 models for each protein target

38

CHAPTER 4: RESULTS

Grid Box Values

Prior to the docking of A. muricata constituents and derivatives, the co-crystallized
ligands from the PDB models were first redocked in order to establish the appropriate grid
box parameters. The grid box and docking parameters were considered valid by ensuring
that the average RMSD relative to the original pose is less than 2A. These were then used
as grid box parameters for the 36 ligands for each PDB model of the protein targets. For
the AF2 models, the values of binding attributes of site one provided by Discovery Studio
Visualizer were considered as this covers the reported significant residues of each protein
target, respectively. The results of grid box optimization are shown in Table 1. The grid

points are spaced at 1A.

Table 1: Grid box values

11B-HSD1 PTP1B SIRT6
PDB AF2 PDB AF2 PDB AF2
Center (coordinates)
51.462 6.531 47.127 1.451 -24.047 -0.853
5.505 1.605 15.482 11.154 26.630 -0.327

Parameters

-21.655 -7.245 4.526 ~8.226 20.292 -11.688

The reported amino acid residues listed in Table 2 were checked and matched in
both PDB and AF2 models. The highlighted residues in both models were superimposed

to visualize the alignment. The RMSD of PDB and AF2 models for each protein target

38

11B-HSD1 1.169A

ow.
Figure 6: Superimposed PDB (Blue; Surface structure) and AF2 (Yellow: Ribbon
structure) models, and RMSDs (A) of the protein targets

40

CBO in 11B-HSD1 (2BEL) 0.819 + 0.003A

1.733 + 0.010A

Figure 7: Superimposed redocked conformations and RMSDs (A) of the bound ligands
(yellow)

The co-crystallized ligand in 11B-HSD1 target (PDB Code: 2BEL) is

Carbenoxolone (CBO). As for the PTP1B target (PDB Code: 2CM8), the ligand 5-(3-

41

Hydroxyphenyl) isothiazol-3(2H)-one 1,1-dioxide (F16) can be found. Lastly, the SIRT6
target (PDB Code: 6QCD) contains Quercetin (QUE). The extracted native ligands were
prepared the same way as the experimental ligands and served as probes to identify and
visualize the amino acid residues or active binding sites shown in Figure 7. The amino acid
residues listed in Table 2 were correctly matched the active sites of the bound ligands in

PDB models and the predicted binding sites in AF2 models.

Figure 8: Two-dimensional structures of the native ligands of 2BEL, 2CM8, and 6QCD

Binding Energies

After successfully identifying the grid box parameters, the 36 parent compounds
from Annona muricata leaves were then subjected to docking simulations. Ten trials were
performed for each ligand for every protein model. The average top binding energy of each
protein-ligand pair can be seen in Table 3. For easier comparison, the mean of the binding
energies of each ligand towards the PDB and AF2 models of each protein target was

calculated and predicted in Figure 9.

42

Table 3: Average binding energies of the parent compounds towards the six protein
models.

Family Ligand

11B-HSD1
PDB AF2 PDB AF2 PDB AF2
Native ligand* 12.1 8.3 9.7 6.5 -7.2 9.3
10.5% -10.5° a - - -
10.1

Substrate

Alkaloids

Annonamine (DAME)

Anonaine (DANE) 82 93 66 7.7
Coreximine (DCXE) 91 91 -7.0 8.2
Isolaureline (DILE) 81-9600 7.1 -8.1
Reticuline (DRTE) 88 86 -6.6 “74
Xylopine (DXLE) 85-90-66 74
Acetogenins — Annonacatalin (GACN) 70 83 5.9 -8.4
Annomuricin A (GAMA) 720 830-54 -78
Annomuricin B (GAMB) 69 87-55 “7.7
Annomuricin C (GAMC) 71 870 5.4
Annomuricin E (GAME) 69 86 56
Annomutacin (GAMT) 7.0 830-57
Annonacin A (GANA) Tl 85-54
Annopentocin A (GAPA) 69 83 -58
Annopentocin B (GAPB) 69 83-57
Annopentocin C (GAPC) 68 83 -58
Cis-corossolone (GCCS) 71 820-54
Gigantetronenin (GGTN) 71 840-55
Murihexocin (GMHN) 69 86 -6.0 7 8.0
Muricapentocin (GMPT) 69 85 5.4 55-79
Muricoreacin (GMRN) 69 86 59 5.6  -8.0
Muricatocin A (GMTA) 69 83-55 5.7 -19
Muricatocin B (GMTB) 69 84  -5.6
Muricatocin C (GMTC) 69 85 5.7
Phenolic Chlorogenic Acid (PCAD) 86 83 0-711
compounds —_Catechin (PCTN) 88 88 6.5
Epicatechin (PECE) 9.0 87 0 -7.7
Gallic Acid (PGLA) 63 62 -58
Kaempferol (PKFL) 8400-8700 27700 71
Kaempferol 3-O-rutinoside(PKOR) -9.7. -106 = -7.1_—--9.0
Quercetin (PQTN) 8.7 9.0 820-74
Rutin (PRTN) 99 110 -74  -76
Other Epiloliolide (RELE) 75° -70 5405.7
compounds —_Loliolide (RLLE) 7300-68 = 5.2 -5.7
Roseoside (RRSE) 84 92 58 68
Vomifoliol (RVFL) 65 68 53-58

* Bound ligands for PDB models, CBO (11p-HSD1), F16 (PTP1B)-Control, QUE (SIRT6)-Contrl
® Substrate; Cortisone (11P-HSD1)-Control
* Product, Cortisol (118-HSD1)

43

8 11B-HSD1
GCCS Spee nreenegeerreeer reg
=PTPIB

SIRT6

Figure 9: Mean binding energies of the parent compounds towards the three
protein targets

It can be observed that the binding energies of the 36 ligands range from of -5.2 to
-11.0 kcal/mol (Table 3). Compared to controls, PRTN and PKOR, as an analogue
exhibited the lowest binding energies in AF2 models of 11B-HSD1 and PTPIB,
respectively. In SIRT6, PCTN showed the lowest binding energy on both PDB and AF2
models.

As for Figure 9, it can be observed that the mean energy scores are generally
lower in 11B-HSD1 compared to the other two targets. It is followed by SIRT6, except for
DAME, DXLE and PKOR, which exhibited lower average scores in PTP1B. Another
noticeable ligand is DANE, which exhibited equal mean energy with SIRT6 and PTP1B.
The rest of the parent compounds bound to PTP1B with mean binding energies have less

affinity than SIRT6.

Derivatization

After initial docking simulations of the parent compounds, the 36 ligands
of Annona muricata were filtered to identify the active ligands in all models which were
then considered for drug design. The analysis was done by applying a 2.85 kcal/mol
threshold based on the standard error of AutoDock Vina, getting the difference between
the binding energies of the ligands and the controls. The results of the analysis are shown
in Table 4.

Among all 36 ligands, the alkaloids DCXE and DILE, and phenolic compounds
PCAD, PECE, PKFL, PKOR, PQTN, and PRTN passed all the criteria for all protein

models.

4S

Prior to derivatization, the top 8 parent compounds were subjected to Discovery
Studio Visualizer to identify the points of replacement for bioisosteres. The sites of
molecular replacements represented by unsatisfied bonds of each parent compound were
analyzed across all protein targets to obtain consensus, thereby establishing the final points
of replacement for each ligand. As shown in Figure 10, PRTN and PKOR has 9 points of
replacements, PECE, PKFL, and PCAD has 5, DILE has 4, PQTN, and DCXE has 3. These

sites were then subjected to initial ligand modifications.

Single Modifications

MolOpt and SwissBioiostere, both of which are databases of molecular
replacements, were used to generate bioisosteres for the selected R groups in the 8 parent
compounds (Figure 10). The suggested bioisosteres were ranked based on the synthetic
accessibility scores of the resulting structures, thereby selecting the specific functional
groups to use in each R. The summary of bioisosteres used in single modifications is listed
in Table 5.

As a result of single site modifications, a total of 305 structural analogues for the 8
parent compounds were designed — 65 for PRTN, 61 for PKOR, 17 for PRTN, 35 for
PECE, 27 for DILE, 33 for PKFL, 31 for DXCE, and 36 for PCAD. These molecules were
processed into ligands using the same preparation as the parent compounds. Table 5 shows

the bioisosteres used for each single site of replacement in each parent compound.

46

Table 4: Summary of the selection of parent compounds

Affinity (7)
Ligand 11B-HSD1 PTPIB SIRT6 Binding
PDB AF2 PDB AF2 PDB AF2 Total Ranking scores
Control -10.50 -10.50 -9.70 -6.50 -7.20 -9.30 (kcal/mol)?

Criteria (kcal/mol)* -7.65 _-7.65 __-6.85__-3.65_-4.35_-6.45

GAPB
GAME
GAMB
GMTC
GANA
GMRN
GMPT
GMTA
GAMA
GMTB
GAMT
GGTN
Gccs
PGLA
RVFL
RELE
RLLE
*2.85 kcal/mol difference of the binding energies of controls
* Mean of the average binding energies for each protein target

MM RK MK KM MK MK KK RK KKK KK ERLE REE RK KY
RRL RK KERR RK KERR KKK KERR KKK RRR KAR KKK
KRALL RRR RRR RRR RR RR KK KK KKK KERR KERR KKK
EH RRR KK RRR RRR RRR KK KKK RRR K RRR RRR KK
NNWUAAA AAA ARR Edo ee eRe RUUUUUUADZADARAD

FHKE QLLLLLV LLL LLL KLE KR LKR LK KKK KKK KAKA G
OM OO OE RK KE KERR KK

47

PRIN PKOR

DILE PKFL

DCXE . PCAD

Ro

eo

+

Zou
‘z

Figure 10: Points of molecular replacements in the 8 parent compounds

48

Table 5: Summary of bioisosteres used in single modifications

‘Substituent® Bioisosteres
~C(=OP ‘C=NOCH,, S=O, CHOH
-OH CH,OH, NHOH, CHs, C(CHs)s, F, OCHs, NH:
-OH CH,OH, NHOH, CHs, C(CHs)s, F, OCHs, NH2, Pyrrole®
-OH CH,OH, NHOH, CHs, C(CH)s, F, OCHs, NHp, Pyrrole*
RS5(n=9)  -OH CH,OH, NHOH, CHb, C(CHs)s, F, OCHs, NH,, Pyrrole’, C(O)NH(CH:):CH,
R6(n=9) -OH CH,OH, NHOH, CH, C(CHs)s, F, OCHs, NH, Pyrrole‘, C(O)NH(CH2):CH
R7(n=9) — -OH CH,OH, NHOH, CH), C(CHs)s, F, OCHs, NH;, Pyrrole®, C(O)NH(CH2):CHs
R8(n=6) — -O- CH), OC(O), Phenyl, (CH,):, CH:C(O), NH
R9(n=6)__-O- CH), OC(O), Phenyl, (CH;):, CH:C(O), NH
~C=Oy ‘C=NOCH;, S=O, CHOH
-OH CH,OH, NHOH, CH;, C(CH;)s, F, OCHs, NH
-OH CH.OH, NHOH, CHs, C(CH3)s, F, OCHs, NH
-OH CH,OH, NHOH, CHs, C(CHs)s, F, OCHs, NH, Pyrrole*
-OH CH,OH, NHOH, CH;, C(CHs)s, F, OCHs, NHp, Pyrrole®
-OH CH,OH, NHOH, CHs, C(CH))s, F, OCHs, NH2, Pyrrole®
-OH CH,OH, NHOH, CHs, C(CHs)s, F, OCHs, NH, Pyrrole®
-O- CH, OC(O), Phenyl’, (CH2);, CH:C(O), NH
-O- CH, OC(O), Phenyl, (CH2)s, CHC(O), NH.
<C=0y ‘C=NOCH;, S=O, CHOH
-OH CH,OH, NHOH, CHs, C(CHs)s, F, OCH, NH:
-OH CH,OH, NHOH, CHs, C(CHs)s, F, OCHs, NH?
PECE -OH ‘CH:OH, NHOH, CHs, C(CHs)s, F, OCHs, NH?
-OH CH,OH, NHOH, CH, C(CHs)s, F, OCH, NH:
-OH CH,OH, NHOH, CH, C(CHs)s, F, OCHs, NH;
-OH CH,OH, NHOH, CH, C(CHs)s, F, OCHs, NH
-OH CH,OH, NHOH, CH, C(CHs)s, F, OCHs, NH;
DILE -0- ‘NH, NCHs, (CH;):, C=O, C(O)NH, OCH, (CH2)s, Phenyl?
-CHs H, CH(CH5):, C(O)CHs, NH, F, COOH, OH, OCH, Pyrrole®
“CH; H, CH;CHs, C(O)CHs, NH:, F, COOH, OH, OCHs, Pyrrole®
-1,3-dioxolane__(CH;OCHs)
PKFL Ri (n=4)___ -C(=O ‘Oxetane’, C=NOCHs, S=O, CHOH
R2(n=9) OH CH, OCHs, COOH, O(CH:):CHs, CH:CHs, NH;, NHOH, F, Tetrazole*
R3(n=9)  -OH CHs, OCHs, COOH, OCHs, CH.CHs, NH, NHOH, F, Tetrazole*
R4(n=9) — -OH CH,, OCHs, COOH, OCHS, CH:CH;, NH, NHOH, F, Tetrazole*
R5(n=2)___-O- CH;, NH
DCXE  RI(n=9)_ -OH ‘CH, OCHs, COOH, C(O)CHs, CH.CH;, NH, NHOH, F, Tetrazole™
R2(n=11)— -O- NCH, C(O)NH, OCH,, (CHi):, C(O)O, CH;, C=O, CHCHs, NH, NHCH;,
C(O)CH:
R3(n=11)— -O- NCH, C=O(NH), OCHz, (CH2):, C(0)O, CH, C=O, (CH:):, NH, NHCFh,
C(O)CH,
PCAD_RI(n-9)—~-OH ‘CHs, OCHs, COOH, C(O)CH;, CH:CH;, NH, NHOH, F. Tetrazole*
R2(n=4)— -C(=O}- Oxetane’, C=NOCHs, S=O, CHOH

(CH, OCH}, COOH, COCH;, CHyCH;, NH2, NHOH, F, Tetrazole*
NHCHs, NH, CH:, (CH), C(O)O, C=O, C(O)NH, CHCHs, NHCH:, C(O)CH;
Oxetane’, C=NOCH, S=O, CHOH.

“Original substituents of the parent compounds

* n=total number of single structurally modified compounds per R
attachment to nitrogen atom (NH)

meta substitution

‘para position

“attachment to C2 atom

Combined Modifications
Following the single site modifications, multisite variations were performed. This
was done by selecting the best functional group per point of replacement of each parent

compound. The average binding energies of each single structurally modified analogue

49

across all targets were calculated. This was then compared to the average binding energy
of the corresponding parent compound in all targets, respectively. For a bioisostere to be
considered, an analogue’s binding energy must be less than or equal to the average binding

energy of the parent compound.

Table 6: Summary of bioisosteres used in combined modifications
Ligand ieee Position Substituent” Binding Energy (kcal/mol)"

R2 -OH F
R3 -OH F

R4 -OH CH;
R6 -OH CHs
R7 -OH F

R8 Phenyl

CH, C(CHs)y
C(CHs)s

Phenyl
Pyrrole!

Tetrazole*
(CH),
“Average binding energy of the parent compound across all targets
* Original substituents of the parent compound
« Average binding energy of the single structurally modified compound per R
“attachment to nitrogen (-NH) atom:
© meta position
“para position
“attachment to C2 atom

50

Table 6 displays the top and best bioisosteres from single modifications that were
subsequently used in combined variations. Some replacement points were disregarded
because their corresponding binding energies did not meet the parent compound's criteria.
Some points of replacement have more than one selected functional group, such as the R1
of PECE and the R1 and R3 of PKFL, because of their equal binding energies.

A total of 297 structural analogues were designed by combining these selected
bioisosteres. This was done by generating all the possible combinations per parent
compound based on the number of points of replacement. In summary, 120 combined
analogues for PRTN, 26 for PKOR, 4 for PQTN, 64 for PECE, 4 for DILE, 64 for PKFL,
4 for DXCE, and 11 for PCAD were generated and tested against the protein targets.

The summary of the structural design of the parent compounds for both single and

combined modifications can be found in Appendix B and Appendix C.

Metabolite Prediction

The 8 parent compounds were also subjected to metabolite prediction. The
CYP450-mediated sites of metabolism were predicted in each parent compound using the
online web server SMARTCyp. These functional groups were considered for structural
modification based on phase 1 CYP450 predicted biotransformation reactions. The
predicted sites of metabolism are shown in Figure 11.

Most of the moieties that were predicted to be labile to CYP450 mediated phase 1
metabolism were carbon, nitrogen, oxygen atoms, and carbonyl groups. PRTN has 11
predicted sites of metabolism, PKOR has 12, PKFL has 8, and DCXE has 6, while the

remaining four compounds have 7. The phase | biotransformation products predicted by

51

the online tools BioTransformer 3.0 and MetaTox were also considered. As a result, a total
of 70 metabolites were generated — 14 for PRTN, 15 for PKOR, 8 for PKFL, 7 each for
DILE, PQTN and PCAD, and 6 each for DCXE and PECE. The summary of structural

modification in metabolite-likeness prediction is listed in Table 7.

PRIN k PKOR

cH
Figure 11: Predicted sites of metabolism in the 8 parent compounds

52

Replacement _ Phase I Metabolic Reaction/s
Hydrolysis
R2 -C(=O)- CHOH Keto reduction
O-dealkylation or Hydrolysis
Aromatic hydroxylation
PKOR RI -OR -OH Hydrolysis

R2 -C(=0)- CHOH Keto reduction
R3-R6 -OR -OH O-dealkylation or Hydrolysis
R7-R12 -H -OH Aromatic hydro: i

PQTN RI -OR -OH Hydrolysis
R2 -C(=O)- CHOH Keto reduction
R3-R7 -H -OH Aromatic hydro:
PECE RI -OR -OH Hydrolysis
R2-R6 -H -OH Aromatic hydro:
DILE RI -NR -NH N-dealkylation
R2 -OR -OH Hydrolysis
R3-R7 -H -OH Aromatic hydro:
PKFL RI -C(=0)- CHOH Keto reduction
R2 -OR -OH Hydrolysis
R3-R8 -H -OH Aromatic hydroxylation
DCXE RI -OR -OH Hydrolysis
R2 -OR -OH Hydrolysis
R3-R6 -H -OH Aromatic hydro:

PCAD RI -OR -OH O-dealkylation or Hydrolysis
CHOH Keto reduction
Aromatic hydro:

lation

“Original substituents of the parent compound

As shown in Table 7, the predicted sites of Phase I are ethers, carbonyls, aromatic
carbons, and tertiary amine. Hydroxyl groups are then produced from either hydrolysis or
O-dealkylation of ethers, reduction of carbonyls or the oxidation of aromatic carbons. On
the other hand, N-dealkylation of the tertiary amine results in the replacement of acyclic
alkyl substituent with a hydrogen atom. Most of the oxygen atoms were predicted to go
through O-dealkylation or hydrolysis, either by adding a single hydroxyl group or two
hydroxyl groups, producing simple structures. The structure simplification was explicitly

indicated for PRTN and PKOR resulting from the possible O-dealkylation or hydrolysis of

53

their ether linkages (at positions 3 and 5). The summary of the structural design of the

parent compounds for metabolite prediction can be found in Appendix D.

Binding Energies of Derivatives

A total of 672 derivatives composed of structural analogues and predicted
metabolites were generated and subjected to molecular docking. For organization purposes,
all derivatives were labelled with identification codes based on their respective parent
compounds, modification types and nominal position in each series. The first character
represents the source from which an analogue is derived — A for PRTN, B for PKOR, C
for PQTN, D for PECE, E for DILE, F for PKFL, G for DCXE, and H for PCAD. The
second and third characters represent the degree of substitution applied on the parent
compound — SM for single modifications, CM for combined modifications and single letter

M for metabolites. The last three digits represent the respective number of each compound.

10.42%
a)

Acthe Structural Analogues
Oe Target

17.41%
a7)

x

Figure 12: Classification of derivatives based on their binding energies

54

Figure 12 shows that out of 672 derivatives, 280 or 41.67% derivatives, all of which
are structural analogues, exhibited mean binding energies which are less than or equal to
the mean binding energy of the control for at least one of the three protein targets. Of these
280, 155 (23.07%) have improved binding energies in just one target, 117 (17.41%) in at
least 2 of the protein targets, and lastly, 1.19% or 8 analogues in all three protein targets.
The 8 derivatives that were found to interact with all protein targets are shown in Table 8.

For metabolite prediction, out of 70, none of the metabolites were subjected to
further analysis because no metabolite exhibited lower or better binding energies than the
controls. Moreover, some of the designed metabolites were also observed to have similar
structures to those of the generated analogues from single modifications in terms of the
substitution of the hydroxyl substituent in the carbonyl groups of the parent compounds.
These include ASM003 and AM004 (PRTN), BSM003 and BM004 (PKOR), CSM003 and
CM002 (PQTN), FSM004 and FM002 (PKFL), HSM013 and HM003 (PCAD). And the
simple structures of PRTN and PKOR, AM022 and BM022 with the hydroxy! replacement

in the R3 and RS ether linkers.

55

Table 8: Structural analogues with improved binding energies in all protein targets

Ligand

11B-HSD1
Control* -10.5 -8.1 -8.3
PRTN? -10.5 -7.5 -7.6
PKOR® -10.1 8.1 -7.1

DILE> -8.9
ACMO008 -lL.l
ACM012 -11.5
ACMO016 “IL.
ACM054 -10.8
ACM055 -10.9
BCMO005 -11.8
BCM006 17

ESM008 “11.2
“Controls: 11f-HSDI° Cortisone, PTPBIB: F16, SIRT6. QUE
* Binding energies of the parent compounds

Table 8 shows that 5, 2, and | of the 1.19% are derivatives of PRTN, PKOR and
DILE, respectively. Among these derivatives, ACM055 has shown to be the ligand with
the highest affinity towards PTP1B and SIRT6, while BCM00S binds the best with 11B-

HSDI1. Their chemical structures can be seen in Figure 13.

56

i re
siege a.
: iB
ACM008
3] igs
1 Lo I J re y

1 - ie ‘G RS

ACM055 BCM005

BCM006 ESM008

Figure 13: Two-dimensional structures of the analogues with improved binding energies
in all targets

All 5 derivatives of PRTN have the parent compound’s R4 hydroxyl group replaced
by methyl. Except for ACM008, their R2 hydroxyls are replaced by fluoro substituent.

ACMO008, ACM012 and ACM016 have their R3 and R6 substituted by fluoro and methyl

57

groups, respectively, while ACM016, ACM054 and ACMO055 have their R7 hydroxyls
replaced by fluorine. In the case of ACM055, its R9 ether linker is replaced by a phenyl
ring.

On the other hand, the 2 PKOR derivatives both have their R3 and R6 hydroxyls
replaced by methyl and fluoro substituents, respectively. BCM005 has a methyl substituent
as its R7 instead of a hydroxyl and a phenoxy ring instead of ether linker R9. The ether R8
linker of PKOR was replaced by an ester in BCM006. Lastly, the sole DILE derivative is
actually an analogue having only a single modification — a phenyl ring that replaced its R1

ether.

60

Py

[-12.8, -12.4] (-12.4, -12.0] (-12.0, -11.6] (-11.6, -11.3] (11.3, -10.9] (-10.9, -10.5]
Binding energies (kcal/mol)

Figure 14: Distribution of binding energies of the potential derivatives in 1 1B-HSD1

In terms of individual targeting, 137 derivatives were observed to show improved

binding energies towards 11B-HSD1. The binding energies of these derivatives range from

58

-10.5 to -12.8 kcal/mol (Figure 14). The majority of which fall within the -10.9 to -11.3
kcal/mol range, followed by the 37 derivatives under -10.5 to -10.9 kcal/mol, 26
compounds fall within the range of -11.3 to -11.6 kcal/mol, 17 compounds under -11.6 to
-12.0 kcal/mol, 6 compounds under -12.0 to -12.4 kcal/mol, and 2 compounds under the
range of -12.4 to -12.8 kcal/mol. The structures of the top 5 derivatives for 11B-HSD1

enzyme can be seen in Figure 15.

ACMO21 ACM036
12.8 keaV/mol 12.7 kcal/mol

on Ls @ ie
es cere Be

ACM044 ACM024
-12,3 keal/mol -12.2 keaV/mol

ACMO18
12.2 keal/mot

Figure 15: Two-dimensional structures of the top 5 compounds in 11B-HSD1

59

The top compounds for the 11B-HSD1 enzyme are all derived from PRTN. They
all possess a phenyl ring as a substitute of R8 and R9 ether linkers. Except for ACMO018,
they also have fluoro substituents which replaced the R2 and R3 hydroxyls. The same
substitution was also applied to the R7 hydroxyl except for ACM024. Methyl groups were
also used as substitutes at R6 hydroxyls in all structures of ACM021, ACM036, ACMO18
and ACM024. The same replacement was also used in the R4 hydroxyls of all the structures

except ACM036 and ACM044.

60
50
40
30

20

[-9.8, -9.5]  (-9.5,-9.2]  (-9.2,-9.0]  (-9.0,-8.7] (-8.7,-8.4] (-8.4, -8.1]

Binding energies (kcal/mol)

Figure 16: Distribution of binding energies of potential derivatives in PTP1B

In PTPIB, 155 derivatives exhibited improved binding affinities. Figure 16 shows
that the average binding energies for this enzyme range from of -8.1 to -9.8 kcal/mol.
Majority of the derivatives fall within the range from -8.1 to -8.4 kcal/mol which

constitutes 51 derivatives, 34 under the range of -8.7 to -9.0 kcal/mol, 32 under the range

of 8.4 to -8.7 kcal/mol, 17 are within the range of -9.0 to 9.2 kcal/mol, 15 under -9.2 to -
9.5 kcal/mol, and 6 under the range of —9.5 to -9.8 kcal/mol. The top 5 derivatives for

PTP1B are shown in Figure 17.

Rane
“SO
(
‘ewe

RI R2
A RS

spp

R7

ACMO14 ACMO021
-9.8 keal/mol -9.8 kcal/mol

ACM028 ACM020
-9.7 kea/mol -9.6 keal/mol

ACM024
-9.6 kcal/mol

Figure 17: Two-dimensional structures of the top 5 compounds in PTP1B

61

The top 5 compounds for PTP1B enzyme are also derived from PRTN. All of the
structures possess a phenyl ring and methyl groups as substitutes of R4 hydroxyl and R8&
ether linker. Except for ACM014 and ACM028, they also have fluoro and methyl
substituents replacing the R3 and R6 hydroxyls, respectively. Fluoro substituents were also
applied as substituents at R7 hydroxyls of ACM014, ACM021, ACM028 and ACM020.
Among the 5 derivatives, ACM014 is the only that does not have a phenyl substituent at

R9 hydroxyl.

60 mae

50

40

20

[-9.5,-9.3] (-9.3,-9.1] (9.1, -8.9] (-8.9, 8.7] (-8.7, -8.5] (-8.5, -8.3]

Binding energies (kcal/mol)

Figure 18: Distribution of binding energies of potential derivatives in SIRT6

Lastly, there are 121 derivatives exhibiting improved binding energies towards
SIRT6 enzyme, the energies of which range from -8.3 to -9.5 kcal/mol (Figure 18).
Majority of these derivatives, 48 to be exact, fall within the -8.3 to -8.5 kcal/mol range,

followed by 20 under the range of -8.5 to -8.7 kcal/mol, 21 under -8.7 to -8.9 kcal/mol, 15

62

are within the range of -8.8 -9.1 kcal/mol, 13 under -9.1 to -9.3 kcal/mol range, and 4 under

the range to -9.3 to -9.5 kcal/mol. The top 5 analogues for SIRT6 are shown in Figure 19.

| J
I J
merarNe Ri oR A
mi eee
ms NG I Li
T 1G
BCM008 as BCM022
-9.5 kcal/mol -9.3 kcal/mol

RI
DCM027 DCM004
-9.5 kcal/mol -9.4 kcal/mol

DCM025
-9.3 kcal/mol

Figure 19: Two-dimensional structures of the top 5 compounds in SIRT6

The top compounds for the SIRT6 enzyme were derived from PKOR and PECE.
For PKOR derivatives, all structures possess a phenoxy ring and fluoro substituent as an
attachment and replacement of R9 ether linker and R6 hydroxyls, respectively. The only

difference between the 2 structures was the presence of a methyl substituent in the R3

hydroxyl of BCM008.

63

On the other hand, all of the 3 PECE derivatives possess a 2-methylpropane and a
methyl group at R2 and R3 hydroxyls. Except for DCM004, having -NHOH replacement
of R5 hydroxyl, all structures possess a methyl! group as a substitute of R5 hydroxyls. A

methyl substituent was also applied as a replacement at RI hydroxyl for DCM004.

Binding Interactions

The representative conformation of each ligand-macromolecule pair of parent
compounds and the topmost derivative for each protein target were subjected to binding
analysis. The binding of the top 8 parent compounds and top 5 ligands per protein target
were analyzed by superimposing their representative PDB- and AF2-bound conformations,
which was done for each ligand-macromolecule pair. After superimposition using PyMol,
the protein targets were deleted, and the ligands were imported to Discovery Studio

Visualizer for RMSD calculation.

Representative Conformations

Since several trials were conducted for the molecular docking of the parent
compounds and designed derivatives, the top poses of a protein-ligand pair were compared
with one another. The RMSDs of these top poses were calculated in reference to a
representative conformation — the top pose from a trial with the lowest Gibbs free energy.
Moreover, selection of the representative conformation is needed for binding analysis. The
average RMSDs of the 8 parent compounds and derivatives for each protein target are

shown in Tables 9 and 10.

Table 9: RMSD values of the top parent compounds relative to the representative

conformation
‘Average RMSD + Standard Deviation (A)
Ligands
11p-HSD1 PTPIB SIRT6
PDB AF2 PDB AF2 PDB AF2

Control* —0.018+0.009 —0.10240.125 0.00940.020 0.01140.019 —0.026+0.017 _0.059+0.047
Native  0.285#0.163" 0.290.135" - - - -
ligands 9.38540.153° 0.40140.154° - - - -
PRTN —_0.52840.189 0.50740.191 0.51840.195  0.48840.191  0.48840.191 — 0.5420.374
PKOR —_0.33140.232 0.45440.169 0.44940.176 0.49840.192  0.49840.1920.52420.191
PQTN —_0.46240.199 0.75140.947 0.50240.185  0.54540.207 0.5450.207 _0.525:0.204
PECE —0.54640.226 0.51020.200  0.48740.185 0.491+0.184 0.49140.184 _0.51540.188
DILE —_0.058+0.039 —0.00540.003 1.590+2.513 0.13040.008 0.130#0.008 —_1.182+2.423
PKFL —_0.480£0.176 0.47940.185  0.47040.179 0.46840.186 0.468+0.186  0.42540.242
DCXE —0.28540.145 —1.09942.418 0.44340.203 0.37740.142 0.37740.142 0.326+0.135
PCAD —_0.64320.237 0.54240.229 0.52840.209 1.40841.3621.40841.362 _0.551+0.209

“Bound ligands for PDB models. CBO (11f-HSDI:2BEL), F16 (PTP1B:2CM8), QUE (SIRT6:6QCD)

* Substrate: Contisone
* Product: Cortisol

Table 10: RMSD values of the potential derivatives relative to the representative

conformation
Protein

11B-HSDI

Ligand

ACM021
ACM036
ACM044
ACMO18
ACM024
ACM014
ACM021
ACMO028
ACM020
ACM024
BCM008
DCM027
DCMO004
DCM025
BCM022

Average RMSD + SD (A

PDB model
0.295+0.169
0.326+0.183
0.386+0.220
0.33140.194
0.366+0.208
0.326+0.183
0.360+0.203
0.660+0.864
0.579+0.372
0.410+0.322
0.39240.222
0.313+0.190
0.23140.159
0.222+0.192
0.39340.221

65

AF? model
0.318+0.183
0.27940.181
0.479+0.344
0.370+0.210
0.325+0.194
0.396+0.224
0.28240.160
0.354+0.202
0.37740.225
0.698+0.876
0.38140.220
0.319+0.190
0.250+0.155
0.422+0.551
0.313+£0.185


Parent Compounds

All 36 Annona muricata parent compounds together with the known substrates and
co-crystallized ligands — cortisol (CTL), cortisone (CTN) as control and carbenoxolone
(CBO) as the native ligand for 11B-HSD1, F16 for PTPIB, and QUE for SIRT6 were
subjected to interaction analysis with the 3 protein targets to determine the types of
interactions present, and the interacting residues involved. Since every protein target has
two models, PDB and AF2, identifying the residues was done per protein model to compare

their similarities and differences regarding interactions with the experimental ligands.

Table 11: Summary of the interacting amino acid residues in 11B-HSD1
RESIDUE PDB AF2 RESIDUE PDB AF2
THRO40
GLY041
SERO43
Lys044
GLY045
ILE046
GLY047
THRO64
ALA065
ARG066
GLY091
THRO92
METO093
ASNI19
HIS120
ILE121
THRI22
ASN123
THRI24
SERI25
LEU126
ASN127
LEUI28
PHE129
HIS130
ASP132
HIS135
VAL168

tbe b tee tt

ee
tthe te tte tees

ote te
see tteetteeeste

eet tee eeteeee
oe ee

tee eee retest

66

Additional interacting residues have been observed with the 36 parent compounds
aside from the reported amino acid residues listed in Table 2. For 11B-HSD1, Ile121,
Thr124, Leu126, Prol78, Vall80, Leu215, Gly216, and Thr222 exhibited interactions with
the ligands. The cofactor NADPH was also observed to interact with the ligands in PDB
model. On the other hand, Thr122, Asn123, Ser125, Asn127, Leul28, Phel29, His130,
Asp132, His135, Alal81, Alal82, Gly229, Ile230, His232, and Leu262 are the active
residues to interact with the PDB model, while Thr040, Gly041, Ser043, Lys044, Gly045,
Tle046, Gly047, Thr064, Ala065, Arg066, Gly091, Thr092, Met093, Asn119, His120,
Val 168, Ser169, Lys187, Ile218, and Thr220 are also the identified residues to interact with

the AF2 model (Table 11).

RESIDUE

+

re eS

teeter ttt eeeeeee terest
HEE HEE tHe tt eee teeeest

+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+

PHE182

67

In PTPIB, additional interacting residues were identified — Tyr020, Arg047,
Gly259, and Gln266. The amino acid residues GIn021, Lys116, and Thr263 are also
considered active residues to interact with the PDB model while Ala027, Ser028, Asp029,
Lys036, Asn042, Asn044, Arg045, Phe052, Leu088, Serl18, Leul19, His320, Asn321,
Gly322, Cys324, Arg325, Glu326, Phe327, and Phe328 to interact with AF2 model (Table

12).

Table 13: Summary of the interacting amino acid residues in SIRT6

tte
Che tte tte etter eet teetgste

+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+

t+ etteee

68

Lastly in SIRT6, Gly111 and Thr213 were reported in previous studies but did not
show any interactions in any of the parent compounds. However, additional interacting
residues were observed — Gly054, Asp063, Arg065, Gly066, Val070, Trp071, Gin113,
Asn114, His133, Asp187, Trp188, Thr215, Ser216, Ile219, Asn240, and Gln242. The
cofactor ADP-ribose was also observed to interact with the ligands in PDB model. On the
other hand, the residues Pro010, PheO11, Lys015, Gly052, Ser056, Thr0S7, Gly060,
Pro067, His068, Gly069, Glu074, Leu078, Ala079, Pro080, Lys081, Met136, Met157,
Val170, Asp183, Ile185, Leu241, Asp252, Gly256, and Tyr257 are active residues to
interact with PDB model while Asn004, Tyr005, Ala006, Leu009, Tyr012, Asp014,
Leu186, Glul89, Asp190, Ser191, Asp194. Leul97, Alal98, Leu217, Gln218, Arg220,

and Pro221 with AF2 model (Table 13).

69

Ei il i ed iS end EER Eabl T ]

HESS Rl [aye FR

3] EEREES AEBS =|

EEE a=] [2 al _| [ala Ale!

ara Al LUBA AEE aL =
Nil BEBE EE) a] EJ eal BEEBE =]
EEE SS BSE EA ABE SSEG0SSE05 =|]
(else FSCSRCME al alelololel | lel [le/=l=|a lala | ra
EES =| [aI =| [3 | BEES Ic] BE

Ey FHLLLSSER BEBE | BREE a

| [= EER I _[al a ESGEC mls)
EERE i =] =|} | {aI a] [ajelay [=]ala ys)

EE EES SEES ABE = | [R/A]3) T=[@[=[ [3] A
SEES SESS Sees SEES GEESE RE SeSeseoeesee
=]]f=] TRyR[R) [3[=]-)ala [3]3]o SEBEEE ca] BEEEBEES SESESSEE8

[=f] lai=| [al BEE a] [a AEM ca al [=lala}al [|] fal [ay al _(=|2
SESSSe SS FEE cel fal TT aleol=[ ala foal | fal [almfal [al [Al afo[z |S ERSR
SEER BEEBE EE BEBE Ej eo] [ala] SELGE5 5
ESERE Ej =[5[e( {alsa BEE) fF AEE SEGRE SSSSseGee
SEES ala FSoSSSee SERRE EG =| [eal] |) |e] [eo] 3] 3] als
Sseaee E BEG Ea SSSEGG0ESEo BEES SEES Pblaoeee
SSSanm EaG SEG EREEREE eal [ea| en] ca] a] 2] en] en] ea] en] 3] ]ea] 5
SEES ERG | |e] BERBER EERE al [al aloo] a] afefeleafeol [fa [al [|S |
EEE ERGSSCmE FEROS ECE EGS SS SS Seoeee BEE
WAV, [3)3)=[A[3)5) =] BEHSERES SEHR EREE BEEBE SSEESEELESEeeee
anv9a_ [=/afE[A[R[E] [ale =|] 2] >| [a BEEBE oa] al [3] fen] BESEEEE =s)
anvo,_ [3[=[A[3/3)=) [Ale FEDS BEB SEERS FBEEE [| EEG | [ala]
onvel_(=[a[=[3/3[=[ 1 [iat [f= [fell fel 73] FSOOSCEEOEEOECESEEoeSSeas Als
=]=[=][3]=] [Ai] BEHSEEES SEBEEE ea] AEBS en oo EI |
E[=[=[l=| el) elle! [olelal| eajealmleal | fel | fel |exle|eo|a|e|=|o) |=] al als

=| (=|) I= FSRSSSer PEHSEOR ESSE CSOs =e

EX [aI fea] emf] Teal [Toa al TTT la Ee
aadl ESSE ili ELESSS | eal |= lel = EEE I ES
aiid] -) | FESHRSmS ‘eo fe@lat [Al [/2) SI
axod [Ay [E[A] JR EEBEES =[o} 3] |i | ABBE |=] 3] i Ea
anval | =f || | SESHSES a] [eofan) SEES =|
aval Fac BEGG a Be) BAG Sct l=
1 ESE ESS al [A] =| BEEEEEESES =a
ND ASS a)a1=I Te} Ts 2] [=| [|l1ele) =e)
oa (3) [AT [3 =[5 =I E alapalel Te fel [afe) [a fa|ol fen EEER
2 Islalslslelelslslelsialalslelelatalalalalelalalalelaialelelelalaletelalalalalalalelelsielalajalstslalelalslaleiils
2 Fass ea ee a el a Eb Pd EEE
2 SSIASISISEl=| SISlE|S| BzIFIE|S1E|S) S| 2) S212] 225] 21215] <|e2|515 |<] =] 4) She] S|= [Fle] <|<|S|e|=|S |= 13] 5) 51>

Table 14: Summary of interactions in 11B-HSD1

Green: PDB mode!
Blue: AF2 model

70

Gold: Both models
I-Bond interaction

L: Lipophilic interaction

B: Both interactions

HH

The interacting residues listed in Tables 11, 12, and 13 were further analyzed to
identify the top active residues that tend to possess a high affinity and selective binding to
each protein target. And to further analyze these complexes, the types of interactions were
categorized into hydrogen or hydrophobic bonds.

Table 14 shows that among the identified amino acid residues in 11B-HSD1, out of
the 39 (non-cumulative) number of ligands, Ser170 and Tyr183 are considered to be the
most active residues as they showed the greatest number of interactions with the docked
ligands having a total 38. On the other hand, out of 78 (cumulative) number of ligands,
Serl170 exhibited the most number of interactions, with 76 interacting ligands in both
models.

As for the type of interactions, out of the 78 (cumulative) ligands, Ser! 70 exhibited
the greatest number of hydrogen bonding with all the docked ligands in 11B-HSD1 having
a total of 43 while Ala223 exhibited the greatest number of hydrophobic bonding having a
total of 49 interacting ligands.

In PTPIB, among the identified amino acid residues, out of 37 (non-cumulative)
number of ligands, Tyr046, Phe182 and Ala217 are most active residues as they show the
greatest number of interactions with the 37 docked ligands. In terms of the total number of
ligands in both models, which is 74 (cumulative), the same amino acid residues exhibited
the most number interactions, specifically to interact with all docked ligands (Table 15).

On the other hand, out of 74 (cumulative), Asp048 exhibited the most number of
hydrogen bond interactions, specifically to interact with 37 ligands while Phel82 for

hydrophobic interactions with 49 interacting ligands.

71

PTPIB

in

31]

H/3q

B/8/8/8/B[8/B/B[B[B/B/B[B/B/BIL[L[B/BIL[BIcLIL [BIL |r[ Bs

TAAYT

1 [Bz

asea| a
ary)
aTae
Nid)
NIOd=
woud =
Taal =|
V19di
wad)
NiDd=|
avod\=
DLW) =) =|
SLND
VLW9)=
NUW9|=/=|
Law|!
NHW|=|
NISD=
S995
dav5|5] 5]
fdv9|o/=|
Vvav9|2
WNV9/2 |
IAVd|2
anv9|2|[3
OWS)
anv5|2| EE
VAV5/2/3| E|
Novo] [=
axa)
aud
aud
axod|
aNVG|
aNVG)
ora

-

LLB
a

i

ia

H.

L

it

H

fo

B[BIL {ras

B/B/B/B/ BIL {LI L[BiL [Bla
L
ni

|

L
L
L

LIL|B
L{Bic{Lie

4] B/C [B/B/B[B/B/ Hn] B/ B35

LIL
nina

LIL

ie
Lfafal [|
Lal

B

H
i
ie

|

L|B/a
H
HAC [AA
B/B[B/L]4[8/B/B/B/A|B/H[B/B/B/H[L[H[BIL[BI/L [HILL

Neca
B
LI
HIJH/H

L
L{t]BIL

Ala2i7 [H|L{L [A] LLB] B/B/B/B/B[B/ B/C [B[B/B/B/c[B/LIL[B/B/AIL[B/ BIC [Bale] cic [3:
BILIL[t

LIH]L

L{L[w

H

L

LIt{e
L

it

B/B/H/B/B/L[B/BIL
8/B/B/B/H[5[B[B[B/ BIL] B/B/B/B[A

it
LIL {fee
L
L
H

LILI irye
BILI TILA
HH
B
LL{e feel ie
LIL|_jLiL

B
ie
Liale

LBL

L
B
BIB
ie
Haye
L
H[B/L|a[B
{LIL [t[e[e}s]B[c |B
LIL
LIL
Lc fAle ln
BIBI

Lic

i

ie
HIT
B
H
ie

1
i
H

L
if

LH] LILA
H

H|BILIH]H

B/BIL
Te
a

fafa

Livi [ce faley eee ie

HILL
B/B/[B/B/B/B/B/B/B/B

Ale [al

i

B

L

L

HH

B/L|H/s8/B/B[B[B]H

L
Te

LIL

B
L
H
Bit] [B
7
iu
LIL
L[B/ BIT
LIA]
LIL

L{L|B/B

fT fu

BIL /B/C[B/5/B/B/B [BIB
L
L

L{]B [BIL

i

iy
LH

it
ih
1
L

L
irs
B
te
i)
LIL

LIL{cie

ui

Summary of interactions

L
LILIL icicle [BlalB[B

Pheis2 [L{L|L [BILL] B/B/B[B

Aio27 [LLL [eye fe
Ser028 | L

‘Asp029 [LC].

Lys036

‘Asn042

‘Asn044

‘Argoas

valoa9 [1
Phe052
Ser 18
Leul!9
Ser216 [H
e219 [H
e261
Gin262 [L JL
Thr263
His320
‘Asn321

Tyr046 [LI LILA] L IL] 8] 6/8 [8] B/B[B/B/B/B/B/B/B/B

H
Arg2s4 [A[L LIL [L IL
Gly259 [LIL IL [LPAI

if

Tyo20 [Jae [ee [
Argo24 [AIL [CL [L [CC

Table 15
Residues}
Gin021
‘Arg047
‘Asp048 [L[B
Leu088
Lys116
Lys120
Asp181
‘Cys215
Gly220 [H
‘Arg221
Met258 |L
Gin266 |H.
Gly322
Cys324
‘Arg325
Glu326
Phe327

72

TALE

BIBI3:

L3:
HA]!

4

[cfc

L
L{BIL 3:

L
H

L
7
im
LLL

BIH

H

H{L]A{C Aaya 3i}

Lae lei ire

TT

Lciefefe

L[BICIL IL

Lae

HiL

L[BiL[B

af

L
L

L
L
L
H

LILIAIL ILI LILI LIL [ LI ]3

L

Lit

LIL

HH] AICI

BIH

:

H/ACIC
a

{Hl |

B/B/B/ BIL [AIL

LIcfefefe

He

alata

L

LIL

H]H/H

H/A[H

LIcicie

te

L

it

LILILILIBIB
LILI eI L Lie

H
BIB/BILILIL
i

LILILIL

H

LB

LILIL

Lit
Lit

B
L
HALA

L

H]H/A/A] HI
Ls
i

L
H

L
iG

Lie

BIB
L]H]cJa[aH]H

LILI ee ieee cei

LIL
LIL

FOG EN eS OS
ie

LILieir ie
os os
LILILIe

LILI epecieie

:

L

t

1

B/B/B/B/B(B/B/B/B/B/ BIL || B/B{Bl BILL BIBI3

:

if

HH

H

Leelee icici

LILirie

i
rs LILILILILILILILILIL
Fd OM NEY BN NS a

LIL

L

LIL{ecie

8 OS

8 8 EH a
LIH|L}H] A) BILIHIL | AHH] AIH
H

LIL{BiLic[BlB

BIL

a

LIL

L{BIc{LiLie

:

HLA] A]

H]AA] LA

i

a

DEH

iG

if,

a

$0 BE BN NN NN BN

LILI ie

B/B/B/B/B/B[B/B/AlB/B/ BIL
a

Laie ice

BH] B/B/B/B/B/H/B/B/B/B/B/B/B

B/H]B/B/B[B/B/H[B/ BIH
LiLie fee

L
Lei ie

HL [A[H
HiH| HH

$9 FN NE a a

Liefeie {ee yale (elec faye

au
Liefefe elec ee ieee ie ye icici

Live eee (ei |atatete cpa papayatc te

L

Ui

LILI Lire

LIL[e {cic

L
LILe{eeieie

i)

LILIe ieee elec [e fey

LILI IL

a
L
L

ie

L

L

Fe NN OM ME BN A

B

ia
H
L

i
1

iG

£8 8 NY yD

1B
L

19

i

i
LILI
cat

i
LIL

i

L

CL eie ieee yaya [ei fale cS

L

i

ie

ti

L

iG

[alae

L

imo

L

a

CIC eI Ic cei cei {eye ie

Table 16: Summary of interactions in SIRT6

Tyr005 [IL

‘Asn004

Leud09 [LC
Pro010

‘Ala006
PheOIt

Tyr012

Asp0l4

‘Gly052

‘Ala053 |.
Glyos4
Ser056
Thr057
Gly060

Te061
Pro062 |
‘Asp063

if

Phedos [B(L |] B/L [BIL] B/B/B[B/B[B/B/ BIB
H
iG

‘Arg065 |L.
Gly066
Pro067
His068
Gly069

Vval070
Trp07

Leu078
‘Ala079
Pro080
Lys081

|

Glu074

|

Phe086 |L_

PheO82
Ginti3 [LC
Asnii4

‘Valls [L.

Hisi33 [L
Met 36
‘Met 57 [L

Aspli6 |
Vall70

Te 185

‘Asp183
Leul86

Ser 91

‘Asp187 [L
Trpi83 [L
Glul89
‘Asp190.

Leul92

Asp194

Leul97
‘Alal98
Gly2i4

ne219 [LILI LIL IL

Ser216

Thr215
Leu2i7,
Gin218

‘Arg220

73

Table 16. Continued

iG elaleleiale|
Residues| El<|< alo 3} <<} a} cel z| | oa] 62] ca] a] —
2g 2218 PRR REEREREEEER
a6 BS}5} 3|5) Sl | el | | oe | ond Be
Pro221 LILIL LIL L 1

ce] [e c 5
i
i i
Pes L
Totat_[18 13] 11] 26 19] 24] 19] 39] 34] 35137133 32] 364 32] 33] 35] 30] 40] 37] 3] 34 38 33) 37] 244 204 119 2429]21] 29] 141
Green: PDB model
Blue: AF2 model

Gold: Both models
H: H-Bond interaction
L: Lipophilic interaction
B: Both interactions

Among the identified amino acid residues in SIRT6, out of 37 (non-cumulative)
number of ligands, the reported amino acid residue Phe064 is considered the most active
residue as it shows the greatest number of interactions with all docked ligands.
Furthermore, it also considered to have most number interactions in both PDB and AF2
models having 74 interacting ligands.

However, as for the types of interactions, out of 74 (cumulative), the unreported
amino acid residue Arg065 and Ile219 exhibited the most significant number of hydrogen
and hydrophobic bonding interactions having 33 and 67 interacting ligands, respectively.

Lastly, the superimposed representative conformations of the co-crystallized
ligands, controls and top 8 parent compounds alongside their RMSDs are shown in Figures
20, 21, 22, and 23.

Each comparison of the superimposed ligand structures of the controls from the
protein-ligand complex of both models displays an RMSD higher than 2.0A (Figure 20),
specifically for the control in PTP1B, which generated the highest value of 11.853A,

followed by QUE of SIRT6 having 10.798A, and 9.409A of CIN in 11B-HSDI.

74

In terms of the parent compounds, although as positioned in the same binding
pockets, different orientations in different locations have been observed yielding RMSDs
greater than 2.0A. In 11B-HSD1I, PCAD yielded the highest RMSD having 12.954A, while
PRTN had the lowest RMSD value of 6.613A (Figure 21). In PTP1B (Figure 22), PCAD
also yielded the highest RMSD of 12.148A, while PKOR had the lowest RMSD value of
2.294A. In SIRT6 (Figure 23), PRTN had the highest RMSD of 14.511A while PQTN
yielded the lowest RMSD score of 8.805A. The summary of the RMSD values is listed in

Table 17.

CBO in 11B-IISD1 F16 in PTPIB
537A, "S

CIN in 11B-1ISD1 QUE in SIRT6
9.4094, 10.798A

CTL in 11B-HSD1
10.076

Figure 20: Superimposed docked conformations and RMSDs (A) of the controls and
native ligands with both PDB (blue) and AF2 (yellow) models of the protein targets

75

PRIN PKOR
6.613A 6.613A

PRL
7.049

PCAD
12.9544

Figure 21: Superimposed docked conformations and RMSDs (A) of the top parent
compounds with both PDB (blue) and AF2 (yellow) models of 11B-HSD1


PKOR
2.2944

PKEL
11.602,

DCXE PCAD
10.7724 12.148

Figure 22: Superimposed docked conformations and RMSDs (A) of the top parent
compounds with both PDB (blue) and AF2 (yellow) models of PTPIB


PKOR
13.9974

QUIN PECI
8.8054 13.678A

DILE PKFL
14.201A 12.4894

DCXE PCAD
10.9204 UL.757A

Figure 23: Superimposed docked conformations and RMSDs (A) of the top parent
compounds both PDB (blue) and AF2 (yellow) models of SIR


Table 17: Summary of the RMSD values of the controls and the top 8 parent compounds

5 RMSD Values (A)
Ligand 11-HSD1 PIP1B SIRT6
Control 9.409 11.853 10.798
PRTN 6.613 11.194 14.511
PKOR 7.047 2.294 13.997
PQTN 8.831 11.759 8.805
PECE 8.772 6.730 13.678
DILE 8.005 13.149 14.261
PKFL 7.049 11.602 12.489
DCXE 6.559 10.772 10.920
PCAD 12.954 12.148 11.757

Derivatives

The top derivative of each protein target shown in Figures 15, 17, and 19 were also
subjected to interaction analysis. The orientations and interacting residues of each analogue
compared with those of the corresponding parent compound for each model of the 3 protein
targets were analyzed.

Figure 24 and 25 show the interactions of CTN (A) as control, PRTN (B) and
ACM021 (C) in the PDB and AF2 models of 11B-HSD1, respectively. In the PDB model
(Figure 24), the cofactor NADPH exhibited a hydrogen bond interaction with the control.
This interaction was also observed with PRTN. Hydrophobic interactions of Tyrl77,
Val180, Thr222, and Ala223 with both CTN and PRTN were retained. On the other hand,
Leu217 exhibited a hydrogen bonding in both PRTN and the analogue ACM021.
Interactions were also retained with Leul26, Val180, Ala223, Gly216, and the cofactor
NADPH. Furthermore, hydrogen bonding between ACM021 with Gin234 and Alal72 was
observed, and additional hydrophobic interactions were also observed with Leul71 5
Ala226, Val227, Gly229, Ile230, Val231, and Met233. As shown in Figure 24D, a flipped

position was observed between the binding pose of ACM021 (green) and the parent

79

compound PRTN (white) leading to a change in the types of interactions and additional

interacting residues.

Ae
et 9
A. ° jus
oe pe vee
(Ons en
TO? matte a Pala ee gt,
‘@
ote ayn
1,
Lae
‘cm
ye
ic Tne D
“2

Figure 24: Binding interactions of ACM021 with 11B-HSD1 PDB model

80

Figure 25: Binding interactions of ACMO021 with 11B-HSD1 AF2 model

In the AF2 model of 11B-HSD1, Serl170, Tyr183, Gly216, and Tyr183 exhibited
hydrogen bonding with CTN (A). For these active residues, Ser170 also exhibited the same
interaction with PRTN. In terms of hydrophobic bonds, Gly045, Ile046, Thr220, Thr222,
and Ala223 were also found to interact with CTN and PRTN (B). Moreover, hydrogen
bonding with amino acid residues Lys44, Asn119, Serl170, and Gly216 were retained.
Hydrophobic interactions with Thr220, Leu215, Thr124, Val231, Leu216, Tyr183, Tyr177,
Ala223, Ilel21, and Thr222 were still evident for both. Additional interactions were
observed with ACM021, such as hydrogen bonding with Gly38 and hydrophobic

interactions with Val180, Val227, Prol78, and Met!79. The overlaid position of ACM021

81

with the binding pose of PRTN shows that the substitution of the two phenyl rings to the
two linker groups extends and adjusts the whole structure inside the binding site leading to

additional interactions with the last aromatic ring.

Acwos

é
ca
ns
oe

Figure 26: Binding interactions of ACM014 with PTP1B PDB model

In the PDB model of PTPIB, Phe182, Ser216, Ala217, Ile219, Gly220, Arg221,
and Gln266 exhibited hydrogen bonding with F16 (A), with the same interaction also
observed with Arg221 and ACMO014 (C). Furthermore, Cys215 had a hydrophobic
interaction with both F16 and ACMO14. On the other hand, hydrogen bonding with Asp181

and GIn262 and hydrophobic interactions with Arg047, Phe! 82, and Ala217, were retained

82

in both ACMO14 and PRTN (B). Changes in the types of interactions were observed with
Asp048 and Tyr046. The overlaid position of ACM014 with PRTN reveals the reverse
orientation of the distal chain of the rings AC leading to the repositioning of hydrogen

bonding with Gly262 and additional interactions with Tyr020, Arg024, and Thr263.

Figure 27: Binding interactions of ACM014 with PTP1B AF2 model

In the AF2 model of PTP1B, Arg24, and Arg254 exhibited hydrogen bonding while
Tyr020, Ala027, Ser028, Asp029, Met258, and Gly259 showed hydrophobic interaction
with F16 (A), but none of these amino acids were found to interact with PRTN (B). On the

other hand, aside from the retained hydrogen bonding with Asn321 and hydrophobic

83

interactions with Tyr046, Arg047, and Asp048 in PRTN and ACMO021 (C), several
additional interactions were observed such as 4 hydrogen bonding with Arg024, Tyr02,
Lys120, and Gln262, hydrophobic interactions with Asp181, Phel82, Ala217, Ile219,
Arg254, Met258, Gly259, and Cys324. These number of additional interacting residues
have been observed because of the change in position of the last ring of ACM014 relative

to the position of PRTN heading towards the outside of active the binding site.

Figure 28: Binding interactions of BCM008 with SIRT6 PDB model

Lastly, the interactions in SIRT6 are presented in Figures 28 and 29. Hydrophobic

interactions were only present with QUE (A) and the PDB model of SIRT6, while Phe064,

84

Phe082, Phe086, Vall15, Vall70, Metl36, and Metl57 were observed to retain its
hydrophobic interactions with QUE and PKOR (B). On the other hand, comparing PKOR
and BCM008 (C), it can be observed that most of the retained interactions are hydrophobic
bonding, with amino acid residues Phe064, Val070, Trp071, Glu074, Ala079, Pro080,
Pro082, Phe086, Vall 15, and Met157. Additional interactions of BCM008 have also been
noted with Ala053, Ile061, Pro062, Asp063, Asp116, and Asn114. These additional
interactions were due to the different orientation of the Ring AC of the analog relative to

the position of PKOR.

3

Figure 29: Binding interactions of BCM008 with SIRT6 AF2 model

85

In the AF2 model, only hydrophobic interactions were present with QUE (A) and
the residues Trp188 and Ile219 were also present exhibiting the same interaction with
PKOR. On the other hand, comparing PKOR (B) and BCM008 (C), most of the interactions
were retained with amino acid residues with Tyr012, Asp014, Arg065, Phe064, Gin113,
His133, Leul 86, Asp187, Trp188, Asp190, Ser191, Leul92, Gin218, Ile219, and Arg220.
The orientation of the BCM008 closely resembles the original pose of the PKOR with some
extension due to the addition of a phenoxy ring.

In addition, the superimposed structures of the top 5 ligands per protein target are
shown in Figures 30, 31, and 32. The comparison of both models in all ligands display
higher RMSDs than 2.0A. In 11B-HSD1, ACM044 yielded the highest RMSD score of
12.279A, while the lowest was ACM036, having an RMSD of 11.808A. In PTPIB,
ACMO021 has the highest RMSD of 12.496A and ACM028 yielded the lowest RMSD of.
9.1500A. Lastly, in SIRT6, BCM008 and DCM027 yielded the highest and lowest RMSD
values having RMSDs of 15.824A and 11.252A, respectively. The summary of the RMSDs

of the top 5 ligands is listed in Table 18.

86

ACMO2|

ACMOIS
12.0854

ACMO024
11.9754

a

Figure 30: Superimposed docked conformations and RMSDs (A) of the top 5 derivatives

with both PDB (blue) and AF2 (yellow) models of 11B-HSDI

ACMO14 ACMO021
9:972A 12.4964

ACM028 ACM020
9.150A 10.952.)

ACM024
10.581A.

Figure 31: Superimposed docked conformations and RMSDs (A) of the top 5 derivatives

with both PDB (blue) and AF2 (yellow) models of PTPIB

87

BCM008.
5.824A

DCM004
114034

DCM027
11.252A

DCM025
11.5504

Figure 32: Superimposed docked conformations and RMSDs (A) of the top 5 derivatives
with both PDB (blue) and AF2 (yellow) models of SIRT6

Table 18: Summary of the RMSD values of top 5 derivatives in each protein target

Protein

Ligand

11p-HSDI

PTPIB

SIRT6

ACM021
ACM036
ACM044
ACMOI8
ACM024
ACMO014
ACM021
ACM028
ACMO020
ACM024
BCMO008
DCM027
DCMO004
DCM025
BCM022

88

RMSD Value (A)
12.807A
11.808A
12.279A
12.085A
11.975A
9.972A
12.496A
9.150A
10.952A
10.581A
15.824A
11.252A
11.403A
11.550A
15.7454


Pharmacophore Analysis

Shared and merged pharmacophores were generated for each protein target. A
shared pharmacophore for a model was obtained using the consensus of its top 5. Using
the shared pharmacophore model from the PDB and another from the AF2 model, a merged
pharmacophore was generated for the corresponding target. Using the top ligand with the
most negative binding Gibbs free energy that serves as reference molecule, all the best-
matching pairs for the top 5 ligands of each target are highlighted and presented as vector

spheres, forming a new pharmacophore model.

Figure 33: Pharmacophore models for 11B-HSD1

89

In PDB model (A) of 11B-HSD1, hydrophobic and hydrogen bond donor groups
were highlighted to be the important features in the top 5 ligands having 7 and 2,
respectively. These two groups were involved in lipophilic and hydrogen bond interactions
with the target. While in AF2 (B), hydrophobic, hydrogen bond donors and acceptors were
marked as essential features having 7 and 2 of each, respectively. Just like in PDB, these
were anticipated to participate in lipophilic and hydrogen bonding. As for the merged
pharmacophore (C), a total of 7 hydrophobic and 2 of each hydrogen bond donor, and

acceptor are needed for the optimal binding with 11B-HSD1.

Figure 34: Pharmacophore models for PTP1B

90

In PTPIB, hydrophobic, hydrogen bond donors and acceptors were marked in the
top ligands in PDB model (A) having 3 and | of each, respectively. These are predicted to
be involved in lipophilic and hydrogen bonding interactions. In the AF2 model (B), the
same groups were also highlighted having 4, 3, and 1, respectively. Same types of
interactions for these groups to be involved with. As for the merged pharmacophores of
the two models (C), 4 for hydrophobic, 3 for hydrogen bond donors, and 2 for hydrogen

bond acceptors were marked as essential elements for a better binding affinity with PTP1B.

|
hae

Figure 35: Pharmacophore models for SIRT6

For the SIRT6 pharmacophores, individual models were generated for each
analogue under the same class of the parent compound PKOR and PECE. As BCM008

exhibited the most negative binding energy, the structure of which was used as the

91

reference for the features. In the PDB model (A), hydrophobic and hydrogen bond donor
groups were observed to be important in lipophilic and hydrogen bonding interactions,
having 4 each. The same groups were also marked in the AF2 model (B) with the addition
of hydrogen bond acceptors. The oxygen atom in the last ring of the distal chain was also
highlighted as a hydrogen bond acceptor. As for the merged pharmacophore models (C) —
4 hydrophobic, 5 of each hydrogen bond donor, and acceptor were essential in the optimal

binding with SIRT6.

Pharmacokinetic and Physicochemical Analysis

All 280 structural analogues with improved binding energies and their
corresponding parent compounds were subjected to ADMET and physicochemical
analysis. The criteria for evaluating the ADMET and physicochemical properties were
based on the criteria set by ADMETIlab 2.0 and a thorough literature search. This analysis
was done as an additional characterization of the designed analogues and their
corresponding parent compounds. The parameters used to evaluate the compounds were
grouped into major categories as shown in Figure 36 and the specific parameters are listed

in Table 19.

92

=Passed @ Failed

100.00%
90.00%
80.00%
70.00%
60.00%
50.00%
40.00%
30.00%
20.00%
10.00%

0.00%
&

s S RY g e s
s & s s = x s
fe a Se
® » ¥ eR fs SS
& Ca
AS Ss
’ $
eS)

Figure 36: Evaluation of top binding ligands based on ADMET-physicochemical profiles

Figure 36 shows that 24.65% or 71 compounds passed all absorption screens, which
means that these compounds have an acceptable oral bioavailability and are predicted to
be inactive substrates and inhibitors of P-glycoprotein (P-gp). As for the distribution, it was
predicted that 17.01%, or 49 compounds, would have a high therapeutic index and no CNS
effects. Regarding metabolism, 35.07%, or 101 compounds, were inactive inhibitors and
substrates of the major CYP450 isoforms. In the excretion parameter, 13.54%, or 39, were
predicted to have moderate to high drug clearance and a short half-life. In terms of toxicity,
69.79% or 201 compounds were considered non-carcinogen, non-hepatotoxic, and inactive
hERG inhibitor or substrate. The indicated compounds with good solubility profiles in
both aqueous and lipid phases were composed of 20.90% or 60, having the ideal

physicochemical properties. Furthermore, 29.51% or 85 compounds were predicted to be

93

drug-like molecules, meaning these compounds can be considered for oral administration.
Lastly, for synthetic accessibility, all the designed compounds and their corresponding
parent structures met the criteria of being synthetically accessible.

The data shown in Figure 36 were further evaluated to determine the numbers of

the potential compounds for each protein target.

@1IB-HSDI (n=141)  & PTPIB (n=161) SIRT6 (n=129)

By
s
100.0%
90.0%
80.0%
70.0% a 3
60.0% sy
Sa
50.0% ta x
40.0%
30.0% x 5 2
= ec
20.0% = ai
10.0% % 1 ]
0.0% =
s , ¢
oy e y
<

Figure 37: Evaluation of top binding ligands for each target based on ADMET-
physicochemical profiles

47.3%
26.4%
33.3%
63.6%

20.9%

Figure 37 shows that in 11B-HSD1 target, 2.8% or 4 compounds passed all of the
absorption parameters. These fully absorbed compounds were mostly from DILE and
PKFL. For distribution parameters, PRTN and PKOR derived analogues comprised of
17.7% or 25 compounds passed all the conditions. The same group of analogues passed the

metabolism with 46.1% or 65 compounds. DILE derived compounds comprised of 2.8%

94

or 4 compounds passed the excretion, 68.1% or 96 compounds from PRTN and PKOR
analogues passed the toxicity screening, 4.3% or 6 PRTN derived compounds met the ideal
physicochemical properties, and DILE analogues with 5% or 5 compounds were predicted
to be drug-like molecules. All the designed compounds and their corresponding parent
structures are synthetically feasible.

In PTPIB target, most of the PQTN and DILE derived compounds passed all
absorption screens with 14.9% or 25 compounds. PRTN and PKOR derivatives with 14.3%
or 24 compounds have the ideal distribution profiles. The same groups of 68 compounds,
or 42.2%, were also predicted as inactive substrates and inhibitors of the major CYP450
isozymes. All of the 3.1% or 5 compounds, are DILE analogues that were predicted to be
well excreted. The non-toxic 60.9% or 98 compounds, were also from PRTN and PKOR.
The derived compounds from PRTN, PKFL, PCAD, and PQTN with 12.4% or 20
compounds met the ideal physicochemical properties, 6.2% or 10 compounds that were
predicted to be drug-like molecules are PQTN and DILE derived compounds. Lastly, all
of the designed compounds and their parent structures met the criteria of being
synthetically accessible.

On the other hand, in SIRT6 target, 47.3% or 61 compounds passed all of the
absorption parameters. These derivatives are analogues of PQTN, PECE, DILE, PKFL,
and DCXE. Most PRTN, PKOR, and PCAD analogues comprising 7.1% or 22 compounds,
passed the distribution. The same group of derived compounds with 20.9% or 27
compounds passed the metabolism, 26.4% or 34 compounds passed the excretion, the
majority from PECE. The derive compounds of PRTN, PKOR, PQTN, and PECE with

79.1% or 102 compounds passed the toxicity screening. Most PECE analogues comprising

95

33.3% or 43 compounds, possessed the ideal physicochemical properties, and 63.6% or 82
compounds, of PQTN, and PECE were predicted as drug-like molecules. All the designed
compounds for SIRT6 and their parent compounds are synthetically accessible.

The data in Figure 37 were further processed to identify the best ligand in each
protein target that fulfills the most number of properties. These ligands are illustrated in
Figure 38 and their properties are shown in Table 19. Out of 137 analogues, ASM021, a
derivative of PRTN, had the most number of passed ADMET and physicochemical screens.
Compared to its parent compound, the R3 hydroxyl group, replaced by a methyl
substituent, resulted in improved lipophilic properties. Except for being a P-gp substrate,
not orally absorbed, having low renal clearance, having a short half-life, and not ideal for
oral administration, ASM021 was predicted to be a well distributed, inactive substrate and
inhibitor of the CYP450 isozymes, non-toxic, and have acceptable solubility profiles.

In PTPIB, out of 155 analogues, HCM004, a compound derived from PCAD,
fulfills the most number of ADMET and physicochemical filters. The pyrrole and oxetane
rings replacing the RI and R2 hydroxyls resulted in improved lipophilic property, renal
clearance, and decreased ability to cross the blood-brain barrier (BBB). HCM004 was
predicted to have ideal distribution, metabolism, toxicity, drug-likeness, and
physicochemical profiles. However, HCM004 was predicted to have an increased property
of being a P-gp substrate.

Lastly, for SIRT6, the PECE derived compound, DSM008, had the most accepted
profiles out of the 121 analogues. Except for having a short half-life, DSM008 was
predicted to be well absorbed, distributed, inactive inhibitor and substrate of the major

CYP450 isozymes, non-toxic, a drug-like molecule, and has the ideal solubility profile.

96

Compared to its parent compound, the substitution of the R2 hydroxyl with a
hydroxymethyl group in DSM008 decreased the property of being an active CYP2C9
substrate and a compound with a low therapeutic index. The summary of the
pharmacokinetic and physicochemical analysis and the criteria for each parameter can be

seen in Appendices E and F.

: as y

16
nes

ASM021 HCM004

DSM008

Figure 38: Two-dimensional structures of the top ligands for each target based on
ADMET-physicochemical profiles

97

Table 19: Pharmacokinetic and physicochemical screening results of the best ligand in 11B-
HSDI1, PTP1B and SIRT6

11p-HSD1 PTPIB SIRT6
tn PRTN ASM021__PCAD _HCM004__PECE _DSMO008
Absorption P-gp inhibitor 0.005 0.008 0.000 0.003 0.007 0.003
P-gp substrate 0.997 0.998 0.558 0.996 0.004 0.003
GSI 0.876 0.830 0.873 0.888 0.037 0.105
Distribution BBB permeation 0.041 0.043 0.590 0.088 0.025 0.030
Plasma Protein 87.11% 89.20% 67.19% 78.99% 92.36% 84.31%
Binding
Metabolism CYPIA2 inhibitor 0.121 0.135 0.036 0.027 0.393 0.206
CYP1A2 substrate 0.041 0.066 0.042 0.064 0.224 0.111
CYP2C19 inhibitor 0.035 0.046 = 0.023 (0.036 0.031 0.025
CYP2C19 substrate 0.048 0.056 0.053 0.065 0.054 0.061
CYP2C9 inhibitor 0.018 0.017 0.016 0.109 0.323 0.127
CYP2C9 substrate 0.139 0.140.511 0.267 0.827 0.579
CYP2D6 inhibitor 0.056 0.073. ~=—S«0.003 (0.007 0.139 0.100
CYP2D6 substrate 0.129 0.134 (0.156 (0.080 0.310 0.252
CYP3A4 inhibitor 0.039 0.048 == 0.030 (0.034 0371 0.158
CYP3A4 substrate 0.003 0.006 0.022 0.089 0.180 0.307
Excretion Renal clearance 1.502 1.501 3.251 12.158 16.512 14.565
Half life 0.728 0.638 0.928 0.827 0.884 0.879
Toxicity HERG inhibition 0.227 0.219 (0.014 ——(0.048. 0.030 0.039
Carcinogenicity 0.055 0.065 (0.059 (0.884. 0.159 0.118
Hepatotoxicity 0.083 0.084 = 0.122 0.241 0.093 0.099
Lipinski 25% 25% 715% 15% 100% 100%
Physicochemical LogP ~0.038 0.545 0.162 0.637 1.213 0.961
Properties Logs “3.742 3.837 1.198 -2.205 2.720 --2.881
Violations Ghose 0% 0% 75% 100% 100% 100%
Veber 50% 50% 50% 50% 100% 100%
Egan 50% 50% 50% 50% 100% 100%
Muege 56% 56% 78% 89% 100% 100%
QED 0.140 0.161 0.234 0.287 0.510 0.535
Synthetic Accessibility 4.783 4.763 3.781 «4.074 3.334 3.346

98

CHAPTER 5: DISCUSSION

Target Proteins
11B-HSD1 Enzyme

The PDB model of 11B-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type I (11B-HSD1) is co-
crystallized with carbenoxolone (CBO), a compound that is present in licorice and was the
first 11B-HSD1 inhibitor tested in humans. Although CBO is a nonselective inhibitor that
causes sodium retention, hypertension, and hypokalemia (Schuster et al., 2006), it
demonstrated the ability to increase hepatic insulin sensitivity and decrease glucose
production, which is clear evidence of its hypoglycemic properties (Andrews et al., 2003).
Studies have shown that CBO was also able to improve verbal fluency in healthy elderly
men and verbal memory in non-obese type 2 diabetes patients (Sandeep et al., 2004). The
insulin sensitization appears to be caused by decreased hepatic glucose production and
glycogenolysis rather than peripheral glucose uptake, possibly because carbenoxolone does
not inhibit 11B-HSD1 in adipose tissue in rats or humans (Livingstone & Walker, 2003). It
was also observed that carbenoxolone reduces both baseline and excessive drinking in rats
and mice (Sanna et al., 2016).

On other hand, as the enzyme 11B-HSD1 has a substantial capacity for cortisol
production, the reactivation of cortisone is estimated to account for 25% of circulating
cortisol (Basu et al., 2005). This local conversion of cortisone to cortisol in metabolically
important tissues can drive glucocorticoid-mediated functional antagonism of insulin
action in a manner that is independent of circulating cortisol levels. Although 11B-HSD1
is not directly involved in adrenal cortisol biosynthesis, it also emphasizes the need to

carefully examine the endocrinologic effects of decreasing this non-adrenal source of

99

cortisol. Studies have shown that prolonged inhibition of cortisol production mediated by
11B-HSD1 leads to hypothalamic-pituitary—adrenal (HPA) axis activation to ensure
homeostasis (Hollis & Huber, 2011). In response to 11B-HSD1 inhibition, serum cortisol
levels tend to decrease. However, negative feedback in the HPA axis causes compensatory
increases in ACTH levels, resulting in cortisol biosynthesis by the adrenal gland to restore
cortisol homeostasis in the blood. As a major consequence of the increased ACTH
production, the maintained cortisol level comes at the expense of hyperandrogenism and
adrenal hypertrophy (Cooper & Stewart, 2009). Moreover, in the context of type 2 diabetes
mellitus, as long treatments are needed to keep blood sugar levels under control, Gutierrez
et al., (2015) demonstrated that continuous 11B-HSD1 inhibition in human adipose tissue
resulted in tachyphylaxis and was lost after repeated doses of AZD8329, an investigational
drug. Consequently, the future development of compounds that target 1 1B-HSD1 inhibition
will require an evaluation of the consequences of HPA axis activation and other effects

during long-term treatments.

PTP1IB Enzyme

In metabolic signaling pathways, phosphorylation and dephosphorylation of
tyrosine are crucial processes. Protein tyrosine kinases (PTKs) are responsible for
phosphorylation, whereas protein tyrosine phosphatases (PTPs) are responsible for
dephosphorylation, coordinating and regulating cellular signaling. Particularly, protein
tyrosine phosphatase 1B (PTP1B) has been linked to type 2 diabetes mellitus because it
negatively regulates the insulin signaling pathway, and its inhibition has shown promising

results in the treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus (Shi et al., 2004).

100

Moreover, the PDB model of protein-tyrosine phosphatase 1B (PTP1B) has a
bound 5-(3 Hydroxyphenyl)isothiazol-3(2H)-one 1,1-dioxide (F16), a member of the
isothiazolidinone (IZD) heterocyclic containing compounds reveals an extensive
interaction within the binding site of PTP1B by mimicking photyrosine (pTyr), studies
have shown that it poses some challenges such as selectivity due to the highly conserved
catalytic site, specificity, bioavailability with limited cell membrane permeability (Zhang
& Zhang, 2007). While PTP1B overexpression promotes insulin resistance, prolonged
inhibition of PTP1B or deficiency has negative effects on certain metabolic pathways.
Protein tyrosine phosphatase 1B (PTP1B) has been identified as a key modulator of the
activation process of macrophages, limiting the pro-inflammatory signaling response
time. It could be increased or activated by inflammatory factors such as TNF-a (Traves et
al., 2014). Therefore, future development of PTP1B inhibitors, despite having potential
benefits for the insulin signaling pathway, must consider the undesirable effects in response

to immune stressors, such as the fine-tuning of the pro-inflammatory and pro-resolution

balance.
SIRT6 Enzyme

Sirtuin-6 or Mono-ADP ribosyltransferase-sirtuin-6 (SIRT6) has a bound
quercetin, a naturally occurring flavonoid that was reported to activate SIRT6, however it
poses a non-selectivity and nonspecific activities (You et al., 2019). Due to its nonspecific
actions, quercetin has further been labeled as SIRT6 inhibitor at low concentrations and

activator at high concentrations. Furthermore, quercetin derivatives trichostatin, catechin

101

gallate and gallocatechin gallate acted as potent small molecule SIRT6 inhibitors (Wood
et al., 2018; You & Steegborn, 2018).

On the other hand, the biological functions of SIRT6 play a crucial role in
regulating lifespan and a number of fundamental aging processes, including DNA repair,
gene expression, and telomeric maintenance. In type 2 diabetes mellitus, SIRT6, also
serves as a regulator of glucose homeostasis, by enhancing insulin secretion and sensitivity.
The physiological activation of SIRT6 drives improved insulin sensitivity in skeletal
muscle and liver, it also plays an essential role in histone deacetylation which contributes
to the integrity of pancreatic B-cells (Liu et al., 2020). Despite the contributions of SIRT6
activation to several biological processes, aberrant behavior of this enzyme has also been
observed. It has been linked to cancer advancement and tumor growth (Khan et al., 2018).
In vitro and in vivo studies on squamous cell carcinoma have demonstrated that high levels
of SIRT6 are expressed due to the downregulation of RNA-34a (miR-34a), a tumor
suppressor gene (Lai et al., 2013). SIRT6 levels in patients with chronic lymphocytic
leukemia were also found to be fourfold higher (Wang et al., 2011). Consequently, future
development of SIRT6 activators, despite its evidence to be potentially involved in a wide
variety of biological processes, consideration must take into account the potential for
prolonged activation or overexpression of this enzyme, which can also be linked to cancer

progression.

Derivatization

Structural modifications of natural products have been an ongoing and

indispensable source of novel drug leads. Plants are a large category of natural products

102

with a wide range of pharmacological activity that has yielded an abundance of clinical
drugs. It has been evident that a lot of clinical drugs have been developed by the structural
derivatization of natural products. The objective of structural modification is to improve
binding affinities, increase selectivity and therapeutic action, reduction of possible side
effects, improve physicochemical and pharmacokinetic activities, improve synthetic
feasibility and create compounds that can be patented (Majhi & Das, 2021).

As a result of the selection of the parent compounds listed in Table 4, the alkaloids
DCXE and DILE, along with the phenolic compounds PCAD, PECE, PKFL, PKOR
analogue, PQTN, and PRTN were subjected to drug design. They were structurally
modified based on the identification of the underutilized functional groups that were
anticipated to facilitate interactions with the protein targets. Consequently, they were
designated as molecular replacement points. Furthermore, the PKOR used in this study was
further identified as an analogue due to the L-linked second ring of the distal chain. Hence,

it was still considered for further modifications.

Bioisosteric Replacement

Bioisosteres are functional or atomic groups with similar physicochemical
properties to their parent functional or atomic groups, and compounds containing
bioisosteres have similar biological properties to their parent compounds (Hamada & Kiso,
2012). In drug design, bioisosteres are frequently used to replace a problematic group while
retaining activity. In certain instances, the use of bioisosteres can improve target protein-

ligand interactions. Bioisosterism permits molecular modification of the lead compound

103

without compromising the drug-target interaction, improves biological activity with
enhanced pharmacokinetics, and reduces toxicity (Patani & LaVoie, 1996).

Most of the identified functional groups that were considered problematic moieties
listed and illustrated in Table 5 and Figure 10 were carbonyl, hydroxyl, methyl, 1,3-
dioxolane of DILE, and the linker groups. The SwissBioisostere and MolOpt generated
equivalent bioisosteres were based on rules applied in data mining of similar chemical
groups. These comprise classical and mostly nonclassical bioisosteres, including
monovalent (OH, NH2, CHs, F), divalent (-CH2-, -C(=O)-, -COCH2R, -CO2R, -CONHR),
and ring equivalent groups (phenyl, oxetane, pyrrole) as these groups have similarities in
shapes, electronic configuration of atoms, groups, and molecules, or they share the same
physicochemical properties, spatial arrangements and often produce similar biological

activities.

Structural Analogues

For the top 8 parent compounds, 305 single and 297 combined structural analogues
were designed. They were subjected to molecular docking and assessed for their binding
energies compared to the controls per protein target. They were also consolidated and
assessed for their distribution across all targets. Among the designed structural analogues,
8 compounds were considered to have lower binding energies on all targets as compared
to the controls. As shown in Figure 13, these are ACM008, ACM012, ACM016, ACM054,
and ACM055, which were analogues of PRTN, PKOR derived compounds BCM005 and

BCMO006, and ESM008 as an analog of DILE, suggesting that these derivatives can be

104

considered as multifunctional compounds that can efficiently bind to 11B-HSD1, PTP1B
and SIRT6 enzymes.

On the other hand, in terms of individual targets - ACM021, ACM036, ACM044,
ACMO018, and ACM024 for 11B-HSD1, ACM014, ACM021, ACM0258, ACM020, and
ACM024 for PTP1B and BCM008, BCM022, DCM027, DCM004, and DCMO025 for
SIRT6, these analogues exhibited the most negative binding energies for each protein

target, hence have the highest binding affinity.

Metabolites

The site of metabolism (SOM) is the location within a molecule where a possible
metabolic reaction takes place. Identification of phase I CYP-mediated SOM is typically
the first step in metabolic pathway investigation and may aid in the optimization of leads
(Jouko, 2015). Nevertheless, if a metabolite is undesirable, the SOM information can be
used to guide structure modification in a way that deactivates or eliminates unstable sites
in order to prevent such biotransformations.

A total of 70 predicted metabolites were designed for the 8 parent compounds. The
sites of metabolism were roughly identified by the recognition of key functional groups
within the complete chemical structure and suspected to be labile to CYP450-mediated
biotransformations. Although 40 compounds showed improved affinity compared to their
corresponding parent compounds, none of them were selected for further analysis because
their corresponding binding energies did not outperform the absolute binding energies of
the controls for all protein targets. On the other hand, this suggests the possibility that these

predicted metabolites may be more reactive than their corresponding parent compounds.

105

As listed in Table 7, it is evident that most of the parent compounds were predicted to
undergo different functionalization reactions. Most of the reactions predicted were
aromatic hydroxylation of the C-H skeleton, O-dealkylation or hydrolysis, and keto
reduction. Some of the predicted metabolites, such as the products of O-
dealkylation/hydrolysis at the R3 and RS positions of PRTN and the aromatic
hydroxylation at the R7 position of PQTN, were also reported in the literature in agreement
with in vitro experiments (Sousa et al., 2013). It has also been observed that simple
structures as the products of O-dealkylation or hydrolysis in the R3 and RS hydroxyls
producing only the distal chain rings of both PRTN and PKOR have less affinity in all of

the protein targets.

Grid Box Optimization

Since the downloaded PDB protein files are models of the targets with co-
crystallized ligands, it is necessary to obtain the optimal grid box parameters that can
reproduce the experimental pose of each ligand, as these parameters will greatly affect the
docking accuracy (Feinstein & Brylinski, 2015). On the other hand, since two models of
each protein target were used, quantitative structural comparison of these models is also
essential for docking accuracy. The appropriateness of grid box parameters is determined
by calculating the root-mean-square distance (RMSD) of the redocked conformations
relative to the original pose of the co-crystallized ligand. Additionally, the RMSD between
matching atom pairs is also used to measure the degree of similarity between two three-
dimensional (3D) protein structures (Neveu et al., 2018). For an accurate prediction of

the bound conformation and structural similarity of biological structures, the RMSD should

106

be less than or equal (<) to 2A (Trott & Olson, 2010) or the smaller the RMSD, the more
similar the two structures (Reva et al., 1998).

With the RMSD values of the superimposed PDB and AF2 models (Figure 6) —
1.169A for 11B-HSD1, 0.687A for PTP1B and 1.033A for SIRT6, and for redocking of the
bound ligands (Figure 7) — 0.819+0.003A for 11B-HSD1 (PDB:2BEL), 0.335+0.001A for
PTP1B (PDB: 2CM8), and 1.733+0.0.010A for SIRT6 (PDB:6QCD), all of which are less
than 2A, the comparison of the models and the grid box used in redocking are considered
structurally similar and valid. The grid boxes were then used for all molecular docking

simulations of the parent compounds and derivatives.

Binding Energies

Binding energy is the change in Gibbs free energy associated with the formation of
a protein-ligand complex where it represents the binding event of the system. This quantity
of interest represents the strength of how much affinity a compound has towards the pocket
of a target protein. A negative binding energy suggests that the binding of the ligand with
the protein is energetically favored, hence spontaneous (Du et al., 2016). The more negative
the values, the more favorable the affinity of the ligand.

The scoring function of AutoDock Vina is derived from a combination of
knowledge-based potentials and empirical scoring (Trott & Olson, 2010). It is based on
pairwise interactions between atoms, which are defined by five terms and based on the
surface distance between the atoms dy = rj — Ru— Ry, where ry isthe distance between atoms
iandj, Rr is the van der Waals radius of atom type t. Interaction functions fig is also a factor

where it corresponds to certain weights of steric interactions, which are represented in

107

terms of gaussi(d), gausso(d), and repulsion(d) with its corresponding formulas,
hydrophobic interaction is weighted depending on the distance: when d < 0.5A: 1, d >
1.5A: 0, and it is linearly interpolated between these values. The hydrogen bonding is also
expressed in terms of distance, where | is when d < —0.7A, 0 when d > 0, and it is also
similarly linearly interpolated in between. In terms of metal ions, AutoDock Vina treats
metals as hydrogen bond donors. The distance cutoff ry = 8A, was applied to expedite the
calculation of non-bonded interactions. The final formula also includes a penalty for the
number of active rotatable bonds between heavy atoms in the ligand and its associated
weight, which is capable of producing changes in conformations (Trott & Olson, 2010).
After identifying the appropriate grid box coordinates, the 36 bioactive compounds
of Annona muricata were tested virtually through molecular docking towards the 3 protein
targets related to Type 2 diabetes mellitus. They were assessed primarily based on their

binding energies (kcal/mol).

Binding Towards 11B-HSD1

The crucial enzyme 11f-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type I (11B-HSD1) is
responsible for the conversion of cortisone to cortisol, a functional glucocorticoid hormone.
This activation has been linked to a number of human diseases, including the metabolic
syndrome, which is commonly associated with Type 2 diabetes mellitus, where 11B-HSD1
has been identified as a novel target for potential therapeutic drugs. The primary effect of
cortisol, the major glucocorticoid in humans, is to regulate glucose metabolism and blood

pressure in order to limit stress levels (Munckt et al., 1984). Due to the wide array of

108

physiological properties of cortisol, the circulating levels of the glucocorticoid must be
tightly regulated (James & Lawson, 2010).

Cortisol was also able to stimulate gluconeogenesis indirectly via increasing amino
acid uptake in hepatic tissues and by stimulating lipolysis in adipose tissue with a
subsequent increase in the mobilization of fatty acids. The catabolic effect of cortisol on
protein in skin, muscle, and bone also contributes to an increase in circulating glucose via
an increase in circulating amino acids, which will stimulate gluconeogenesis in the liver.
An excess of cortisol would therefore lead to unusually high levels of circulating glucose
(Rahimi et al., 2020). The focus of this study is to find potential candidates that can
competitively inhibit the binding of cortisone to the active site of 11B-HSD1 to potentially
arrest the action of the enzyme in converting cortisone to cortisol, hence cortisone was used
as a control for screening the experimental ligands.

Based on the average values of the Gibbs free energy listed in Table 3, it is evident
that the redocked CBO has the lowest binding energy, having -12.1 kcal/mol in the PDB
model, but in the AF2 model, it generated -8.3 kcal/mol. None of the parent compounds
exhibited more negative binding energies against carbenoxolone in the PDB model, even
with cortisone and cortisol as the substrate and product. In terms of the af2, it can be
observed that out of the 36 ligands, specifically in comparison with cortisone as the control,
only PRTN and PKOR exhibited more negative binding energies having -11.0 and -10.6
kcal/mol, respectively. On the other hand, PGLA has the least binding energy for PDB and
AF2 models of 11B-HSD1 having -6.3 kcal/mol and -6.2 kcal/mol.

As for the average binding energies of parent compounds in both models of 11B-

HSDI1, PRTN has the same binding energy with the cortisone (-10.5 kcal/mol), and lower

109

binding energy than CBO (-10.2 kcal/mol). PKOR has the same binding energy with CBO
(-10.2 kcal/mol). Considering the +2.85 kcal/mol threshold as the standard error of
AutoDock Vina, most of the parent compounds fall within the acceptable range of having
a comparable binding affinity with cortisone except for GACN, GAMT, GAPA, GAPB,
GAPC, GCCS, GMTA, GMTB, PGLA, RLLE, RELE, and RVFL having less affinity.
The amino acid residues of 11B-HSD1 listed in Table 2 were found to be essential
for its catalytic reaction (Hosfield et al., 2005; Thomas, 2011; Hapman et al., 2013). Ser170
and Tyr183 have been considered the most crucial interacting residues for catalysis when
it comes to the reduction of cortisone to cortisol, as these 2 residues form close contact
with C-11 hydroxyl of the cortisol. Ser1 70 is often found to stabilize the orientation of the
bound substrate. These two residues increase the electrophilicity of the reactive C-11 atom
of the cortisone facilitating the proton transfer from Tyrl83 being reduced through
electrostatic interactions to the substrate 11-keto oxygen converting to the active form
cortisol (Hosfield et al., 2005). These reported residues have also been observed after the
docking simulations of the parent compounds to the catalytic site of 11B-HSD1 enzyme.
As summarized in Table 14, Ser170 and Tyr183 are the most active residues. Except for
PGLA, Ser170 and Tyr183 exhibited interaction with the 38 docked ligands. On the other
hand, Ser170 exhibited the greatest number of interactions in all ligands in both PDB and
AF2 models. As shown in Table 14, Ser! 70 and Ala223 had the most number of hydrogen
and hydrophobic bond interactions in both PDB and AF2 models. These residues reflect
their critical roles in the catalytic activity of 11B-HSD1 as they were found to exhibit most

of the interactions with docked ligands.

110

Among the top structural analogues for 11B-HSD1, ACM021, a PRTN derived
compound, exhibited the best affinity towards 11B-HSD1, having the lowest binding
energy of -12.8kcal/mol. The reverse orientation of the binding pose of ACM021
analogue in the 11B-HSD1 PDB model compared to the original pose of its parent
compound PRTN caused additional and altered interactions with the amino acid residues
(Figure 24D).

Although most amino acid residues retained their interactions with PRTN and
ACM021, there were changes in types of interactions and specific contacts with the atom
ligand groups. Leu217 had a moderate hydrogen bonding with the ring A hydroxyl of
PRTN at a distance of 2.84A. However, in ACM021, Leu217 was observed to form a
moderate hydrogen bond with the hydroxyl group of the last distal chain ring at a
distance of 3.13A. There was also an observed shift in the interaction of the cofactor
NADPH, from hydrogen bond with PRTN to hydrophobic interaction with ACM021.
Lastly, Leul26, Val180, Ala223, and Gly216 maintained their hydrophobic interactions
but changed in their positions of interaction with PRTN and ACMO021.

Additional interacting residues were present for ACM021. Alal72 formed a
moderate hydrogen bond at a distance of 3.2A with the fluoro substituent in the R3 position
of ring B. The carbonyl group of Gln234 with the two hydroxyl groups of the last distal
chain ring of ACM021 formed two moderate hydrogen bonds. Literature reported amino
acid residues — Leul71, Ala226, Val227, Val231, and Met233, exhibited hydrophobic
interactions. The unreported Gly229, and Ile230 also participated in hydrophobic

interactions with ACM021.

11

On the other hand, for the 11B-HSD1 AF2 model, the binding pose of ACM021
was slightly different compared to PRTN (Figure 25D). It is evident that the substitution
of 2 phenyl rings in the ether linker groups leading to structure extension caused the
difference in the binding pose.

Figure 25B and 25C illustrate the 2D interactions of PRTN and its top analogue
ACM021. Gly216 retained its moderate hydrogen bonding (2.92A and 2.70A) with original
hydroxyl substituent at the first ring of the distal chain. However, for Ser170, a change
from moderate (2.91A) to weak (3.33A) hydrogen bonding with original hydroxyl group
in the first distal chain ring was observed.

A retained moderate and weak hydrogen bond between Lys044 and Asn1 19 with
the original hydroxyl moiety of the last distal chain ring in both PRTN and ACM021
was also observed. Leu215 and Ile121 have retained interactions with both ligands.
However, they have shifted from hydrophobic bonding with PRTN to moderate
hydrogen bonding with ACMO021. It was also observed for Thr220 and Thr222 to retain
their interactions with PRTN and ACM021. However, there was a shift in their position
to the phenyl ring substituent of ACM021.

The reported Tyr177, Tyr183, Ala223, Val231, and unreported amino acid residues
Thr123, and Vall26 showed hydrophobic interactions in both PRTN and ACMO021, but
somehow have changed in the position of interactions with the ligand atoms. Additional
interactions with unreported residues were also observed for ACMO021. These include
Gly041, which has hydrogen bonding, His120, Val227, Prol78, Met179, and Val180,

which initiated a hydrophobic interaction.

112

Binding Towards PTPIB

Insulin receptor desensitization is caused by Protein Tyrosine Phosphatase.
Increased activity of PTP1B in diabetic mice and insulin resistant HepG2 cells has been
implicated in the development of insulin resistance. Since inhibition of PTP1B may
prolong insulin receptor activity, PTP1B has emerged as a therapeutic target for the
treatment of Type 2 diabetes mellitus (Zhang & Zhang, 2007).

As a result of docking simulation of the parent compounds in the PTP1B enzyme,
none of the 36 ligands outperformed the binding energy of the bound ligand in the PDB
model. In contrast to this, some parent compounds showed lower binding energies with
control in AF2 model including PRTN and PKOR as the top parent compounds. RLLE and
PGLA generated the least binding energy having both -5.2 kcal/mol. Based on the average
binding energies of parent compounds in both models and applying the +2.85 kcal/mol as
the standard error, all of the parent compounds fall within the acceptable range of having
a comparable binding affinity.

Protein-tyrosine phosphatase 1B (PTP1B), one of the most validated drug targets
for treating type II diabetes, inhibits the phosphorylation of the insulin receptor (IR),
causing impairment in the insulin transduction pathway in various tissues (Ala et al., 2006;
Teimouri et al., 2022). All of the amino acid residues listed in Table 2, were reported to be
found in its catalytic region (Fu et al., 2002; Johnson et al., 2002; Ala et al., 2006; Rath et
al., 2022). The catalytic active site of the protein is composed of the amino acid residues
His214—Arg221, which contain the active site nucleophile Cys215 and Arg221. Tyr46,
Val49, Lys120, Asp181, Phe182, and Gln262 are additional residues that contribute to

catalysis and substrate recognition and form the sides of the catalytic cleft. These reported

113

essential amino acid residues were all recorded to have interactions with the docked
ligands. Moreover, as shown in Table 15, Ty046, Phe182, and Ala217 were found to be
the most active residues to interact with all of the docked ligands. On the other hand, the
same group of amino acid residues exhibited the greatest number of interactions in all
ligands in both PDB and AF2 models. As for types of interactions, Asp048 and Phel82
exhibited the most number of hydrogen bond and hydrophobic interactions with the docked
ligands in both PDB and AF2 models. All of these active residues were reported, hence
validating their significant role in PTP1B catalytic action.

In PTPIB, as shown in Figure 17, PRTN derived compounds — ACMO014,
ACM021, ACM028, ACM020, and ACMO024 had the highest affinity towards PTP1B.
These suggest that substitution of phenyl ring at the ether linker groups, replacement of
fluoro substituent in the R2, R3 and R7 hydroxyl groups, placement of methyl group at R4
and R6 hydroxyls, and the retention of original substituents such as the carbonyl and
hydroxyl group at R1 and R5 positions might be a good starting framework in designing
compounds for PTPIB enzyme. Most of the optimized structures for 11B-HSDI and
PTPIB are somehow the same because the scaffold was from one framework, PRTN.
ACMO021, a designed derivative from PRTN, may also be a promising compound with an
excellent binding affinity toward 116-HSD1 and PTP1B targets.

For the topmost potential ligand for PTP1B, ACM014 was subjected to interaction
analysis. As shown in Figure 26, the parent chain of the ACMO14 analogue had almost the
same orientation with PRTN in PDB model. However, the distal chain of the ACM014 had
been oriented at the opposite side of binding site. This suggests that the substitution of

phenyl ring in the R8 ether linker redirected the distal chain of ACM014.

114

Some amino acid residues have retained their interactions with ACM014 compared
with PRTN, reported GIn262 retained its hydrogen bond interactions. However, there is a
shift in position and added hydrogen bonding interactions with the atoms of ACMO14, the
carbonyl substituents of Gln262 exhibited moderate hydrogen bonding with the hydroxyl
groups of ACM014, the amino substituent also showed a moderate hydrogen bonding with
the fluoro substituent of the ACM014.

On the other hand, Asp181 maintained the moderate hydrogen bond in the same
ring position. A shift in interactions from moderate hydrogen bonding to hydrophobic
interactions was observed for Tyr046 and Asp048. Reported amino acid residues Phe! 82
and Ala217 have retained hydrophobic interactions. Unreported residues Tyr020 and
Thr263, on the other hand, initiated hydrophobic bonding interactions with ACM014.
Among the residues that were reported in literature, Arg024 was found to have additional
hydrophobic interaction with ACM014.

In Figure 27, ACMO014 in the AF2 model had a complete reverse orientation
compared with the PRTN. The distal chain of ACMO14 was completely oriented inside the
binding pocket therefore, initiated an additional number of interactions. Asn321
maintained its moderate hydrogen bonding in the same distance at the same ring position.
The reported residues Arg024 and Gln262 were noticed to promote moderate hydrogen
bonding with the extended distal chain of ACMO014 while the unreported residues Tyr020
and Lys120 have moderate hydrogen bonding interactions. Among the reported amino acid
residues, Asp181, Phe182, Ala217, and Ile219 exhibited hydrophobic interactions with
ACMO014. In addition, new hydrophobic interactions between ACMO14 and Arg254,

Met258, Gly259 and Cys324 were also observed.

115

Binding Towards SIRT6

Sirtuin-6 or Mono-ADP ribosyltransferase-sirtuin-6, although it is associated with
physiological and pathological processes, it has also been recognized to play a role in
glucose metabolism. Several studies have proven that the elimination of SIRT6 from the
entire body of mice results in severe hypoglycemia. Its deficiency is associated with hepatic
steatosis, diet-induced obesity, and insulin resistance. Its activation also provides
protection against obesity and diabetes (Kuang et al., 2018).

SIRT6 deficiency causes glucose intolerance and impaired insulin secretion in
response to glucose. It has been recognized that by deacetylating histone H3, SIRT6 plays
an essential role in the maintenance of B-cell viability and normal function. When inhibited,
B-cells of the pancreas showed decreased sensitivity. Its deficiency increases the
acetylation of histone H3 lysine residue at 9, acetylation of histone H3 lysine residue at 56
leading to increased levels of H3K9Ac, H3K56Ac, and also active RNA polymerase II in
the promoter region of thioredoxin-interacting protein (TXNIP), resulting in the expression
and increased levels of TXNIP that promotes B -cell apoptosis. Hence, SIRT6 is on the line
of potential therapeutic targets for type 2 diabetes mellitus (Qin et al., 2018).

As a result of docking analysis, since quercetin served as the control for the SIRT6
enzyme and one of the parent compounds is quercetin as well, they generated the same
binding energies for PDB model having -7.2 kcal/mol. However, in AF2 model, PQTN as
an experimental ligand yielded a lower binding energy than the control having -8.5
kcal/mol. On the other hand, aside from PQTN, PECE also shows the same binding energy

as compared to control in PDB model. PCTN has -7.7 kcal/mol and -9.7 kcal/mol being

116

both showed a better binding energy in both models. These docking results support the
study of You et al., (2019) proving that quercetin and its based compounds catechin and
epicatechin have good binding profiles and biological effects against SIRT6.

In contrast, RELE has the least binding energy for both PDB and AF2 models,
having -5.4 kcal/mol and -5.9 kcal/mol, respectively. Based on the average binding
energies of parent compounds in both models of SIRT6 and applying the +2.85 kcal/mol
as the standard error, all of the parent compounds fall within the acceptable range of having
a comparable binding affinity having PQTN and PCTN as the top compounds.

SIRT6 enzyme has been implicated in several biological processes including
glucose homeostasis regulated by beta cells, its extended acyl binding channel confirms its
specificity, among other isoforms. Reported amino acid residues in the binding site region
have also been documented to play roles in SIRT6 functions (Rahnasto-Rilla et al., 2018;
You et al., 2019). The reported amino acid Phe064 was considered to be the most active
residue to interact with the docked ligands and also has the greatest number of interactions
in all ligands in both PDB and AF2 models. This reflects that Phe064 is the most crucial
amino acid residue in SIRT6. In contrast to this, the additional interacting residues, Arg065
and Ile219 were observed to have the most number of hydrogen bond and hydrophobic
interactions in both PDB and AF2 models, hence can be added as significant residues for
SIRT6 functions.

For SIRT6, the top 5 compounds shown in Figure 19, BCM008, and BCM022 as
PKOR derivatives, along with PECE derived compounds DCM004, DCM027, and
DCM025 were the best ligands to have the highest binding affinity towards the SIRT6

target. This suggests that the attachment of phenyl ring in the R8 ether linker, replacement

117

of fluoro substituent in R6 hydroxyl and an optional substitution of methyl group in the R3
hydroxyl of PKOR framework might be good scaffold for SIRT6. In addition, in PECE
analogues that exhibited the lowest binding energies, a methylpropane and a methyl group
at R2 and R3 hydroxyls, methyl, -NHOH or a fluoro substituent at R4 hydroxyl as
replacements might be a good starting point in designing drugs for SIRT6.

For the topmost potential ligand for SIRT6, the PKOR derivative BCM008 was
subjected to analysis. In Figure 28, the parent chain of the BCM008 has a flipped
orientation compared with PKOR but both of the distal chains were oriented towards the
binding pocket of the PDB model. Most of the retained amino acid residues were involved
in hydrophobic interactions except for Glu074, which was involved in moderate hydrogen
bonding interactions. These include the reported amino acid residues Phe064, Phe082,
Phe086, Vall15, and Met157, and the unreported residues Trp071, Glu074, Ala079,
Pro080, and Val070. For the BCM008 analogue, additional interacting residues were
observed for the reported amino residues, Ile061, Ala053, and Asp116, wherein they
participated in hydrophobic interactions. Moreover, moderate hydrogen bonding was also
observed with the reported amino acid residue Pro062.

In AF2 model as shown in Figure 29, BCM008 closely resembles the orientation
of PKOR, hence most of the interacting residues are retained. The structure extension of
BCM008 was evident due to the presence of a phenoxy ring as a substitute in the R9 ether
linker group. Some of the retained moderate hydrogen bonding interactions were observed
for Leul82 and Asp014 as well. A change from hydrogen bonding to hydrophobic
interaction was seen with Arg065, Gln113, His133, Leul86, and Asp187. These changes

were evident in the functional groups of the distal chain due to the structural extension of

118

the analogue. The reported Gly214 with moderate hydrogen bonding with BCM008 was
observed to be an additional interacting residue. On the other hand, Ala053, Gly054, and
Ser216 amino acid residues were also found to form new hydrogen bonds, and Gly052,
Asp063, Gly066, and Thr215 formed hydrophobic interactions.

The binding analysis of the top 8 parent compounds and the top 5 analogues per
protein target reveals that binding orientations were different in both PDB and AF2 models
in terms of the position inside the binding pockets, validated by high RMSD values. Other
amino acid residues and possible binding site constraints are thought to be responsible for
varied ligand orientations. For some of these, the changes in orientation and position were
substantial and provided compelling evidence of additional interactions in which the effects

on the ligands differed between the two models.

Pharmacophore Analysis

Pharmacophore analysis was measured as an essential part of identifying the vital
interactions of ligand in a receptor binding site. Pharmacophore analysis approach was
conducted to investigate and compare the different features from multiple pharmacophores.
The pharmacophore analysis of the selected molecules were carried out by using the up-
to-date software LigandScout 4.4.8.

The generation of shared feature pharmacophores is a powerful tool to combine the
knowledge gained from multiple pharmacophores hence, all of the top 5 compounds per
protein target were used as the database and subjected to pharmacophore analysis to

determine different chemical features that are essential in protein-ligand interactions. The

119

red color represents hydrogen bond acceptor, green color represents hydrogen bond donor,
yellow spheres represent hydrophobic and blue rings represent an aromatic ring.

As shown in Figure 33, 2 hydrogen bond donors, and 7 hydrophobic interactions
were recorded in PDB model. On the other hand, 2 of each hydrogen bond donors, and
acceptors, and 7 hydrophobic interactions were determined in AF2 model. This shows that
the substituted phenyl rings in the linker groups, fluorine substitution in R2, R3, and R7
positions and maintaining the original substituents of the last distal chain ring noticed to
play an interaction with amino acid residues of 11B-HSD1. This suggests that 2 hydrogen
bond donors, 2 hydrogen bond acceptors, and 7 hydrophobic features were essential for
optimal 11B-HSD1 target interactions.

In PTPIB target, Figure 34 shows that the phenyl substituted ring, methyl at RS
and Ring B were considered to be essential for hydrophobic interactions in both models.
The original hydroxyl moiety of R5 and fluorine substituent at R7 were considered to be
important for hydrogen and hydrophobic bond interactions, detected in AF2 model,
however, these were not reflected in PDB model. A total of 2 hydrogen bond acceptors, 3
hydrogen bond donors, and 4 hydrophobic features were essential for optimal target
interactions with PTP1B.

On the other hand, Figure 35 shows the shared and merged features for the SIRT6
target. From which, 4 hydrophobic features were recorded in both PDB and AF2 models,
4 hydrogen bond donors were marked in the PDB model, and 3 hydrogen bond donors
were detected and highlighted in the AF2 model. Additional essential elements were also
observed in the AF2 model, the presence of 4 hydrogen bond acceptors. As a result of the

consensus pharmacophore, 4 hydrophobic, 5 of each hydrogen bond donors, and

120

hydrophobic acceptors are essential features to have optimal interaction with the SIRT6

target

ADMET and Physicochemical Predictions

In pharmacokinetic and physicochemical screening, various indices of absorption,
distribution, metabolism, excretion, toxicology, and drug-like properties must be measured
in the early phases of the drug discovery.

ADMETLab 2.0 is a comprehensive database that combines the existing ADMET
and fundamental physicochemical endpoints. The data it provides was derived from two
sources; first, information was manually filtered and processed from peer-reviewed
publications. The second section was compiled from the databases ChEMBL, EPA, and
DrugBank. Each property of Absorption, Distribution, Metabolism, Excretion, and
Toxicity, as well as a series of subclasses based on their endpoint meanings, were analyzed
and cleaned using the molecular operating environment (MOE). The provision of data
backed up by the robust quantitative structure-property relationship (QSPR) models (Xiong
et al., 2021). All the predictive results were expressed in terms of probability values to be
used in empirical decision making as part of the result interpretation. This applies to certain
endpoints or indices including P-glycoprotein (P-gp) substrate and inhibitor, gastro-
intestinal absorption, metabolism covering all the cytochrome P450 isozymes substrate and
inhibitor, half-life, AERG inhibition, carcinogenicity, and hepatotoxicity where 0-0.3 range
values are equivalent to excellent, 0.3-0. range values are equivalent to medium and 0.7-

1.0 range values, which is equivalent to poor (Xiong et al., 2021).

121

In this study, the prediction of the ADMET properties was applied to the 280
derivatives with improved binding energies; they were consolidated per protein target and
presented in numbers in terms of their favorability per property. The criteria for evaluating
whether a compound is said to fulfill a certain property was based on its acceptability in all
of the parameters.

Asa key method of oral absorption, gastro-intestinal absorption is one of the most
crucial ADME properties during the early phases of lead discovery and optimization
(Artursson & Karlsson, 1991). On the other hand, as the first identified and one of the most
clinically significant transporters in the human body, P-glycoprotein (P-gp) serves as a
biological barrier by expelling toxins and xenobiotics from cells (Yamazaki & Lin, 2003).
The absorption of an oral drug by the human intestine is a prerequisite for its apparent
efficacy. The close relationship between oral bioavailability and intestinal absorption has
also been demonstrated, and gastro-intestinal absorption (GSI) can be viewed to some
extent as an alternative indicator of oral bioavailability.

Category 0 represents compounds that are highly absorbed, while Category 1
represents compounds that are poorly absorbed. The output was expressed in terms of
probability values, where poor (0.7-1.0) represents compounds that are poorly absorbed
(Category 1). In terms of P-gp substrate/inhibitor recognition, Category 0 was referred to
as non-inhibitor/non-substrate, while Category | was referred to as inhibitor/substrate. The
output value is the probability of being a P-gp-inhibitor or substrate.

One of the major mechanisms of drug uptake and distribution is through plasma
protein binding (PPB); thus. the binding of a drug to proteins in plasma has a strong

influence on its pharmacodynamic behavior. PPB can directly influence oral bioavailability

122

because the free concentration of the drug is at stake when a drug binds to serum proteins
in this process. Blood-brain barrier (BBB) permeation is a measure of how molecules
would enter the central nervous system (CNS). Drugs that act in the CNS need to cross the
blood-brain barrier (BBB) to reach their molecular target. By contrast, for drugs with a
peripheral target, little or no BBB penetration might be required in order to avoid CNS side
effects (Clark, 2003).

In terms of criteria, a compound is considered to have a proper PPB if it has
predicted value of < 90%, and drugs with high protein-bound may have a low therapeutic
index. Category 0 was referred to as non-inhibitor/non-substrate, while Category 1 was
referred to as inhibitor/substrate. The output value is the probability of being BBB+ and
expressed in terms of probability values, where poor (0.7-1.0) represents compounds that
can easily pass through the blood brain barrier (Category 1).

Metabolism prediction is a significant safety concern to pharmaceutical research,
as it defines the possible roles of compounds in altering the activity of metabolizing
enzymes; hence, it remains the top priority in many research areas. Cytochrome P450
enzymes are responsible for the metabolism and clearance of drugs and xenobiotics from
biological systems. Five isoforms (1A2, 2C9, 2C19, 2D6, and 3A4) are predominantly
expressed in the liver and also in the small intestine, lungs, placenta, and kidneys are
important in xenobiotic metabolism. When any isoform of CYP is inhibited, or compounds
may act as potential substrates, malfunctioning of drug metabolism and elevation of
toxicity and drug interactions are always a usual occurrence (Kell & Goodacre 2014). In

terms of criteria, Category 0 was referred to as non-substrate/non-inhibitor, while Category

123

1 reflects a substrate or inhibitor. The probability value represents a compound's being a
substrate or inhibitor, where poor (0.7-1.0) signifies Category 1.

Renal Clearance is a crucial pharmacokinetic parameter that influences
bioavailability and is essential for determining dose rates. Furthermore, among the various
toxicological endpoints of chemical substances, carcinogenicity is a major cause for
concern due to its grave effects on human health. Chemicals may be carcinogenic due to
their ability to damage the genome or interfere with cellular metabolic processes.
Numerous approved drugs have been identified as human or animal carcinogens and
removed from the market. On the other hand, the human ether-a-go-go (hERG) gene
regulates the exchange of cardiac action potential and resting potential, specifically for a
voltage-gated potassium channel involved in cardiac depolarization and repolarization. The
hERG blockade may result in long QT syndrome (LQTS), arrhythmia, and torsade de
Pointes (TdP), which can cause palpitations, fainting, and even sudden death (Recanatini
et al., 2005).

In terms of the criteria and result interpretation, the unit of output values was
expressed in ml/min/kg. Whereas > 15 ml/min/kg indicates high clearance, 5-15 ml/min/kg
indicates moderate clearance, and 5 ml/min/kg indicates low clearance. Molecules with a
short half-life were represented as Category 0, while Category | referred to compounds
with a long half-life. The output value is the probability of being in Category 1, where poor
(0.7-1.0) signifies a compound having a long half-life.

In toxicity analysis, Category 0 was referred to as an inactive inhibitor/non-

carcinogen/non-hepatotoxic, while Category 1 represents a compound as being an active

124

inhibitor/carcinogen/hepatotoxic. The probability value represents a compound's being
inactive or active, where poor (0.7-1.0) signifies Category 1.

Attention is paid to the conformity of a compound's physicochemical properties
with filter variants such as the Lipinski rule of 5 (ROS), the Ghose filter, the Veber rule,
the Egan rule, and the Muegge rule when estimating its drug-likeness. Consideration is
given to properties, including the number of hydrogen bond donors (HBD), hydrogen bond
acceptors (HBA), molecular mass, logP, molar refractivity, rotatable bonds, topological
polar surface area (TPSA), and number of rotatable bonds. Quantitative estimate of drug
similarity (QED), on the other hand, was considered an integrative scoring function to
evaluate compounds’ potential as lead compounds. Aqueous solubility (log S) and
lipophilicity (log P) are crucial parameters for understanding the dissolution of a drug in
the aqueous gastrointestinal tract and lipid soluble constants. These parameters indicate the
solubility, permeability, potency, selectivity, and promiscuity of a compound, and thus its
bioavailability. To be absorbed, a drug must be water-soluble and then have the ability to
pass through biological membranes (Manallack et al., 2013).

For drug-likeness analysis, SwissADME was used as the tool for the evaluation of
the characteristics of the compounds based on the five major binary rule filters, such as
Lipinski, Veber, Ghose, Egan, and Muegge rules. The representation of the percentage
values was based on the number of violations per rule, wherein 100% corresponds to no
violation, and 0% reflects that it fails all properties desired of the rule.

Quantitative estimate of drug-likeness (QED) was also used to evaluate molecular
drug-likeness. It is derived from a multivariate nonlinear function in which multiple

properties have been parameterized and combined, including those used by Lipinski’s rule-

125

of-five, PSA, Nrow, counts of aromatic rings (NAr), and the presence of certain undesirable
structural motifs (Bickerton et al., 2012). Results interpretation includes > 0.67 (excellent)
as representing attractive compounds while < 0.67 (poor) represents unattractive
compounds.

In the analysis of physicochemical properties, the output values of compounds in
the range from -4 to 0.5 log mol/L reflect an accepted aqueous solubility profile for oral
absorption.

The output values of the predicted logP of compounds are given as the logarithm
of the molar concentration (log mol/L), where 0 to 3 log mol/L reflects an accepted n-
octanol/water distribution coefficient, hence with a considerable impact on both membrane
permeability and hydrophobic binding to macromolecules, including the target receptor as
well as other proteins like plasma proteins, transporters, or metabolizing enzymes.

The synthetic accessibility score is intended to estimate the ease with which drug-
like molecules can be synthesized based on a combination of fragment contributions and a
complexity penalty, wherein the complexity penalty is a score given to descriptors such as
the molecule size, large rings, or macrocycles, and non-standard ring fusions (Ertl &
Schuffenhauer, 2009). Results interpretation includes < 6 (excellent) as representing
compounds to easily synthesize, whereas > 6 (poor) represents compounds to hardly
synthesize.

As illustrated in Figure 36, as part of considering the synthetic accessibility of the
resulting product during derivatization, all of the designed analogues and even their

corresponding parent compounds were considered to be synthetically feasible.

126

In the absorption parameter, 71 compounds were predicted to absorbed or
assimilated through the human intestine. These compounds were also considered to be non-
inhibitors and non-substrates of P-gp glycoprotein. Regarding the distribution, 49
compounds were predicted to have a high therapeutic index and no known CNS effects.
For metabolism parameters, 101 compounds were shown to be non-inhibitor or non-
substrate of the major isoforms of the CYP450 family.

For the analysis of the excretion parameter, 39 compounds were predicted to have
a short half-life and high renal clearance. For toxicity assessment, 201 compounds were
predicted to be non-carcinogenic and will not cause any cardiac problems and liver
damage. In assessing their physicochemical properties, 60 compounds were predicted to
have an ideal solubility, and 85 compounds were predicted to resemble a drug-like
molecule.

In terms of absorption, most of the derivatives of PCAD, such as HSMO021,
HSM014, HCM005, HSM022, HSM019, HCMO11, and HCM006 were completely
predicted to be non-active P-gp inhibitors. On the other hand, FCM039 and DSMO19 were
recorded to have the smallest scores to be non-active P-gp substrates. Most of the
derivatives of DILE, such as ESM011, ECM002, ECM001, ESM018, and ESM008, had
the highest scores for being the best and being easily absorbed by the human intestine.

In distribution parameter, ACM124, ACMO15, and ACMO18 were predicted to
have the lowest scores for having less chances of crossing the blood brain barrier (BBB).
In terms of plasma protein binding (PPB), ESM011, GCM003, and HSMO019 were
predicted to have the lowest scores, reflecting that these compounds have the highest

therapeutic index.

127

In the metabolism parameter, a number of PCAD derivatives were predicted to be
the best ligands to have the property of being non-inhibitor and non-substrate of the major
CYPP450 isozymes such as HCM005, HCM003, HCM007, HCM009, and HSM022.

In the excretion parameter, DSM017, DCMO11, and DSM021 were among the
predicted compounds to have high clearance. On the other hand, DCM004, DCM062,
ECMO001, ESM008, and ECM002 were among the ligands to have the best scores
considering having a short half-life.

In toxicity assessment, most of the derivatives that were predicted to be non-active
inhibitors of the hERG gene were analogues of PKFL, such as FCM003, FCM014,
FCM009, FCM020, and FCM022. The top compounds that were predicted to be non-
carcinogenic were derivatives of PRTN, and these are ACM018, ACM015, ACM124,
ACM119, and ACM120. Derivatives that were predicted to be non-hepatotoxic include
FCM037, BSM011, CSM014, DSM033, and ASM021.

In the drug-likeness analysis, DCM014, CSM014, DSM033, DCM028, and
DCM006 were the top ligands that were predicted to pass all the parameters and were found
to have no violations of the Lipinski, Veber, Ghose, Egan, and Muegge rules. In QED
scoring, GSM028, ESM018, ESM005, DCMO019, and DCM017 were predicted to be the
best candidates as drug-like molecules based on the desirability of their structures.

In synthetic accessibility, the compounds that had the lowest scores and were
considered the best analogues to be synthetically feasible were FCM037, FCM062,
CSMO014, FCM036, and FCM035.

In terms of lipophilicity, PCAD derivatives were predicted to have the best scores

capable of permeating lipid membranes, and these are HCM002, HCM009, HCMO007,

128

HCM006, and HCMO10. On the other hand, compounds that were predicted to have the
best scores to be soluble in the aqueous phase were also PCAD derivatives, including
HSM021, HSM014, HCMO11, HCM007, and HCM006.

In terms of the top ligands per protein target, for 11B-HSD1, ACM021, ACM036,
ACM044, ACMO018, and ACM024 were predicted to be highly absorbed in the human
intestinal tract. The top 5 ligands were also predicted to be strong substrates of P-
glycoprotein (P-gp) and strong inhibitors, except for ACM018, ACM036, and ACM044.
All the top 5 ligands were also predicted to have little chance of crossing the blood brain
barrier (BBB). However, they have a low therapeutic index. Except for CYP2C9, where
they were predicted to be strong substrates, all of the compounds are non-inhibitors and
non-substrates for the major CYP450 isozymes. It was also noticed that ACM024 is a
strong substrate of CYP2D6. It was also predicted that these compounds would have a
short half-life and high clearance. In toxicity analysis, these compounds were predicted to
be inactive inhibitors of the hERG gene, and non-carcinogenic. However, they were
predicted to be hepatotoxic except for ACM024. Due to their complex structures, most of
the compounds had several violations in the Lipinski, Veber, Ghose, Egan and Muegge
filters. They were also considered unattractive compounds based on their QED scores. The
top 5 compounds were also predicted to be highly lipophilic and insoluble in the aqueous
phase. Regarding synthetic accessibility, ACM024, ACM044, ACM021, ACMO18, and
ACM036 were ranked based on their synthetic accessibility scores, where ACM024 is
considered the most synthetically feasible among the top 5 ligands in 11B-HSD1 enzyme.

For the top 5 compounds in the PTP1B target, ACM014, ACM021, ACM028,

ACMO020, and ACM024 were predicted to be highly absorbed in the human intestinal tract.

129

Except for ACM014 and ACM028, the top 5 ligands were predicted to be strong substrates
and strong inhibitors of the P-glycoprotein (P-gp) transporter. All the top 5 ligands were
also predicted to have little chance of crossing the blood brain barrier (BBB). However,
they have a low therapeutic index. All of the compounds are non-inhibitors and non-
substrates for the major CYP450 isozymes except for CYP2C9, where they were predicted
to be strong substrates, and in CYP2D6, ACM020, and ACM024 were predicted to be
strong substrates. It was also predicted that these compounds would have a short half-life
and high clearance. In toxicity analysis, these compounds were predicted to be inactive
inhibitors of the hERG gene, non-carcinogenic, and non-hepatotoxic except for ACM014,
ACM020 and ACMO02!1 that were predicted to induce hepatotoxicity. Due to their complex
structures, most of the compounds had several violations in the Lipinski, Veber, Ghose,
Egan, and Muegge filters. Based on their QED scores, they were also deemed to be
unappealing compounds. All of the top 5 compounds were predicted to be highly lipophilic
and water insoluble. In terms of their synthetic accessibility scores, ACM028 had the
lowest synthetic accessibility score, hence considered the most synthetically feasible,
followed by ACM024, ACM014, ACM020, and ACMO021.

In terms of the SIRT6 target, BCM008, DCM027, DCM004, DCM025, and
BCM022 were predicted to be highly absorbed in the human intestinal tract. In terms of
their roles in the P-glycoprotein (P-gp) transporter, BCM008 and BCM022 were predicted
to be non-inhibitors. However, they are strong substrates of the P-gp transporter. DCM004,
DCM025, and DCM027 were predicted to be strong and specific inhibitors of the P-gp
transporter. It was also noted that DCM004 is a strong substrate of the P-gp transporter. It

was also predicted that none of the top 5 ligands would cross the blood-brain barrier (BBB).

130

Except for BCMO008, all the top ligands have a low therapeutic index. In terms of their
metabolism roles, BCM008 and BCM022 were non-inhibitors and non-substrates of the 5
CYP450 isozymes except for CYP2C9 where they were predicted as active substrates.
DCM004, DCM025, and DCM027 were predicted to be substrates of CYP1A2, CYP2C9,
CYP2D6, and CYP3A4, and also inhibitors of CYP2C19 and CYP2C9. DCM004 and
DCM027 were also predicted to be inhibitors of CYP2D6 and CYP3A4. It was also
predicted that these compounds would have a short half-life. DCM004, DCM025, and
DCM027 were predicted to have high clearance. In toxicity analysis, all of the compounds
were predicted to be inactive inhibitors of the hERG gene, non-carcinogenic, and non-
hepatotoxic. Due to the complex structure of BCM008 and BCM022, they had more than
50% violations in the Lipinski, Veber, Ghose, Egan, and Muegge filters. The ligands
DCMO004, DCM025 and DCM027 were recorded as having | or no violations in the drug-
likeness binary rule filters. Based on their QED scores, only DCM004, DCM025, and
DCM027 were deemed to be attractive compounds. Except for BCM022 and DCM027, all
of the top 5 compounds were predicted to be very lipophilic and insoluble in water. Based
on their synthetic accessibility scores ranking, DCM025 was predicted be the most
synthetically feasible for SIRT6, having the lowest SA score, followed by DCM027,
DCM004, BCM008, and BCM022.

Table 19 shows the best candidate for each protein target. For ASM021, minimal
consideration for some modifications in dosing and contraindications might improve the
excretion and absorption parameters. For HCM004 and DSMO008 minimal modifications

in dosing might address the long half-life of the compound.

131

CHAPTER 6: CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS

In silico methods were utilized in this study for the preliminary screening of the
selected phytoconstituents of Annona muricata and derivatives for potential binding with
potential targets related to type 2 diabetes mellitus: 1 1B-HSD1, PTP1B, and SIRT6. A PDB
model and an AF2 model were used for each target. Grid boxes were adjusted and
positioned in a way that the significant binding residues in each model are effectively
covered. These grid box parameters were validated using the PDB models through the
redocking of the ligands that are co-crystallized with the targets, which all showed RMSDs
of less than 2A relative to their corresponding native poses. The models used for each
protein target were deemed to be of high quality and similarity, confirmed with RMSD
values of less than 2A.

Based on the binding energies of the parent compounds in both models, PRTN and
PKOR exhibited average binding energies equal to those of the controls in 11B-HSD1
(cortisone, -10.5 kcal/mol) and PTP1B (F16, -8.1 kcal/mol), respectively. In SIRT6, PCTN
exhibited more negative binding energy (-8.7 kcal/mol) than the control QUE (-8.25
kcal/mol). While some parent compounds have energies lower than the controls, their
differences still fall within the +2.85 kcal/mol standard error of AutoDock Vina hence a
significant difference cannot be claimed. This means that those parent compounds have
comparable binding affinity as the controls. It has also been observed that among the 36
experimental ligands, most of the parent compounds that exhibited lower binding energies
are alkaloids and phenolic compounds, suggesting that these families can be considered

good prospects for the selected protein targets.

132

Structural modification was performed to the top parent compounds with a
comparable binding affinity with controls in all models of the protein targets, and these are
PRTN, PKOR, PQTN, PECE, DILE, PKFL, DCXE, and PCAD. A total of 672 derivatives
were designed by employing bioisosteric replacements and metabolic analysis. This is
comprised 305 analogues produced with single modifications, 297 additional analogues
with combined modifications, and 70 predicted metabolites. Compounds with equal or
more negative binding energies than the controls were considered as potential derivatives.
Out of 672, a total of 280 derivatives have satisfied this criterion and were subjected to
further analysis. Of these potential derivatives which are all structural analogues, 137, 155,
and 121 compounds have shown improved binding energies than the controls for 11B-
HSD1, PTPIB, and SIRT6, respectively. None of the metabolites have exhibited better
binding than controls.

All potential derivatives were ranked based on their binding energies with each
protein target. ACM021 (-12.8 kcal/mol; SA 5.111), ACM036 (-12.7 kcal/mol; SA 5.153),
ACM044 (-12.3 kcal/mol; SA 5.105), ACMO18 (-12.2 kcal/mol; SA 5.118), and ACM024
(-12.2 kcal/mol; SA 5.026), all of which are derivatives of PRTN are the top 5 derivatives
for 11B-HSD1. In PTP1B, ACM014 (-9.8 kcal/mol; SA 5.029), ACM021 (-9.8 kcal/mol;
SA 5.111), ACM028 (-9.7 kcal/mol; SA 4.973), ACM020 (-9.6 kcal/mol; SA 5.082), and
ACM024 (-9.6 kcal/mol; SA 5.026), also derivatives of PRTN, are the top 5 ligands. Lastly,
BCM008 (-9.5 kcal/mol; SA 4.993), DCM027 (-9.5 kcal/mol; SA 3.393), DCM004 (-9.4
kcal/mol; SA 3.546), DCM025 (-9.3 kcal/mol; SA 3.319), and BCM022 (-9.3 kcal/mol;
SA 5.023) the top 5 derivatives for SIRT6; the 2" to 4 compounds are derivatives of

PECE while the other two are designed from PKOR.

133

Interaction analysis reveals that most of the reported binding residues have been
observed to interact with most of the experimental ligands. In SIRT6, Gly! 11 and Thr213
were among those reported but did not show any interactions with experimental ligands.
Additional interacting residues were also evident in all protein targets. As indicated by the
presence of aromatic compounds, most of the observed interactions were hydrophobic. The
most active residues in 11B-HSD1 are Ser170 and Ala223, both of which can form
hydrogen and hydrophobic interactions. On the other hand, the most active PTP1B residues
involved in hydrogen bond and hydrophobic interactions are Asp048 and Phe182. Lastly,
Arg065 and Ile219 exhibited the significant number of hydrogen and hydrophobic bond
interactions in SIRT6.

In terms of the ligands, most interactions formed by the parent compounds were
still observed in the interactions of their top derivatives, on top of the new interactions
resulting from the structural modifications done. In certain cases, derivatives even
exhibited binding orientations that are different from the bound poses of their
corresponding parent compounds. Pharmacophoric features of the top derivatives reveal
the number of essential elements needed to obtain good binding profiles. These include the
presence of hydrogen bond donors, hydrogen bond acceptors, and hydrophobic features. In
11B-HSD1, 2 hydrogen bond donors, 2 hydrogen bond acceptors, and 2 hydrophobic
features were highlighted as essential features. In PTP1B, 3 hydrogen bond donors, 2
hydrogen bond acceptors, and 4 hydrophobic features marked as important elements.
Lastly, 5 hydrogen bond donors, 5 hydrogen bond acceptors, and 4 hydrophobic features

were recorded to be present and essential for optimal binding with SIRT6.

134

Pharmacokinetic and physicochemical analysis have shown that out of the 280
potential derivatives, 71 compounds have fulfilled all indices of the absorption parameter,
49 in distribution, 101 in metabolism, 39 in excretion, 201 in toxicity, 85 in drug-likeness,
and 60 compounds in physicochemical properties. All the designed derivatives and their
corresponding parent compounds were predicted to be synthetically feasible. On the other
hand, some derivatives failed certain criteria despite having improved binding energies
relative to their parents. In these cases, the substitution led to an increase in affinity at the
expense of the compounds’ pharmacokinetic profile and drug-likeness.

In contrast, some modifications were found to improve the pharmacokinetic
properties of the parent compounds, such as in the case of ASM021 which had increased
lipophilicity and human intestinal absorption rate. Another example is HCM004. While it
became a full substrate of P-gp, its lipophilicity did improve and its capability to induce
CNS effects was reduced when compared to PCAD. Lastly, relative to parent compound,
DSMO008 showed improved plasma protein binding (PPB) and evasion against CYP2C9
metabolism.

Based on these findings, the following recommendations can be considered. Further
modifications on the underutilized and problematic groups of the potential derivatives can
be done to further improve their binding, pharmacokinetic, and physicochemical profiles.
Performing the same in silico methods in other isoforms is also recommended to test their
selectivity. Using additional models for each target can also be considered since the
location to have a better survey of the possible conformations of the molecules in the
binding pockets, since there were observed differences in the PDB and AF2 orientations of

the ligands. Ensemble docking or molecular dynamic (MD) simulations can also be used

135

for the post-docking refinement of the generated ligand-protein complexes prior to
interactions analysis.

Furthermore, a thorough novelty search can be performed to determine if the top
ligands for each protein target are already reported in literature. Available data can be
useful in the synthesis of the top ligands, the prioritization of which can be based on their
corresponding predicted synthetic accessibilities. These compounds can then be subjected
to in vitro and in vivo studies to determine their actual biological effects — whether they

will serve as inhibitors, activators, or modulators of the target enzymes.

136

REFERENCES

Abirami, N., & Arulmozhi, R. (2017). In-silico approach towards protein targets related to
diabetes mellitus - An Overview. In Oriental Journal of Chemistry (Vol. 33, Issue 4,
pp. 1614-1622). Oriental Scientific Publishing Company.
https://doi.org/10.13005/ojc/330404

Adewole, S. O., & Caxton-Martins, E. A. (2009). Morphological changes and
hypoglycemic effects of Annona muricata linn. (annonaceae) leaf aqueous extract on
pancreatic B-cells of streptozotocin-treated diabetic rats. African Journal of
Biomedical Research, 9(3), 173-187. https://doi.org/10.43 1 4/ajbr.v9i3.48903

Adewole, S. O., & Ojewole, J. A. O. (2008). Protective effects of Annona muricata Linn.
(Annonaceae) leaf aqueous extract on serum lipid profiles and oxidative stress in
hepatocytes of streptozotocin-treated diabetic rats.

Adeyemi, D. O., Komolafe, O. A., Adewole, O. S., Obuotor, E. M., & Adenowo, T. K.
(2009). Anti hyperglycemic activities of Annona muricata (Linn). In Afr. J. Trad.
CAM (Vol. 6, Issue 1). www.africanethnomedicines.net

Ala, P. J., Gonneville, L., Hillman, M. C., Becker-Pasha, M., Wei, M., Reid, B. G., Klabe,
R., Yue, E. W., Wayland, B., Douty, B., Polam, P., Wasserman, Z., Bower, M.,
Combs, A. P., Burn, T. C., Hollis, G. F., & Wynn, R. (2006). Structural basis for
inhibition of protein-tyrosine phosphatase 1B by isothiazolidinone heterocyclic
phosphonate mimetics. Journal of Biological Chemistry, 281(43), 32784-32795.
https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M606873200

Almeida, C., Monteiro, C., & Silvestre, S. (2021). Inhibitors of 11®-hydroxysteroid

dehydrogenase type | as potential drugs for type 2 diabetes mellitus—a systematic

137

review of clinical and in vivo preclinical studies. In Scientia Pharmaceutica (Vol. 89,
Issue 1, pp. 1-14). MDPI AG. https://doi.org/10.3390/scipharm89010005
Alonso, H., Bliznyuk, A. A., & Gready, J. E. (2006). Combining Docking and Molecular
Dynamic Simulations in Drug Design. 26(5). https://doi.org/10.1002/med.20067
Alwan, I. A., Lim, V., Samad, N. A., Widyawati, T., & Yusoff, N. A. (2020). Effect of
Annona Muricata L. On metabolic parameters in diabetes mellitus: A systematic
review. Current Research in Nutrition and Food Science, 8(1), 1-11.
https://doi.org/10.12944/CRNFSJ.8.1.01
Alzaid, A., Ladron de Guevara, P., Beillat, M., Lehner Martin, V., & Atanasov, P. (2020).
Burden of disease and costs associated with type 2 diabetes in emerging and
established markets: systematic review analyses. Expert Review of
Pharmacoeconomics and Outcomes Research, 1-14.
https://doi.org/10.1080/14737167.2020.1782748
Andleeb, S., Nadia, A., Waqar, H., & Nouman, R. (2020). in silico discovery of potential
inhibitors against Dipeptidyl Peptidase-4: A major biological target of Type-2
diabetes mellitus. International Journal of Clinical Microbiology and Biochemical
Technology, 3(1), 001-010. https://doi.org/10.29328/journal.ijcmbt.1001008
Andrews, R. C., Rooyackers, O., & Walker, B. R. (2003). Effects of the 11 beta-
hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase inhibitor carbenoxolone on insulin sensitivity in men
with type 2 diabetes. The Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism, 88(1),
285-291. https://doi.org/10.1210/JC.2002-021194
Arnold, K., Bordoli, L., Kopp, J., & Schwede, T. (2006). The SWISS-MODEL workspace:

A web-based environment for protein structure homology modelling. Bioinformatics,

138

22(2), 195-201. https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/bti770

Artasensi, A., Pedretti, A., Vistoli, G., & Fumagalli, L. (2020). Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus:
A Review of Multi-Target Drugs. Molecules (Basel, Switzerland), 25(8).
https://doi.org/10.3390/MOLECULES2508 1987

Artursson, P., & Karlsson, J. (1991). Correlation between oral-drug absorption in humans
and apparent drug permeability coefficients in human intestinal epithelial (Caco-2)
cells,

Badrie, N., & Schauss, A. G. (2009). Soursop (Annona muricata L.): composition,
nutritional value, medicinal uses, and toxicology. In Bioactive Foods in Promoting
Health (pp. 621-643).

Bae, E. J. (2017). Sirtuin 6, a possible therapeutic target for type 2 diabetes. In Archives of
Pharmacal Research (Vol. 40, Issue 12, pp. 1380-1389). Pharmaceutical Society of
Korea. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12272-017-0989-8

Basu, R., Singh, A., & Basu, A. (2005). Obesity and type 2 diabetes do not alter splanchnic
cortisol production in humans.

Begum, N., Nasir, A., Parveen, Z., Muhammad, T., Ahmed, A., Farman, S., Jamila, N.,
Shah, M., Bibi, N. S., Khurshid, A., Huma, Z., Khalil, A. A. K., Albrakati, A., &
Batiha, G. E. S. (2021). Evaluation of the Hypoglycemic Activity of Morchella conica
by Targeting Protein Tyrosine Phosphatase 1B. Frontiers in Pharmacology, 12.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fphar.202 1.661803

Belete, T. M. (2020). A recent achievement in the discovery and development of novel
targets for the treatment of type-2 diabetes mellitus. In Journal of Experimental

Pharmacology (Vol. 12, pp. 1-15). Dove Medical Press Ltd.

139

https://doi.org/10.2147/JEP.S226113

Berawi, K. N., Shidarti, L., Nurdin, S. U., Lipoeto, N. I., Wahid, I., Sari, J., & Nurcahyani,
E. (2017). Comparison effectiveness of antidiabetic activity extract herbal mixture of
soursop leaves(annona muricata), bay leaves(syzygium polyanthum) and pegagan
leaves(centella asiatica). Biomedical and Pharmacology Journal, 10(3), 1481-1488.
https://doi.org/10.13005/opj/1256

Bickerton, G. R., Paolini, G. V., Besnard, J., Muresan, S., & Hopkins, A. . (2012).
Quantifying the chemical beauty of drugs.

Boittier, E. D., Tang, Y. Y., Buckley, M. E., Schuurs, Z. P., Richard, D. J., & Gandhi, N.
S. (2020). Assessing molecular docking tools to guide targeted drug discovery of cd38
inhibitors. International Journal of Molecular Sciences, 21(15), 1-19.
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms21 155183

Boyom, F. F., Fokou, P. V., Yamthe, L. R., Mfopa, A. N., Kemgne, E. M., Mbacham, W.
F., Tsamo, E., Zollo, P. H., Gut, J., & Rosenthal, P. J. (2011). Potent antiplasmodial
extracts from Cameroonian Annonaceae. Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 134(3),
717-724. https://doi.org/10.1016/j,jep.201 1.01.020

Butina, D., Segall, M. D., & Frankcombe, K. (2002). Predicting ADME properties in silico:
methods and models. Drug Discovery Today, 7(11). https://doi.org/10.1016/S1359-
6446(02)02288-2

Choudhury, H., Pandey, M., Hua, C. K., Mun, C. S., Jing, J. K., Kong, L., Em, L. Y.,
Ashraf, N. A., Kit, S. W., Yee, T. S., Pichika, M. R., Gorain, B., & Kesharwani, P.
(2018). An update on natural compounds in the remedy of diabetes mellitus: A

systematic review. Journal of Traditional and Complementary Medicine, 8(3), 361—

140

376. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JTCME.2017.08.012

Clark, D. E. (2003). In silico prediction of blood-brain barrier permeation.

Cooper, M. S., & Stewart, P. M. (2009). /1B-Hydroxysteroid Dehydrogenase Type 1 and
Its Role in the Hypothalamus-Pituitary-Adrenal Axis, Metabolic Syndrome, and
Inflammation.

Coria-Téllez, A., Montalvo-Gonzalez, E., Yahia, E., & Obledo-Vazquez, E. (2016).
Annona muricata: A comprehensive review on its traditional medicinal uses ,
phytochemicals , pharmacological activities , mechanisms of action and toxicity.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.arabjc.2016.01.004

Damayanti, D. S., Utomo, D. H., & Kusuma, C. (2017). Revealing the potency of Annona
muricata leaves extract as FOXO1 inhibitor for diabetes mellitus treatment through
computational study. Jn Silico Pharmacology, 5(1). https://doi.org/10.1007/s40203-
017-0023-3

De Graaf, C., Vermeulen, N. P. E., & Feenstra, K. A. (2005). Cytochrome P450 in Silico:
An Integrative Modeling Approach. Journal of Medicinal Chemistry, 48(8), 2725—
2755. https://doi.org/10.1021/JM040180D

Du, X., Li, Y., Xia, Y. L., Ai, S. M., Liang, J., Sang, P., Ji, X. L., & Liu, S. Q. (2016).
Insights into protein—ligand interactions: Mechanisms, models, and methods.
International Journal of Molecular Sciences, 17(2), 1-34.
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms1 7020144

Ertl, P., & E, Schuffenhauer, A. (2009). Estimation of synthetic accessibility score of drug-
like molecules based on molecular complexity and fragment contributions.

Feinstein, W. P., & Brylinski, M. (2015). Calculating an optimal box size for ligand

141

docking and virtual screening against experimental and predicted binding pockets.
Journal of Cheminformatics, 7(1). https://doi.org/10.1186/s13321-015-0067-S

Feldman, J. L., Baeza, J., & Denu, J. M. (2013). Activation of the protein deacetylase
SIRT6 by long-chain fatty acids and widespread deacylation by Mammalian Sirtuins.
Journal of Biological Chemistry, 288(43), 31350-31356.
https://doi.org/10.1074/JBC.C113.511261/ATTACHMENT/ASD9F42F-F3A7-
4D4D-BFFC-4E7893FC3C28/MMC2.PDF

Fiscal, R. R. (2017). Ethnomedicinal Plants Used by Traditional Healers in Laguna,
Philippines. Asia Pacific Journal of Multidisciplinary Research, 5(4), 132-137.
www.apjmr.com

Florence, N. T., Benoit, M. Z., Jonas, K., Alexandra, T., Désiré, D. D. P., Pierre, K., &
Théophile, D. (2014). Antidiabetic and antioxidant effects of Annona muricata
(Annonaceae), aqueous extract on streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats. Journal of
Ethnopharmacology, 151(2), 784-790. https://doi.org/10.1016/j jep.2013.09.021

Freude, S., Heise, T., Woerle, H.-J., Jungnik, A., Rauch, T., Hamilton, B., Schélch, C.,
Huang, F., & Graefe-Mody, U. (2016). Safety, pharmacokinetics and
pharmacodynamics of BI 135585, a selective 11 -hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase-1
(HSD1) inhibitor in humans: Liver and adipose tissue 11 -HSD1 inhibition after acute
and multiple administrations over 2 weeks.

Fu, H., Park, J., & Pei, D. (2002). Peptidyl Aldehydes as Reversible Covalent Inhibitors of
Protein Tyrosine. X, 10700-10709.

Gajalakshmi, S., Vijayalakshmi, S., & Devi, R. V. (2012). Phytochemical and

pharmacological _ properties of Annona muricata: A review,

142

https://www.researchgate.net/publication/280012402

Galicia-Garcia, U., Benito-Vicente, A., Jebari, S., Larrea-Sebal, A., Siddiqi, H., Uribe, K.
B., Ostolaza, H., & Martin, C. (2020). Pathophysiology of type 2 diabetes mellitus. In
International Journal of Molecular Sciences (Vol. 21, Issue 17, pp. 1-34). MDPI AG.
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms2 1176275

Ge, R., Huang, Y., Liang, G., & Li, X. (2010). 1-Hydroxysteroid Dehydrogenase Type 1
Inhibitors as Promising Therapeutic Drugs for Diabetes: Status and Development. In
Current Medicinal Chemistry (Vol. 17).

Geer, E. B., Islam, J., & Buettner, C. (2014). Mechanisms of Glucocorticoid-Induced
Insulin Resistance: Focus on Adipose Tissue Function and Lipid Metabolism.
Endocrinology and Metabolism Clinics of North America, 43(1), 75.
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ECL.2013.10.005

Gregory, S., Hill, D., Grey, B., Ketelbey, W., Miller, T., Muniz-Terrera, G., & Ritchie, C.
W. (2020). 11B-Hydroxysteroid Dehydrogenase Type | Inhibitor Use in Human
Disease-a Systematic Review and Narrative Synthesis. Metabolism: Clinical and
Experimental, 108. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.metabol.2020. 154246

Gutierrez, P. M., Gyte, A., Deschoolmeester, J., Ceuppens, P., Swales, J., Stacey, C.,
Eriksson, J. W., Sjostrand, M., Nilsson, C., & Leighton, B. (2015). Continuous
inhibition of 11 -hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type i in adipose tissue leads to
tachyphylaxis in humans and rats but not in mice.

Hamada, Y., & Kiso, Y. (2012). The application of bioisosteres in drug design for novel
drug discovery: Focusing on acid protease inhibitors. In Expert Opinion on Drug

Discovery (Vol. 7, Issue 10, pp. 903-922).

143

https://doi.org/10.1517/17460441.2012.712513

Hanhineva, K., Térrénen, R., Bondia-Pons, I., Pekkinen, J., Kolehmainen, M., Mykkanen,
H., & Poutanen, K. (2010). Impact of Dietary Polyphenols on Carbohydrate
Metabolism. International Journal of Molecular Sciences 2010, Vol. 11, Pages 1365-
1402, 11(4), 1365-1402. https://doi.org/10.3390/1JMS 11041365

Hapman, K., Holmes, M., & Seckl, J. (2013). 11B-Hydroxysteroid Dehydrogenases
Intracellular Gate-Keepers of Tissue Glucocorticoid Action. Physiological Reviews,
93(3), 1139-1206. https://doi.org/10.1152/physrev.00020.2012

Hardoko, Halim, Y., & Wijoyo, S. V. (2015). In vitro antidiabetic activity of “green tea”
soursop leaves brew through a-glucosidase inhibition. International Journal of
PharmTech Research, 8(1), 30-37.

Hasan, S., El-Andaloussi, N., Hardeland, U., Hassa, P. O., Biirki, C., Imhof, R., Schar, P.,
& Hottiger, M. O. (2002). Acetylation regulates the DNA end-trimming activity of
DNA polymerase beta. Molecular Cell, 10(5), 1213-1222.
https://doi.org/10.1016/S1097-2765(02)00745-1

Heinrich, M., Kuhnt, M., Wright, C., Rimpler, H., Phillipson, JD, Schandelmaier, A., &
Warhurst, D. (1992). Parasitological and Microbiological Evaluation of Mixe Indian
Medicinal Plants (Mexico). J Ethnopharmacol.

Henquin, J.-C. (2004). Pathways in-Cell Stimulus-Secretion Coupling as Targets for
Therapeutic Insulin Secretagogues.

Hollis, G., & Huber, R. (2011). 1] -Hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type | inhibition in type
2 diabetes mellitus.

Hosfield, D. J., Wu, Y., Skene, E. J., Hilgers, M., Jennings, A., Snell, G. P., & Aertgeerts,

144

K. (2005). Conformational flexibility in crystal structures of human 11B-
hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type I provide insights into glucocorticoid
interconversion and enzyme regulation. Journal of Biological Chemistry, 280(6),
4639-4648. https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M411104200

Hoshiro, M., Ohno, Y., Masaki, H., Iwase, H., & Aoki, N. (2006). Comprehensive study of
urinary cortisol metabolites in hyperthyroid and hypothyroid patients.

Huey, R., Morris, G. M., & Forli, S. (2012). Using AutoDock 4 and AutoDock Vina with
AutoDockTools: A Tutorial. The Scripps Research Institute Molecular, December,
32.

IDF Diabetes Atlas (10th ed.). (2021). https://diabetesatlas.org/

Irving, E., & Stoker, A. W. (2017). Vanadium Compounds as PTP Inhibitors. Molecules
(Basel, Switzerland), 22(12). https://doi.org/10.3390/MOLECULES22122269

James, A., & Lawson, F. (2010). Structure-Function Analysis of 11 B -Hydroxysteroid
Dehydrogenase by School of Biosciences. August.

Johnson, T. O., Ermolieff, J., & Jirousek, M. R. (2002). Protein tyrosine phosphatase 1B
inhibitors for diabetes. In Nature Reviews Drug Discovery (Vol. 1, Issue 9, pp. 696-
709). https://doi.org/10.1038/nrd895

Jouko, U. (2015). the Role of Drug Metabolism in Drug Discovery and Development —
Case Ospemifene.

Justino, A. B., Miranda, N. C., Franco, R. R., Martins, M. M., Silva, N. M. da, & Espindola,
F. S. (2018). Annona muricata Linn. leaf as a source of antioxidant compounds with
in vitro antidiabetic and inhibitory potential against a-amylase, a-glucosidase, lipase,

non-enzymatic glycation and lipid peroxidation. Biomedicine and Pharmacotherapy,

145

100, 83-92. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopha.2018.01.172

Katzung, B. G. (2017). Pancreatic Hormones & Antidiabetic Drugs. In Basic & Clinical
Pharmacology (14th ed.).

KELL, D. B., & GOODACRE, R. (2014). Metabolomics and systems pharmacology: why
and how to model the human metabolic network for drug discovery.

Khan, R. I., Nirzhor, S. S. R., & Akter, R. (2018). A review of the recent advances made
with SIRT6 and its implications on aging related processes, major human diseases,
and possible therapeutic targets. In Biomolecules (Vol. 8, Issue 3). MDPI AG.
https://doi.org/10.3390/biom8030044

Khan, R., Nirzhor, S., & Akter, R. (2018). Review of the Recent Advances Made with SIRT6
and its Implications on Aging Related Processes, Major Human Diseases, and
Possible Therapeutic Targets. Biomolecules.

Kim, J. S., Kwon, C. S., & Son, K. H. (2000). Inhibition of alpha-glucosidase and amylase
by luteolin, a flavonoid. Bioscience, Biotechnology, and Biochemistry, 64(11), 2458—
2461. https://doi.org/10.1271/BBB.64.2458

Kitchen, D. B., Decornez, H., Furr, J. R., & Bajorath, J. (2004). DOCKING AND
SCORING IN VIRTUAL SCREENING FOR DRUG DISCOVERY : METHODS AND
APPLICATIONS. 3(November). https://doi.org/10.1038/nrd1549

Kooti, W., Farokhipour, M., Asadzadeh, Z., Ashtary-Larky, D., & Asadi-Samani, M.
(2016). The role of medicinal plants in the treatment of diabetes: a systematic review.
Electronic Physician, 8(1), 1832-1842. https://doi.org/10.19082/1832

Koshland, D. E. (1994). The Key-Lock Theory and the Induced Fit Theory.

Kuang, J., Chen, L., Tang, Q., Zhang, J., Li, Y., & He, J. (2018). The role of Sirt6 in obesity

146

and diabetes. In Frontiers in Physiology (Vol. 9, Issue FEB). Frontiers Media S.A.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fphys.2018.00135

Lai, C.-C., Lin, P.-M., Lin, S.-F., Hsu, C.-H., Lin, H.-C., Hu, M.-L., Hsu, C.-M., & M.-Y,
Y. (2013). Altered expression of SIRT gene family in head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma.

Liu, G., Chen, H., Liu, H., Zhang, H., & Zhou, J. (2020). Emerging roles of SIRT6 in human
diseases and its modulators. October. https://doi.org/10.1002/med.21753

Liu, W., Katz, D. A., Locke, C., Daszkowski, D. J., Wang, Y., Rieser, M. J., Awni, W. M.,
Marek, G. J., & Dutta, S. (2013). Clinical safety, pharmacokinetics, and
pharmacodynamics of the 11 -hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1 inhibitor ABT-
384 in healthy volunteers and elderly adults.

Livingstone, D. E. W., & Walker, B. R. (2003). Is 11B-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type
1 a therapeutic target? Effects of carbenoxolone in lean and obese Zucker rats. Journal
of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, 305(1), 167-172.
https://doi.org/10.1124/jpet.102.044842

Luu, L., Dai, F. F., Prentice, K. J., Huang, X., Hardy, A. B., Hansen, J. B., Liu, Y., Joseph,
J. W., & Wheeler, M. B. (2013). The loss of Sirt] in mouse pancreatic beta cells
impairs insulin secretion by disrupting glucose sensing. Diabetologia 2013 56:9,
56(9), 2010-2020. https://doi.org/10.1007/S00125-013-2946-5

Macherey, A. C., & Dansette, P. M. (2015). Biotransformations Leading to Toxic
Metabolites: Chemical Aspects. The Practice of Medicinal Chemistry: Fourth
Edition, 585-614. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-417205-0.00025-0

Majhi, S., & Das, D. (2021). Chemical derivatization of natural products: Semisynthesis

147

and pharmacological aspects- A decade update. In Tetrahedron (Vol. 78). Elsevier
Ltd. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tet.2020.131801

Manallack, D., PRANKERD, R., Yuriev, E., & Oprea, T. (2013). The Significance of
Acid/Base Properties in Drug Discovery.

Marin-Pefialver, J. J., Martin-Timon, I., Sevillano-Collantes, C., & Cafiizo-Gomez, F. J.
del. (2016). Update on the treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus. World Journal of
Diabetes, 7(17), 354. https://doi.org/10.4239/wjd.v7.i17.354

McConkey, B. J., Sobolev, V., & Edelman, M. (2002). The performance of current methods
in ligand-protein docking Photosystem II View project Coevolution View project.
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/242084834

Mina, E. C., & Mina, J. F. (2017). Ethnobotanical Survey of Plants Commonly used for
Diabetes in Tarlac of Central Luzon Philippines (Vol. 16, Issue 1).

Moghadamtousi, S. Z., Fadaeinasab, M., Nikzad, S., Mohan, G., Ali, H. M., & Kadir, H.
A. (2015). Annona muricata (Annonaceae): A review of its traditional uses, isolated
acetogenins and biological activities. In International Journal of Molecular Sciences
(Vol. 16, Issue 7, pp. 15625-15658).  MDPI _—AG.
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms 160715625

Moghadamtousi, S. Z., Rouhollahi, E., Karimian, H., Fadaeinasab, M., Firoozinia, M.,
Ameen Abdulla, M., & Abdul Kadir, H. (2015). The chemopotential effect of Annona
muricata leaves against azoxymethane-induced colonic aberrant crypt foci in rats and
the apoptotic effect of acetogenin annomuricin E in HT-29 aells: a bioassay-guided
approach.

Morris, G. M., Ruth, H., Lindstrom, W., Sanner, M. F., Belew, R. K., Goodsell, D. S., &

148

Olson, A. J. (2009). AutoDock4 and AutoDockTools4: Automated docking with
selective receptor flexibility. Journal of Computational Chemistry, 30(16), 2785—
2791. https://doi.org/10.1002/JCC.21256

Moynihan, K. A., Grimm, A. A., Plueger, M. M., Bernal-Mizrachi, E., Ford, E., Cras-
Méneur, C., Permutt, M. A., & Imai, S. I. (2005). Increased dosage of mammalian
Sir2 in pancreatic B cells enhances glucose-stimulated insulin secretion in mice. Cell
Metabolism, 2(2), 105-117.
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.CMET.2005.07.001/ATTACHMENT/6A0869DE-BB07-
4848-9702-568FCEF42308/MMCI1.PDF

Munckt, A., Guyre, P. M., & Holbrooke, N. J. (1984). Physiological Functions of
Glucocorticoids in Stress and Their Relation to Pharmacological Actions: Endocrine
Reviews: Vol 5, No 1. 5(1), 25—44. http://press.endocrine.org/doi/pdf/10.1210/edrv-5-
1-25

N’gouemo, P. (1997). Effects of ethanol extract of Annona muricata on pentylenetetrazol-
induced convulsive seizures in mice. Phytother Res.

Neveu, E., Popov, P., Hoffmann, A., Migliosi, A., Bouvry, P., Besseron, X., & Grudinin,
S. (2018). Structural bioinformatics RapidRMSD : rapid determination of RMSDs
corresponding to motions of flexible molecules. 34(March), 2757-2765.
https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/bty 160

Nguyen, N. D. T., & Le, L. T. (2012). Targeted proteins for diabetes drug design. In
Advances in Natural Sciences: Nanoscience and Nanotechnology (Vol. 3, Issue 1).
IOP Publishing Ltd. https://doi.org/10.1088/2043-6262/3/1/013001

O’Boyle, N. M., Banck, M., James, C. A., Morley, C., Vandermeersch, T., & Hutchison,

149

G. R. (2011). Open Babel. Journal of Cheminformatics, 3(33), 1-14.
https://jcheminf.biomedcentral.com/track/pdf/10.1186/1758-2946-3-33

Patani, G. A., & LaVoie, E. J. (1996). Bioisosterism: A rational approach in drug design.
Chemical Reviews, 96(8), 3147-3176. https://doi.org/10.1021/cr950066q

Patel, H., Dhangar, K., Sonawane, Y., Surana, S., Karpoormath, R., Thapliyal, N., Shaikh,
M., Noolvi, M., & Jagtap, R. (2018). In search of selective 11B-HSD type | inhibitors
without nephrotoxicity: An approach to resolve the metabolic syndrome by virtual
based screening. Arabian Journal of Chemistry, 11(2), 221-232.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.arabjc.2015.08.003

Patnaik, A., & Vaz, J. (2012). Diabetes mellitus: Exploring the challenges in the drug
development process. Perspectives in Clinical Research, 3(3), 109.
https://doi.org/10.4103/2229-3485.100660

Phang-Lyn, S., & Llerena, V. A. (2021). Biochemistry, Biotransformation. StatPearls.
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK544353/

Philippine Statistics Authority, 2021Causes of Deaths in the Philippines (Preliminary):
January to December 2020 | Philippine Statistics Authority. (2021). Philippine
Statistics Authority, 2021. https://psa.gov.ph/content/causes-deaths-philippines-
preliminary-january-december-2020-0

Priefer, R. (2020). PTP1B Inhibitors as Potential Target for Type II Diabetes. Current
Research in Diabetes & Obesity Journal, 14(1).
https://doi.org/10.19080/crdoj.2020.14.555876

Qin, K., Zhang, N., Zhang, Z., Nipper, M., Zhu, Z., Leighton, J., Xu, K., Musi, N., & Wang,

P. (2018). SIRT6-mediated transcriptional suppression of Txnip is critical for

150

pancreatic beta cell function and survival in mice. Diabetologia, 61(4), 906-918.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00125-017-4542-6

Rahimi, L., Rajpal, A., & Ismail-beigi, F. (2020). Glucocorticoid-Induced Fatty Liver
Disease Major Pathways Contributing to. 1133-1145.

Rahnasto-Rilla, M., Tyni, J., Huovinen, M., Jarho, E., Kulikowicz, T., Ravichandran, S.,
Bohr, V. A., Ferrucci, L., Lahtela-Kakkonen, M., & Moaddel, R. (2018a). Natural
polyphenols as sirtuin 6 modulators. Scientific Reports 2018 8:1, 8(1), 1-11.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-22388-5

Rahnasto-Rilla, M., Tyni, J., Huovinen, M., Jarho, E., Kulikowicz, T., Ravichandran, S.,
Bohr, V. A., Ferrucci, L., Lahtela-Kakkonen, M., & Moaddel, R. (2018b). Natural
polyphenols as sirtuin 6 modulators. Scientific Reports,  8(1).
https://doi.org/10.1038/s4 1598-01 8-22388-5

Rath, P., Ranjan, A., Ghosh, A., Chauhan, A., & Gurnani, M. (2022). Potential Therapeutic
Target Protein Tyrosine Phosphatase-1B for Modulation of Insulin Resistance with
Polyphenols and Its Quantitative Structure — Activity Relationship.

Recanatini, M., Poluzzi, E., Masetti, M., Cavalli, A., & Ponti, F. De. (2005). QT
prolongation through hERG K(+) channel blockade: current knowledge and
strategies for the early prediction during drug development.

Reidenberg, M. M. (2000). Environmental inhibition of 11B-hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase. Toxicology, 144(1-3), 107-111. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0300-
483X(99)00196-1

Reva, B. A., Finkelstein, A. V, & Skolnick, J. (1998). What is the probability of a chance

prediction of a protein structure with an rmsd of 6 A ? 3, 141-147.

151

Rodriguez, A. C. I., Epel, E. S., White, M. L., Standen, E. C., Seckl, J. R., & Tomiyama,
A. J. (2015). Hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis dysregulation and cortisol activity
in obesity: A systematic review. Psychoneuroendocrinology.

Rydberg, P., Gloriam, D. E., Zaretzki, J., Breneman, C., & Olsen, L. (2010). SMARTCyp:
A 2D method for prediction of cytochrome P450-mediated drug metabolism. ACS
Medicinal Chemistry Letters, 1(3), 96-100. https://doi.org/10.1021/m1100016x

Sandeep, T. C., Yau, J. L. W., MacLullich, A. M. J., Noble, J., Deary, I. J., Walker, B. R.,
& Seckl, J. R. (2004). 11B-Hydroxysteroid Dehydrogenase Inhibition Improves
Cognitive Function in Healthy Elderly Men and Type 2 Diabetics. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 101(17), 6734-6739.
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0306996101

Sanna, P. P., Kawamura, T., Chen, J., Koob, G. F., Roberts, A. J., Vendruscolo, L. F., &
Repunte-Canonigo, V. (2016). 11B-Hydroxysteroid Dehydrogenase Inhibition As a
New Potential Therapeutic Target for Alcohol Abuse. Translational Psychiatry, 6(3),
€760-7. https://doi.org/10.1038/tp.2016.13

Schuster, D., Maurer, E. M., Laggner, C., Nashev, L. G., Wilckens, T., Langer, T., &
Odermatt, A. (2006). The discovery of new 11B-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type
1 inhibitors by common feature pharmacophore modeling and virtual screening.
Journal of Medicinal Chemistry, 49(12), 3454-3466.
https://doi.org/10.1021/jm0600794

Shaker, B., Ahmad, S., Lee, J., Jung, C., & Na, D. (2021). In silico methods and tools for
drug discovery. Computers in Biology and Medicine, 137(July), 104851.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiomed.2021.104851

152

Shi, K., Egawa, K., Hiroshi Maegawa, Takaaki Nakamura, S. U., & Yoshihiko Nishio, A.
K. (2004). Protein-tyrosine phosphatase 1B associates with insulin receptor and
negatively regulates insulin signaling without receptor internalization, .

Sousa, M. C., Braga, R. C., Cintra, B. A. S., de Oliveira, V., & Andrade, C. H. (2013). In
silico metabolism studies of dietary flavonoids by CYP1A2 and CYP2C9. Food
Research International, 50(1), 102-110.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodres.2012.09.027

Souza, D. O., Sales, V. dos santos, Rodrigues, C. K. de S., & Oliveira, L. R. de. (2018).
Phytochemical Analysis and Central Effects of Annona Muricata Linnaeus: Possible
Involvement of the Gabaergic and Monoaminergic Systems.

Szczepankiewicz, B. G., Liu, G., Hajduk, P. J., Abad-Zapatero, C., Pei, Z., Xin, Z., Lubben,
T. H., Trevillyan, J. M., Stashko, M. A., Ballaron, S. J., Liang, H., Huang, F.,
Hutchins, C. W., Fesik, S. W., & Jirousek, M. R. (2003). Discovery of a potent,
selective protein tyrosine phosphatase 1B inhibitor using a linked-fragment strategy.
Journal of the American Chemical Society, 125(14), 4087-4096.
https://doi.org/10.1021/ja0296733

Tabish, S. A. (2007). Is Diabetes Becoming the Biggest Epidemic of the Twenty-first
Century? International Journal of Health Sciences, 1(2), Vv.
/pmc/articles/PMC3068646/

Takahashi, J., Pereira, C., Imenta, L., Boaventura, M., & Silva, L. (2006). Antibacterial
activity of eight Brazilian Annonaceae plants.

Teimouri, M., Hosseini, H., Sadeghabadi, Zahra Arab Babaei-Khorzoughi, R., Gorgani-

Firuzjaee, S., & Meshkani, R. (2022). The role of protein tyrosine phosphatase 1B

153

(PTP 1B) in the pathogenesis of type 2 diabetes mellitus and its complicationsNo Title.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s13105-021-00860-7 Abstract

Thomas, M. P. (2011). Crystal structures of 11 b - hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type |
and their use in drug discovery. 367-390.

Traves, P., Pardo, V., Pimentel-Santillana, M., Mojena, M., Rico, D., & Montenegro, M.
(2014). Pivotal role of protein tyrosine phosphatase 1B ( PTP1B ) in the macrophage
response to pro-inflammatory and aanti-inflammatory challenge. 1-13.
https://doi.org/10.1038/cddis.2014.90

Tripathi, A., & Bankaitis, V. (2017). Molecular Docking: From Lock and Key to
Combination Lock. Journal of Molecular Medicine and Clinical Applications, 2(1).
https://doi.org/10.16966/2575-0305.106

Trott, O., & Olson, A. J. (2010). AutoDock Vina: improving the speed and accuracy of
docking with a new scoring function, efficient optimization and multithreading.
Journal of Computational Chemistry, 31(2), 455. https://doi.org/10.1002/JCC.21334

Vasquez, M. (1990). Useful Plants of Amazonian Peru Second Draft. USA: Filed with
USDA’s National Agricultural Library;

Wang, J. C., Kafeel, M. I., Avezbakiyev, B., Chen, C., Sun, Y., Rathnasabapathy, C.,
Kalavar, M., He, Z., Burton, J., & S., L. (2011). Histone Deacetylase in Chronic
Lymphocytic Leukemia.

Wang, M. (2011). Inhibitors of 11 -hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type | in antidiabetic
therapy.

Ward, D. T., Yau, S. K., Mee, A. P., Mawer, E. B., Miller, C. A., Garland, H. O., &

Riccardi, D. (2001). Functional, Molecular, and Biochemical Characterization of

154

Streptozotocin-Induced Diabetes. Journal of the American Society of Nephrology,
12(4), 779-790. https://doi.org/10.1681/ASN.V124779

White, J. R. (2014). In Brief A Brief History of the Development of Diabetes Medications.
In Diabetes Spectrum (Vol. 27, Issue 2).

Whiting, D. R., Guariguata, L., Weil, C., & Shaw, J. (2011). IDF Diabetes Atlas: Global
estimates of the prevalence of diabetes for 2011 and 2030. Diabetes Research and
Clinical Practice, 94(3), 311-321. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.diabres.2011.10.029

Wirth, M., Zoete, V., Michielin, O., & Sauer, W. H. B. (2013). SwissBioisostere: A
database of molecular replacements for ligand design. Nucleic Acids Research,
41(D1). https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gks1059

Wolber, G., & Langer, T. (2005). LigandScout: 3-D pharmacophores derived from protein-
bound ligands and their use as virtual screening filters. Journal of Chemical
Information and Modeling, 45(1), 160-169. https://doi.org/10.1021/ci049885e

Wood, M., Rymarchyk, S., Zheng, S., & Cen, Y. (2018). Trichostatin A inhibits
deacetylation of histone H3 and p53 by SIRT6. Archives of Biochemistry and
Biophysics, 638(July 2017), 8-17. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.abb.2017.12.009

World Health Organization, (WHO). (2021). Diabetes. https://www.who.inU/news-
room/fact-sheets/detail/diabetes

Xiong, G., Wu, Z., Yi, J., Fu, L., Yang, Z., Changyu, H., Yin, M., Xiangxiang Zeng, C.
W., Lu, A., Chen, X., Hou, T., & Cao, and D. (2021). ADMETIab 2.0: an integrated
online platform for accurate and comprehensive predictions of ADMET properties.

Yamazaki, M., & Lin, J. (2003). Role of P-glycoprotein in pharmacokinetics: clinical

implications.

155

Yi, F., Li, L., Xu, L. jia, Meng, H., Dong, Y. mao, Liu, H. bo, & Xiao, P. gen. (2018). In
silico approach in reveal traditional medicine plants pharmacological material basis.
Chinese Medicine (United Kingdom), 13(1), 1-20. https://doi.org/10.1186/S13020-
018-0190-0/FIGURES/3

You, W., & Steegborn, C. (2018). Structural Basis of Sirtuin 6 Inhibition by the
Hydroxamate Trichostatin A: Implications for Protein Deacylase Drug Development
[Rapid-communication]. Journal of Medicinal Chemistry, 61(23), 10922-10928.
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jmedchem.8b01455

You, W., Zheng, W., Weiss, S., Chua, K. F., & Steegborn, C. (2019). Structural basis for
the activation and inhibition of Sirtuin 6 by quercetin and its derivatives. Scientific
Reports, 91). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-55654-1

Zhang, S., & Zhang, Z. Y. (2007). PTP1B as a drug target: recent developments in PTP1B
inhibitor discovery. Drug Discovery Today, 12(9-10), 373-381.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.drudis.2007.03.011

Zou, W. (2016). Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus and Protein-Tyrosine Phosphatase 1B1. Journal
of Diabetes, Metabolic Disorders & Control, 3(8).

https://doi.org/10.15406/jdmdc.2016.03.00096
