HUMAN SECURITY IN TIMES OF A GLOBAL PANDEMIC: CASE OF OLDER PERSONS IN BARANGAY SAN CARLOS, BINANGONAN, RIZAL

DIANE MARIE R. CAMPAÑANO-BERNARDO

UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES DILIMAN

Doctor of Social Development

June 2022

Abstract

The global health pandemic in early 2020 caused a kind of reset in all facets
of development. The affected countries, such as the Philippines, were caught
off-guard when medical institutions could no longer handle the continuous
increase in COVID19 cases. In the course of a global pandemic, poverty was
aggravated given the multi-dimensional insecurities that continue to press on
the various sectors given the shocks created by the pandemic and the
unpreparedness of the Government and the people to address the impacts of
the pandemic. The pandemic paved the way to revisit the theoretical
underpinnings of Human Security through the perspectives of the older
persons in Barangay San Carlos, Binangonan Rizal. This research described the current conditions of OPs in a global health crisis;
determined the perspectives of OPs on Human Security and other factors
affecting OPs and the community; identified the major insecurities,
mechanisms, and experiences which affect how OPs and the community
respond to, cope with, and move forward from the challenges of a global health
crisis; to analyze the policy and research gaps which are important in
promoting human security and social development among OPs; and,
recommended policy directions for Barangay San Carlos and the Municipality
of Binangonan in Rizal Province. The 15 male and 45 female OPs, aged 50 to 85 years old, who passed the
Cognitive Assessment participated in the In-Depth Interview. Likewise, a mix
of 16 key informants was also interviewed to provide an overview of the
governance landscape during the successive declarations of community
quarantines and the pandemic-related responses and initiatives. Further, this
research reviewed documents at the barangay and municipal levels. Given the eight (8) dimensions of human security (economic, health, food,
personal, community, political, spiritual, and digital), the responses of OPs
were clustered and analyzed. Based on the data gathered, observations, and field notes, it was affirmed that OPs had major difficulties during the
heightened implementation of community quarantines, mainly when
communities were put on “lockdown” mode and restricted their mobility.
Further restrictions negatively affected their access to government services
and programs and their capacity to engage in economic activities, thus,
aggravating the insecurities experienced by OPs. Based on the responses of OPs, eight (8) human security dimensions can be
used to measure the level of human security among OPs in Binangonan, Rizal.
Using Chi-Square Test, there was no significant difference in the responses
between male and female OPs. The overall scores of OPs were plotted based
on the highest possible score from the prescribed human _ security
questionnaire. This showed that the OPs in Barangay San Carlos were slightly
above the 50% passing rate of the proposed human security level. It was affirmed in this research that Human Security is a multi-dimensional
development framework that requires a multi-sectoral approach and a diverse
set of strategies anchored on Filipino values, human rights, and access to
development opportunities. Likewise, it can underscore that recognition and
respect for the human rights of OPs were not enough. Together with
empowered community-based partners and institutions, the government
needs to take bolder steps to address the insecurities that continue to
marginalize and exclude the OPs in the development process. The Human Security-based Social Development Framework also utilizes the
proposed dashboard and Human Security Index, reflecting the experiences of
OPs in Barangay San Carlos, Binangonan, Rizal. This research envisions that
the Binangonan LGU can further improve its policy development, planning,
and programming endeavors that aim to reduce the level of insecurities and ensure equitable access to opportunities and guarantees among OPs.

Key words: ageing, human security, pandemic, COVID19, insecurities, human
security index

CHAPTER 1

INTRODUCTION

1.1 BACKGROUND OF THE STUDY

This study recognizes the resiliency of older persons (OPs) against all
insecurities in life, particularly in the global pandemic. Their experiences can
serve as an inspiration to many OPs and community members as they thrived
and flourished despite the many unprecedented challenges that had happened

in Barangay San Carlos and nearby communities of Binangonan, Rizal.

The research has been conducted in the second year of the COVID19
outbreak, when vaccines were rolled out worldwide. The focus on OPs is a
sequel to the various researches conducted in the past. Said studies have
explored the capacities of OPs in times of a destructive typhoon “Ketsana’” /
“Ondoy” in 2009 (Campafiano-Bernardo D. M., 2012); perspectives on ageing
and retirement among OPs in the Department of Science and Technology
(Campafiano-Bernardo D. M., 2018); or the policy options for older persons in
the Philippines (Campafano-Bernardo D. M., 2015). These studies have
celebrated the experiences of OPs in various contexts and explored the
different perspectives on ageing and their lives in the later years, including
their vital roles in sustaining development in their respective communities and
their families despite the negative perceptions and limitations of being old.
Nonetheless, the human rights of every person do not diminish regardless of
age.

OPs serve as the repository of knowledge, wisdom, and values. Their roles in
their families and communities have significance in passing on lessons in life,

culture, skills, and beliefs to the younger generation towards opening up

windows of learning opportunities. Given the time spent in a community, OPs
become a repository of knowledge from which the younger generations can
learn and relearn life lessons. Indeed, reaching the age of 60 without sickness

is already a hallmark of success, for having survived various phenomena.

As an asset, OPs also deserve the love and care from their family members.
Likewise, OPs can also deepen their understanding and appreciation of life as
they continue to provide love, care, and service for their families and even their

communities.

The year 2020 can be considered the dawn of the new development era. The
global pandemic has set the center stage to create and adopt new and better
knowledge to bounce back from the “pause” that COVID-19 has caused. This
is another great opportunity, more than just being a liability. When a global
health threat shook the world and economies were caught unprepared,
insecurities prevailed among nations — creating widespread chaos. Previously
known as a military-related term, Human Security is now viewed as a human
tight encompassing all aspects of human development and not just territorial
sovereignty. When the World Health Organization (WHO) declared a global
pandemic in early 2020 due to the uncontrollable spread of the New Corona
Virus 2019 (COVID19), the virus has not spared anyone from being infected
in both developed and developing countries. Worst, the vulnerable sectors
have been burdened most of the multi-dimensional shocks. (World Health
Organization, 2020)

Countries and individuals have not prepared to respond and address a global
pandemic. In the event of outbreaks, economies are greatly challenged by the
incontrollable rising of the death toll, causing massive destruction in the socio-

cultural, environmental, and economic spheres of development (World Health

Organization, 2021). A sudden global pause in all COVID-19-affected
societies has happened in one sweep. This has raised diverse questions and
debates, particularly on Human Security in times of a global pandemic (Abbott,
2021).

One by one, economies have declared “lockdowns” to prevent further spread
of the virus, with high hopes for the effectiveness of the said approach to raise
the level of Human Security through intensive health-related measures and
protocols. The so-called “The Great Lockdown” has set forth the worst
nightmares of all times — worse than The Great Depression. The sudden
“global pause” has challenged the states and communities to rethink the
development strategies and policy actions to counter-attack the invisible
enemy — COVID-19 while ensuring that the emerging needs of people are
addressed. (International Monetary Fund, 2020)

Several critical events can be noted with regards to the turnout of events in the
Philippines, such as: (1) When the first COVID-19 case was recorded in the
Philippines on 30 January 2020 (World Health Organization, 2020); (2) When
WHO declared that COVID-19 outbreak had reached a pandemic status as of
11 March 2020, affecting more people across the globe with unmanageable
increasing cases of positive patients and of death due to the said virus; and,
(3) when Pres. Rodrigo R. Duterte (PRRD) initially declared a “Community
Quarantine” or “lockdown” in the National Capital Region (NCR) in a Press
Conference aired on 12 March 2020, followed by the declaration of “Luzon-
wide Enhanced Community Quarantine (ECQ)” on 16 March 2020.
(Tomacruz, 2020)

In all of the reports published through the mainstream media, the data show a

macro-level view of the situation per country. The urgency to respond to the

chaos brought by COVID-19 prompted national leaders to adopt practical
solutions to address the visible predicament immediately — the rapid increase
of spread of COVID-19 and the rise of mortality due to unprepared medical
institutions and experts to provide the appropriate cure and adequate services.
The government's policies and interventions, from the national down to the
local level, have varying effects on the so-called vulnerable groups - OPs,
children, and pregnant women, as identified in several issuances of the
COVID-19 Inter-Agency Task Force and Management of Emerging Infectious
Diseases (IATF). This pandemic affirmed the need to redefine the hegemonic
discourse of Human Security, which mainly focused on national security, post-
war development, the sovereignty of states, and territorial integrity, among
others (Madruefio-Aguilar, Human Security and the New Global Threats:

Discourse, Taxonomy, and Implications, 2016).

The rise of the interest and urgency to construct new perspectives on Human
Security as a development approach led to the realization that the current
understanding of Human Security and the complexities of the threats and risks
that countries and local communities experience are not enough to fully
address human needs for security while upholding human rights at the same
time. (Atienza, 2015; Madruefio-Aguilar, 2016)

In this time and age of a global pandemic, the voices of the vulnerable groups
are missing in the spectrum of policy development, planning, and
implementation of COVID-19 management-related efforts. For instance, OPs
were identified as one of the sectors that have the highest risks of being
infected by COVID-19. However, the complexities of specific local contexts
have further exposed OPs to far more disadvantaged situations — leading to
insecurities that may have affected the well-being of the individual, household,
and eventually the community. Unfortunately, there has been a weak

cognizance of the Human Security aspects of development at the local level
defeats the purpose of national and even international-level policies and
advocacies to push for Human Security-based interventions. Further, the lack
of push to operationalize Human Security as a development approach in local
terms places Human Security as an abstract concept rather than a concrete
strategy to address development challenges, particularly among older

persons.

The declaration of the global pandemic due to COVID-19 calls for the need to
recalibrate the development strategies and refocus the priorities from national
down to the local contexts. The efforts at the national level to address the
COVID-19-related challenges overshadowed other development issues at the
local level, with a great impact on the Human Security aspects - economic,
food, health, environmental, personal, community, and political (United
Nations, 2016). Thus, understanding the concerns of OPs, based on their
perspectives vis-a-vis the local community context, can significantly make a
difference as they stride into a much different level of insecurities caused by

the pandemic.

1.2) RATIONALE

This study is based on the build-up of knowledge on OPs, taking off from OP-
related OPs since 2009. After more than ten years, OPs are faced again with
another challenge. However, this time it is a non-traditional threat because it
is in the form of a virus that drastically increases the mortality rate across the
globe. In previous experiences, hazards are more localized and visible in
terms of physical presence in a community — like earthquakes, typhoons, and
fire.

With the acknowledgment that a global pandemic can directly affect the local
communities, it is imperative to take bolder steps on how Human Security can
be operationalized at the local level. The initial step is to better understand
the specific conditions on the ground, given premium to the perspectives and

experiences of OPs.

By engaging OPs in the study, opportunities for learning open up, and spaces
for the exchange of ideas and experience facilitate knowledge-building by the
community members. These spaces can deepen understanding and
appreciation of their present conditions and serve as bedrock in addressing
future challenges that may impact the security of OPs. Likewise, the term
“Human Security” can be understood based on the perspectives of OPs,
leading to a better operationalization of the used-to-be jargon into a concrete
instrument that can assist OPs in creating a life they value even in their later
years.

The critical Human Security issues and concerns of OPs in a non-armed
conflict area and under a global pandemic situation can construct a new way
of understanding and analyzing social development challenges. These can
also offer a better approach to a more inclusive planning and policy
development for communities with similar contexts, such as Binangonan and
Rizal. The global pandemic has offered a whole different arena in the
development discourse, given the different social and economic landscape in
2020 up to the current year. As such, the experiences of OPs have been
transforming in the sense that they became exposed to various factors which

can only be experienced under a global pandemic context.

Furthermore, an in-depth analysis of Human Security based on the
perspectives of OPs serves as an essential breakthrough in enriching the

social development practice in the Philippines.

1.3 RESEARCH PROBLEM

The emerging interests in gerontological research have redefined the
conventional perceptions about ageing and OPs, even in the roles of OPs in
their families and communities, for example, in times of disasters
(Campanhano-Bernardo D. M., 2012). In the Philippines, most existing studies
on OPs focused on individual well-being, particularly exploring active and
healthy aging in the later years. Indeed, it has been established in the
literature on the importance of good health and smart choices in the younger
years to have a better life in the ageing years (Cruz, Cruz, & Saito, 2019).
While Active Ageing Theory promotes the need for OPs to remain in the active
mode and not to detach from the world after retirement (Bytheway B. , 1995),
the view among OPs remains to be passive recipients of development. Worst
is that the underprivileged OPs have not fully maximized the advantages of
science, technology, and innovation (STI) advancement in the urbanized

areas.

The roles, opportunities, and capabilities of OPs are complex. Without proper
account and in-depth understanding of the experiences of OPs, the local
community may unintentionally contribute to the continuous deprivation of
OPs. The worst is that the OPs continue to experience insecurities as they
journey in their later years in life. Recognizing the need for OPs is just one
aspect of Human Security. It is not enough to recognize that OPs have needs
and rights. It is a great challenge to put all acts together to ensure that even

in the later years, OPs can have the development opportunities and can still

be part of the development process towards gaining the capabilities to reduce

whatever insecurities in life.

Given the limited interest in aging-related research in the Philippines, the lack
of an in-depth understanding of the approaches to connect the dots towards
achieving more secure ageing for OPs in the later years can affect how the
local community and the State prepare for the future OPs; thus, resources may
not be enough to support relief-dependent OPs for a long time. The promise
of modernization that ensures people experience the fruits of development
through the trickle-down effect (Peet & Hartwick, 2015) has not been a reality
for most OPs, particularly in the remote areas and informal settlements in the

municipality of Binangonan, Rizal.

There is a need to properly frame the development efforts to address the
ageing risks at hand and promote an ageing process that upholds dignity for
every OP. It is imperative to build on the cases of OPs and their capabilities

toward becoming active contributors to reshaping the country’s future.

Given that the existing laws for Senior Citizens in the Philippines have
recognized the role of the elderly in Nation Building or the Republic Act (R.A.)
7432 (Republic of the Philippines, 1992); some provided comprehensive
benefits and privileges for discounts or the R.A. 9994 (Republic of the
Philippines, 2009), hospitalization or the R.A. 10645 (Republic of the
Philippines, 2014), monthly social pension of P500.00 for the indigent Senior
Citizens according to R.A. 9994 (Republic of the Philippines, 2009), and even
entertainment perks as implemented in selected cities such as Quezon City,
Makati City, among others (Purnell, 2019) - these benefits are insufficient to
respond to the actual needs of a Senior Citizen and achieve a level of security

in the ageing years. Eventually, when that older person has failed to prepare

for the golden years properly, the OPs may have more difficulties living a

meaningful life in their ageing years, exposing themselves to more insecurities.

The lack of study on OP’s perspectives on Human Security can further
marginalize OPs from the local and national plans, creating wider gaps
between OPs and social development. The equitable distribution of
opportunities across the Philippines has been a critical challenge, as evident
in the rising poverty incidence at 23.7% and subsistence incidence at 9.9%
(Philippine Statistics Authority, 2021).

There is still a great challenge among LGUs to effectively and efficiently deliver
programs and services to OPs in the remote areas of a barangay. Likewise,
valuing the OPs as active development participants may not be accurate in all
communities. The common perception was that they were mere receivers or
recipients of benefits or passive participants in development. The negative
perceptions about how OPs can contribute to reshaping a community in their

later years can still be observed in most communities.

The OP-centered Human Security model is envisioned to support safe spaces,
enabling opportunities that respond to the needs, uphold the rights, and protect
the human security of OP, family members, and the entire community. Thus,
failure to place proper mechanisms to match the needs and aspirations of OPs
with the service providers’ policies and programs create a disconnected

society that nurtures ageing risks instead of well-being among OPs.

Human Security is not just about a state of being happy with what one has.
There is a great need to see things clearly from a bigger picture and in various
dimensions so that the security of an OP will not cause insecurities in other

sectors and vice versa. While this can be a major societal goal, it is imperative

to begin somewhere and go back from the basics —here the people are, what
they know, what they have (Manalili, 1990), and what they can still contribute

to their families and communities.

Given (a) the breadth of research and gaps in the literature on ageing; (b) the
impact of social and economic development on the ageing landscape in the
Philippines; and (c) the fast-changing needs, characteristics, and capabilities
of OPs; it is imperative for social development researches on ageing to keep-
up with the pace of development to reduce, if not to eliminate the insecurities

of the ageing society, in the context of Binangonan, Rizal.

In this regard, this research analyzed the current understanding of Human
Security concepts and the conditions of male and female OPs in a pandemic
setting. This research has presented the importance of Human Security as a
precondition to achieving social development in the changing environment,
given the need to operationalize the foreign term in the Philippine context. This
tesearch has been guided by the following research questions:

a) What is the current condition of the OPs in a rural-urban community,
given the current global health crisis?

b) What are the perspectives of OPs on Human Security? What factors
determine the level of Human Security among OPs given their current
situation?

c) What are the insecurities among OPs in a global pandemic context?
How do OPs respond to, cope with, and move forward from the
challenges of a global health crisis?

d) What policy and research gaps at the barangay and municipal levels
are relevant to the human security of OPs? What are the program
initiatives of the LGUs and senior citizen groups that provide services
and programs for the OPs?

10

e) What indicators can measure the level of Human Security in Barangay
San Carlos? What social development framework can represent
Human Security in creating OP-centered social development
opportunities and guarantees in Binangonan, Rizal? What are the
policy recommendations that the LGU, church groups, senior citizen
groups, and other community members should adopt to uphold the

human security among OPs?

1.4 RESEARCH OBJECTIVES

This research is directed by the following objectives:

a) To describe the current condition of OPs in a global health crisis within
the context of Barangay San Carlos;

b) To determine the perspectives of OPs on Human Security and the
factors affecting OPs and the community;

c) To identify the insecurities, mechanisms, and experiences which affect
how OPs and the community respond to, cope with, and move forward
from the challenges of a global health crisis;

d) To analyze the policy and research gaps that are critical in promoting
Human Security and social development among OPs; and,

e) To recommend a Human Security-based Social Development
Framework for OPs and propose policy directions at the Barangay and

Municipal Local Government Unit.

1.5 SIGNIFICANCE OF THE STUDY

In social development research, the OPs are placed at the center of the
research process to amplify their voices in the development process of their

communities. This research can somehow close the gap between the duty-

11

bearers and the claim-holders in a human rights-based approach while gaining
a deeper understanding and consciousness of the current insecurities of the
ageing population in a global pandemic towards achieving social development

while thriving under the threats of a pandemic.

The contribution of this research to the knowledge-building thrust on ageing-
related research in the country can provide a solid basis for crafting new and
enhancing current policies that impact OPs, particularly in disadvantaged and
marginalized areas. The research results may be considered in
institutionalizing local policies that guarantee security and make opportunities

available and accessible to OPs.

It is hoped that the respondents can learn from the exercises and apply such
learning in approaching ageing with more meaning and value. The research
design highlighted the experiences and narratives of OPs and selected
community members in understanding Human Security and all other factors
contributing to the individual and community experiences of being secured

under a global pandemic.

This study also challenges the Human Security framework, given the
predicaments of a global pandemic. While literature considered OPs as one
of the target sectors of COVID-19, a thorough study has not been conducted
that focused on the context of OPs. Thus, through the interviews, discussions,
and integration in the selected communities, the situation on the ground can
be documented where lessons are drawn and have an in-depth understanding

of Human Security based on the perspectives of OPs.

Likewise, awareness of the roles of OPs in creating a community that

recognizes human rights or addresses their needs and, more importantly,

12

provides a safe and healthy environment. Similarly, the LGU and other
community members and leaders can collaborate more closely with OPs to
further improve the current services, programs, and activities that cater to OPs

and their families to address related issues and concerns.

In documenting the experiences of older persons, they become participants in
creating their stories which facilitate their being cognizant about the factors
affecting Human Security in the ageing years and in times of a global
pandemic. In the process, OPs formed part of the knowledge building for OP
Filipinos and Human Security in a 1S‘ class municipality of Binangonan in Rizal
Province and under a global pandemic situation. Their experiences provide a
concrete example of OPs. They experienced thriving with non-traditional
threats, coupled with externalities as effects of particular policies being

implemented from the national down to local levels.

It is an opportune time to engage in studies under a global pandemic situation
because this is a unique social development issue, unlike the usual and
traditional hazards that people encounter when there is a typhoon, earthquake,

drought, and the like.

1.6 SCOPE AND LIMITATION

This research mainly focused in Barangay San Carlos, Binangonan, Rizal.
Rizal is part of the NCR+ Bubble as declared by IATF (Galvez, 2021) with
varying community quarantine (CQ) classifications based on the number of
recorded COVID19 positive cases; the mobility restrictions have not yet been
lifted even with the current vaccination initiatives. The community partners

were selected based on geographical location in Barangay San Carlos. At the

13

same time, the key informants were chosen based on their role in

implementing interventions that directly affect the OPs.

Two (2) female community research champions were tapped to assist in
coordinating the interviews in the research areas. While the researcher
resides in the barangay, it was necessary to have fully-immersed community

members with whom the OPs were familiar.

Data gathering methods were adjusted based on the community quarantine
declarations. Delays in the conduct of interviews were attributed to varying
levels of CQs, with some weather disturbances. The supposedly virtual
interviews did not push through as well based on the availability of internet
connections in the remote locations within the research area vicinity. Likewise,
many households were found to have very weak access to the mobile data
signal. Given these limitations, the community partners strongly suggested
pushing for face-to-face interviews. In the process, the minimum health

protocol was observed at all times.

Local champions played an important role in this research, given the limited
exposure of the researcher in the research sites. They served as local guides
and rapporteurs. Limited availability of documents also restricted the analysis

of the researcher.

There are also limited sources of locally-published peer-reviewed studies
focusing on OPs in Binangonan, Rizal. The specificity of a context and a
sector serves as a significant aspect of a human security study to lay the
foundation for a better understanding of the context and facilitate creating
opportunities and guarantees for a particular group.

14

The review of local documents is limited to the available records at the

barangay and municipal levels. Local information is necessarily better to

understand the sitio-level socio-economic conditions at the target sites.

Unfortunately, the 2015 Census of Population offers only an overall

aggregated information about the state of socio-economic conditions at the

Municipal and Barangay Levels.

Tagalog is the native dialect in the selected area. The guide questions were

written in Tagalog, with some words or terms that do not directly translate to

Tagalog.

1.7. DEFINITION OF TERMS

Ayuda / Pay-offs

Bayanihan

Disaster

Disaster Risks

Externality

Distribution of pension or financial assistance to
OPs by the Municipal Government

Filipino culture of volunteerism and the act of
paying-it-forward

An activity, process, or a phenomenon that disrupts
human —functionings (social, environmental,
economic, political, and cultural), leading to loss of
human lives, economic losses, increased
insecurities, and conflicts, among others

A combination of interlaced relationships of the
intensity and magnitude of hazards and the levels of
vulnerabilities and capacities that affect a person's
coping mechanisms, resiliency, and recovery

The unintended consequence of activity or policy

that imposes cost or harm or insecurity over other
members of a community

15

Geriatrics

Gerontology

Global Health
Emergency Crisis
(interchangeable
with ‘pandemic’)
Hazards

Human Security

Inclusion

Inequality

Intensity

Lockdown

Magnitude

Older persons

Branch of medical science that focuses on the
unique needs, prevention, and treatment of
diseases, nutrition, and health of older persons

A multidisciplinary study of social, cultural,
psychological, cognitive, and biological aspects of
ageing processes and implications of ageing among
older persons, their families, community, and
society

Spread of disease reached a critical and
unmanageable level, creating an emergency health
crisis on a global scale.

Natural or human-induced factors that pose a
danger to lives and properties

People-centric view of security based on threats to
human rights, considering seven main categories:
economic, food, health, environmental, personal,
community, and political security

Removal of barriers impedes the efficient and
effective flow of services and programs to the
people.

Refers to a condition where the unjust distribution of
or access to resources and opportunities is based
on gender, age, race, culture, socioeconomic
status, influence, and power.

The strength of the effect of a hazard, threat, or
activity

IATF measure that prescribes very limited
movement of people outside their homes

The scope of a particular hazard, threat, or activity

Male or female individuals whose age range from 50
years old and above

16

Opportunity

Resilience

Threats

Vulnerabilities

Well-being

Includes all facilitating factors for the realization of
people's aspirations (education, learning
opportunities, participation in the
household/community decision-making process,
access to government services, among others)
(Midgley, 2013)

Capacity to bounce back or to return to a better, if
not the original, state of being after experiencing or
undergoing disasters

External shocks: conflicts, health crises,
pandemics, natural or human-induced disasters,
economic shocks, violence, endemic illnesses,
social exclusion, unhealthy living conditions, poor
infrastructure, and pollution, among other factors
which pose risks to human lives

Characteristics of a person or a group that increase
the level of insecurities, affecting one’s capacities or
capabilities to respond or adapt to a specific
situation

A state or condition where individuals, families,
communities, and societies have effectively
managed social problems, met social needs and
created opportunities for people to maximize their
potential (Midgley, 1995)

17

CHAPTER 2
REVIEW OF RELATED LITERATURE

It is a shared global trend that the graying phenomenon cannot be slowed
down. Thanks to STI, a person's longevity has improved over the years. The
graying of the Philippine population may not occur as fast as the developed
countries like Japan, which was regarded as a “super ageing society” in 2011
(Muramatsu & Akiyama, 2011). However, the increasing undocumented
needs of OPs in the local context pose a critical challenge to the future ageing
population and local government units in the local communities. There is,
however, a limited number of research that focus on the ageing society,
particularly in the Philippines (Villegas, 2014). The graying of societies cannot
be slowed down anymore, which creates a whole new level of discourse,

particularly in terms of Human Security among OPs.

The landscape of the ageing challenges, issues, and concerns requires a
different level of discourse in times of a global pandemic. Moreover, one of
the crucial aspects of OPs is Human Security. While debates and discourses
on Human Security are ongoing, the worsening global security scenario due
to COVID-19 presents another development issue that greatly affects the local
communities.

The current literature on ageing and Human Security in the global, national
and local context was reviewed and presented in the following section. The
general concepts, frameworks, theories, and policies that are related to ageing
and Human Security formed part of the review of documents in order to provide
a comprehensive understanding of the roles of Human Security in the ageing
years towards creating social development opportunities and guarantees for

older persons in the Philippines.

18

2.1 AGEING AND OLDER PERSONS FROM GLOBAL TO LOCAL
CONTEXT

a. Definition of Ageing

The growing concern on the plight of the ageing population in the developed
economies has directed the country’s strategic plan in approaching social and
economic development. The national plans of the said economies have been
directed by the urge to address the current social challenges — one of which is
“ageing.” The increasing number of older persons globally has created the
demand from the respective governments to redesign their policies and
programs to address the current and future needs of the ageing population
that can affect the economic policies of a country. Similarly, the need to have
an in-depth understanding of older persons’ current and future challenges is
beginning to rise, together with the increasing ageing population. Aging-
telated research is encouraged globally to explore all possible areas of
concern for older persons and viable strategies and solutions to address the
challenges of this sector. Addressing these concerns needs a more localized
approach to contextualize the social problems, including the policy
recommendations and plan of action toward an age-responsive society. There

is no one-size-fits-all solution. (Campafiano-Bernardo, 2018)

Compared with the developed countries, Southeast Asia is still considered a
young economy where ageing has not yet become the center of attention.
However, the fast and vast development brought about by science,
technology, and innovation can extremely affect the ageing population in one
way or another. Different perspectives and mindsets on ageing and retirement
exist among the older persons in the community, public sector, and private
organizations. Only through an in-depth study of such perceptions can provide

19

a more holistic understanding of the issues, challenges, and opportunities that
an older person may encounter in the ageing years. (Campafiano-Bernardo,
2018)

Ageing can be understood and interpreted from different perspectives and
disciplines. The biological deterioration in physiological terms seems to be the
current hegemony in looking at ageing. The graying of hair, changes in
physical make-up, sluggish movement, memory lapses, and wearing
eyeglasses. These all pertain to the physical and biological make-up of older
persons, like what can be observed among the grandparents. Words indeed
possess power in defining what ageing is all about and how it should be looked
at. Such a mindset on older persons overshadows the positive energy that
flows among them, which could make a difference in all the limitations set forth

before them. (Campafiano-Bernardo, 2018)

Phillipson (2013) noted that deterioration of physical capacities among OPs
hinders the ageing population from performing what they used to do while in
their younger years. Villegas (2014) further affirmed such observations when
she underscored in her research the perceptions of OPs as burdens to their

families, mainly on financial needs.

Every living thing is subject to the inevitable process of ageing. It is a given
biological fact that all organisms are subject to senescence or the deterioration
of physical and functional characteristics. Moreover, as a personage, the
biological make-up of that person depreciates, making the older person (OP)
more sickly, vulnerable, weak, and incapable of doing the things that they
previously performed in their younger years (Phillipson, 2013). These
stereotypes that have existed since the 1940s contributed to the current

20

normative images of an older person as a burden to caring family members —

worst, as a burden to the society (Villegas, 2014)

This questions the term ‘ageing’, whether it is a crisis or an opportunity, an
asset rather than a liability, or whether it permits an individual to affect public
policies or be treated as a passive recipient of benefits. In communities where
poverty provides a daily overdose of crises among the low-income families,
the marginalized, disadvantaged older persons are more exposed to life's
insecurities that overly burden the OPs as they tread in their later years.
However, the other unexplored side of the coin is - do these OPs, despite the
said crises, value the life they have in their families and communities and can
pursue their later years with dignity? How do they live a free life from want,

fear, and indignity?

Putting forward social development among the OPs is a very challenging task.
This means placing the older persons at the heart of the development process
and making that process more people-centered to serve the disadvantaged,
marginalized, neglected, vulnerable, and underserved OPs. An alternative
way of developing national plans is to turn the development pyramid upside
down and place the underprivileged sectors of society at the top as the
determinant and recipients of the development policies and programs. They
need to steer the wheel of development, not only for their cause but also for

the entire society.

With regards to OPs who are termed as “elderly, elder, older person, older
adult, aged or in Filipino — Jolo, lola, matanda, nakatatanda,” according to
Cavanaugh and Blanchard-Fields (2015) and Gilbert (2000), the term elderly
is equated with the later phase of ageing that is characterized by the
deterioration of physical and biological attributes, based on the inevitable

21

natural process that prevails in all the living organisms. The existence of
varying terms for this age group somehow creates “stereotypes” that
negatively affect one’s view of being old. In an Editor's Message (Avers,
2011), the use of “Elderly” in the Journal of Geriatric Physical Therapy has
been critiqued as a term that connotes negative characteristics of ageing:
senile, demented, frail, dependent. In the current discourse, the term “older
person” has been widely used and accepted as a more appropriate alternative
term for “elderly” to discount the negative connotations that the latter provides

to the ageing population.

Avers (2011) further underscored that the term “elderly” connotes negative
perception about an aging person, given the heterogeneity in the ageing years
instead of becoming a homogenous population sector. They called the OPs
“elderly,” suggesting that they were more frail, sensitive, dependent, sickly,
and less robust. Thus, “Elderly” seemed inadequate and inaccurate to
characterize an ageing person, given their varying capacities and capabilities.
The Journal of Geriatric Physical Therapy editors strongly suggests using
“older adult” or “older person” as a more courteous and appropriate term for
the ageing population. There is diversity in ageing; there is a diversity of
concerns among OPs (Phillipson, 2013).

Like racism and sexism, ageism or the elderly can affect how policies and
programs are crafted in a particular country. In addition, equating the elderly
with negative characteristics as dependent, helpless, frail, and sickly creates
a different world of the ageing population which negatively affects how the
service providers also approach the elderly. (Avers, 2011)

Avers et al. (2011) have noted that the United Nations Committee on Economic
Social and Cultural Rights (UNCESCR) (1995) rejected the use of the elderly.

22

Robert Butler disagreed with the use of Senior Citizens and the elderly.
Instead, and instead strongly suggested using “older adults” or “older

persons.”

Hence, the term “older person” (OP) or “nakatatanda” was used throughout
the study to cover all individuals whose ages ranged from 50 years old and
above; likewise, the term Senior Citizen (SC) was used only to refer to define
the age group with access to legal entitlements as stipulated in the existing
laws and policies in the Philippines. With these stereotypes alone, insecurities

may already arise among OPs.

Phillipson (2013) cited the observations of Lloyd-Sherlock in 2004, which
highlighted the reservations in a generalized understanding of the older

population:

“OPs have high levels of vulnerability and
dependence, compared with other members of
the society who have more contributions than the
ageing population. The main shortcoming of this
observation is the sweeping view of later life as a
common experience. A more balanced
perspective requires an appreciation of later life
as a fluid, complex and _ heterogeneous

phenomenon.”

b. Ageing and Economic Development

In the course of development, specifically economic development, the older
population is one of the silent factors considered in the picture. It can still be
subdivided within this sector based on gender, class, race, and geographic

23

differences. As such, inequalities emerge as a by-product of the interplay
between and among the sectors, influenced by the current power struggle
between the ruling and oppressed classes as per the works of Karl Marx (Peet
& Hartwick, 2015).

In the early writings on economic development, efforts from the state and the
market focused on addressing poverty, inequality, and unemployment. Dudley
Seers, in the 1970s, has put forward the idea that development’s main purpose
was only hinged on economic growth through the Western model of
development, which equates poverty to the lack of financial capacity to achieve
a good life. The frame of mind of Seers was based on statist planning.
However, it underscored the need for non-conventional planning that is not
100% rely on quantitative results. Notwithstanding the Dependency Theory of
Ander Gunder Frank, Seer noted that the dependency of nations to the core
was influenced by “class, power, and imperialism by strong governments and

economies against the weak ones.” (Nafziger, 2006)

Nafziger (2006), on the other hand, emphasized the alternative economic
goals which Sen advocated in his works in 1999. Sen has veered away from
the monetary definition of economic development, where the human
development happens only when the economies developed — where freedom
of human beings is only an end of all the economic development efforts. For
Sen, it is high time that the economies look at the social, political, and
environmental problems that prevail in the society in order to address all forms
of unfreedoms (i.e., hunger, famine, ignorance, unemployment, barriers to
economic fulfillment of minorities)women, premature death, violation of
political freedom and basic liberty, threats to the environment, little access to
health, expensive quality healthcare systems, poor sanitation, unclean water,

among others). Sen pointed out that the freedom and liberty of every person

24

are “the” development means and ends. These were the basic tenets of Sen’s
Capabilities Approach that Nussbaum expanded, who prescribed the 10
capabilities necessary for a human being to live in dignity. (Nussbaum, 2011;
Sen, 1999; Nafziger, 2006)

In the theories of development, concerns on human beings were more on their
ability to deliver outputs to support the thrust of the state and the market — that
is, to create wealth. Initially, the spheres of development only included the
state, market, and society, where people are mostly perceived as a resource
to keep up with the demands of the state and the market. People work
because their primary motivation is to earn money for a living. Later, they want
to accumulate more and more wealth. This creates a solid basis for human
beings to be labeled as “greedy by nature.” This is a typical representation of
the Classical Theories of Development, where a linear progression of a
society's so-called development can be observed through people’s

engagement with wealth accumulation. (Peet & Hartwick, 2015)

Most economists and political leaders are still using the founding economic
models to push for development in a country. As a social science, Economics
is meant to address the problems that prevail in the social systems, which are
made up of human behaviors towards the utilization and distribution of
resources. There were individual and unique values that governed the
decisions of every person towards production and consumption patterns.
From being part of the commons, the freedom to use natural resources was
eventually restricted through the birth of privatization of properties. Thus, the
right to accumulate wealth was not restricted and gave the first wave of private
property owners the freedom to access the public domains and unlimited
private parcels of land. (Todaro & Smith, 2007)

25

The rise of development issues such as “poverty, unemployment, population
growth, rural stagnation, and environmental decay” challenged the economic
development experts’ so-called value judgment. On the other hand, their
values have tremendously hinged on the classical economic development
perspectives, which says that decisions on the production and consumption
were subjective and primarily based on making people happy about what they
have or what they will have in the future; not minding the effect of such
decisions in the totality of natural resources and social systems. (Todaro &
Smith, 2007)

Todaro & Smith (2007) and Peet & Hartwick (2009, 2015) pointed out that in
the course of development, the classical views on economics were critiqued
and challenged to move beyond the wealth-based development given the
evolving needs of the society. Todaro & Smith (2007) mentioned the non-
economic values that were excluded or almost forgotten by the economic
model in the past. These non-economic values refer to culture, religion, race,
social context, traditions, political dynamics, and local and international
pressures. This has called call for a more holistic understanding of
development. However, OP as a vital member of society has not yet emerged.
It took quite some time before they needed to address their concerns was

placed a major development goal.
c. Ageing and Social Development

The perspectives about ageing research over the years posed challenges in
the current times. It was using different tools and methods, responses, and
interventions to address aging-related issues and concerns called for a more
in-depth and holistic understanding of the underlying context. Gerontological

research has become an eclectic field. It requires the dynamic interaction of

26

different theoretical underpinnings and a complete presentation of the factors

that continue to affect the ageing process. (Phillipson, 2013)

The approaches to responding to the concerns of the OPs vary from country
to country. The awareness of the ageing challenges in Asia, particularly in the
Philippines, is incrementally rising due to the pragmatic efforts of both the
government and non-government sectors and the increasing number of ageing
populations. Different sources offer promising opportunities for new markets
to emerge. However, the private sector has not fully taken this route due to the
immense risk and high investment required by such an endeavor, even with
existing policies in support of the ageing population. Given such a choice of
the market not to pour in investment in addressing the ageing population
concerns, market failure occurs, leaving the sole responsibility of addressing

the predicament to the Government (Weimer & Vining, 2011).

The relationship between the spheres of the government, market, society,
environment, culture, and politics sets a different playing field. The
development stakeholders have varying degrees of power and influence over
resource distribution, participation, policy development process, and framing
of social issues. While the term social development has existed for decades,
it is still struggling until now to be taken as an alternative development

paradigm, aside from the overall and mainstream economic development.

Before the 1960s, ageing research focused on ageing as a disability that can
be addressed by medical and health practitioners. Nevertheless, as
sociologists moved forward, ageing does not only refer to the physical and
mental make-up of an OP but rather, it is intertwined with varying social
concerns that deal with human rights violations, age discrimination, social

pension, negative perceptions, and abuses, among others. Henceforth,

27

ageism reinforced the discrimination of OPs based on their differences from
the rest of the society, dictated by their ages and experiences in their later
years. (Featherstone, 1995; Bytheway B. , 1995; Estes, Biggs, & Phillipson,
2003)

In 1969, the United Nations (UN) defined social progress and social
development as the means and the end goal of all nations pursuing robust
economies. UN emphasized the importance of the rights to development and
the active participation of every individual to effect change for the betterment
of their lives. In addition, the UN has noted that the member nations must
provide opportunities to all individuals that shall promote Human Security and

development. (United Nations, 1969)

In 1981, the UN defined social development as institutional change that
addresses human needs by developing and adopting social policies and
programs. The said process can be facilitated by different social development
strategies or two or more. The identified social development strategies are:
(a) DISTRIBUTIVE PROPERTY which ensures equitable distribution of
income, resources, and wealth; (b) PARTICIPATIVE STRATEGY which
ensures that all sectors in the population are involved or engaged in the
development process, answering the development questions “through whom
and for whom”; (c) HUMAN DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY which underscores
three types of people’s involvement — as a resource, as an agent, and as
beneficiaries. This strategy aims to rechannel investments at improving the
quality of life of people through the development of capacities and
opportunities; (d) SOCIAL INTEGRATION STRATEGY - (Jones & Pandey,
1981)

28

While there has been a great clamor about the need for alternative economic
development models to veer away from the neoclassical development model,
it was only in 1995 when the first World Summit for Social Development was
held in Copenhagen, followed by the declaration of the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs). Most industrialized countries have championed
this endeavor and aimed to develop policies, plans, and programs to balance
economic development aspirations. Based on the mainstream development
perspectives, economic development is the key to pursuing social
development. (Midgley & Tang, 2008; Midgley, 1995)

Similarly, Midgley (1995) has presented a comprehensive discussion on social
development definition, characteristics, strategies, and application to a
country's overall thrust for economic development. For Midgley, social
development is a planned process of social change designed to promote the
population's well-being in conjunction with a dynamic process of economic
development (p.25). As an eclectic discipline, social development combines
several theories and perspectives to analyze the social conditions and
facilitate the crafting of policies, plans, and strategies to address a certain
social issue or problem. Midgley summarized the basic characteristics of
social development into eight (8): it is connected with economic development;
it is multi-disciplinary (or even transdisciplinary); it connotes a process that
begins with pre-existing conditions that social development seeks to change,
and the process of change itself, and the “end state of social development’; it
is “progressive” in nature; it facilitates intervention; it is founded on strategies
to “directly or indirectly link economic development with social development”;
it is “inclusive or universalistic which directs the interventions to communities,
regions, and societies based on the spatial and temporal context; and, social
development promotes social welfare which ensures the satisfactory

management of social problems, meeting of social needs, and making

29

opportunities available and accessible to all, particularly those who are

marginalized, vulnerable, and disadvantaged. As a good change process,

social development is composed of three stages (See Figure 2.1).

Three major debates
about the pre-existing
social conditions:
underdevelopment
always exists (referring
to the Modernization
Theory),
underdevelopment is
caused by a series of
events (referring to the
Dependency Theory),
and the presence of the
need to change such
pre-existing conditions.

Stage 3: End state or
goal which the social
development seeks to
attain

The GOALS of social
development are
interlinked with the
achievement of social
well-being or the state
or condition that
characterizes
individuals, families,
communities and even
whole societies that
have effectively
managed social
problems, met social
needs and created
opportunities for people
to maximize their
potential.

FIGURE 2.1 ADOPTION OF MIDGLEY’S (1995) SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT

Attempts to frame Social Development have become the foundation of the

current definitions that international organizations advocate.

Taking into

account all of these, everything redounds to people-centered approaches that
all programs should be from, for, with, and by the people, without discounting
the responsibilities of the people to be good stewards of their communities. It

can be noted that social development is an eclectic discipline because it

combines two or more theoretical underpinnings. It cannot be understood by

just using a single lens.


In summary, Social Development (SD) Research aims: (1) to amplify the voice
of the voiceless, the underprivileged, the marginalized groups of the society,
of the discriminated individuals; (2) to magnify the invisible sectors; (3) to
reinforce policy frameworks based on SD realities; and (4) to engage all
sectors of the society in self-discovery and empowerment. (Campafano-

Bernardo D. M., Research with older persons, 2015)

Having stated that and having reviewed the existing frameworks and theories
on ageing, OPs have proven their significance to SD and its existence as a
vital focus of SD research, given the continuum of ageing issues and concerns
that persist despite all the horizontal and vertical efforts of both the local and

international communities.

d. Major Theories on Ageing

Ageing theories are interwoven, which appear to have commonalities in the
supported arguments and the prescribed perspectives that explain the
dynamism or staleness among OPs. Major ageing-related theories which can
be mentioned are as follows:

Age Stratification Theory presents a theoretical model which categorizes the
population based on age and the functionality of each age cohort or strata,
such as children, adults, or older persons. Critics cited that this theory
disregarded the interplay of social and economic factors in the ageing process,
which dramatically affects the lives and well-being of older persons in their
later years. (Phillipson, 2013)

The Marxian Theory stresses that OPs are withdrawn from the workforce due
to the limitations set forth by labor policy (Phillipson & Walker, 1986). This is
the foundation of Retirement Policies that are nowadays being enjoyed by OPs
who used to work in either public or private sector.

31

Cumming and Henry, in 1961, has developed the Disengagement Theory,
which pointed out that OPs experience a sharp decline in opportunities as they
age, with a very high tendency to develop complacency with what life offers
after separation from the busy world (Matcha, 1997; Phillipson, 2013). This
observation has become an acceptable behavior among the ageing
individuals, as they have accepted that their physical capacities and worth in
economic activities have diminished as they reach the age of 60. The OPs
tend to detach themselves from the active way of life. (Campafhano-Bernardo,
2018; Campanano-Bernardo, 2018; Campanano-Bernardo, 2012)

Likewise, Match (1997) cited Social Breakdown/Competence Theory. It has
underscored the dependency of ageing on the negative labels constructed by
society, instilling the notions of incompetency, loss of roles in development,
and reduced self-reliance once the ageing individual fails to overcome social

pressures and consequences of old age.

Beyond the negative attributions on the ageing population in the 1960s, the
first ageing theory that Cavan has developed, Burgess, Havighurst, and
Goldhamer (1949) have attempted the explanation of Activity Theory which
supported the idea that ageing is directly proportional to the desire to engage
in activities; to receive more roles instead of losing; to have more positive self-
concept; and eventually, to have higher satisfaction in life. This theory has
also emphasized the role of participation of OPs in group relationships that
seemed to affect the level of satisfaction in the life of the ageing society.
(Campahano-Bernardo, 2018)

Debates on the ageing theories have continued over the years; the theorists
became more challenged to defend their points of view on ageing. Matcha
(1997) presents that the Subculture Theory of Arnold Rose in 1965 somehow
depicts the American ageing society in the current times. However, she poses

32

a warning that the arguments of Rose's theory were formulated over 30 years
ago, which may have discrepancies already in the present-day trends of the
ageing society. According to Rose, Subculture Theory is grounded on the
following trends: ageing population grows over time; good health makes an
ageing society more capable of doing things; the ageing population is prone to
health risks which treatment is costly; the prevalence of retirement among the
OPs; the economic conditions of OPs determine their capacities and interests;
social programs also create impacts on the ageing culture; socio-economic
conditions decide on the living set-up of OPs; and, aging group consciousness
suggests that as people age, they tend to be involved in ageing groups that
become the learning ground for the ageing population towards achieving life
satisfaction.

These major theories are being challenged through time, with the rise of
various perspectives on ageing as a social construction. Sociologists noted
that the functionalist and naturalist view on ageing was insufficient to have a
holistic view of the current processes that OPs experience and undergo.
Philipson (2013) and Campanano-Bernardo (2012) noted the importance of
looking into three (3) major levels of perspectives in understanding OPs and
in consideration of the dynamics that occur in each of the levels: (a) micro-
level or that which represents the individual and family sphere; (b) meso level
or that which considers community, organizational and or institutional
influences and relationships; and, (c) macro-level which involves national to

international factors that affect OPs in general.

Robert Butler emphasizes that, like racism and sexism, ageism refers to the
great sense of exclusion and discrimination of OPs. Butler and Lewis (1973)
defined ageism in 1973 as the process of labeling older persons in a manner

that discriminates against them through the creation of negative images and

33

labels against being old. Like sexism and racism, ageism separated the old
from the younger generations and placed the older persons on the
disadvantaged side of development. Categorically speaking, ageism
mainstreams the negativities about being old and overshadows that older
persons also have the same and equal rights as the younger generations.
(Bytheway B. , 1995)

From another perspective, ageing concerns were captured through exciting
life stories from OPs that narrate their views on how they put meaning into their
lives. There is an increasing interest in finding the meaning of well-being in
old age using the theoretical foundations of philosophy, phenomenology,
symbolic interaction, and social psychology. However, the appropriate
framework has not been prescribed by an expert because the meanings in the
stories are a work in progress. Social gerontological research continuously
evolves to offer a creative approach to aging-related issues and concerns.
Instead of providing the statements for the OPs, the OPs are given the
opportunities to translate their own experiences and thoughts into words or
symbols. By letting them express their thoughts, the OPs create their

meaning, not the researcher. (Hillier & Barrow, 2015)

The origins of ageing theories are western-based thoughts, making it difficult
for this research to solely depend on the abovementioned theories and
perspectives. The foundations of ageism speak of the processes of the ageing
society through the decades, which may somehow depict the experiences in
some countries. However, as ageing has become a social construct, more
than just a natural phenomenon, the interest in gerontology, given the
difference between the Philippine settings to the place of origin of the theories,
thus, it is important to note the need for a holistic understanding of the

processes involved in ageism and the need to discover the experiences of

34

OPs, particularly those that affect Human Security, in the local setting. For
some, ageing is a threat, but for others, like the OPs in Bagong Silangan,
Quezon City, who have experienced the wrath of Typhoon Ondoy (Ketsana)
in 2009, ageing has been viewed as an opportunity to serve other OPs who

are in need (Campanhano-Bernardo D. M., 2012).

Furthermore, the Western-dominated writings on OPs pose a great challenge
for Filipinos to enrich their research on aging to have evidence-based plans
and policies for the current and future OPs. Addressing the current challenges,
insecurities, and vulnerabilities of OPs can put forward a better quality of life

in the future.

yw
a

These theories need to be revisited, as the game changer COVID-19 has
tremendously placed the development paradigms into a stringent test. The
current conditions of all, not only OPs, called for a significant review of
development theories and paradigms. The balance of all the development
factors: Human Rights, Human Security, economic development,
environmental conservation, and global politics, among others — all of these is
being rehashed. Thus, a great challenge for social development discourse is
to tackle these challenges based on the perspectives of OPs. Do OPs still
contribute to nation-building and address the challenges of COVID-19? What
can be the development opportunities for OPs, given the science-based
information that the most vulnerable in the situation are those aged 50 and
above? These are questions that this research may not directly answer but
can contribute to the knowledge-building efforts on COVID-19 and ensure that
the rights and welfare of OPs are upheld.

35

e. Demographics and Trends of OPs from Global to Local Context
“The world is undergoing an unprecedented demographic transformation.
Between now and 2050, the number of older persons will rise from about 600
million to almost two billion. The increase will be greatest in developing
countries [...]....where numbers are expected to multiply by four. [...] In less
than 50 years from now, for the first time in history, the world will contain more
people over 60 years old than under 15 [...].” Therefore older persons are no
longer a minority, becoming a growing majority!”

(Commission on Human Rights - United Nations, 2006)

Global Context

In 2006, the UN has been vocal about its foresight that the older person
population would rise to almost two billion by 2050. The growth rate multiplies
four times, particularly in developing countries. In UN -Department of
Economic and Social Affairs (2017) has reported that since 1980, the number
of older people has doubled in 37 years. Moreover, with the projections of the
UN’s model, it can reach about 2.1 billion by 2050.

(SEE APPENDIX 2 — FIGURE 2.1 NUMBER OF PERSONS AGED 60
YEARS OR OVER BY DEVELOPMENT GROUP*, FROM 1980 TO 2050)

In the 2019 World Population Ageing Report, the fast ageing rate of the world
is mainly due to the decline in the fertility rate and increase in longevity due to
advances in technology. A general observation of the trends showed that older
women outlived their spouses based on the data that a higher number of
households with older women living alone. The continuous rise of the ageing
population poses significant challenges to the governments to ensure that
appropriate policies and plans are in place, anticipating the needs and welfare
of the older persons in the respective countries. Such policies need to be

anticipatory enough to foresee future scenarios; thus, they will not be

36

overtaken by the events. Nonetheless, the United Nations calls for innovative
policies and solutions that can immediately adapt to emerging needs and
challenges of the society, particularly in creating better and inclusive
opportunities and guarantees for the older persons and in solidarity with other
sectors of society. The report also identified the critical needs and interests of
the older persons on the global scale, namely: “housing, employment,
healthcare, social protection, and other forms of intergenerational solidarity.”
(United Nations-Department of Economic and Social Affairs, 2020)

* “Developed Regions’ include Europe and Northern America plus Australia,
New Zealand, and Japan; while the ‘developing regions’ include all other parts
of the world. These terms do not imply any judgment as to the current

developmental stage of a particular country or region.”

The major trends in the ageing population may include: (1) Increasing
proportion of the ageing population globally from 6% in the 1990s to 9% in
2019, and is fastest in Eastern and South-Eastern Asia; (2) Longevity is
improving; (3) Fertility is declining; (4) old-age dependency ratio will increase
to 28 older persons per 100 working-age persons by 2050; (5) increasing
consumption with fewer funding sources to finance such behavior; and, (6)
Increasing financial requirements for medical needs and social security,
putting intense pressure at national social welfare planning and policy
development efforts. The Republic of Korea, Singapore, Taiwan, Macao,
Maldives, Thailand, Hongkong, Spain, Kuwait, and Brunei Darussalam are the
Top 10 countries with the highest percentage increase in the share of the
number of older adults persons aged 65 years old and above between 2019-
2050. Moreover, seven (7) out of ten (10) countries are in Eastern and South-
Eastern Asia. (United Nations-Department of Economic and Social Affairs,
2020)

37

Globally, there are more older women who live alone or by themselves. As a
general observation, women usually outlive men. In the developed countries
such as those in Europe and Northern America, about 70% of male and female
older persons are either living with their spouse or living alone. The situation
is lower in Africa, Asia, Latin America, and the Caribbean.

(SEE APPENDIX 2.1 - FIGURE 2.2 PERCENTAGE OF MEN AND
WOMEN AGED 60 YEARS OR OVER LIVING INDEPENDENTLY (ALONE
OR WITH SPOUSE), BY REGION, CIRCA 2010 (UN, 2017))

According to the UN (2020), older persons have four (4) primary sources of
funds to finance their consumption: “(1) public programs such as pensions,
health care, and other social welfare programs; 2) transfers from family
members or other private sources; (3) own assets and wealth; and, (4) their
labor income.” The older people get, the higher their consumption needs
become, particularly in accessing quality health care facilities and medicines.
Given this projection, the younger generations will have a significant stake in
ensuring that the economies are functioning well and are earning the needed

funds to support social services, particularly for the older persons.

UN (2020) recognizes the need for a better quality of life in the younger years
to participate in the labor market — creating more diverse sources of funds
when an individual reaches old age. Similarly, the UN encourages the
governments to invest in lifelong learning facilities that provide age-friendly
learning opportunities to spur continued growth and development for older
adults. Savings has been part of the critical aspect of ageing to ensure that
older persons have enough money to spend on the more essential things like
food and medical needs.

38

More proactive and evidence-based policy development capacities that rely on
comprehensive data collection, management, and analysis should be in place
to assist the governments and their constituents in planning and addressing

aging-related issues and concerns.

WHO presents the major challenges that OPs encounter: (a) diversity in old
age, (b) health inequities; (c) outdated and ageist stereotypes, and (d) a rapidly
changing world. In response, WHO encourages all governments to commit to
healthy ageing, align health systems with the needs of older populations,
develop systems for providing long-term care, create age-friendly
environments, and improve measurement, monitoring, and understanding of
ageing issues and solutions. (World Health Organization, 2018)

SEE APPENDIX 2 - FIGURE 2.3 DISTRIBUTION (PERCENTAGE) OF
PERSONS AGED 60 YEARS OVER BY TYPE OF HOUSEHOLD LIVING
ARRANGEMENT, FOR REGIONS CIRCA 1990 AND CIRCA 2010
(UN, 2017)

In 2012, Japan was regarded as the most aged country, with South Korea as
the fastest ageing country globally (UNESCAP, 2012). This was further
supported by a 2018 report about the ranking of Asian countries based on the
number of older persons in 2015 and 2030.

The Global Age Index showed that Japan is still in the lead as it takes center
stage of being an ageing society. In 2015, it recorded 33% of its population
as older persons. This number will grow more prominent in 2030 as it reaches
37.3%. South Korea followed Japan with a rate in 2015 pegged at 18.5%;
however, the older persons will rise very fast to 31.4% by 2030. Thailand,
China, Sri Lanka, and Vietnam occupy the upper limits for reaching more than
17% of their population as older persons by 2030. The increase from the 2015
rate ranged from 7% - to 13%. While Japan seems to be in the lead, the model

39

says it has a modest percent increase between 2015 and 2030, with about
4.2% only in 15 years. (DataLEADS/ANN, 2018)

SEE APPENDIX 2 — FIGURE 2.4 POPULATION AGEING SCENARIO IN
ASIA, 2015-2030 (DATAPEADS/ANN, 2018)

Local Context

Philippines is one of the Asian countries with the slowest ageing rate of 3%
(DataLEADS/ANN, 2018), but still a little bit higher than Laos (2.1%) and
Pakistan (1.8%) in a span of 15 years (from 2015 to 2030). Even though the
scenario is not as bad as the other Asian countries or other developed
countries, the older people in the Philippines also face varying difficulties and
challenges, particularly in emergencies, crises, and calamities. Thus, the
Philippine Government needs to exert more effort in preparing the current

population for a better ageing journey in the coming years.

Looking at the demographic data, the Philippines’ population has been
projected to increase from 109 million to 142 million by 2045, with an average
annual growth of 1.21%. In 2020, 8.7% (9,509,000) comprise the OPs with
3.9% (4,287,000) male and 4.8% (5,222,000) female. (Philippine Statistics
Authority, 2015)

SEE APPENDIX 2 — FIGURE 2.5 OVERALL POPULATION IN THE
PHILIPPINES AS OF MAY 2020; FIGURE 2.6 2020 PROJECTED
POPULATION OF OLDER PERSONS IN THE PHILIPPINES BASED ON
2010-2015 DATA (PSA,2015)

A similar article states the consistent growth rate among senior citizens from
2000 through 2015. It is evident that very few older persons reached 80 years
of age. Based on PSA data, CALABARZON Region has recorded the highest
number of older persons, contributing to 13.3% of the Philippines’ total number

of senior citizens. This is followed by (2") Central Luzon or Region Ill (11.6%),

40

(3'4) National Capital Region (NCR) (11.35), (4"") Western Visayas or Region
VI (9.4%), and (5'*) Central Visayas or Region VII (8.25). Based on reports,
the Cordillera Administrative Region (CAR) and the Bangsamoro Autonomous
Region in Muslim Mindanao (BARMM) have the lowest number of senior
citizens in the country. Said figures may be correlated with people’s access to
and quality of public and affordable health and social services in their
respective regions. (Fabonan, 2019)

SEE APPENDIX 2 - FIGURE 2.7 SENIOR CITIZENS IN THE
PHILIPPINES: 2000-2015

In CALABARZON (Cavite, Laguna, Batangas, Rizal, and Quezon), the
population based on the 2015 PSA data is 14,414,774 in total. Compared with
the 2010 figures, it was noted that Cavite had recorded the fastest growth rate
of 3.37% annually, with Rizal Province the second at 2.88% per year; followed
by Laguna (2.47%), Quezon excluding Lucena City (1.23%). Rizal Province
somewhat slowed down its population growth based on the 3.82% in 2000-
2010. (Philippine Statistics Authority, 2016) (See Figure 2.2)

Population CALABARZON based on the 2015 Census of the

Philippine Statistics Authority SE IRSaTENGHEG

3,678 CALABARZON:

2150 14,414,774
3,035,
3,000 2,884
2,694
2,500
2,123
S 2,000
So
[s}
= 1,500
1,000
500
0

BATANGAS — CAVITE LAGUNA  QUEZON RIZAL

4,000

Number of Individuals in Thousands

41

FIGURE 2.2 POPULATION IN CALABARZON BASED ON THE 2015 CENSUS
DATA (PSA, 2016)

Looking closely at Rizal Province’s population, it had 2.9M in 2015, spread in
13 municipalities and one (1) city. The population has consistently increased
annually, with the highest growth rate in the City of Antipolo. Based on the
overall ranking of municipalities with more than 150,000 population in 2015,
the top four (4) came from Rizal Province: (15') Rodriquez; (2"4) Cainta; (3'4)
Taytay; and (4'*) Binangonan.

SEE APPENDIX 2 - FIGURES 2.8 AND 2.9: POPULATION IN RIZAL
PROVINCE PER MUNICIPALITY AND CITY (PSA, 2015) AND TOP TEN
(10) MUNICIPALITIES WITH AT LEAST 150,000 POPULATION BASED

ON THE 2015 CENSUS DATA (PSA, 2019)

f. | Policy Frameworks on Ageing

The developed and developing countries have varying opinions on the graying
of their economies—one as a crisis and the other as an opportunity. In 2000,
it was predicted that the developing economies would have about a 200-300%
increase in their older population in the next 30 years due to science,
technology, and innovation (STI). The burden of the rise of the ageing
population is its costly maintenance of health and pensions, including the
existence of “frail and non-productive” individuals upon which economic
productivity is dependent. The report pointed out that, whether an older person
lives in a developing or developed country, choosing to have a healthy life in
the ageing years matters the most to mitigate the risks of being marginalized
and excluded. Indeed, health is wealth, not only to individuals but also to the
entire economy. This has shifted the perception of ageing as an opportunity
rather than a crisis. (World Health Organization, 2000)

42

The increasing global concern on ageing gave rise to the development of
policy instruments, including adopting a human rights-based approach to
respond to the growing challenges among the OPs. (Campanano-Bernardo D.
M., 2018)

In 1978, the United Nations (UN) issued the resolution 33/52, which called for
the need to convene a “World Assembly on Aging in 1982” to respond to the
emerging pressing challenges of ageing concerning the member states. The
said assembly served as a platform to explore action points and opportunities
in promoting socio-economic security and healthy well-being among older

persons.

This was further supported by another UN resolution 35/129 in 1980 which
directed the member states to address the “specific needs of OPs”. It was
followed by the development of the Vienna International Plan of Action on
Ageing in 1982 or the first instrument on ageing endorsed by the United
Nations General Assembly in 1982. The said Plan of Action aimed “to
strengthen the capacities of governments civil society to deal effectively with
the ageing of populations and to address the developmental potential and
dependency needs of older persons.” This Plan focused on the seven (7)
sectoral areas, namely: (a) health and nutrition; (b) protection of elderly
consumers; (c) housing and environment; (d) family; (e) social welfare; (f)
income security and employment; and (g) education. (Campafiano-Bernardo
D. M., 2018)

43

| In 1992, the United Nations approved
| another resolution that provides the
| Principles for Older Persons,
enlisting _five (5) important
| perspectives for an older person to
live a life with dignity: (a)
| independence; (b) participation; (c)

Challenges, ©
) Stereotypes, |

|
and Social ! +} (e) dignity, as shown in Figure 2.3.

care; (d)__ self-fulfillment; and,

Constructs

Campanano-Bernardo (2012)
highlighted the need to bridge the
widening gap caused by OP-related
challenges, stereotypes, and social

FIGURE 2.3. ADOPTION OF THE UN FRAMEWORK ON THE 18 PRINCIPLES
FOR OLDER PERSONS IN 1991 (CAMPANANO-BERNARDO, 2012)

After six (6) years, “Macao Declaration and Plan of Action on Ageing for Asia
and the Pacific” was adopted in 1998. These have strengthened more action-
oriented national policies and plans for the older persons in the Asia and
Pacific Region economies. The significant areas of concern are shown in (See
FIGURE 2.4). (Campafiano-Bernardo, 2018)

44

MAJOR AREAS OF CONCERN:

¢. Health and
nutrition

a. Social position” 9p. Older persons
of older persons and the family

d. Housing,
transportation e. Older persons
and the built and the market
environment

f, Income security,
maintenance and
employment

g. Social services
and the
community

FIGURE 2.4. MACAO DECLARATION AREAS OF CONCERN

The Second World Assembly on Ageing on 8-12 April 2002 has adopted the
Madrid International Plan of Action on Ageing, aiming to ensure the ageing
population with “a sense of security and dignity while maintaining full
participation and fulfillment of human rights.” The plan highlights three
significant areas of concern such as (a) ageing and development, (b) health
and well-being into old age, and (c) enabling and supportive environments for
ageing. It is founded on the Rights-based Approach (RBA) to mainstream the
tight to development among the ageing population by all policymakers.
(Campafiano-Bernardo, 2018)

As a follow-up assembly, Shanghai Implementation Strategy was formulated
on 23-26 September 2002 in China, which revisited the recommendations and
policy options from the first two (2) international plans. It suggested three
major strategies to address the pressing needs of every country should be

45

prepared for the ageing population would not be in place, these are: (a) OPs
and development; (b) health and well-being advancement for the old age;
(c) enabling and supportive environments; and (d) implementation and follow-
up. Several key points consisted of each key area to provide full guidance to
the member countries. (United Nations Research for Social Development,
2011)

Active ageing has become a buzzword globally, considering that the
developed countries have been experiencing graying of their economies.
Even though ageing has not been a severe phenomenon in Asia, the
determinants of active ageing were identified to include health and social
services, behavioral determinants, personal determinants, physical
environment, social determinants, and economic determinants. Because
ageing has been identified as a social construct, more than just a biological
phenomenon, it is fair to enclose ageing within the bounds of gender and
cultural dimensions. The report has stressed that the three pillars of active
ageing are Participation, Health, and Security. These pillars (See FIGURE
2.5) are affected by the determinants of active ageing. They are aligned with
the United Nations (UN) Principles for Older Persons. (World Health
Organization, 2007)

46

|

Participation

FIGURE 2.5. UN PRINCIPLES FOR OLDER PERSONS (WHO, 2007)

Moving from the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), nations have been
united toward attaining the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) by 2030.
SDGs underscored that “no one will be left behind and that every human being
will have the opportunity to fulfill their potential in dignity and equality.” WHO
anchored its strategies on this basic framework, encapsulated in the 10
Priorities Towards a Decade of Healthy Ageing as presented in FIGURE 2.6.
(World Health Organization, 2017)

47

Priority 1. Establishing a platform for innovation and change: Igniting change for healthy ageing by
connecting people and ideas from around the world

Priority 2. Supporting country planning and action: Countries get the skills and tools they need to create
policies that enable people to live long and healthy lives

Priority 3. Collecting better global data on healthy ageing: What gets measured gets done.

Priority 4. Promoting research that addresses the current and future needs of older people: Research
includes and benefits older people by answer relevant questions in innovative ways.

Priority 5. Aligning health systems to the needs of older people: Older adults get the health care they
need - where and when they need it.

Priority 6, Laying the foundations for a long-term-care system in every country: Older people and care
|__ givers get the care and support they need to live with dignity and enjoy their basic human rights.

~ Priority 7: Ensuring the human resources necessary for integrated care: People have the skills to
deliver quality health and long-term-care services for older people.

=|

_{ Priority 8: Undertaking a global campaign to combat ageism. Changing how we think, feel and act
|__ towards age and ageing.

Priority 9. Defining the economic case for investment: Better understanding the costs and opportunities
of Healthy Ageing - the starting point for sustainable, equitable and effective responses.

“Priority 10. Enhancing the global network for age-friendly cities and communitie: sand
communities, around the world, enable older people to do the things they have reason to value.

FIGURE 2.6. WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION'S 10 PRIORITIES TOWARDS A
DECADE OF HEALTHY AGEING

There is no one size fits all strategy when it comes to mainstreaming the 10
priorities for healthy ageing. While these priorities have been crafted in the
1990s, the turnover of events created complex processes, leaving the
Philippines in the catching-up mode to somehow be at par with the said
international plans towards putting forward an ageing-friendly society.

48


g. Ageing-related Research Landscape

Research with Older Persons (OPs) denotes the involvement of OPs in the
research process. It engages OPs as active research participants and not
merely passive research objects. The roles of OPs in social development
research can enrich the entire research process and outputs while providing a

venue for OPs to deepen their understanding of ageing.

According to Teerawichitchainan (2011), history accounts for the origin of OP-
oriented research even before the 1800s, focusing on the health and medical
aspects of ageing. It can be noted that insurgencies and warfare shape how
social policies are crafted and how people view ageing as a biological process
and a sociological phenomenon. Research on OP peaked after WWII, which
undeniably, brought the concerns of OPs into the limelight. Affected nations
from the war have been challenged to respond to the needs of the survivors
who were in the later years of life with physical and mental challenges. Social
policies are then crafted to ensure social security measures for the ageing
survivors. This phenomenon has shaped the current approach and strategy
of all nations to deal with the needs and challenges of OPs.

In this age and day of globalization, growing concerns in ageing nations have
capitalized on the need for critical research that can provide a more dynamic
framework for social policies. Notwithstanding the flourishing geriatrics
research or those that deal with the health and medical needs of OPs, critical
gerontological research has also established a niche in academic institutions,
research institutes, and other organizations. Experts have recognized the
importance of dealing with the sociological perspectives of OPs that focus on
the roles, social constructs, behavior, gender dimensions, and oppressions,
among others.

49

The common research trends involving OPs in the United Kingdom (UK)
involved themes on the OPs as consumers of services produced by the
government and the private sector; the level of involvement of OPs in the
development of such goods and services for the older population; not only is
involvement important for OPs, but they are found to belonging to becoming
“active participants” in the development process; services that are necessary
for OPs to have a better life; then Involving OPs in research suggests
innovative ways to rethink policies, strategies and socio-cultural perceptions
on ageing. With OPs as active participants in social research, they can liberate
themselves from the bars of ageism and move towards achieving a better
quality of life in the later years. (Walker, 2007)

Walker (2007) has pointed out that research among OPs is essential to
address the social issues that challenge OP, namely: age discrimination,
violence, and other forms of exclusion. The researchers were challenged to
create a platform that veers away from a “tokenistic” approach toward genuine
empowerment among OPs. Walker supported a participatory approach to
elicit stories of OPs based on their experiences and create a clearer
understanding of the context of OPs and their aspirations to move forward to
a better future. Organizations like the HelpAge International have contributed
to building up experiences and practices on OP participatory research, with
high hopes that the OPs will soon take up the challenge to engage in

community activities even in their later years actively. (Walker, 2007)

Origins of ageing theories are western-based. The research outputs are also
highly contextual. The holistic approach to responding to the development
needs of OPs and empowering them to aspire for a better future cannot be

based on the experiences of other countries. The context of every country,

50

province, municipality, or barangay varies greatly. With less interest in ageing
research, it will be difficult to create policies, plans, programs, and services

that can be responsive to the needs of OPs.

The global context of ageing research and trends on the ageing population
and social policies have greatly influenced the Philippines’ setting. The urge
to focus on the so-called marginalized, disadvantaged and invisible sector of
the society was brought into the limelight by the non-government organizations
and civil society groups, which firmly believed that OPs have a significant role

in the ambit of development. (Campafiano-Bernardo D. M., 2018)

A group of OPs organized themselves in 1980 and founded the Coalition of
Services of the Elderly (COSE) to serve the poorest of the poor OPs in the
Philippines. It advocates and lobbies for OP-responsive policies and programs
which have become the cornerstone of what the OPs today enjoy. Continuous
research on geriatrics and gerontology can be accounted for, focusing on the
varying age-related diseases, diagnostics, rehabilitation, development

framework, discrimination, and GAD issues. (Campanano-Bernardo, 2018)

Studies in the Philippines (1989-1996) on the ageing population, as reviewed
by Apuan (2005), discussed the following major themes: (a) respect for the
elderly; (b) negative perceptions about OPs, which were related to the physical
attributes of OPs; (c) socio-economic status as a determinant of the family’s
capacity to take care of the OPs; (d) women family members tend to shoulder
the burden of taking care of OPs; and (e) media's role in instilling negative
perceptions about OPs. (Campafano-Bernardo D. M., 2018)

Apuan (2005) has emphasized the need for a gender lens in understanding
the ageing landscape in the Philippines because ageing is more than just

51

growing old and acquiring additional years. Ageing is socially constructed
based on the roles portrayed by women and men and based on the social
perceptions the older persons need to overcome to realize a life they can
value.

OP researches focus on people whose ages are 50 years old and beyond. In
some literature, OPs are termed elderly, old old, and elders. In the Philippines,
the Philippine Statistics Authority (PSA) has adopted the Senior Citizens to
tefer to those 60-year-old and above individuals. Nonetheless, OPs cover
individuals whose age begins at 50 years old. Based on the findings,
preparation for later years should begin as early as this age (Barkan, 2010).
Disaster risk reduction and management (DRRM) have been the central focus
of research in 2011 and 2012. Interests in DRRM-related research increased
with the aggravating climate change issues that Typhoon Ondoy drastically
brought about (Ketsana) in the Philippines — one of the strongest typhoons that
had hit the country. A valid observation was that OPs were considered the
most vulnerable in times of calamities, such as typhoons. This perception was
even worsened when poverty came into the picture. Thus, OPs were generally
considered mere passive beneficiaries of any DRRM-related activity or
intervention.

Campanano-Bernardo (2012) study noted the grit among COSE-member OPs
in actively participating in the post-disaster phase when Typhoon Ondoy hit
Metro Manila. Being an organized group, COSE-formed OP organizations
(OPOs) have served the welfare of co-OPs in Bagong, Silangan, as they were
able to process the delivery of post-disaster assistance to the poorest of the
poor OPs in their localities. The study showed that OPs have the assets and
capacities to be developed and celebrated if they are organized as a strong
OPO in their communities (Figure 2.7). Further, in general, the study defied

52

the common perceptions that OPs are mere recipients of the fruits of
development because they have a significant role in the development
discourse if proper opportunities and support mechanisms were in place.
(Campafiano-Bernardo D. M., 2012)

CAPACITY BUILDING

for OPs to maximize their

assets and capacities

towards performing an

‘active aging and forging of

| capital.

MAINSTREAM aaa

the OPs' assets and L(€.9. DR3M Program)

capacities into the local

DISCOVERY development plans (i.e.

of OPs' assets and

capacities based on
LABOR

D
l
iS}
A
Ss
Fs
E
R
Pp
H
A
iS}
EB

HOUSEHOLD PRODUCTIVE
RELATIONS CAPITAL

POST-DISASTER PHASE DISASTER

FIGURE 2.7. OP-CENTERED DISASTER RISK REDUCTION AND
MANAGEMENT PROGRAM (CAMPANANO-BERNARDO D. M., 2012)

Looking at the major themes of the OP-related studies in the Philippines from
1983 to 2019, the most explored themes are retirement (23), health (15), care
for the elderly (11), and the ageing process (9) as shown in Figure 2.8. These
studies consist of undergraduate and graduate thesis and research conducted
by non-government organizations focusing on OP. Likewise, in 2006, the

53

highest number of OP-related studies was recorded in the selected online
catalogs or portals, followed by 2011, 1996, and then 2008 (Figure 2.9). It can
also be noted that the National Library of the Philippines houses the highest
number of OP-related studies, followed by the National Academy of Science
and Technology and then the University of the Philippines (See Figure
2.10). These recorded observations were based on the available online
catalogs as of January 2020.

54

Use of internet

Economic conditions

Preparation for Old Age

Role - Resource

Women Elderly

Living arrangement

Ageing (global context)

Sexuality

Intergenerational Support
Empowerment

Spirituality

Mobility

Disaster Risk Reduction and Management
Social Pension

Aging

Organizing

Behavior

Govemment Services / Social Protection
Continuing Education
Socio-Economic Conditions

Needs (wellness, services)

Life Stressors

Quality of life

Satisfaction (Life, Nursing Care)

Life Satisfaction

Therapy (Counselling, Dance, Music)

0

BERR Eee ees

PRERPP PRR PPR RB BR eR

NN

Government Services / Social Protection / Resources [INN 3
Nutrition [NN 4
Physical Fitness [NNN 4
Familyrelations [I 4
Dwellings [ll 4
Ageing process TE 9
Care forthe Elderly [IN 11
Health EVR ak Sree amen 15
Retirement NTR a eee eee 23

5

10

15 20

25

FIGURE 2.8. NUMBER OF OP-RELATED RESEARCHES/STUDIES IN THE
PHILIPPINES FROM 1983 TO 2019 BASED ON THE SELECTED LOCATIONS,
CATEGORIZED PER MAJOR THEME

55

9S

6102 OL £861 WOYS SNOILVOOT

G3L0373S NO GaSva SANIiddIIHd SHL NI SSIGNLS/SSHOYVASAY G3LV1au-dO 40 HAGAN 62 AYNSIS

sea,

SS yt gt gt gt >t St St ot ot F CK SC K
\ nN €‘2002| _. os
\/ ‘r'etoz / \ € ‘6007 eee T0002,

eal | tas / Z ‘v66T

\“ “ptoz \ | v ‘vooz Z ‘6661 € ‘7661

\ | 7
9 ‘9102 \$ ‘otoz encod ECaEET S ‘S66T
8 ‘Z10z ‘8002 \
T ‘L102 V L‘s00z 6 ‘966T
ne ET ‘TLOZ
T ‘6t0z

LT ‘9002

&

ws

&

&

.

T ‘€86T

7 ‘L861

€ ‘T66T

v

ol

ras

tT

oT

8T

sayaeasay Jo aqUINN,


SNOILVOO1
G5L0373S NO G3SVE 6102 OL £861 NOUS SSIGN.LS/SSHOYVASAY GALV1ISu-dO 4O YSSWNN “O12 SYNSIS

SdIPNys Jo JAQUINN
OL S9 09 SS OS SP Ob SE O€ SZ OZ ST OT S O

rad yd-yseu

et qndn

Auesgn aynyysuy uoNe|ndog dN

cy

Ayisuaniun ejue, ap oauayy ‘Auesqi7 jeziy

Asesqr] adayop weil)

uoles07

/npa:nsd'ysi"x1a8se719 //: dyyxsaasay}1o

340°103sf
ayesyeasy
“294 [e4}UaD-AZojouYra| pue a2uUAalIs JO JUaWIedaq

“sul ‘uolje puno4 uawidojanag pue Yyoseasey IIydeusowag


h.  Insecurities and Vulnerabilities among Older Persons based on
previous Studies

In 2018, Campafiano-Bernardo has engaged the soon-to-retire government
employees at the Department of Science and Technology-Central Office.
Based on a focused-group discussion (FGD), ageing is defined by the
physical, mental, spiritual, and sexual aspects of being a person. Figure 2.11
provides the diverse answers of respondents in DOST. The gray boxes
represent common answers among male and female participants. It can be
noted that spirituality was more common among female respondents. At the
same time, the change in sexual activities was mentioned during the FGD with

the male participants.

The DOST participants can be considered part of the Middle Class, given their
tenure and employment benefits. While they seem to have economic security
due to government service, as soon-to-retire employees, they also find
themselves in undesirable situations, which adds to their insecurities as older
persons. The cost of health maintenance, the kind of future that retirement life
offers, limited opportunities for development, and lesser monthly income are
some of the significant negative connotations of retirement. The answer on
‘decrease in sexual activity was prevalent among male retirees. On the other
hand, in both sexes, most participants also raised the positive points about
ageing and retirement: better decisions, freedom from stress (work-related),
more time for spiritual development, and more time for the self and the family.
(Figure 2.12)

58

\ Better decisions / wisdom [*] [>]

\ Change in attitude

| Change in outlook in life

_, Change in physical / biological make-up

_~ Change in outlook in life
_— Weaker (in terms of bodily strength); more vulnerable
£ Detachment from work with salary
Retirement) __ | imited opportunities for development

"~~ Higher health maintenance cost

FIGURE 2.11. PERSPECTIVES ON AGEING AMONG SOON-TO-RETIRE
EMPLOYEES IN DOST CENTRAL OFFICE (BERNARDO, 2018)

FIGURE 2.12, PERSPECTIVES ON AGEING AMONG SOON-TO-RETIRE
EMPLOYEES IN DOST CENTRAL OFFICE (BERNARDO, 2018)

59

As people age, they face more challenging stages in life where physical and
psychosocial changes, environmental factors, gender, cultural dimensions,
and socio-economic factors increase the vulnerabilities of an older person. As
such, ageing can be viewed as a hazard that may cause damage to any
individual at any given time. Moreover, if that ageing individual has inadequate
capacities to counteract the existing vulnerabilities, it would be difficult for that
individual to cope with such hazards, and recovery from the damaging effects
of ageing may be impossible. This is an adoption of the Community-Based
Development Oriented-Disaster Response (CBDO-DR) Framework (Heijmans
& Victoria, 2001) where the likelihood that disasters in life would occur is
determined by the type of hazard and the degree of vulnerabilities of an
individual to such hazard. Capacities of the individual have been
overshadowed by the vulnerabilities, resulting in a low level of resiliency.
Below is an adoption of the Disaster Risk formula:
Let H = Hazards = Inevitable factors that aggravate being
OP; these can be natural, human-induced, health-
related, biological
Vv = Vulnerabilities = constraints or hindering factors
that affect the active ageing process
Cc = Capacities = opportunities or facilitating factors
that affect an active ageing process and how older
persons respond, react and cope with the stressors
in life
R = Level of Exposure to Ageing Risks refers to the
product of Hazards and Vulnerabilities divided by
the Capacities of older persons.
Hence:
RISK = HAZARDS X VULNERABILITIES
CAPACITIES

60

Based on existing studies, Heijmans & Victoria (2001) framework on Risk can

be further expanded to consider other ageing factors (See Figure 2.13).

Hazards are inevitable because there is no way that ageing can be stopped.
Thus it is a constant factor in life. Vulnerabilities and capacities are the
controllable factors, and any increase in the V or C can affect the level of
resiliency of an OP to withstand the negative impacts of ageing that one may
experience in the later years. Notice also the inverse proportion of V and C,
such that when vulnerabilities of an OP increase, that individual's capacity to
respond to any hazard decreases appropriately. Capacities in Figure 2.13 are
expanded to include personal and relational capacities (Campanano-
Bernardo, 2012); opportunities and guarantees (Sen, 1999); social capital and
spirituality (Eriksen, 2010).

DISASTER RISK
OF AGEING

EXPOSURE TO “ENVIRONMENTAL > 4
EXTERNAL FACTORS

PERSONAL
AND
RELATIONAL

OPPORTUNITIES
AND
GUARANTEES

CAPACITIES
SOCIAL SPIRITUALITY
CAPITAL (FAITH AND HOPE)

FIGURE 2.13. ENHANCED MODEL OF DISASTER RISK OF AGEING

Based on existing resources, @Diane Marle C. Bernardo copyright 2020

Consequently, when Vulnerabilities become larger than the Capacities of older
persons, multiplied by the constant value of Hazards, older persons’ exposure
to destructive risks becomes higher, making them more susceptible to further

insecurities and lower chance of being resilient. Resiliency, according to

61

Merriam-Webster, “is the ability of something to return to its original size and
shape after being compressed or deformed (Merriam-Webster, 2020).
Vulnerabilities are always present, but without proper preparation,
opportunities, and guarantees from the duty bearers (State and its
representatives) to develop the Capacities of OPs, the OPs will have lower
chances of surviving the challenges of ageing or will have a higher likelihood

of not enjoying the ageing years with a healthy, happy, and secured lives.

Through building capacities, preparedness is key to increasing an individual's
resiliency from the hazards brought by ageing. However, according to
Mandigma (2016), “millions of Filipinos are not prepared for retirement” based
on her study, which focused on the middle-class income Filipinos. Her
assessment suggests that preparation at an earlier stage needs to cover
various aspects, such as “personal responsibility, level of awareness, financial
capability, retirement planning, financial preparedness, and income
replacement.” Suppose middle-class income Filipinos were not prepared for
retirement, making them even more vulnerable to the ageing hazards. How
much more would ageing cost those at the bottom of the pyramid as they

continue to become marginalized in the economic development discourse?

Mandigma (2016) focuses on four dimensions of retirement readiness which
include the following:

(1) Happiness (psycho-social) encompasses “personal strength, social
networks, working in their retirement either with pay or voluntarily,
finding meaning in life, a sense of fulfillment, among others”;

(2) Health (bio-medical) refers to the physical and biological make-up
of a retired person. This covers the ‘lifestyle, aging-related health
risks, medical care prevention and treatment, personal
understanding longevity and inherited health traits”;

62

(3) Financial refers to the monetary make-up of a retired person, which
allows him/her to sustain the daily cost of living. It has been found
that among the middle-class retirees, the income “is very close to
the cost of expenses which leaves no room for savings or prepare
for retirement.” Research shows that average-income earning
families face difficulties stretching their budget upon entering
retirement properly. This dimension has been considered as one of
the determinants of the retirement well-being of the older persons;
and,

(4) Contingency Planning sets forth the foundation for retirement
preparedness. This provides the disciplined and sustainable
allocation of resources at present with a major consideration of the
needs when people retire. This somehow serves as the building
blocks of a happy and healthy retirement process wherein today's

decisions shall greatly impact life’s condition in the future.

The study further noted the need to urge the government to develop
mechanisms to assist middle-income earners properly and sufficiently prepare
for retirement and achieve a better quality of life as they age. Henceforth, her
research can serve as a “springboard for future studies along the line of

retirement preparedness” and healthy aging. (Mandigma, 2016)

On the explored dimensions, the results affirm the consistency with the
international studies that the economic well-being of retirees seems to be the
determinant factor of healthy and happy ageing years. On the other hand, the
relationship may be the other way around. A happy disposition about life yields
a healthy ageing process and good economic well-being.

In another study, the assets and capacities of OPs are necessary factors in

facilitating an OP-oriented community-based disaster risk reduction and

63

management program. The proposed framework has adopted the United
Nations Framework for Older Persons to ensure that community-based
programs support achieving a life with dignity in the pre-disaster, disaster, and

post-disaster phases. (Campafano-Bernardo D. M., 2012)

The two studies provide different perspectives on promoting active ageing.
However, both pointed out the need to prepare for the later years to enjoy a

life with dignity, a life that OPs can truly value.

Efforts in exploring the role of spirituality and STI in the ageing process and
OP-focused research using the Human Security approach are not yet fully
established in the Philippines. While some institutions deal with the needs and
welfare of OPs, these are more focused on service provisions and advocacies,
leaving the research aspects behind. The burden among OPs continues to
expand and has overtaken the existing policies, services, and programs of the
government and non-government institutions. Thus, the so-called service
providers’ capacities are insufficient to meet the needs of OPs, and the
development of coping mechanisms among OPs is poorly addressed within

the communities (Carandang, et al., 2019).

Aging-related concerns have been a major concern for everyone. However,
the local context of OPs has been silent in current research. Like the other
social development issues such as gender and disaster risks, it will take a
while before ageing can become a recognized critical social problem. The
Philippines is still generally considered a predominantly young economy.
Anticipatory planning approaches and tools are necessary core competencies
among local government units to take more proactive roles in dealing with the

various sectoral concerns affecting security in various settings.

64

i. OP-related Policies in the Philippines

Ageing-related policies are encapsulated under the so-called “social
protection” policies. The National Economic Development Authority (NEDA)
Cabinet Resolution No. 1, series of 2007, defines “social protection” as
“policies and programs that seek to reduce poverty and vulnerability to risks
and enhance the social status and rights of the marginalized by promoting and
protecting livelihood and employment, protecting against hazards and sudden
loss of income and improving people’s capacity to manage risks.” This has
paved the way for the formulation of the “2012 Philippine Social Protection
Framework and Strategy,” directions of which are embodied in the Philippine
Development Plan, reviewed and reformulated at the beginning of every new
administration. (Villar, 2013)

According to Villar (2013) and Cuenca (2016), the Philippine Social Protection
Program (PSPP) has four (4) components, namely: (1) Labor Market
Programs / Interventions; (2) Social Insurance; (3) Social Welfare; (4) Social
Safety Nets. The Program aims to protect, build capacities, expand

opportunities and ensure that the poorest of the poor can be resilient.

Currently, the Philippines has adopted several policies to promote healthy
well-being among senior citizens. The following are just some of the national
laws and programs which have been cited in the Business Mirror (Oro-Josef,
2014), and the Department of Health's Website (2018):

a) 1987 Philippine Constitution, Article XV, Section 4, on the Filipino
Family, mandates that “The family must take care of its older person
members, while the State may design programs of social security for
them”;

b) Presidential Proclamation No 470, Seris of 1994 or the declaration of
the first week of October as the “Elderly Filipino Week’;

65

c) RA 7431, or the Senior Citizens Act of 1991, mandates a 20% discount
for senior citizens;

d) RA 9257 or the Expanded Senior Citizens Act of 2003 or the
organization of OSCA in every municipality;

e) RA 9994 or the Expanded Senior Citizens Act of 2010, which provides
an additional 12% value-added tax exemption; discounts on essential
medical supplies, accessories, equipment; social pension (amounting
to Php500.00 is given to indigent older persons aged 77 and above) /
PhilHealth coverage/death benefit assistance; among others;

f) R.A. No. 8425 created the National Anti-Poverty Commission (NAPC);

g) Section 28 of R.A. No. 10155 or the GAA of 2012 — mandates all
government agencies to allocate 1% of the total agency budget to
programs and projects for senior citizens and PWDs; and,

h) Philippine Plan of Action 2011-2016.

i) R.A. No. 10642 or “An act granting mandatory national health insurance
program of PhilHealth for all senior citizens”; and,

j) Philippine Health Agenda (2017-2022), with provisions for the
implementation of the Health and Wellness Program for Senior Citizens

by the Department of Health

A more recent update on the government's assistance for older persons is on
health support packages provided by the Department of Health (DOH) through
the Philippine Health Insurance Corporation (PhilHealth) that provides
healthcare benefits to elderly PhilHealth members and their legal dependents.
It was reiterated that geriatric concerns had been a priority of the Philippine
Government through the efforts of DOH and PhilHealth. (Philippine Health
Insurance Corporation , 2017)

66

A major milestone under the Duterte Administration is the enactment of the
Universal Health Care (UHC) Act or R.A. No. 11223 on 20 February 2019 and
its Implementing Rules and Regulations (IRR) on 10 October 2019. This law
enables access for every Filipino to a preventive and curative care-focused
system. In March 2019, the Philippine Government has aimed to increase the
efficiency of tax collection to pool an amount of P7.3 billion for the
implementation and sustainability of this act. The Government has determined
a funding requirement of P270 million per year, with P217 billion of which was
expected to come from the PhilHealth members’ contributions, Philippine
Amusement and Gaming Corporation (PagCor), and the Philippine Charity
Sweepstakes Office (PCSO). (Diaz, 2019)
Under the Duterte Administration, the Philippine Development Plan (PDP)
2017-2022 has noted the following provisions which can directly or indirectly
affect the lives of OPs:
¢ Chapter 9 supports access to finance and enhancement of financial
literacy;
e Chapter 11 labeled the older persons as vulnerable, considering their
physical fragility and limited economic resources. In addition, Chapter
11 supports the improvement of the pension system where the Senior
Citizen Law will be subjected to review, the establishment of a Council
for the Welfare of Older Persons, addressing the issues of
statelessness, and expanding the Social Protection program.
¢ Chapter 13 recognizes the continuous growth in the older person
population in the country with decreasing trend in the Fertility Rate from
1973 to 2013. While this chapter focuses on the aggressive education
and information campaign among the young individuals, the outcomes
were expected to create a better quality of life for the next generation of
older persons.

67

j. Current Needs and Trends in OP Research

In developing a research agenda, the policy analysis framework of Dye is a
necessary tool to properly frame the problem based on the policy stakeholders,
public policy, and the policy environment. Weimer & Vining (2011) also
provide a policy process closely similar to Midgley's framework when analyzing
social development issues. Figure 2.14 provides the adoption of Dye and

Midgley’s frameworks.

The Stakeholders / Actors / Key Players need to be clearly defined to develop
the appropriate strategies based on participatory and empowering methods
and activities. The stakeholders can include any of the following: individuals,
family/nouseholds, community organizations, public servants, local
government units, national government agencies, media, policymakers, and
private sectors, among others. The gender and age aspects are important
factors that need to be considered to provide voices for the voiceless members
of the society, such as the disadvantaged, underprivileged, and marginalized
older persons, women, children, and youth. The power, influence, and
potential of a group to meddle in the development process are important
factors to consider to have strategies that can make the voices of the
disadvantaged loud enough, so loud that they can be heard and become active

agents of development.

The development policy or program refers to the instruments crafted by the
government or the state to put forward public services and programs for the
people. The case is not as ideal because facilitating and hindering factors
affect the government's performance. Those in power are key to how the
government will take its bold steps to initiate social justice and adhere to public

administration and good governance.

68

69

SYYOMAWNVS S.ASTOGIN GNV SAG 4O NOILdOOY ‘vb’? SENSIS

S3AAILDIdSY 3d AALLWINYON LNAINdO13AN30 1WID0S

joyed|2qWed ‘uoneUIWiIA>sIp
-Uou ‘me| Jo ajns ‘Aaualnyja ‘sy2iyuod
‘fouasedsuen ‘Ayiqeiunos2e ‘sdeo,
4o sajdiouiid ayy 0) azaype yey)
werBosd/ uejd/me| aya Jo sn30|
AYE sn90} ‘suo|sInoud ‘sassaz04g

weigoid
ued / Aryjod 48332q

2 10} aAIeUsaIIy pasodoid
Jo [205 yuaudojanag je!20S$

'sa2|0yD “uatudojanag,
au) UI sajoy ‘aauanyjuy
‘sjenuarod ‘s1saaqul 4@Mog

HSADALVYLS NAN dOINAGIVIDOS


The Policy Environment is an important field that needs to be explored to
understand the social-economic — political — cultural - and environmental
context that is affected by the policies and the stakeholders. The relationships
among the key actors can form part of the context. On broader strokes, the
policy environment would encompass the facilitating and hindering factors that
affect the policies in place, the processes involved, the relationships among
the key actors/stakeholders, and the dynamics of past, present, and future

interrelated conditions and choices and opportunities.

The Social Development Normative Perspectives provide the different foci and
loci of social development: Livelihood, Community Development, Enterprise,
Gender, Statist, Sustainable Development / Environment, and the Structural
Institutionalist perspectives. Each perspective offers a different focus and
locus of analysis. Midgley pointed out the need to converge these
perspectives and have a holistic view of the situation through a structural
institutionalist approach to weave the first six perspectives. (Midgley, 2014,
pp. 89-98)

Lastly, the social development analysis needs to consider the social
development strategies used to achieve the set social development goal. The
said strategies are very similar to the perspectives. The social development
goal needs to promote the well-being of the population through a planned
process (that is participatory and empowering enough to uphold the dignity of
the people), recognizing the varying context given the dynamic processes and

intricacies of development.
The overall vision for the Philippines needs to be enhanced to move away from
the conventional economic paradigms and promote the social well-being of all.

Thus, the Ambisyon 2.0 provides the vision: “Filipinos enjoy the life that they

70

reason to value.” All development programs need to be designed and
conceptualized together, involving the following development actors:
disadvantaged groups of the society, academe, civil society groups,
government, policymakers, national government agencies, local government
units, media, and the church. While the vision is of a national level, the bottom-
up approach to harness the collective visions for all sectors is still the best way.
While it is also nice to use simple terms and have simple ideas to convey, it is
important to note the need to consider the different perspectives based on age,

gender, and culture.

The goals of the government programs must aim towards “creating sustainable
and secured communities, with empowered individuals who have the
capacities to do and to be” - the very words of Amartya Sen (1999) and Martha
Nussbaum (Nussbaum, 2011). It is high time that a person's well-being
becomes central in the government's unified planning and policy development
approaches. This is a major shift from what has been thought of as the most
effective way to measure development through the Gross Domestic Product
(GDP). Suppose the capacities/capabilities of the individuals will now be the
central focus of development in the Philippines. In that case, the current
measures and mechanisms are incoherent.

2.2 HUMAN SECURITY

a. From Human Development to Human Security
The economic tigers, such as China, is in the lead of the so-called “Fourth
Industrial Revolution” (FlRe). Being the lead Asian country globally, the
Philippines is now taking bold steps to catch up with the development trends,
particularly in placing so many investments on infrastructure — a clear sign of
government-led industrialization. The “Build, Build, Build Program” has
increased the government spending to Php1.6 trillion-worth infrastructure

71

projects in the mid-2019 (de Vera, 2019), compared with the Php 493 billion
infrastructure expenditure in 2016 (de Vera, 2017). Infrastructure is a
necessary tool to boost development in a country. However, social problems
that arise from such economic activities cannot be discounted from the realities
that the Philippines face. These social problems are sometimes taken for
granted. The worst is the impact on individuals exposed to threats yet do not
have the capacities and do not have access to guarantees to survive or

overcome such threats.

The emergence of social development discourse takes its course of action
based on human rights, which premium human dignity as nations push for
development. Following the HRBA wave, social development advocates
recognized that it is not enough to recognize and protect human rights alone.
Human beings are part of a more complex system, dictated by nature, politics,
economics, relationships, culture, and gender. Placing people at the center of
the development is far more different than placing money or profit at the core
of the development regime. The hegemony on the economic development
blueprint has been a great wall to be challenged by the social development
advocates — that is why, until now, the mainstream idea of development is
based on a flourishing economy — and not flourishing human beings or a
flourishing environment. Economists and politicians push for a development
that gains more, earns more, consumes more, and spends more at the
expense of the VMD sectors and the scarce natural resources. This can
significantly affect future generations when they have fewer opportunities and

limited capabilities to live meaningful lives.
For quite some time, the approach to addressing the concerns of older persons
was based on their needs. Like any other vulnerable group, they were viewed

as individuals who needed special attention and assistance. However, with

72

the recognition of the rights of the older persons, and their continuing role in
the development process, approaches to respond to their concerns shifted to
amore inclusive social development perspective — which is the Human Rights-
Based Approach (HRBA). According to the United Nations (UN) Declaration
on the Right to Development in 1948, “Right to development is an inalienable
human right by which every human person and all peoples are entitled to
participate in, contribute to and enjoy economic, social, cultural and political
development in which all human rights and fundamental freedoms can be fully
realized.” In this day and age, local and international organizations are calling
for a rights-based commitment among the states to (a) respect and refrain from
interfering with the enjoyment of human rights; (b) protect against human rights
abuses, and (c) to take positive action to facilitate the enjoyment of rights.
(Fredvang & Biggs, 2012)

The Human Rights Principles include Participation, Accountability, Non-
Discrimination, Transparency, Human Dignity, Empowerment, and Rule of
Law. Based to the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations,
the principles are defined as follows (Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations, 2006): Participation requires that everyone have the right to
subscribe to decisions that affect them; Accountability requires that politicians
and government officials be held accountable for their actions through
elections, judicial procedures, or other mechanisms; Non-
discrimination prohibits arbitrary differences of treatment in decision-making;
Transparency requires that people be able to know processes, decisions, and
outcomes; Human dignity requires that people be treated in a dignified way;
Empowerment requires that they are in a position to exert control over
decisions affecting their lives; The Rule of Law requires that every member of

society, including decision-makers, comply with the law.

73

Analyzing the ageing policy in the Philippines through the HRBA lens can
provide a more inclusive approach to look at the scheme of things when
planning, directing, managing, and administering policies and programs that

uphold the rights to the development of older persons.

Furthermore, social development advocates have taken the development
discourse to the next level. It began with human rights, and then the term
Human Security became a buzzword in the 1990s, given the recognized need
to refocus the development programs in addressing various levels of threats
and vulnerabilities or more known as ‘insecurities’ that people encounter
among the OPs. Human Security (Sen, 2000; Gasper, 2007; Eriksen et al.,
2010; United Nations, 2016; and Howe & Park, 2017).

The Human Security framework (Figure 2.15) is based on the three (3)
freedoms that a person needs to thrive in a society — freedom from fear,
freedom from want, and freedom to live in dignity. It evolved from human rights,
human needs, and human development frameworks. Human Security creates
a more active and dynamic platform to ensure that the prevailing social
conditions can be improved while reducing by combining these people-
centered alternative development paradigms. It cannot be eliminated all forms

of insecurities to achieve better well-being (United Nations, 2016).

According to the study by Gasper (2007), Human Security has taken its shape
from the discourse about human rights and needs, given the struggle of
societies to have a real hold on the concept of human rights and needs. The
Human Security-type of the framework has been attributed to the works of Sen,
Burton, and Galtung in the 1970s-1980s. While the notion of Human Security
has been around for quite some time, the term “Human Security” per se was

only coined in the mid-1990s based on the said fifth wave of development

74

discourse. This discourse has been attributed to the development alternatives
of Sen, Haq, and Nussbaum, that introduced the theories of the Capability
Approach, Human Development Approach, and Capabilities Approach,
respectively. At that time, human security was used to deploy development
programs that addressed social development issues such as conflicts, debts,
ill-being (in comparison with well-being), human rights violations (i.e., violence,
poverty, hunger, etc.), global disorder, vulnerabilities from natural and human-

induced hazards, among others. (Casper, 2007)

On the other hand, Howe and Park (2017) have cited that human security was
traditionally viewed as closely related and connected with the language of
peace and security from the international to regional to the national and local
setting. The dominant notion about human security then was hinged on
addressing military threats. The development advocates later have
challenged this view and pointed out the need for a more comprehensive,
inclusive, and people-oriented definition of human security from the local

communities. (See Figure 2.15)

75

FREEDOM
FROM
FEAR

e e8
at
FREEDOM

TO LIVE
IN DIGNITY

Figure 2.15. HUMAN SECURITY FRAMEWORK (United Nations, 2016)

These are among the many perspectives on human security, mostly based on
Western culture's experience. The United Nations coined such a term. It
emerged as a development perspective through grants and loans for
development programs. However, Human Security per se has not enjoyed the
limelight in research compared with the Human Rights-based Approach,
particularly in OP research. The usual impression about Human Security is its
relationship with National Security and defense.

Eriksen et al. (2010, p. 39) have implied that governance significantly impacts
how a country deals with insecurities. Every society has varying degrees of
strategies on how to respond to social anxieties and loss of social cohesion.
They have underscored that kinship-based societies were stronger given that
the people were deeply rooted in their traditions and cultures; thus, they have

76

been more resilient and lived a peaceful life than other societies. They have
also mentioned that some insecurities experienced by societies in Africa,
Melanesia, and South Africa were related to “witchcraft, political instability,
economic uncertainties, tribal wars, poisonous snakes, and crop failure.” In
other societies, the major insecurities have included “prevalence of male-
induced violence that places the women in constant fear (case in India),
vulnerabilities on disaster risk, alienating forces of globalization, environmental
crisis, health or war outbreaks; economic instability; starvation; poverty;

terrorism; crimes,” among others.

Defining human security has never been easy without understanding
insecurities first. There seems to be an apparent dichotomy between the
securities and insecurities. Like human security, human insecurities can be
from many themes — from military to non-military threats, from natural to
human-induced vulnerabilities, and from rights-based to needs-based
insecurities. However, in the extensive discussion on human security, experts
underscore the need to refocus human security-based development programs
and understand human security from the ground or people’s perspectives.
(Eriksen, 2010, p. 5)

According to Eriksen (2010, p. 285), Human Security has four (4) dimensions,
as presented in
Figure 2.16.

Economic | Political

HUMAN
SECURITY

Existential
(Spiritual Beliefs)

Environmental

77

FIGURE 2.16. ADOPTION OF ERIKSEN'S FOUR (4) DIMENSIONS OF HUMAN
SECURITY

Using human security as a social development lens offers a different discourse
among older persons. The usual areas of concern among the elderly include
tetirement, active ageing, preparations for old age, well-being, individual
health, and family relations. It is always about being prepared when a person
detaches from an active mode of life and enters the retirement years at about
60 years old. The focus of most research is more on the personal level. The
relationships of the different key players in ensuring that the OPs experience
a sustainable sense of security in the ageing years have not been fully
explored. Likewise, the dichotomy between security and insecurity among

OPs has not been challenged yet in the Philippines.

Tavanti (2013), on the other hand, proposed the Sustainable Human Security
Framework, which is also based on the basic foundations of human security.
According to the development timeline, the notion of human security began in
1983 when the Report of the World Commission on Environmental and
Development (WCED), Brundtland Report: Our Common Future, came into
being and provided a new agenda for all nations (particularly those which have
been labeled as underdeveloped countries) to embrace the so-called
development. He has highlighted the critical milestones in human security,
such as:
1990: Human Development Index (HDI) and Human Development
Report (HDR)
1992: United Nations Conference on Environment and Development
(UNCED), Earth Summit: Agenda 21
1994: New Dimensions of Human Security (HDR 1994)
2000: Millennium Development Goals (MDGs)

78

2002: World Summit on Sustainable Development (WSSD),
Johannesburg Summit

2010: Inequality Adjusted Human Development Index (HDI),
Multidimensional Poverty Index (MPI)

2015: Post-2015 Development Agenda integrating MDGs with SDGs

2030: Integrated goals for poverty eradication, climate change, and

sustainable development

These milestones contributed to developing the Sustainable Human Security
Framework, which enhanced the three pillars of human security from the UN
Framework and added “freedom from vulnerability” or Human Sustainability,

as shown in Figure 2.17.

Combining the frameworks on human security and ageing can provide an
exciting platform to understand the developmental needs of OPs and the
institutional capabilities necessary to ensure that the next generation of OPs
can have better lives compared to the current. human security has raised the
human rights-based approach (HRBA) to a higher level of development and
critical thinking. In addition to the fulfillment of human rights alone, the human
security framework tackles the contributing factors that prompt fear, conflicts,
vulnerabilities, and other insecurities among individuals living in a particular
context, affecting how an individual. The positive and negative streams of
development that can affect human development are necessary elements
when dealing with the needs, rights, freedoms, and peace-related challenges.
(Casper, 2007, pp. 9-43).

It is not just merely upholding HR; but also ensuring that OPs can live a life
free from fear, indignity, and poverty. It is not just about addressing the needs

of people and transforming the economic goals into human development

79

goals. With HR and HDA, human security offers a more holistic approach to
an improved and inclusive development of policies, plans, and programs that

place a premium on people's security, particularly in the OPs.

The onset of the COVID-19 Outbreak in March 2020 has challenged these
frameworks. The global pandemic has provided a whole new stage of
development discourse, which caused tremendous insecurities worldwide.
While this paper focuses on older persons, the human security issue that
COVID-19 presents requires a more holistic approach to understanding how
older persons can secure their lives as they go through the varying preventive

and mitigating measures that the respective governments implement.

Persona secunty
Communr'y secunty

Human Rights-based Poltical secunty
Approach to HUMAN Natonal secunty
Sustainable Capacity SURVIVAL Public secunty

Development freedom from

fear

Economic secunty
Food secunty
Health secunty
Educational secunty
Enwronmenta’ secunty

/

HUMAN HUMAN
SUSTAINABILITY [iiubealbeteieiemmm DEVELOPMENT
freedom from HUMAN freedom from

vuinerability Wiaaheed want

Economic sustainabilty HUMAN Cultural Diversity
Enuronmental sustainably DIGNITY Human Rights
freedom from

Social Sustainability Equality and Faimess
Good Govemance Democratic partic pation
Communty Restience Decent work

MNO”

Figure 2.17. SUSTAINABLE HUMAN SECURITY FRAMEWORK (TAVANTI,
2013)

shame

b. Human Security Discourse
There are ongoing efforts among the development experts regarding the

operationalization of human security. The evolution of the concept of human

80

security to a development approach was brought about by the emerging
threats worldwide, which already affected the local communities. In this
regard, human security as both an approach and a perspective to development
is still an ongoing discourse. (Madruefio-Aguilar, Human Security and the New

Global Threats: Discourse, Taxonomy, and Implications, 2016)

c. Conflict, Crime, and Terrorism on a Global Scale

Madruefio-Aguilar (2016) has pointed out in his work that the primary concern
in human security discourse was the adaptability of the current models and
frameworks to encompass the aggravating global threats. When threats,
hazards, and vulnerabilities are combined, Human Security is at stake. The

fear, conflicts, confusion, and indignity manifest at the local level.

Human Security is a multi-dimensional social development paradigm and
requires varying perspectives and levels of analysis to capture the context
within a particular community. With the global framework on human security,
it is still imperative to understand the security context in the local community,
considering the different facets of development and the existing social
structures that pose impediments to social development. (Madruefio-Aguilar,
Human Security and the New Global Threats: Discourse, Taxonomy, and

Implications, 2016)

Based on the Human Development Report (HDR) in 1994 and the United
Nations (UN) General Assembly Resolution 66/290 in 2012, human security
emerged not merely as a development concept but as a development process
and an approach to push for more inclusive and people-centered development
among the UN Member States. Both documents expanded the human security
definition and scope from what was previously stated in 2004: where human

security covers only “inter-state conflict; civil war; genocide; large-scale

81

atrocities; nuclear, radiological, chemical, and biological weapons; terrorism;
and other crime-related factors” which are on a global scale. It was
underscored that such global threats impact the very lives of the people and
the environment at the local level in one way or another. (Madruefio-Aguilar,
2016, p. 158 & 161)

A critical analysis of historical data on Human Security presents the evolution
of sufferings that people experienced as development occurred centuries ago.
While Human Security has been coined only recently, the idea that people
need to secure their lives from armed conflicts, territorial disputes, invasions,
imperialism, and crimes is a common part of daily life. For instance, a war
disrupts an individual's security in material, nutrition, education, livelihood, and
culture. While the notion of wars intends to defend peace in a country, the
local communities greatly suffer from the violent acts and a lifetime of agony
and trauma due to violence, death of loved ones, exposure to chemical or
biological warfare, and irreversible effects of armed conflict. (Nishikawa, 2010,
pp. 1-4)

Among the Southeast Asian countries, the discourse on human security is still
ongoing. It encourages putting more effort on the table in defining context-
based concepts, indicators, scope, and interpretations of human security.
While the interest in human security is increasing among scholars, country-
based efforts are insufficient to put forward human security as a concrete
approach to development, given the varying degrees of understanding of
security and insecurity factors. The more complex part is the
operationalization of human security in the local community, considering the

different contexts based on age, gender, and culture. (Nishikawa, 2010, p. 5)

82

d. Natural Hazards as Threats to Human Security

Similar Madrueho-Aguilar (2016) position, human security has been framed
earlier in 2014 as very much related to natural disasters that can emanate from
a local disaster but with immense impact in the global arena. The climate
change and disaster risk-related issues and concerns have touch-based on
environmental threats. They have shown tremendous and lasting impact on
people's lives. With just a slight change in the global temperature, the
magnitude and intensity of natural hazards such as cyclones, typhoons,
earthquakes, and drought, among others, can have a lasting effect on people's
lives.

When the environment is compromised — land, bodies of water, air, and energy
- all life forms are under threat. Together with flora and fauna, human beings
interact with the environment's components. Moreover, unsustainable
practices such as the rise of global temperature will trigger the occurrence of
natural hazards. In the same way, such unsustainable practices can also lead
to human-induced hazards, which can cause life-threatening effects on all
living things. This has been the battle cry of environmentalists since the 1970s.
These are all encapsulated in the long history of development theories, where
efforts to pursue development have placed human beings, including other life
forms, in a tragic war to survive in an imbalanced environment. (Peet &
Hartwick, 2015, pp. 3-5)

The uncontrollable intensity and magnitude of natural hazards manifest
insecurities among the affected population due to a disaster. Infrastructure
destruction can disrupt economic and social activities within a locality. Much
worse if such a disaster becomes a national concern, putting the country's
national security at stake. Again, the use of Human Security has been

confined on a national level relating to a high level of intensity and magnitude

83

of security issues. The more people become affected by a particular disaster,
the more likely it can be considered a security concern. The more critical
infrastructure is destroyed, with more economic activities being paralyzed, the
more people become immobilized. Hence, the existence of unfreedoms

restricts the flow of goods and services to the affected communities.

In the course of a disaster — during and after a disaster- literature can cite a
multitude of human rights violations, thus increasing insecurities within every
household, in an evacuation center, within a community, or within the affected
locality.

The action and inaction of the state are not the end and means of the HUMAN
SECURITY approach. The participation of the people, and their capacity to
overcome the current insecurities toward achieving a safer and more secured
future, are all significant factors that need to be considered when designing
the appropriate measures or programs to address the prevailing insecurities
caused by natural disasters. (Cameron, 2014, pp. 158-162)

Based on a United States (US)-model and as adopted by Australia, the United
Kingdom, and the European Union, the “Critical Infrastructure Protection
(CIP)” has served well in institutionalizing an “all-hazards management
approach to disaster.” CIP is a hybrid approach, integrating all existing
disaster risk reduction and management models to include natural hazards
and those related to cybersecurity, global terrorism, and others. (Cameron,
2014, p. 158)

Notice that Human Security issues and concerns are not confined to areas
based on economic status. Even 1% world countries, when hit by disasters,

can experience havoc in all facets of society. This removes the geographical

84

borders among affected countries and brings out the sense of “Bayanihan” and
volunteerism among concerned citizens. Nonetheless, the insecurities caused
by disasters did not spare wealthy nations from experiencing multi-faceted

challenges.

The insecurities become more complicated when the various factor intersect
and affect human lives as a whole. Gasper (2007) clarifies that Human
Security is an advanced tool to document the human processes that begin with
fear and anxiety to the actual journey of thriving in attaining a sense of security.
In this regard, it was argued that Human Security is not as abstract as human
rights. Human Security is a live process that focuses more on how individuals
are shaped body the realities in their niches and even by the global scenario.
The relationships were highlighted as one of the major contributors that mold

individuals' sense of security in a community.

e. Understanding Human Security through a Gender Lens

When Human Security is interfaced with disasters caused by natural, human-
induced, or technological hazards, the understanding and appreciation of the
preparedness, mitigation, and adaptation will be very different if not done with
a gender lens. It has been a great challenge for feminists and gender
advocates to mainstream gender in climate and disaster-related frameworks
and interventions, given the predominance of masculine perspectives in this
respect. While gender and development (GAD) mainstreaming has been
around for quite some time, reports still view that such efforts are still weak to
fully understand the underlying social development issues if what is being
analyzed is just the tip of the iceberg, a gender-neutral view of the social
problems. (Enarson, 2014, pp. 38-40)

85

In 2000, the United Nations Security Council recognized already the need to
mainstream gender in maintaining peace and security in a country or locality.
It warrants a multidimensional approach to attaining a secured and peaceful
life, emphasizing women’s empowerment. In the Human Security concern,
women's contributions to maintaining a household and community security
have been the core of a gender-sensitive Human Security approach to
development. The discourse has placed a premium on human development
to achieve Human Security, not through peaceful and not violent means of
resolving disputes. In all the struggles for peace, women become the most
vulnerable members of the community and, at the same time, are active
participants in resolving certain conflicts and issues arising from poverty and
war. (UN ACC INter-Agency Committee on Women and Gender Equality,
1999, pp. 8-10)

The discussion on the inclusion of women in Human Security is still in the
infancy stage, even if it began in early 2000. However, recognizing that they
are vital in the Human Security discourse is already a milestone. The
involvement of women, not only men, to identify the security needs of a country
has brought to the table a different perspective on how to approach all kinds
of insecurities, not only armed conflict. While the states have always
emphasized territorial security, the human aspect of security cannot deny that
it is not always about war, defense, and armaments that matter the most when
one tries to achieve a peaceful and secured life. There is a visible inter-
relatedness, interconnectedness, and intersection of internal factors and
externalities play a vital role in identifying the security needs of people, as well
as in coping and adapting to the new way of life in the coming days. (UN ACC
INter-Agency Committee on Women and Gender Equality, 1999, pp. 20-21)

86

It can be emphasized that the predominantly masculine nature of “security”
discourse has neglected the issue of gender-based violence perpetuated
within a household, a community, or even on a regional and national scale.
Similarly, the conflict-centered definition of Human Security has been silent
over the years when a state deals with security concerns. In addition, gender
inequalities have created a great challenge to access resources and

development opportunities.

f. Human Security in the Philippines

Human Security in the Philippines is embodied in R.A. 9372 issued in 2007,
also known as the Human Security Act of 2007. This Act aims to secure the
State and protect the people from terrorism. In “Section 3, Terrorism is defined
as any person who commits an act punishable under the prescribed provisions
of the Revised Penal Code: Article 122 (piracy in general and mutiny in the
high seas or the Philippine Waters; Article 134 (rebellion or insurrection);
Article 134-a (Coup d’Etat), including acts committed by private persons;
Article 248 (Murder); Article 267 (kidnapping and serious illegal detention);
Article 324 (crimes involving destruction or under PD No. 1613 of the Law on
Arson, RA 6969 or the Toxic Substance and Hazardous and Nuclear Waste
Control Act of 1990, RA 5207 or Atomic Energy Regulatory and Liability Act of
1968, RA 6235 or Anti-Hijacking Law, PD No. 532 or Anti-Piracy and Anti-
Highway Robbery Law of 1974, PD No. 1866 or the Decree Codifying the Laws
on Illegal and Unlawful Possession, Manufacture, Dealing in, Acquisition or
Disposition of Firearms, Ammunitions or Explosives).” (Republic of the
Philippines, 2007)

Through the Executive Order (EO) No. 34, series of 2001, the National
Security Council (NSC) was created with the President of the Philippines as
the Chairperson and with Members consisting of 11 Cabinet Members, 16

87

Legislative Officials, Former Presidents, and other government officials and
private citizens as needed. Related to this, the Executive Committee of NSC
is composed of the following members: (1) Vice President; (2) Senate
President (or His Representative); (3) Speaker of the House (or His
Representative); (4) Executive Secretary; (5) National Security Adviser; (6)
Secretary of Foreign Affairs; (7) Secretary of Justice; (8) Secretary of National
Defense; (9) Secretary of Interior and Local Government; and, (10) Others as
needed.

In April 2017, Pres. Rodrigo Roa Duterte (PRRD) signed the “National
Security Policy (NSP) for Change and Well-being of the Filipino People,” which
provides the blueprint for the country’s National Security Strategic Plan, with a
premise that is founded on the two-pronged development framework —
“development or economic and social well-being is a precondition for national,
internal and external security and vice versa.” National Security in this light
has been defined as:

“a state or condition wherein the people’s welfare,

well-being, ways of life; government and _ its

institutions; territorial integrity; sovereignty; and

core values are enhanced and_ protected.”

(Republic of the Philippines, 2017)

The NSP (2017) has three (3) pillars that focus on the country’s national unity,
national security, and the protection of properties. The country can be
considered threatened if national emergencies, natural disasters, or grave civil
disturbances have occurred. To the effect that the whole or big part of the
country is suffering, the magnitude and intensity of such threats become the

very basis of declaring a state of national emergency or calamity.

88

The three (3) pillars are further presented in detail through NSP’s Goals in
Chapter 5, as shown in Box 2.1:
BOX 2.1. GOALS OF THE NATIONAL SECURITY POLICY

GOAL 1 Strengthen Public Safety, Law and Order, and the
Administration of Justice

GOAL 2 Sustain and Enhance Socio-Political Stability

GOAL3 Bolster  Solidarity-based and Sustainable
Economic Development

GOAL 4 Safeguard the Territorial Integrity and Sovereignty

GOAL 5 Protect and Preserve Ecological Balance

GOAL6 Advance Cultural Cohesiveness

GOAL 7 Promote moral-spiritual Consensus

GOAL 8 Contribute to International Peace

Similarly, strategies were crafted to deliver the abovementioned Goals. The
National Security Council (NSC) has developed the 12-point National Security
Agenda, as shown in Box 2.2.

BOX 2.2. 12-POINT NATIONAL SECURITY AGENDA

Human and Political Security
Health Security

Economic and Financial Security
Food and Water Security

Military and Border Security
Socio-Cultural Security
Environment and Disaster Security
Energy Security

Maritime and Airspace Security
10 International Security

11 Informational and Cyber Security
12 Transportation and Port Security

OCOVNOHRWN>

Similarly, the AmBisyon 2040 or the Long-term National Development of the
country, together with its accompanying Mid-Term Development Plan or the
Philippine Development Plan 2017-2022, embody the HUMAN SECURITY
principles. Under the AmBiSyon 2040, the highlight is more on the economic
security where most Filipinos chose a life of a Middle Class, who can buy a
car, own a house and lot, and afford leisure activities. Thus, this vision was

encapsulated to the Filipino terms: Matatag, Maginhawa, at Panatag na

89

Buhay. To become a middle-class means earning more to afford all the
abovementioned conditions, or even more. This aspiration promotes a
materialistic way of viewing what Filipinos should aim for. Like in the previous
section, better life would only mean if the material conditions have been
achieved; such that, if an individual failed to achieve all of the four (4) pre-
requisites for a better life, he/she would not be considered to have a life that

can be valued. (National Economic and Development Authority, 2017)

The Ambition Natin 2040 ensures the alignment of the succeeding PDPs,
beginning in the PDP 2017-2022. The latter's mid-term goal is “By 2022, to
lay down the foundation for inclusive growth, a high-trust and resilient society,
and a globally-competitive knowledge economy” with the country's long-term
vision. PDP has three (3) major strategic outcomes, also known as the PDP
pillars: (a) “Malasakit” or Enhancing the Social Fabric; (b) “Pagbabago” or
Inequality-reducing Transformation; and (c) “Patuloy na Pag-unload” or
Increasing the Growth Potential. These are supported by an “enabling and
supportive economic environment” through macroeconomic trade and fiscal
policies. These are grounded on the so-called “bedrock” that represents “just
and lasting peace, security, public order and safety” through infrastructure
development and a healthy environment. (National Economic and
Development Authority, 2017)

The PDP is set to provide the foundation for Ambisyon 2040 through massive
infrastructure programs such as the Build, Build, Build Program (National
Economic and Development Authority, 2017). In this regard, it can be noted
that development moves from traditional living methods into a more
sophisticated and advanced society. Development means industrialization to
increase growth potential while reducing inequalities and enhancing the social

fabric. To be “prosperous” means buildings, efficient transport systems, big

90

water dams, and high-speed telecommunications — in order for the society to

adapt to the ever-changing world.

PDP addresses almost all aspects of Human Security but puts a premium on
economic security, highlighting the economic aspects of poverty. The context
of “poor” is taken from the economic perspective based on income. Together
with the Philippine Statistics Authority (PSA), NEDA has been dealing with
many number-crunching to define and determine the number that can tell who
is poor and who is not. This aspiration is based on the premise that all
individuals who once become part of the middle class are no longer poor. The
basic assumption is that an individual with education will contribute to the
economy, earn a living, and be able to afford the middle-class lifestyle.

Therefore, he exists as a non-poor individual.

According to World Bank, the poor live below the poverty line set forth by the
international organizations or PSA. Economists have defined poverty as a
one-sided deprivation of material means to survive. Moreover, poverty is just
determined as living below $3.20 (World Bank, 2018) or around P162.55 per
day. The intervention would be just to increase the earnings. The national
measures on poverty seemed to be non-reflective of the experience on the
ground. Thus, it is imperative that the local plans need to have a strong basis

for developing and implementing policies, plans, and programs.

2.3 THE GLOBAL HEALTH CRISIS, A GLOBAL PANDEMIC

The World Health Organization (WHO) has been on guard since December
2019, when the first report for an unknown cause of pneumonia was observed
in Wuhan City among 44 patients. At that time, there was little interest, given
that the cases were concentrated only in the said city. However, come January

2020, China had already identified that a coronavirus type of disease had hit
91

Wuhan, given the genetic composition. The said virus was initially named
2019-nCoV or novel coronavirus. (World Health Organization, 2020)

As of 20 January 2020, the cases spread from Wuhan, China, to five (5) more
municipalities outside Wuhan. It has already reached Thailand, Japan, and the
Republic of Korea. Total reported cases reached 282 by this time. (World
Health Organization, 2020)

By the end of the 1° quarter of 2020, COVID-19 (previously called 2019-nCoV)
has reached an alarming level globally, affecting all regions (Western Pacific,
European, South-East Asia, Eastern Mediterranean, America, and Africa). The
total confirmed cases globally were 750, 890 with a rising death toll of 36,405.
The primary concern highlighted this time was the insufficiency of medical
supplies and testing kits globally. In this regard, the Pandemic Supply Chain
Network exhausted all possible private partnerships to ensure that countries
with a high incidence of COVID-19 can access appropriate and quality medical
supplies. (World Health Organization, 2020)

WHO aggressively called for the nations to adopt stricter policies to interrupt
human-to-human transmission of the virus. This also included the need for
patient isolation, support mechanisms for health workers, and the minimized
impact of health protectionism on economic gains. Currently, the Philippines
is not yet included in the WHO statistics. However, the global spread is worst
in the United States of America, reaching 140,640 cases, followed by Italy at
101,739 cases, Spain at 85,195, and China at 82,545 confirmed cases. The
Philippines was slowly catching up with the rest of the world, with 1,546 new
cases, given the “lockdown” measures that the Duterte Administration has
implemented. (World Health Organization, 2020)

92

After three (3) months, the 2" quarter concluded with much higher cases of
COVID-19 — a total of 750 890 confirmed cases. Still, nations have been
grappling with how to address the pandemic issues and concerns, particularly
the economic and social shocks that continuously aggravate the entire local
conditions. Global trends were felt at the local level, given the increasing and
unstoppable spread of the virus, despite the lockdown efforts done in most
countries. Given the high resistance to the government's strict quarantine
protocols, crowd control has been a significant challenge for certain countries.
Vaccination programs were launched in Syria to manage the risks brought by
COVID-19. (World Health Organization, 2020)

Around late September 2020, WHO reported that the global COVID-19 cases
had already reached 32.7 million and 991,000 deaths. In two (2) weeks, 2
million new cases recorded 991,224 deaths. (World Health Organization,
2020)

Countries tried different variations of COVID-19 management schemes.
Everything seemed trial and error in flattening the curve of COVID-19
confirmed cases, which kept increasing daily. By 27 December 2020, over 79
million cases have been recorded, with an average of 4 million new cases in
the last seven (7) days, with reported cumulative deaths of 1.7 million. Still,
the most common mode of virus infection is community transmission. The
report also noted that a new variant - SARS-CoV-2 was present in South
Africa, causing faster virus transmission among people. In this regard, most
developed countries — the US, China, and Russia- pushed forward efforts on
vaccine development and infection research. (World Health Organization,
2020)

93

With the development of vaccines in the US, China, Russia, and European
countries, the downward trend in the COVID-19 infections was remarkable in
January and February 2021. However, some states relaxed the quarantine
and isolation policies to boost economic gains after long months of lockdown.
It can be noted that by the end of February 2021, the number of new cases
spiked again. By March 2021, the number of new COVID-19 cases globally
was 126.4 million, with cumulative deaths of 2.8 million.

As per 01 May 2021 data, the global confirmed cases reached 150 million, with
3.2 million deaths. These figures are drastically rising, even with the
development of COVID-19 vaccines. Still, the American and European
regions take the top two places, with the South East Asian region in the 3rd
place for the most COVID-19 cases. (World Health Organization, 2021)

2.4 COUNTRY PROFILE UNDER A GLOBAL HEALTH PANDEMIC

It has been more than a year since the Philippines adopted measures to
counteract the effects of the global health pandemic due to the spread of
COVID-19, causing paralysis among the country’s healthcare institutions and

even funeral service providers.

The first reported case of COVID-19 in the Philippines was in early February,
concerning two (2) Chinese individuals admitted to San Lazaro Hospital. Then
on 07 March 2020, the Department of Health (DOH) recorded the first
transmission of COVID-19 when a female individual got infected by her
husband. The latter came from a Muslim prayer hall. These incidents, coupled
with the global COVID-19 scenario, prompted the President to issue the
Proclamation No. 922, series of 2020 or the declaration of a State of Public
Health Emergency, even with only 24 confirmed COVID-19 cases at that time.
On 12 March 2020, a lockdown through the “community quarantine”

94

declaration was implemented in Metro Manila which suspended inbound and

outbound travelers in all modes of transportation. (Baclig, 2020)

The sudden closure of economies across the globe has affected how
government officials in the Philippines respond to the need for heightened
protection against COVID-19. In the 2"? quarter, the primary strategy that the
Government of the Philippines, through the Inter-Agency Task Force for the
Management of Emerging and Infectious Diseases (IATF), was to limit social
mobility by enforcement of “strict home quarantine, transportation suspension,
provision of food and essential services only, and strict observation on hand

washing and wearing of face mask and face shield.” (Baclig, 2020)

The Bayanihan to Heal as One Act was signed into law on 25 March 2021,
which granted the President emergency powers to urgently adopt critical
measures to address the country's emerging health and economic concerns.
The said law provided subsidies of P5,000.00 to P8,000.00 to identify 18
million low-income households. By June 2021, the Department of Budget and
Management (DBM) released P355.1 billion to fund the government's efforts
to alleviate the pandemic's impact. Said financial support was released to help
the voluminous workers. They had been laid off or could not physically report

to work due to the suspension of public transportation. (Baclig, 2020)

The global pandemic has spill-over effects, which touch base on all aspects of
development. Health is the primary at stake, which is the deciding factor on
how people can put forward the quality of life that can be valued. The question
of survival has again become glaring in all corners of the world. Thriving,
trying, surviving, and until all hopes are gone, people cling on to try still to
outlive the virus. The death toll is rising due to the collapse of the healthcare

system and the lack of financial means to support life. The International

95

Labour Organization (ILO) reported four (4) key findings in its study on the
impact of COVID-19: (a) The pandemic has greatly affected 10.9 million
workers who have no promising future until the quarantine restrictions ease
out. Thus, the micro, small, medium, and large enterprises or industries
experienced a sharp drop in income — and most non-essential businesses shut
down due to unrecoverable losses; (b) An estimated 7.2 million workers are
likely exposed to “double-tiered” job disruption risks: digitalization and COVID-
19. The health and safety concerns set forth by COVID-19 may be just one
side of the coin. The other side has multi-faceted factors that placed the
Filipinos in a very disadvantaged situation, given the dwindling source of
income and opportunities to earn a decent living under a global pandemic.
Those enterprises and individuals that cannot adapt to the technological
advancements that the pandemic calls for had difficulties adjusting — worse,
the industries shut down; (c) The impact on the labor market is much felt
among the informal and vulnerable groups, including the overseas Filipino
workers and medical workers. The families of these groups also suffered from
the loss of jobs and had difficulties looking for part-time employment. The
safety requirements from employers’ costs were so high that they had to
decrease the number of employees or even shut down due to non-compliance
with new labor guidelines. ILO reported that an estimated 1.7 million, aged 15
to 24 are at risk under this category. This age group comprised 27% of the
productive sector, with 58% of the workforce attributed to young men; and (d)
In order to augment the varying degrees of social and economic burdens of
this group, the government, and even some well-off private sector members,
provided financial and in-kind donations to community members to appease
the anxieties and insecurities felt by the Filipinos. (International Labour

Organization, 2020, pp. xi-xvi)

96

IATF sets the type of CQ that should be declared in a particular city,
municipality, or province. Depending on the trend of the COVID-19 cases, the
IATF can declare an ECQ anytime

WHO noted that the Philippines has a downward trend in the last part of the
1st quarter. Nevertheless, the number of confirmed cases is growing. The 22
April 2021 report shows that the Philippines has 1.03 million confirmed COVID-
19 cases and 17 thousand deaths due to COVID-19. (World Health
Organization, 2021)

SEE APPENDIX 2 - FIGURE 2.11 NUMBER OF COVID-19 CONFIRMED
CASES AND DEATHS IN THE PHILIPPINES AS OF 22 APRIL 2021 BASED
ON THW WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION COVID-19 DASHBOARD

Currently, a vaccination campaign is being rolled out across the country based
on procured and donated vaccines. As per the 22 April 2021 report, a

milestone of inoculating about 1.7 million doses was recorded.

In local statistics, the Philippines also created its dashboard to communicate
to the public the COVID-19-related information. Based on the data as of 15
May 2021, CALABARZON has 198,102 confirmed cases with 185,188
recoveries or 93.5% rate of recovery. This is quite remarkable, given the death
rate of about 1.2% only. (Gozalo siblings, 2021)

In Binangonan, Rizal, there is a record of 3,798 cases with a recovery rate of
93.6% (3,558) and 47 deaths as of 15 May 2021. Based on the confirmed
cases, there is a very slight difference in the sex of COVID-19 confirmed
cases, with 49.4% female and 50.6% male. On age disaggregation, 26%
(1,003) is accounted for OPs. As for ages 20 — 49, this group comprised 68%
of the confirmed cases in the municipality. (Gozalo siblings, 2021)

97

2.5 THEORIES THAT GUIDED THE RESEARCH

The current development theories from which social development has
anchored its principles were formulated after World War II. Countries pushed
for the so-called development to recover from the wrath of war and move
forward with a brighter future. Tracing ageing-related policies and research
from this context until before the COVID-19 virus has drastically changed the
development landscape worldwide. This social development presents an
eclectic discipline given the need to integrate the many theories and
perspectives to put forward new concepts and models based on the

experiences from the ground.

Based on the existing studies and documents, there are four (4) major
classifications of thematic areas that respond to the development needs of
OPs, and these are (1) international and local policies and plans; (2) benefits
and privileges for Senior Cities; (3) health and well-being, which includes the
biological make-up of every OP; and, (4) Human Development Opportunities
which include continuous learning opportunities, organizing, advocacy,
empowerment, among others. These have been established in almost every
country, like the Philippines. All programs for OPs aim to uplift the social and
economic conditions of OPs.

On the other hand, public policies and even social development programs
have externalities or unintended consequences that, more often than not, are
being overlooked. When the cost outweighs the benefit of a policy or program,
it already defeats the very purpose of providing goods and services to OPs.
Under the Public Choice Theory, the externalities occur when a certain group
in society is left uncompensated in a particular activity or policy; thus, the

market and state fail to provide the necessary goods and services to the target

98

stakeholders. (Dye, 2017, pp. 19-20, 238) Externalities may also impose
insecurities over other community members, given a particular activity or
policy. This aspect creates a more complicated perception of security. Various
factors tend to create conflicts on the ground rather than just a state-led and

state-centric development issue.

The conventional view of security as a state-centric can be traced from the
Hobbesian Social Contract, which underscored the ultimate responsibility of
the state — that is, to protect the security of its people and the territorial
sovereignty. Indeed, Hobbesian Social Contract has made its legitimate point
that a country's security is the state's ultimate responsibility. Such a failure to
do so, the international community shall take the necessary steps to secure
the lives of the affected individuals. On the other hand, throughout the debate
and academic discourse on Human Security, the Hobbesian Theory has
expanded and broadened the concept of Human Security. While security is
considered a governance concern, it is also a subset of human rights that
advocates for citizens’ entitlements as human beings and not just a passive
recipient of the state intervention through military terms. (Luckham, 2010, pp.
275-277)

Human Security is continuously redefined and deconstructed based on the
social context and the concepts of threats and risks. It now transitioned from
being state-centric to people-centric, where it warrants the involvement and
empowerment of people to overpower the day-to-day threats that can be
pervasive already in one way or another. Human Security is no longer
exclusive to territorial disputes or armed conflict. Instead, he considers the
Neo-Malthusian theory, highlighting resource competition. Moreover,
insecurities arise from the inequalities that continue to persist in society. Such

inequalities in the development arena exist as individuals tend to access

99

scarce resources, subject to capacities and guarantees that the environment
dictates. Global health pandemics, terrorism, and disaster risks can aggravate
the day-to-day causes of inequalities people encounter. Human Security
becomes more integrated with individuals’ protection from local insecurities,
rooted in the government's inaction on social, economic, political, and
environmental problems. (Luckham, 2010, pp. 275-277)

Human Security calls for action by the State and community members who
may want to advocate for the government's action or organize themselves to
ensure their security against any identified threat. The context dictates the
interests and biases within a community that affect the course of action of the
community members. With a very loose understanding of Human Security,
the development stakeholders (state, community, business, household) may
engage in actions that can result in conflicts and broaden the insecurities in a
country or a locality. (Luckham, 2010, pp. 275-279)

Throughout the discourse, Human Security from the perspectives of OPs and
in the context of a global health crisis or a pandemic has not been explored.
The realities in the current times can substantiate the Human Security
discourse and contribute to knowledge-building as social development gains

prominence in addressing the emerging issues brought forth by the pandemic.

OPs are affected by the internal context of their physical bodies, households,
and relationships in their communities. We can borrow “vulnerabilities” from
the disaster risk reduction and management (DRRM) concepts. Vulnerabilities
refer to “characteristics of a person or group and their situation that influence
their capacity to anticipate, cope with, resist, and recover from the impact of a
natural hazard.” In this study, OPs become vulnerable to natural and human-

induced hazards that increase the level of insecurities due to the global health

100

crisis. When a group has been considered vulnerable, the following traits may
be considered: extreme difficulties in recovering from a disaster; living in an
area that is highly exposed to natural or human-induced hazards; individuals
who are economically challenged and have long been experiencing poverty;
and, individuals who have minimal access to food, clean water, breathable
air, and sustainable source of energy. (Wisner, Blaikie, Cannon, & Davis,
2004, pp. 11-15)

The Pressure and Release (PAR) Model provides an in-depth understanding
of disaster risks, given the pressures from hazards or uncontrollable
phenomena, unsafe conditions, dynamic pressure, and the root causes of a
particular disaster. Households and communities are central in this model,
given the major role of the individuals and institutions in “releasing” the
pressures caused by the hazards to reduce or minimize the likelihood of
disaster risks. A person or community's coping mechanisms are key to
recovering from untoward events and being more resilient.

Natural hazards, such as typhoons, volcano eruptions, tidal waves, tornadoes,
and drought, have tremendously proven the magnitude and intensity of their
impact on human lives. The effects have endured even longer, particularly
when the local officials have poorly managed the aftermath. The case of
Typhoon Ondoy (2009), Typhoon Yolanda (2013), and the Taal Volcano
eruption in early 2020 —are just a few Philippine-based disasters that killed
thousands of people, displaced families, and cost billions of pesos for repair
and recovery, which took place months or even years after the disaster took
place.

On the other hand, biological hazards are not so new, given the negative

effects of micro-organisms on people, crops, and animals in a wider

101

geographical scope, such as in an epidemic and pandemic. Ebola virus, HIV-
AIDS, malaria, SARS, and dengue —are just some of the biological hazards
that alarmed the world and caused the loss of millions of lives. Biological
hazards are interlinked with biological warfare, which abuses science and
technology to conquer a territory at the expense of people’s lives. Normal life
is already at stake in this course, and Human Security has been a question
often overlooked due to the urgent need to address the most visible effect of
biological hazards. (Wisner, Blaikie, Cannon, & Davis, 2004, pp. 168-169)
Nonetheless, strategies worldwide to respond to wide-range outbreaks, like a

global health crisis, are currently tested by the spread of COVID-19.

Experts have already recognized the need to understand the underlying
causes of any disaster risk, including the importance of a community-based
early warning system to institutionalize appropriate preparedness and
response if there is a likelihood that disaster risk would occur. It is noted that
local knowledge and capacities must be highlighted in all of the DRRM efforts,
no matter what types of hazards are causing the disaster risks. From the
global development frameworks to national efforts and local initiatives, there
is aneed to raise awareness among people to raise their capacities to address
the constraints of their conditions and overcome the challenges posed by the
disaster risks. (Wisner, Blaikie, Cannon, & Davis, 2004, pp. 179-195)

The PAR Model by Wisner is an excellent theoretical framework for
understanding the underlying causes and the factors that affect a community's
capacity to recover from disaster risks. This can be further improved if age
and gender were considered in the process. The model can further deepen
understanding of vulnerabilities and capacities at the local level, considering

each age group's uniqueness, like the OPs. The other dimension is gender,

102

which also presents a diverse configuration of social development issues at

the local level.

However, understanding a global health crisis using DRRM is insufficient by
considering only the hazards, vulnerabilities, and capacities. Integrating
Human Security into the DRRM frameworks can make a lot more difference
by recognizing and acknowledging the security concerns in a community or a
household. The two social development approaches are interrelated. Both
address threats and hazards affecting the individual’s capacity to respond to,
cope with, and continue living. The question then goes back to the quality of
life that will be pursued in the disaster phases or the course of thriving, given

the presence of threats and insecurities.

Four (4) black arrows in Figure 2.18 are blocked by the vulnerabilities and
constraints, which reduced it to only one (1) arrow representing the access of
OPs to certain services and programs by the providers.

Research on OPs has explored the factors affecting them as individuals, their
family members and carers, and their local communities. OPs’ social and
economic conditions are highly contextualized, just like other social
development issues. The national surveys can significantly differ when
zoomed in on a barangay community. While there are existing interests in
OPs through research publications, there has not been a regular national,
regional, and municipal effort to take note of the social development processes
that encompass OPs, particularly in the light of Human Security. Government-
initiated studies are more inclined on the demographics of OPs through the
efforts of the Philippine Statistics Authority (PSA) and on the health and well-
being through the Department of Health. However, the data on Filipino OPs

103

are very slim, and age-responsive evidence-based studies are not yet a

priority, given the greater challenges of today brought by COVID-19.

Many authors on disaster risk reduction have defined vulnerabilities as a multi-
dimensional word correlated with poverty. For this research, vulnerability
refers to an individual or group representing those that can still be mitigated to
appease the impact of uncontrollable factors or hazards such as
environmental, biological, health-related, and technological. These affect the
local communities, down to the individual level of OPs. To counteract the
vulnerabilities and constraints of OPs, various efforts in the form of programs
and projects build on the capacities, freedoms, and spirituality of OPs — these
strengthen the individuals to respond to and cope with the hazards and
vulnerabilities that restrict or impede development among OPs in the later

years.

On the other hand, the existing research has not considered looking into the
Human Security aspect of OPs in the later years, such as how OPs define
Human Security and perceive security issues and concerns as they lead their
lives, particularly before COVID-19. Prior to COVID-19, Human Security,
based on the perspectives of OPs, had not been thoroughly explored and
analyzed, which affected how the Human Security framework (if there would
be any) in the Philippines should be crafted. Aside from sex, age is an
important factor to consider, given the varying factors that affect an individual's
needs and welfare. While there have been anti-age discrimination laws and
policies, the framework on human security needs to be proactive so that OPs

still form part of the framework and not just recipients of benefits and programs.

Given the emerging issues and concerns under a global pandemic situation,

the significance of social development is challenged nowadays as the

104

government is leaning toward charity-based policies to augment the so-called
“shocks” of the global pandemic. This, however, overshadows the Human
Security aspect — that is, in a more sustainable and long-term manner. The
state-centric human security requires a more people-centric model of
addressing insecurities. Moreover, a global perspective on insecurities needs
a more context-based approach to better understand the ground realities and
move forward in synergy — towards creating a safer environment and future for
all.

The identified gap in OP research focuses on how OPs define and understand
Human Security in times of global pandemic. It is critical to note that OPs —
having identified as one of the vulnerable sectors in a global pandemic
scenario — are still part of the social development discourse. Their experiences
and narratives are important in crafting local policies and plans and perhaps

developing future human security policies even at the national level.

105

901

AGNLS SHL GAGINS LVHL SAINOSHL ‘81'2 SYNSIS

poo4 - 4
‘Ayjunuiwos - 3
wee -H
31WO0U03 ~ 23 ‘Awieg—4
Jeuosiag—ad — Ayunwiwi0)-3 jUaudojanap [2190s 0} yreoidde jen}xaUu0>
leoniiod- Od ssauisng—@ A\yaiy pue paiejues-2|doad :(suoisuauig |e2141/0d
quawiuos}Aug — 3 ayeis—S INWLUOD “jUOSJad “Y3/22H ‘poo ‘2/WoOU0Dz
& ‘a eee. s. /EJUALUOJIAUZ) YLOMALELY SH SUO!JEN pazun,

<==

SISIID Y3|22H [2q0|9)
e Ul SdO SuoWe Ajlundes UeWNY

SH Bu|puajap jo
daseag-Aynp ay} Se 33235 :32243U0D |e190S ueIseqqoH

SIWAYHL ‘SAILMIGVYANINA ‘SALLVNOANI

OL ING SALLINNLYOddO GNV
‘S3D1NUAS ‘SGOOD JO MOTS 3H NO NOILdnusia

saijunyioddo
quauidojaneq
uewny

ulaq-|]2M.
pue y3jeaH

pue saz|nsas
31LU0U039-0190S

ie)
ec
i)
m
a
uv
m
Fo]
(%)
[e)
2
7%)
[e)
uu
2

SUP|d
pue saj9}|0d [2207
pue jeuoneuiszuy


As shown in Figure 3.1, development opportunities and guarantees in the form
of policies, services, health and well-being, and human development
opportunities are blocked by certain inequalities, vulnerabilities, and threats.
The existing OP-related research has exhausted these topics, considering the
varying contexts where OPs were situated. However, with the onset of a global
pandemic in 2020, the development landscape has tremendously
metamorphosed, creating a more challenging arena for OPs to continue

pushing for development among the ageing population.

The translation policies, plans and programs, and the flow of goods, services,
and development initiatives were disrupted when COVID19 hit many countries,

and the global pandemic was declared in 2020.

In the current times of 2021, inequalities, vulnerabilities, and threats still affect
the level of security among OPs. The emerging social conditions may also
present opportunities to create new development paradigms and platforms to
continue a more secure and safer future for all. In the process, the conditions
among OPs, particularly in various municipal contexts in the Philippines, were
silent. Thus, having a broad understanding of the national level's Human
Security issues and concerns is not enough. However, this concept needs to
be operationalized and used to understand the conditions of OPs in the

communities.

This presents that the existing theories and perspectives on Human Security
have not yet considered the current pandemic, particularly in the local context.
With human security at stake in a global pandemic, it is an opportune time to
engage in a discourse on human security to push for social development
among OPs and within the community where OPs are situated. Using the

existing framework of the United Nations, the seven (7) dimensions of human

107

security can be very helpful in understanding the state of human security in a

community under a global pandemic.

108

CHAPTER 3
CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK

Insecurities

State
(National
and Local)

°

Environment

Qo

KS)
=
oO

Bo)
=
G

a
i)
io)

a

RC)

co

Legend:
G = Gender (limited to
“Assigned Sex’ only)
S = Spirituality

T- Technology

- Opportunities
C-Capacities

FIGURE 3.1. CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK- HUMAN SECURITY LANTERN
MODEL

There is a general perception that Human Security-related policies and
programs are tested during disasters or terrorist attacks. Over the years, the
usual perceptions about disasters are mostly caused by typhoons,
earthquakes, volcano eruptions, storm surges or tsunamis, drought, floods,

109


and landslides, among others — or naturally occurring which no one can ever
have control of. Considering September 2009 until December 2019 — it has
been a decade of challenges that posed crises to the Filipinos, namely:
Typhoon Ondoy and Pepeng (2009), Lava flow from Mayon Volcano (2010),
Typhoon Pedring (2011); Typhoon Pablo (2012); Typhoon Yolanda (2013),
Territorial dispute with China (2011-present); Marawi Siege (2017);
Maguindanao Massacre (2009); Declaration of Martial Law in selected areas
in Mindanao due to Maute-group related conflicts (2017); War on Drugs (2016-
present); Taal Volcano Eruption (2020); Dengvaxia Case (2018-ongoing),
among others. From typhoons, earthquakes, armed conflict, and territorial
disputes to health-related, none of the countries have ever prepared for a viral
outbreak that can rapidly increase the global death toll in days. The COVID-
19 pandemic has shocked the entire globe with its potent and unimaginable
effect on all aspects of development: economic, psycho-social, political,
cultural, and environmental.

Setting the stage of the “new normal” is not an easy path because nobody
knows at this time how long it will take for the scientists and research and
development institutes (RDIs) in order to formulate the most effective anti-
COVID-19 vaccine for all ages. Human Security and resiliency frameworks
are now being challenged to address the invisible enemy of any person on the
globe. New articles have labeled this phenomenon as World War II! for having
exceeded the social and economic shocks it had brought to all economies

simultaneously.

The context of every country differs greatly. Suddenly, the world has been put
into a major standstill given the great need to shut down the economic activities
to reduce the mobility of people to minimize the likelihood of spreading the
virus. Various factors are being identified on who has been the most

vulnerable on how to prevent the possible exposure to COVID-19.

110

As we are now transitioning to the so-called “new normal” that COVID-19 has
set forth before us, the older persons are once again labeled as the most
vulnerable group, including those 21 years old and below. Thus, this research
adopts the Conceptual Framework as shown in

Figure 3.1 provides the continuum diagram from the Pre-COVID19 to the “New
Normal” context based on the perspectives of the older persons. This
phenomenon is an opportune moment for social development specialists to
document properly. It analyzes the changes in security needs and perceptions
among older persons to develop viable policies and solutions that can address

the plight of older persons.

Based on the narratives of the selected older persons, family members, and
community members, the foreign concept of human security can be properly
defined and understood by the future generations; henceforth, it can provide a
better grasp on how government policies, particularly at the local level, can
properly respond to the needs and policy gaps at the moment for the future
older persons given the present threats of COVID-19.

The transition period to the new normal can present new forms of insecurities,
vulnerabilities, fears, and needs among OPs. Moreover, even during a
pandemic, development rights should and must never be suspended.
Nevertheless, given the current situation, OPs are left out of the development
discourse because they are being perceived and supported by scientific

evidence as vulnerable groups in society.
Even though the situation somehow slows down, if not hinders, there is still a

need for a safe space for OPs to be heard. Their aspirations, perceived

challenges, perceptions, and understanding of Human Security or how to have

111

a more secure life today or in the future are equally important to those

perceived as not vulnerable.

Under the Enhanced Community Quarantine (ECQ), Modified ECQ (MECQ),
General Community Quarantine (GCQ), or Modified GCQ (MGCQ), OPs and
minors have been regarded as the most vulnerable individuals to COVID-19,
in addition to pregnant women and people with special needs. Had there been
a Human Security framework at the national and local level, the approach may
be different in addressing the impact of the pandemic, particularly the
disadvantaged and vulnerable members of the communities. The mitigation,
preparedness, response, and recovery measures in a health crisis could be
different and more empowering than charity-based. Nonetheless, collective

efforts are necessary to achieve a better quality of life.

Based on the review of related literature, Human Security in the ageing years
did not appear as a topic in the available research prior to 2019. This
observation and the insecurities have brought about by the global pandemic
challenged the researcher to focus on Human Security and ageing. !n this
light, the different factors affect how OPs respond to the insecurities they
experience. Such factors can be a combination of government policies,
environmental conditions, community, different organizations, businesses in
the area, and the influence of media and technology.

The Lantern or “Parol” Framework (Figure 3.1) provides an improved Human
Security model, further expanding the Human Security framework, combining
essential elements from DRRM and Human Security frameworks.

The four (4) characteristics of Human Security, as shown in Figure 2.15 —

universal, interdependent, people-centered, and _participatory—are

incorporated in the yellow circle or core of the framework, with OPs as the

112

nucleus of the study. The focus on OPs considers the internal experiences
and processes among the target age groups, given the complexities of a
pandemic phenomenon. Human Security perspectives in the current situation
can form part of the policy development initiatives later, as the Municipality of
Binangonan, Rizal crafts its post-pandemic measures and recovery

approaches.

113

CHAPTER 4
METHODOLOGY

This research was conducted while the world was experiencing a pandemic.
It was challenging to proceed with the data gathering given the limitations in
the community and identified research respondents. A mixed-methods were
adopted, combining qualitative and quantitative approaches to augment the
limiting factors on the ground. The mobility and safety protocols have
prevented the researcher from spending a long time with the key informants

and respondents and being fully immersed in the selected communities.

4.1 RESEARCH DESIGN

This research mainly utilized mixed methods to have a balanced perspective
in describing OPs conditions before and during the COVID-19 outbreak about
the Human Security framework. Quantitative measures supported the
qualitative aspect of the design to summarize the overall responses and
determine the possible differences in responses between male and female
respondents. Brief narratives during the interviews were used to highlight a
particular idea or experience of the respondents and key informants beyond
the provided choices.

In this qualitative research, OPs were given the opportunities to be heard and
draw their understanding of Human Security in the context of a global
pandemic. The factors affecting the sense of Human Security among OPs
were explored given the “Assigned sex at birth,” expression of spirituality thru
faith and good works, and access to technology, information, and
opportunities.

114

The timing of the data gathering was an important factor because it was done
during the roll-out of COVID19 vaccines. Thus, there was an assumption that
the respondent OPs and community partners had an in-depth understanding
of the different issues and concerns about the global pandemic. With such
assumption, the opportunity to learn more about the various factors which
caused anxieties and insecurities among OPs, including their coping
mechanisms in surviving the negative impacts of the pandemic, was

maximized in this research

The major concerns in designing and implementing the research were the
mobility limitations and safety protocols, including the community quarantine
(CQ) declarations. Given the “Bubble” environment based on the IATF
guidelines, the research area mainly involved Barangay San Carlos,

Binangonan, Rizal.

The design of in-depth interviews consisted of both open and close-ended
questions, which probed further explanations from OPs and, at the same time,
tried to summarize some of the critical perspectives through the use of the
Likert Scale and Ranking-type queries. Critical comments and observations
during the interviews were taken into account. These statements were

classified based on the identified thematic areas.

The key informant interviews were mostly conducted using a guide that utilized
open-ended questions. Included such as in-depth interviews, key informant
interviews, and document reviews were used in this research. Given the
geographical location of the identified research areas, it was impossible for a
virtual model of the interview due to weak internet connection and poor access
to smartphones / mobile applications. The use of technology such as mobile

phones and web-based social media applications was only used with one (1)

115

barangay councilor. As for the rest of the key informants, face-to-face

interaction strictly adhered to the minimum health protocols.

The In-Depth Interview questionnaire combined both the open-ended and
close-ended questions. These mixed questions served as an iterative process
to explore various perspectives on participants’ responses to a particular topic.
The questionnaire design was maximized using a 5-scale Likert Scale,
Ranking, and Enumeration questions. The Google Form platform was utilized
for ease in designing the questionnaire and tabulating the results in the data
processing portion. The community champions helped in refining the

questionnaire.

The guide questionnaire for the critical informant interview was designed
based on the strategic information to provide better perspectives on this
research. The guided questionnaire was modified based on the background
of the key informants and their roles in the community and the institution to
which they belong.

On Document Review, the researcher requested for copies of relevant
documents which served as pieces of evidence Human Security-related or
social development-relevant interventions for OPs from the Barangay and
Municipal LGUs; Senior Citizen Association; Binangonan Federation of Senior
Citizen Associations (BFOSCA); and Binangonan Gender and Development
(GAD) Office.

4.2 RESEARCH SITE

The research activities mainly focused on the three (3) target areas in
Barangay San Carlos — Tolentino, Manggahan, and Aida; local government
units (LGUs) of Barangay San Carlos and the Municipality of Binangonan.

116

Binangonan was considered to have a mixed type of economy (rural-urban or
rurban), having access to agricultural, commercial, and industrial-based
economies; with the coastal and terrestrial environment and _ island
communities (23 barangays on the mainland and 17 barangays are in Talim
Island); and, with pending plans to develop industrial parks and resorts in the
future. While it can be observed that agricultural practices are still present in
very few parts of the municipality, the Zoning Ordinance of Binangonan Rizal
provides only three (3) types of zones: Residential, Commercial, and Tourism.

(Bernardo, Quintana, Sanchez, Laumond, & Galang, 2018)

a. Municipality Profile

The main sources of information in Binangonan were its website, Facebook
Page, Comprehensive Development Plan (CDP) 2013-2022, Comprehensive
Lands Use Plan (CLUP) 2013-2021, Socio-Economic Profile (2021), and
Annual Performance Reports (2016-2020).

Demographics

Binangonan was considered the 5'" biggest municipality in the province of
Rizal in terms of land area (approximately 66.34 km?) and population based
on the 2020 Census (313,361). The 17 island barangays of Binangonan have
a total population of 27,372, while the 23 mainland barangays recorded
286,259 inhabitants. The mainland barangays occupied 78% (52.57 km?) of
the municipality's total land area, while the island barangays occupied 22%
(14.48 km?) only. Barangay San Carlos occupies 1.13 km? only which is 19"
biggest barangay in Binangonan, out of the 40 barangays. (See APPENDIX
4- TABLE 4.1 POPULATION AND AREA OF BARANGAY SAN CARLOS
VIS-A-VIS THE MAINLAND AND ISLAND BARANGAYS IN BINANGONAN,
RIZAL (2020, 2015, 2010)

117

For 10 years, there was a steady increase in the number of older persons in
the municipality. The female OPs have categorically outlived the male OPs
based on the number of women who spend a longer life span or still live
beyond 80 years old. Based on the age groups, the fewer older persons have
higher longevity given the drop in the number of OPs within the age group of
60-69, compared with the 50-59 years old OPs. (See APPENDIX 4— FIGURE
4.2 COMPARABLE TABLE OF PROJECTED POPULATION IN
BINANGONAN, RIZAL BETWEEN 2010 AND 2020)

The Socio-Economic Profile of Binangonan provided a comprehensive
presentation of the projected population of the municipality in a span of 10
years. Based on the data, the 2010 and 2020 projections were culled from the
matrix and computed for the percent difference between the younger and older
age groups. The male and female OPs (50 years old and above) had a growth
factor of 12.91% per year. This has been the factor used by the MPDO to
determine the projected population for this age group. Male vs. Female OPs'
growth factor is 6.06% and 6.85%, respectively. (See APPENDIX 4 -— FIGURE
4.2 - COMPARABLE TABLE OF PROJECTED POPULATION IN
BINANGONAN, RIZAL BETWEEN 2010 AND 2020)

Competitiveness Ranking of Binangonan, Rizal

On the Department of Trade and Industry website, the municipalities and cities
have been ranked based on four (4) dimensions: Economic dynamism,
Government Efficiency, Infrastructure, and Resiliency. Each dimension had
several indicators that constitute the overall rating for each dimension. In
2016, there were only three (3) dimensions when the Competitiveness
Ranking started: economic dynamism, government efficiency, and
infrastructure. These were expanded in the succeeding years to note the
emerging dimensions of competitiveness. However, in 2018, data were

reflected for all dimensions, and reasons were not indicated on the said

118

website. The overall ranking of Binangonan marked a significant improvement
from Rank 11 in 2016 to Rank 6 in 2020. (Department of Trade and Industry,
2021) (See APPENDIX 4— TABLE 4.3 AND FIGURE 4.3)

Physical Environment

The location of Binangonan, Rizal, was a strategic one given its proximity to
Metro Manila, where industries and commercial districts were found. The
increase in the municipal population was brought by the migration of people
from the city proper to the countryside for lower cost of housing facilities.
Henceforth, the population spillover from Metro Manila is already felt in Rizal

Province, including Binangonan, Rizal.

With 33 coastal barangays, 273 hectare-forest areas, mineral resources, and
commercial-residential areas, the Municipality of Binangonan offered diverse
development opportunities such as agricultural, industrial, commercial,
tourism, forestry, and institutional. Access to Laguna Lake and the Sierra
Madre creates more employment and commercial opportunities for
Binangonan residents and entrepreneurs, including the LGU, to expand
development interventions. (Municipal Government of Binangonan, 2021,
pp. 28-29)

On the other hand, it cannot be construed that the municipality also faced
critical environmental challenges, such as the continuous degradation of
Laguna Lake water quality due to sedimentation, extremely high concentration
of nitrates, coliform, and other organic and inorganic substances, which are
continuously lodged into the lake.

Similarly, the upland and coastal areas were also prone to hazards such as

earthquake-induced landslides; liquefaction; and rain-induced landslides

119

based on the Hazard Maps of the Department of Science and Technology-
Philippine Institute of Volcanology and Seismology (DOST-PHIVOLCS)
through its online platforms: www.hazardhunter.georisk.ph and

www.geoanalytics.georisk.gov.ph .

According to the Seismic Hazards Assessment, PHIVOLCS noted that “all
sites may be affected by ground shaking in an earthquake and can be
mitigated by following the Philippines’ National Building code and Structural
Code.” It was underscored in the report that the municipality is prone to
Intensity VIIl earthquakes. (DOST-Philippine Institute of Volcanology and
Seismology (PHIVOLCS), 2021)

According to the GeoAnalytics of DOST-PHIVOLCS, about 87% of the
population in Binangonan is susceptible to rain-induced landslides, given their
location. | Furthermore, PHIVOLCS underscored that “areas with low
susceptibility to rain-induced landslides are gently sloping areas with no
identified landslides.” (DOST-Philippine Institute of Volcanology and
Seismology (PHIVOLCS), 2021)

Other environmental challenges of the municipality identified in the Socio-
Economic Profile (2021) are severe erosion due to slash and burn practices,
flooding, particularly in the coastal areas, pollution (air, land, and water), waste
management, poor sewerage system, and sanitation in informal settlement
areas, among others.

Land conversion in the municipality also posed a development and a threat. It
is part of the LGU’s development efforts to increase economic activities in the
area through job creation and expansion of commercial and residential
spaces. (DOST-Philippine Institute of Volcanology and Seismology
(PHIVOLCS), 2021)

120

According to the Municipal Planning and Development Office (MPDO), there
were already discussions in 2018 about the development of the tourism
industry in Talim Island and the tourist sites such as the Binangonan
Community Water Ecotourism in Mt. Tagapo and the Binangonan Theme
Park. Energy development-related projects were also in the pipeline as per
Municipal Ordinance 020, s. 2018, or the approval of the “Island Wind Energy
Corporation (IWEC) from production forest / Agricultural to mix-use, under the
approved Comprehensive Land Use Plan of the Municipality, situated in
different Barangays of Talim Island, Binangonan, Rizal.” (Bernardo, Quintana,
Sanchez, Laumond, & Galang, 2018)

(See APPENDIX 4 — FIGURES 4.4, 4.5, AND 4.6 - GENERATED HAZARD
MAPS OF BINANGONAN, RIZAL FROM THE WEBSITES OF HAZARD
HUNTER AND GEO ANALYTICS OF DOST-PHIVOLCS)

Planning, Policy Development, Budgeting, and Reporting

The CLUP and CDP of Binangonan contained the prescribed 12-step process
by the Housing and Land Use Regulatory Board (HLURB) Volume 1. The
planning process in the municipality was headed by the Municipal Planning
and Development Office (MPDO), where all plans were consolidated,
assessed, and endorsed to Sandigang Bayan or Municipal Council for

approval. (Bernardo, Quintana, Sanchez, Laumond, & Galang, 2018, p. 19)

Participation of non-government organizations (NGOs) in the planning process
was manifested by including the accredited NGO in the Local Development
Council (LDC). Said NGOs may be representatives of fishermen, farmers,
business groups, and other organizations in the municipality. The alignment
of the NGO’s priorities with the administration is a critical factor that the LDC

looks into before accreditation such groups as part of the Council. This

121

ensured that the planning would be facilitated and not derailed by opposing
views and interests. (Bernardo, Quintana, Sanchez, Laumond, & Galang,
2018, pp. 20-21)

It was a great challenge for many municipalities to ensure that the barangay
annual implementation plans (AIPs) were aligned with the Municipal
Development Plans. The integration of the four (4) significant plans in local
governance: CLUP, CDP, LDIP, and the AIPs — serves as the key to
institutionalizing proper mechanisms in the planning, implementing,
monitoring, and evaluating the municipal to barangay interventions. Better
planning processes require more than just following the template of the
national government agencies. Nevertheless, it also requires an operational
framework to (a) guide the municipal and barangay personnel and (b) build the
competencies of involved people in the process. Moreover, this has been part
of the initiatives of the Municipality of Binangonan, having gone through
intensive capacity-building activities year-in-and-year-out. (Bernardo,
Quintana, Sanchez, Laumond, & Galang, 2018, p. 19)

The MPDO already facilitates the planning and evaluation efforts for strategic
and operational planning. Strategic Planning begins at the beginning of every
administration. In contrast, the Annual Implementation Planning process
begins every 1%‘ quarter of the year. The Barangay Councils submit their
Annual Implementation Plans (AIPs) to the Local Development Council (LDC)
for deliberation from April to May. The AIPs are then approved around
November for their implementation the following year. The said process is
aligned with the DILG Rationalized Local Planning Guide. (Bernardo,
Quintana, Sanchez, Laumond, & Galang, 2018, p. 22)

The Municipal LGU has proper documentation on its Municipal Resolutions

and Ordinances on policy development. All decisions of the Municipal Council

122

were documented, including the approval of annual and supplemental budgets
of the Municipal and Barangay LGUs.

(SEE ANNEX 1 LIST OF RELEVANT MUNICIPAL RESOLUTIONS AND
ISSUANCES FROM 2018-2020)

The Chief Local Executive was authorized several times to enter into a
memorandum of agreement (MOA) on specific infrastructure projects,
including those which initiated improvement of facilities, enhancement of
disaster risk reduction and management capabilities, the establishment of an
innovation hub, and other service facilities, acceptance of donations, among
others.

In 2020, when the global pandemic was declared, 34 resolutions were issued
to set the COVID19-related guidelines, such as wearing masks, face shields,
and curfew, including partnerships with the COVID19 testing laboratory with
funeral service providers. The Municipal LGU waived certain fees within the

Enhanced to General Community Quarantine duration in 2020.

A specific provision for Senior Citizens was observed in 2018, pursuant to
Municipal Resolution No. 047, s. 2018 or the “Resolution was endorsing the
request of the Local Government Unit of Binangonan for fund allocation for the
proposed construction of the Senior Citizen Building under the Local
Government Support Fund (LGSF) in the amount of Five Million Pesos
(Php5,000,000.00)”.

It can be noted that the transactions of the Municipal LGU were covered by
the appropriate policy instruments (resolutions or ordinances). A compilation
of these issuances can be improved if a records portal is available online —
increasing the transparency and accountability of the municipality.

Nonetheless, the Office of the Mayor has easily granted access to MPDO

123

documents as part of this research. (Municipal Planning and Development
Office, 2020)

The Municipal Budget could be found in the Accomplishment Reports,
presenting the Approved Budget by the Municipal Council, based only on the
list of Municipal Resolutions and Ordinances as reflected in the
Accomplishment Reports. There was an increase of 14% in the 2021 overall
Municipal Budget (Php 818M) from the 2019 budget of Php715 M. The said
increase was intended for the municipality's response to COVID19-related
response. The Municipal Development Fund also increased in 2020 due to
the immediate establishment of quarantine facilities on top of the infrastructure
projects in Binangonan. Realignment of funds was also evident, particularly
in the GAD Program, to provide funds for financial assistance to individuals
and households heavily stricken by the pandemic. (Municipal Planning and
Development Office, 2020)

On GAD Budget, an increase in figures in 2019 was brought about by tagging
several activities from the various municipal units/offices as “GAD activity.”
The GAD Office handled only a portion of the reflected “Total Budget” to
facilitate flexibility in offices implementing their GAD-related activities identified
as a critical intervention in the Municipal GAD Plan. (Municipal Planning and
Development Office, 2020)

Regarding the FY2020 GAD Budget of Php 48.8M, the Municipal Government
decided for a realignment of the GAD Budget to be used as financial aid for
individuals and families who were heavily affected by COVID19 in 2020. Thus,
before the 1st quarter of FY2020 ends, GAD Office had to drop all of its
planned activities, given the strict mandate for non-face-to-face interactions.

The GAD allotment for other offices was pooled for realignment, which

124

provided additional funds for the Municipal Government for COVID19-related

expenses. (Municipal Planning and Development Office, 2020)

On the other hand, the suspension of GAD activities in 2020 had challenged
the GAD office on how to implement GAD-related activities given the
restrictions brought to the fore by the pandemic. It was difficult for all municipal
personnel when the restrictions were heightened due to the rise in the number
of cases and even the mortality rate due to COVDI19 infections. This
somehow slowed down the operations at the LGU due to decreased personnel
capacity, reduced working hours, reduced workdays, and limited number of
customers to be attended to within the day. (Municipal Planning and
Development Office, 2020) (See APPENDIX 4- TABLE 4.4)

4.3 BARANGAY SAN CARLOS

The main sources of information about San Carlos included online sources,
activity reports, two (2) yearbooks, and twelve (12) key informants from the
Barangay LGU, Senior Citizen Association, and Barangay Health Workers.
The Barangay Chairperson duly approved the research activities.
Unfortunately, the sudden surge of COVID19 cases in the barangay affected
the data gathering period, coupled with the Habagat Season. This channeled
all efforts of the Barangay LGU to emergency response and distribution of
goods and financial assistance to the affected individuals and families by
COVID19 virus and natural hazards between July to October 2021 or the data
gathering period. In this regard, requests for copies of official documents
were not immediately granted; henceforth, the researcher could not secure
said files from the Barangay LGU.

Conducting research under a global pandemic threat is a unique experience

because this once-in-a-lifetine phenomenon presents new learning, new

125

experiences, and new ways of doing things. Documenting the uncertainties
and opportunities contributes to creating a complete picture of the current
context of Barangay San Carlos and Binangonan, Rizal. This is also an
opportune time to redefine Human Security and look into the current context

of OPs from their perspectives.

a. Brief History

San Carlos Heights Subdivision was a community established in 1957. This
covered a vast rice field and began as a private subdivision under Realty
Development Corporation (RDC). The boundaries of San Carlos then,
included Duluhan (now Barangay Tagpos), Manggahan area (upland), Barrio
Central area (connecting the current Barangay Tayuman and the Tolentino
Area of Barangay San Carlos). This subdivision has been part of the Barangay

Tayuman since its establishment. (Campanano, 2005)

The name “San Carlos” was taken from the RDC President — Mr. Charles Lee,
who was referred to as the visionary behind the design of this community. He
envisioned having a Mountain Resort on top of the hill (now Marian Hill). The
subdivision has both upland and lowland areas. There were various farm lots
within the subdivision owned by private owners. This private subdivision
began as a farm lot without any residents. It was only in the 1960s when it

was subdivided and sold to private individuals. (Campafano, 2005)

The Subdivision also established one deep well at Gate 1 — Lilia Street and
another in Tolentino Area (Chrysanthemum Street) in 1960 and 1967.
Nevertheless, around 1976-1979, the area experienced a water crisis that
urged the community organizers to lobby and raise funds to upgrade the water
well pump to keep up with the water demand of the growing number of
residents in the subdivision. (Campafiano, 2005)

126

The earliest written history of the subdivision is found in the 2005 Yearbook,
as initiated by Mr. David B. Campafiano, Jr. — one of the community leaders
in the 1960s. They started organizing the youth for sports activities,
volunteerism, and water cooperative, among other community-based
activities, strengthening the first few residents of the subdivision. Volunteerism
was alive in the 70s, given the efforts of the homeowners then, particularly
when there was a need for reconstruction. They called this as “San Carlos
Movement,” which led to organizing community activities yearly. (Campafano,
2005) (See APPENDIX 4-— TABLE 4.5)

One of the prominent families in the subdivision is the Ynares Family, who later
emerged as Chief Local Executives in Binangonan, Antipolo City, and Rizal
Province. Resources poured into the barangay, creating the necessary
facilities and infrastructure such as Schools, Churches, and Barangay Hall.
Thus, it was not very difficult to request support for the community initiatives
of the Subdivision. (Campafiano, 2005)

In the humble beginnings of Barangay San Carlos, the San Carlos Heights
Homeowners’ Association (SCHHAI) took the lead role in establishing a
community in the subdivision. It served as a bridge between the homeowners
and the local government unit, Barangay Tayuman. After almost five (5)
decades from when the subdivision was established and turned over to the
owners, the SCHHAI lobbied the Municipality of Binangonan to recognize San
Carlos Heights as a separate barangay from Barangay Tayuman.

The first attempt was unsuccessful due to some irreconcilable political
interests among the LGU and community leaders. Another group was formed
— the San Carlos for Barangay Movement— which aggressively pushed for
another negotiation round regarding the recognition of San Carlos as a

separate barangay from Tayuman. With the strong urge from the subdivision

127

residents, they expressed support by petitioning the Municipal LGU in 1996.
(Campafiano, 2005)

With proper timing and leadership, the Binangonan Municipal Council had
favorably endorsed the creation of Barangay San Carlos to Mayor Pacis
through Municipal Resolution No. 96-046. On 14 October 1996, the Barangay
San Carlos was created by enacting Municipal Ordinance No. 96-26. Then on
15 February 1997, the Commission on Election (COMELEC) approved
Resolution No. 2883, which facilitated the plebiscite among the residents in
Barangay Tayuman to create the barangay. However, the result was
unfavorable — with 922 NO and 973 YES. (Campafiano, 2005)

The protest was filed for the said plebiscite result, but it was not resolved
immediately. |t was shelved until 2003 until another set of advocates — the
San Carlos Barkadahan Group (all men) and the Barkadahan Women’s Club.
This resurrected the protest and was successful in convincing COMELEC for
a recount. The results were overturned, yielding 873 YESes and 871 NOs.
On 03 November 2003, the Barangay San Carlos was officially recognized
through the Provincial Council Resolution No. 03-07, but only as a “corporate
entity” and not yet as a full-fledged barangay. It was a difficult beginning for
Barangay San Carlos, as it did not receive its share from the Internal Revenue
Allotment (IRA) of Barangay Tayuman even with the official documents from
the Provincial Government.

The first set of barangay officials was initially appointed by Mayor Cesar M.
Ynares (and still the current mayor today) on 16 December 2003. In this
regard, the operational budget sources of the barangay came from Real

Property Taxes, Community Taxes, Municipal Aid, and voluntary contributions.

128

It was only in 2007 when Republic Act No. 9457 or the “Act creating a barangay
to be known as Barangay San Carlos in the Municipality of Binangonan,
Province of Rizal” was enacted. With this issuance, the San Carlos Heights
Subdivision was officially declared as a Barangay, duly entitled to IRA shares,
pursuant to Section 285 of R.A. No. 7160 or the Local Government Code of
1991. (Republic of the Philippines - Congress of the Philippines, 2007)

b. Demographics

Barangay San Carlos is the 2 barangay upon entry in the Municipality of
Binangonan via Angono, Rizal. It has a total land area of 1.13 km?, with a total
population of 14,090. In the 2007 and 2010 censuses, it was reported that
Barangay San Carlos had a population of 10,851, and 10,428, respectively.
The number of households then was about 2,445, with an average household
size of about 4.35. However, this increased in 2015, which marked the
population at 11,983, with the total number of households at 3,179. However,
it can be noted that the average household size since 2007 somehow
decreased in the 2015 Census, which was only 3.76. (PhilAtlas, 2021)

In 2020, demographic data showed that the aggregated Mainland population
is 286,259, and the Island population is 27,372 for 313,631. In Barangay San
Carlos, its population increased to 14,090, which is 4.5% of the total population

of the municipality. (Municipal Government of Binangonan, 2021)

The earliest population data available for Barangay San Carlos are in 2007
since this barangay was only created in the said year. Based on the PSA data
published in PhilAtlas, the barangay household population in 2007 was only
10,851, with an average household size of 4.26. The population somehow
decreased in 2010 to about 10,428, with an average household size of 4.45.
The population continues to increase by 11,952, with a smaller average
household size of 3.76. (PhilAtlas, 2021)

129

In terms of population-based age groups, OPs (50 years old and above)
comprised 18% (2,124) of the total barangay population in 2015, with 82%
being under 1 year old to 49 years old. However, if the ratio between the under
1 to 19 years old and 50 years old and above, there are 3 young ones for every
1 OP (4,461:2,124). (See Appendix 4 — Table 4.6 and Figure 4.9)

c. Barangay San Carlos Approved Budget

The 3-year approved budget, including the approved supplemental budget, of
Barangay San Carlos since 2018 has an increasing pattern. The data provided
in Appendix 4 — Table 4.7 came from the list of approved municipal resolutions
and ordinances. The requested document from the barangay was not
available during the data gathering period due to the busy schedule at the
barangay level. Thus, it would be very helpful if anyone could easily access
public documents and information at any time. Investments in the knowledge
management system are necessary to enable efficient and effective
operations at the barangay level and increase the transparency and
accountability of the said public office.

Barangay San Carlos had increasing approved annual budget. In FY 2018,
the barangay had Php 9.4M - this was the lowest budget compared with FY
2019 (Php 10.4M) and FY 2020 (Php 13.4M).

d. Barangay San Carlos - Planning and Budgeting

The Barangay San Carlos follows the planning and budgeting schedule set
forth by the Municipal Government. According to Barangay Councilor del
Rosario, the call for budget proposal commences upon advice from the
Municipal Government. All barangays take note of certain mandatory budget

items as determined by existing laws, such as: 10% Sanggunian; 20% for

130

Development Fund; 5% for Gender and Development; 0.05% for Senior
Citizens; 0.05% for PWDs; 1% for Services of Youth; 5% for Barangay Disaster
Risk Reduction and Management Committee (BDRRMC). (del Rosario, 2021)

Based on the reviewed documents and interviews, the approved budget of
barangay San Carlos doubled in 2021, from its FY2018 budget, with a total
amount of Php 21.00M. The increase was mostly due to the COVID19
response, management, and recovery-related expenses. As for COVID19-
related expenses, these were taken from the BDRRMC budget. COVID19 as
a health pandemic is considered a form hazard. (See Appendix 4 — Figure
4.10)

To implement the activities at the barangay level, the Barangay Council issues
a resolution approving the items to be financed and implemented within the
year. The Barangay Chairperson, Treasurer, and the Barangay Council work
hand in hand in preparing budget proposals and implementing the planned
activities. The Barangay Chairperson, Treasurer, and the Barangay Finance
Committee have significant roles in properly identifying the barangay's
priorities, including the financial management of the barangay funds. After
preparing the draft budget proposal, all barangay councilors were requested
to submit their respective budget proposals. Then, the consolidated budget
proposal is deliberated in a council meeting to issue a resolution — this serves
as the approval of the barangay budget proposal. The Barangay Council
ensures that all committees have enough budget to implement their operations
and projects within the FY. (del Rosario, 2021)

This Barangay Level approved budget is then submitted and defended before
the Municipal Council (Sangguniang Bayan). A budget hearing shall be
scheduled to deliberate all the budget proposals. For implementation, the
Municipal mayor shall issue a resolution approving the barangay budget

proposal. For unbudgeted items, for example — the purchase of additional

131

supplies as part of activities and the like can be taken from the savings. These
savings return to the Barangay General Funds (Land Bank of the Philippines).
(del Rosario, 2021)

According to Councilor Rosario (2021), the Barangay Council reserves 40% of
the appropriated funds in the Barangay General Funds to ensure continuity of
operations, services, and projects of the barangays delays in the release of
the barangay budget the following year.

(SEE ANNEX 2 HIGHLIGHTS OF THE INTERVIEW WITH THE BARANGAY
COUNCILORS)

Based on the interview with Mr. Lyzander Ortigas (2021) — the Barangay
Administrator, he mentioned the main things which should be improved in the
barangay:

“Ang mga kailangang mabago dito sa barangay: ang mga anunsyo ay via
social media nalang (thru FB Messenger or FB Page) — hindi lahat ay naaabot
nito; makahagilap ng pondo para matugunan ang limitadong pananalapi ng
barangay; mapa-igting ang transparency at accountability sa barangay:
pamamaraan ng palakad dito sa barangay; maiayos ang mga records para
madaling mahanap ang mga papel kung nasan na, at madaling makapagbigay
ng kopya ng mga dokumento kung may nanghihingi”. (Ortigas, 2021)

He recalled the incomplete distribution of financial aids, like the 2nd tranche,
which got signed documents from the barangay constituents. However, he did
not know what happened and why many people asked him about the 2nd
tranche. He also noted the difficulties in managing the incoming and outgoing
documents of the barangay, including the storing and retrieving part, which
can be very important in the documentation aspect of a local government unit.
He also observed that the documents were not intact when the administration

changed or there was no turnover ceremony for the incoming administration.

132

Knowing that the barangay did not correctly manage the public documents can
be very frustrating for the barangay personnel, the incoming officials, and the

barangay constituents. (Ortigas, 2021)

SEE ANNEX 3 HIGHLIGHTS OF THE INTERVIEW WITH MR. LYZANDER
ORTIGAS

e. Informal Settlement Areas in the Barangay

Barangay San Carlos started as a private subdivision in the 1960s. As the
years went by, there were vacant lots occupied by non-owners. According to
sources, there were instances in the 1990s when the number of informal
settlers in the private lots increased. There were no available data in this
regard, making it difficult to trace the list of original families. However, it can
be traced through a series of consultations and house-to-house interviews to

re-create the historical background of these areas. (Bernardo F. , 2021)

In 2000, most of the informal settlers in the low-lying area of the barangay were
requested to transfer to higher parts of the Barangay, such as Aida Street and
Manggahan. Although in Manggahan, households have existed since the

1960s, and until now, no private owners have claimed their lots.

There were only about 20 houses in each area in the previous years.
However, the expansion became uncontrollable due to population expansion
and emigration of relatives from provinces such as: Laguna, Marinduque,
Bicol, Batangas, and other parts of Rizal. About 80 to 85 households in
Tolentino, Aida, and Manggahan can be considered informal settlers. The
2013 Census, which tabulated the number of households and household
members in said areas, was unavailable due to corrupted files and misplaced
hard copies. (Bernardo F. , 2021)

133

According to Councilor Bernardo (2021), the informal settlers were welcome
to register as barangay voters. They can avail themselves of the services and
assistance from the Barangay LGU, such as: the issuance of clearances and
other government-issued IDs, financial assistance/aids, possible employment
or volunteer opportunities in the Barangay, health and nutrition services, GAD
services, trainings, among others. However, he reported that the informal
settlers were not fully covered in the Barangay Budget. However, there were
special projects implemented in these areas that allowed disbursement of
funds for its development. He noted the previous project on establishing
restrooms in Aida Street to address the “very poor’ sanitation practices.
(Bernardo F. , 2021)

Councilor Bernardo (2021) mentioned the Barangay Plan for the informal
settlement. He added that the Barangay Council is now alarmed with the
continuous expansion of houses in the informal settlement areas, given the
exposure of these families to various disaster risks. While there was a strategy
for the control and mitigating measures in these areas as per Barangay Plan,
the Barangay still needs improvement in its current strategies to maintain the
integrity of the environment in the areas to ensure the safety of the households.
However, a copy of the said plan was unavailable during the data gathering
period, and reliable information on the demographics of the barangay and the
informal settlement areas.

Based on the Comprehensive Development Plan (CDP 2013-2022) of
Binangonan, Rizal, fifteen (15) programs cover social, economic, infrastructure
and physical development, environmental management, and _ institutional
sectors. The total 10-year local development investment program (LDIP)
amounts to Php 1.042 billion, with about 70% share from the National
Government and 30% share from the municipal funds. (Bernardo et al., 2018)

134

Given the access to and compliance with the community quarantine protocols,
the research will focus only on Barangay San Carlos, particularly OP
respondents. At the municipal level, most of the critical informants will come
from the LGU representatives at the Town Proper, within the vicinity of the
Municipal Hall, to achieve complete representation of the key offices which

have a stake on OP's welfare.

Specifically, the community members who will form part of the research need
access to mobile phones and the internet, particularly those in remote areas.
A research partner will be identified in a particular site to facilitate

communication with the OPs.

Barangay San Carlos was composed of seven (7) sitios or clusters of streets.
This clustering served as an administrative mechanism for planning,
monitoring, and evaluating the situation in the respective cluster, led by each
Barangay Councilor. Most of the informal settlement areas were situated in
the upland areas. Thus, this research intended to focus only on those areas

with informal settlers, given the probable exposure to various insecurities.

Three (3) research areas were selected based on the presence of informal
settlers in the barangay and as per suggestion of the Barangay Councilors —
Area 1: Tolentino; Area 2: Manggahan; and Area 3: Aida. (See Figure 4.1,
Figure 4.2, &

Figure 4.3)

135

Mabuhay|Homes 2000
Elementary School

Rizal Provincial
Hospit

»
BFOSCAOMice()
MPDO.

-+

2,000 my Camera: 11,960 m_ 14°31/05'N 121"

LEGEND:

Yellow polygon: Area 1 - Tolentino
Blue polygon: Area 2 - Manggahan
Red Polygon: Area 3— Aida

Blue pins: location of key informants

FIGURE 4.1 VICINITY MAP SHOWING THE RESEARCH SITES

136

culo
. “0 Cay]

: Thunderbird Resorts
a and Casinos Rizal

Meadows
\d Lot in Rizal

9

Mabuhay Homes 2000
ct
\
~®
~
Ny
Puregold|Binangonan g
a"

FIGURE 4.2 GEOGRAPHICAL BOUNDARIES OF BARANGAY SAN CARLOS

LEGEND:
Yellow polygon: Area 1 — Tolentino
Blue polygon: Area 2 - Manggahan
Red Polygon: Area 3- Aida

FIGURE 4.3 RESEARCH SITES FOR IN-DEPTH INTERVIEW

137

4.4 RESEARCH RESPONDENTS

There were two (2) types of respondents in this research: (1) Older Persons
and the (2) Key Informants. Both were interviewed using the designed
instrument. The OP respondents were selected based on geographical
location in the barangay. The availability of OPs has dramatically affected the
balance between male and female respondents. As regards the key
informants, they were selected based on their roles in the barangay and
municipality. Similarly, the overwhelming tasks handled by some local officials

prevented them from participating in the interviews.

a.In-Depth Interview Respondents

The OPs were the core participants of this research. The focus was given to
OPs because they are considered significant participants in social
development but very few programs and services reach them. This sector was
often neglected, if not ignored, given their mobility limitations, their remote
locations in a community, and perceived vulnerabilities. Thus, for this
research, the OPs were placed at the core of a Human Security-based social
development framework to give them the opportunity to be heard and enable
the local government to somehow place a premium on developing policies and
programs. Understanding where OPs are coming from in this very climatic
phenomenon,

This research considered 60 participants, whose ages ranged between 50 to
around 79 years old. Of the 60 participants, there were 45 (75%) female
participants and only 15 (25%) comprised the male participants. The
interviews were done during day time, between Monday to Saturday. This
affected the presence of male OPs in the research area. Some of them were

working in other places and only went home weekly or monthly due to

138

quarantine protocols and the high cost of transportation. Thus, in all age

ranges, there were always more female OPs than male participants.

Female OPs in age groups 50-59 years old comprised 41.67% of the total
participants in the in-depth interviews. This was followed by the age group of
60-69 years old with 28.33% and then by the last age group (70 years old and

above) with only 5% female participants.

As for male OP participants, there were 16.67% from the age group of 50-59
years old, with 6.67% and 1.67% for the 70 & above and 60-69 age groups,
respectively. In all three (3) research areas, Area 2: Manggahan has the most
female OP participants from the 50-59 age group at 20%; whereas, for male
OP participants, Area 3: Aida has the highest participation rate at 8.33%. For
Areas 1 and 3, no male OP participant was under 70 years old and above. In
all three (3) areas, female OP participants in all three (3) age groups were
present. (See Figure 4.4)

The researcher prepared a thermal gun, wireless lapel microphone, and health
declaration form to consider health and safety protocols for a face-to-face
interview. This was the agreement with the Barangay LGU upon approval of
the data gathering request to ensure the researcher and respondents’ safety
in the entire data gathering.

The difficulty of the current situation is that the researcher cannot just visit the
target research site anytime. The community research champions were
strategic enough to lead the research activities in the research sites, given
their familiarity and rapport with the community members. The selection of
community respondents were mainly based on the (1) availability of OPs, (2)

accessibility of their households and (3) judgment of the community research

139

champions. Using Quota Sampling, the spread of research respondents within
a research area was also considered to ensure that the 20 respondents could
somehow represent the sample of OPs in a particular site. The target 10 male
and 10 female OP respondents per research area were further stratified based
on the following criteria:

a. At least 50 to 79 years old

b. Male or Female (at least 10 Female and 10 Male)

c. With a passing cognitive score of 16 points and or better
Unfortunately, the availability and willingness of male respondents for an
interview were the significant challenges of this research. Thus, the quota for
male respondents was not reached, yielding only 15 male respondents for all
three (3) research areas.

(SEE ANNEX 4 LIST OF RESPONDENTS FOR IN-DEPTH INTERVIEW)

x
x
45.00% ee
o =
5 40.00%
=<
= 35.00% x
5 3
= 30.00% ; a
8 25.00% s °
5 x & 5
tm 20.00% s ° eS
oO ow s =
< so iS
E 15.00% 8 Sine Ge
a S q 4 a <
2 10.00% PS a © Swe PS
poor 8 “me 3
AREA 1: AREA 2: AREA 3: AIDA GRAND TOTAL
TOLENTINO MANGGAHAN
RESEARCH AREAS
@ Female 50-59 & Female 60-69 m™ Female 70 and above
™ Male 50-59 ™ Male 60-69 ™ Male 70 and above

FIGURE 4.4 DISTRIBUTION OF RESPONDENTS IN THREE (3) RESEARCH
AREAS BASED ON AGE AND SEX

140

b. Key Informants

The Key Informants were selected based on (1) their duties and
responsibilities in providing services to OPs at the barangay and municipal
levels; (2) willingness to participate; and (3) availability within the duration of

the data gathering period.

16 key informants were interviewed, with 10 female and 6 male individuals
aged between 40 to around 75 years old. Based on the classification of
responsibilities in the local government, there were two (2) representatives
from the Municipal Level, under the GAD Office and the Binangonan
Federation of Senior Citizen Associations (BFOSCA). The interview timing at
the municipal level was not conducive to most of the pre-identified key
informants due to the drastic changes in the community quarantine protocols
between July to October 2021. The schedule of “payout” or distribution of
financial assistance and “in-kind goods” or “ayuda” to certain groups, such as
senior citizens, also coincided with the data gathering months. This greatly
affected the availability of the informants and made it impossible for an

interview. (See Figure 4.5)

Number of Key Informants based on Age Group and Sex
6

7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0

Number of Individuals

2 2) 2
("a ee rs
40-49 50-59 60-69 70and 40-49 50-59 60-69 70and
above above

Female OPs Male OPs

‘Age Group and Sex

FIGURE 4.5 KEY INFORMANT DISTRIBUTION BASED ON AGE GROUP AND
SEX

141

The Municipal Planning and Development Office (MPDO) provided the
relevant documents for review and expressed its willingness to provide further
assistance to the research. There was overall support and friendly
accommodation from the Municipal Government. This has been the 4h
approval given to the researcher by the Office of the Municipal Mayor, which
allowed the data gathering activities and endorsed the same to the identified

municipal offices for ease in coordination.

At the Barangay Level, the Barangay Chairperson — Mr. Teddy Valerio, has
also given his approval for conducting the research within the prescribed
timeline and covering the identified individuals for interview. Unfortunately, the

requested documents were still pending approval by the barangay council.
14 out of 16 key informants came from the barangay level. This comprises the
barangay LGU officers and volunteers, barangay health workers (BHW), and

the Senior Citizen Association Officers. (See Table 4.1)

TABLE 4.1 CLASSIFICATION OF KEY INFORMANTS BASED ON SEX

TOTAL
CLASSIFICATION MALE | FEMALE | NUMBER OF
INDIVIDUALS

Municipal Level (GAD Office, BFOSCA 1 1 2
Secretary
Barangay LGU (Barangay Councilors, 3 2 5
Administrator, Barangay Tanod)
Barangay Health Workers 7 7
Senior Citizen Association Officers 2 2
TOTAL KEY INFORMANTS 6 10 16

(ANNEX 5 LIST OF KEY INFORMANT RESPONDENTS)

142

Of the total 60 OP respondents, one (1) female OP signified her consent but
refused to reflect her real name in the study. On the other hand, the Key
Informants gave full consent to participate. Nevertheless, for anonymity, the
list of research respondents is coded, and code names are used when

reflecting direct quotes lifted from the interviews.

4.5 METHODS AND TOOLS
This research combined qualitative and quantitative data gathering methods

to have a more holistic understanding of the breadth and depth of the situation
of OPs in the research areas, particularly under a global pandemic. The critical
conditions of the pandemic have eased out somehow, as compared to the
2020 lockdown scenario. This has allowed the research activities in the
barangay and facilitated face-to-face activities. It was also timely that the
researcher received the 2" dose of Sinovac in June 2021, which boosted the

immune system against the COVID19 virus.

Triangulation was observed in data gathering to have a more balanced
analysis of the gathered data, generate conclusions and recommendations,
and ensure the validity and reliability of qualitative data being shared by the
respondents. (See Figure 4.6)

| In-Depth
| Interview

TRIANGULATION

Document Review & Field
Notes on Participant |

Key Informant ]
Observations

| Interview

FIGURE 4.6 DATA TRIANGULATION FRAMEWORK

143

Three (3) qualitative methods were used in this research:

a.

In-depth Interview (IDI) covered all 60 OP respondents. An interview

guide was developed to organize “kuwentuhan,” or an_ informal

conversation with the respondents. The Researcher and the Community

i.

Research Champions strategized on having a good rapport with the
respondents. For OP respondents, four (4) types of questionnaires were

prepared:

Health Declaration Form contained the standard information on the
health status of respondents. The temperature of each OP was
checked using a thermal gun and asked to provide their current
health status.

(ANNEX 6 HEALTH DECLARATION FORM )

The consent Form provided a brief background on the research,
participation conditions, decision to reflect one’s real name in the
research, approval of the Barangay Chairperson, the consent
statement, name and signature of the researcher, and the name and
signature of the participant.

(ANNEX 7 CONSENT FORM)

Adoption of the Montreal Cognitive Assessment — Philippines Form
was used to provide somehow a snapshot of the OP’s capacity to
participate in an interview. The form has seven (7) parts with a
perfect score of 30 points. The suggested average score of 26 points
was adopted, but 16 points or better was considered a “passing
score” in this research.

(ANNEX 8 ENHANCED VERSION OF THE MONTREAL COGNITIVE

ASSESSMENT)

144

In-Depth Interview Guide was developed using Google Forms for
enhanced layout features and ease in the tabulation. The IDI Guide
is a 24-page questionnaire with 68 questions, including the
participant's background information. The questions were designed
by combining nominal, ordinal, and interval/ratio variables as a form
of iteration throughout the interview. The Guide was divided into nine
(9) sections which covered the following data:

1) Personal Information

2) Living conditions when a global pandemic was declared

3) Health Security

4) Food Security

5) Coping mechanisms and Types of Insecurities

6) Opportunities and Guarantees / Political and Protective

Security

7) Economic Security

8) Facilitating and Hindering Factors

9) Digital Security

Open-ended and close-ended questions were utilized to create a
more conversational approach during the interview, rather than
just question and answer format. The open-ended questions also
provided flexibility for respondents to answer the questions based
on their perspectives and opinions. Their inputs, in return, can be
used to enhance the questionnaire for future use.

All four (4) tools were written in Tagalog as the vernacular in the
research sites. Some “Human Security” concepts were further
explained if the OPs could not understand them.

(ANNEX 9 GUIDE QUESTIONNAIRE USED IN THE IN-DEPTH
INTERVIEW)

145

Key Informant Interview (KIl) was conducted with the identified
strategic community members and LGU officials at the barangay and
municipal levels. The Schedule of a face-to-face interview was very
difficult due to the implementation of “bubble environments” and shifting
modifications to the community quarantine classifications within the
Municipality of Binangonan. The planned “virtual interviews” thru FB
messenger or Zoom platforms did not push through because the target
key informants preferred a face-to-face interaction. The minimum health

standards were observed throughout the interview proper.

The KIl Guide was revised based on the responses of the informants.
The interview became more conversational and flowed naturally based
on the organization's background to which the informants belong or
based on their duties and responsibilities in providing services to OPs.
In broad strokes, the KIl questions included the following major topics:
i. Background about the organization/institution
ii. Planning and Budgeting processes
iii. | OP-related projects, policies, and other interventions
iv. Organizational Structure
v. Perception of Human Security (How they understand the term and
its importance)
vi. Facilitating and hindering factors that affect the flow of goods and
services to their customers or target sector, or partner community
vii. | Major challenges encountered under the global pandemic
viii. Creative strategies which somehow augment the insecurities
brought by the pandemic

146

ix. Available documents, statistics, reports, or written materials can
provide information about senior citizens and _ relevant

services/policies.

The interview with the key informants was documented, and highlights

were prepared after the interview proper. Some respondents agreed to

record the conversation, while others did not allow the interview recording.
(SEE ANNEX 10 KEY INFORMANT INTERVIEW GUIDE)

Document Analysis (DA) exhausted all possible sources of written
documents at the barangay and municipal local government units, which
included the following:
(a) Barangay Yearbook, by Mr. David B. Campafano, Jr. (74 years old,
community leader/organizer);
(b) Municipal Gender and Development Report;
(c) Municipal Annual Performance Report;
(d) Records at the Binangonan Federation of Senior Citizen Association
(BFOSCA)

The documents reviewed were limited by the following: (a) busy LGU
officials on disaster risk reduction and management (DRRM)-related
initiatives due to natural disasters and COVID19-related concerns;
(b) distribution of financial assistance; (c) family-related emergencies; and,
(d) poor records management which led to incomplete historical records,
lost files, among others. Some interviews were re-scheduled several times
until the partner organization finally canceled them. This is understandable
due to the demands from the government officials by the rise of COVID-19
cases in the barangay and the entire municipality.

147

4.6 DATA PROCESSING AND ANALYSIS

This research has utilized various types of data, given the mixed methods it
incorporated to balance the perspectives on Human Security among OPs.
Thematic areas were crafted based on the qualitative data. Numerical values
were assigned to nominal, ordinal, and ratio-interval data, particularly on the

perspectives and opinions on Human Security.

a. Questionnaire Components

The In-depth Interview among OPs yielded numerical values and
observations/remarks on a particular concern. The questions were re-grouped
and coded for ease in processing in a spreadsheet application (MS Excel).
The scores for each question were based on a scale of 5. In cases when
responses were ranked, weighted scores were assigned instead of getting the
mean or average score.

Several criteria were developed for each Human Security dimension (in a
question). The aggregate score or the sum of criteria scores becomes the
rating of each human security dimension. All aggregate scores of the

dimensions were added together to reflect one major score for human security.

In summary, Table 4.2 provides the clustering of questions based on themes.

TABLE 4.2 MAPPING THE IN-DEPTH INTERVIEW QUESTIONNAIRE

Personal Information

e Educational attainment 1 to 8, 53

¢ Cognitive assessment score (9 Questions)
e Age group

e Research site

e Sex

e Head of the family
e Living arrangements

148

Economic Security

Social Security
Health Security

Food Security

Number of years living in the
barangay

Number of years living in the
barangay

Lot ownership

Financial Resources

Persons or institutions
providing financial assistance
Working members of the family
Other sources of help in times
of emergency or crisis

Vehicle ownership

Mode of transportation

Access to Market

Level of income sufficiency __

Sickness in the past two (2)
months

Frequency of engaging in
physical activity or exercise
Person or institution who
provides help when a family
member is sick or hospitalized
Options for medical relief /
treatment

State of health

Status of vaccination

Access to vaccination
opportunities

Reasons if one had not been
vaccinated a
Frequency of meals per day
Usual food prepared for the
family

Source of food

Opinion on food sufficiency in a
day

Opinion on experiencing
hunger in a week

149

8,9, 10, 11, 54,
55, 56, 57, 58,
59
(10 Questions)

16; 41 418519,
20521; 22,23;
24 (9
Questions)

| 25, 26, 27, 28,

29, 30
(6 Questions)

Personal
Security

Community Security

_ Level of security

Source of strength in times of 33, 35, 36, 37,
pandemic and life’s challenges 38, 39, 62, 63
Important characteristics to (8 Questions)
overcome problems

Dream or vision in life

Interest in participating in

training

Interest in joining civic groups,

such as Senior Citizen

Association, Cooperative, etc.

How the OPs relieve

themselves from anxieties

Access to information 42, 43, 44, 46,
Presence of crimes and 47, 48
violence (6 Questions)

Capacity of the barangay LGU
to respond to reported crimes
or disasters (e.g., fire)

Presence of evacuation
facilities

Political Security

Digital Security _

Interest in joining civic groups, 39, 40, 41, 45
such as Senior Citizen (4 Questions)
Association, Cooperative, etc.
Awareness of local policies
Opinion on the need for policy
consultations

Capacity to express one’s
political views or opinions

Ownership of gadget 64, 65, 66, 67,
Knowledge of using gadgets 68
Access to internet connection (5 Questions)

Advantages of using gadgets
Disadvantages of using
gadgets _

Perspective on Human Security

150

e Level of difficulty under the 12, 13, 14, 63,
global pandemic 69 (5
e Familiarity with Human Security Questions)
e Sense of being safe or secured
Facilitating and Hindering Factors
e Most important things to OPs 35, 49, 50, 51,

that keep them going 52, 60, 61
e Opinion on the effects of a (7 Questions)
pandemic on OPs — both

positive and negative
e Opinion on having enough
capacity to thrive in the current

times

e Knowledge / awareness about
COVID19

e Source of information about
COVID19

e Level of satisfaction with the
LGU’s. efforts in providing
assistance / aid

e Problems encountered caused
by the pandemic

Threats
e Types of threats that affect OPs 15
ai (1 Question) _
Insecurities
e Factors causing anxieties 31, 32, 33, 34
¢ Overcoming anxieties / (4 Questions)
adversities

e Source of strength
e Things that could not be done
due to pandemic concerns
(SEE ANNEX 11 QUESTIONS AND CODES 1, 2, AND 3)

b. Aggregate Scores vs. Mean Scores
Scores were aggregated to combine the responses and reflect the overall
opinion on a topic or issue. This was adopted to collectively consider the

responses to non-parametric variables, such that “0” scores or “no response”

151

or “not applicable” would not drastically skew the data, as in the case of

average or mean scores.

Statistical analysis for non-parametric variables becomes more credible with
the aggregate score since the scores were only averaged at the last leg of data
processing, ifnecessary. There is also more flexibility in the type of statistical
tool used in the latter part of the study.

The data were organized in a matrix via the Google Form platform. Horizontal
scores provide the individual responses of OPs vis-a-vis the types of
questions. The dimensions of Human Security were summarized separately
and then consolidated in another spreadsheet to reflect the overall Human

Security index per individual.

c. Statistical Tools
Statistical Tools were used in this research to complement the qualitative
analysis:

Chi-Square Test

Given that the IDI questionnaire yielded numerical values from a mix of ordinal,
nominal, and interval values, a statistical tool for non-parametric tests was
explored to test whether there was any significant difference between the

responses of male and female OPs.

Descriptive Statistics was used to elaborate on the profile of respondents and
provide an overview of the Profile Data of the respondents. Graphs were
generated from the data to illustrate the Respondents’ information based on
Sex and Age Group.

152

The second set of the statistical tool was the Chi-Square Test of
Independence, based on the following details:

1. Data per dimension or question were arranged based on sex.

2. The Median was computed for all 60 entries. All scores below the
median were rated “low,” and all scores equal to or higher than the
median were rated “high.”

3. The frequencies for Low and High scores for Male and Female
respondents were tabulated. These were used in Chi-square Test.

4. Hypotheses were identified:

a. Problem: Is there a significant difference in the male responses
from the female OPs per particular human security dimension.
b. Hypotheses:
i. Ho: There is no significant difference
ii. Hi: There is a significant relationship between gender
and the particular dimension.

5. Level of Significance used:

a: 0.05
df: (c-1)(r-1)|, c = column r = row
(2-1)(2-1)
(1)
df: 1.00
(tabular value of chi-square) a significance level
X? (.05) 3.84]of .05

6. Chi-square Test:
-F )2
we py OEP

E
Where:
x = Total values of (O-E) 2/E
[e) = Observed values (participant's aggregate scores per
dimension)

153

E

Expected values (as computed in the succeeding section)

The values were arranged in a 2x2 Chi-square table as follows:

High Low Total
fe) E {e) E
Male a (a) b (b) k
Female c (c) d (a) |
Total m n N
To compute for “E”
(m) (k)
E (a) N

The Chi-Square Tests were done via only the Social Science Statistics

platform. This provides free access to various statistical tools. The outputs

from this Chi-square calculator were randomly checked and compared with the

results from the SPMS program to validate the accuracy of the
abovementioned online calculator.

Spearman’s Rho

This statistical tool measures the level of association and direction between

two variables. This was used to validate the relationship between the Human

154

Security dimensions and the final Human Security scores. This used the
quantitative values generated from each Human Security component and
checked whether the overall responses were correlated with that of the Human

Security.

If r= +1, there is a positive correlation between the two (2) sets of scores; if r
=-1, there is a negative correlation; while, r= 0 means no correlation at all.

To calculate the Spearman’s Rho:

6>y.d?
pot age =D
Where:
fs = Spearman's Rho
d? = Square of the difference between ranks
n = number of scores per dimension / variable
ne = square of the n

The data sets were ranked accordingly, maintaining the original order and
pairing the scores. Using MS Excel, the “Rank” function facilitated a faster
ranking of 60 scores. The ranks are then placed in a new table, ensuring that
the pairing is intact. Then on the 3 column, the difference between the ranks
(di) was determined and then squared on the 4" column (di2). The final figures
were plugged into the online calculator to determine the Spearman’s Rho

value.

This statistical tool supplemented the chi-square test as the Spearman's Rho

value provided the strength and direction of the relationship of a Human

155

Security dimension with the overall Human Security responses based on the

interviews among OPs.

d. Qualitative Analysis

The data gathering was conducted in mid-2021, when lockdown declarations
were somehow easing due to the roll-out of vaccination against the COVID19
virus and when the Province of Rizal was placed under ‘General Community
Quarantine’ under IATF Resolution No. 124, series of 2020. This has allowed
face-to-face interaction with the respondents and key informants, observing
the minimum health protocol. The difficulties challenged this research to
balance the quantitative and qualitative data given the scenario in the
community. In data gathering, the comments and stories of OPs and key
informants were documented with their responses to the close-ended
questions. These qualitative responses were recorded, clustered, and later

used to understand the Human Security perspectives of OPs.

The principles and processes of Grounded Theory were helpful in this research
as the data were coded, grouped, and clustered based on the Human Security
dimensions, emerging thematic areas, and in consideration of the challenges
and opportunities brought which can be affected by the assigned sex,
spirituality, and technology.

156

ZSL

sasuodsal |S ‘uaJpliyo “esnods
MalAa}ul :Buimoyjo} ayy jo {Je 40 Aue
uo paseq uyM Bunt] Jo auoje Buia] SO
sjuapuodsal um spjoyasnoy jo abejuedieg = «
MAlAd}U] Jo ajyoud pjoyesnoy sjuawebueuy
yjdeg-u | a1WoU0da-0190S$ Jad sjenpiaipul jo Jaquinn ¢ Bun] (¢
sesuodsal
MaIAla}Ut aaoge pure plo sieak 02
uo paseq pjo seek 69-09
s}uapuodsal plo syeek ES-0S |!
MalAE}U] Jo ajyoud :sdnoi6 abe
ujdeq-u] | dIW0U0D9-0190S (¢) ae14y, Buowe SsqO jo oles OY dnoln aby (Z
soueg
ues Aebueseg
jo }x9}U09
sasuodsal ayy UIYyIM
MaIAJ9}U! sisuo - yyeay
uo paseq feqoj6 e ul SgO
sjuapuodsal jo uolpuod
MAIA9}U] Jo aloud sjuapuodsal ajeway yuewno
yydaq-uj | o1lU0U09a-0190S pue ajew usemjeg oes ey, xag (| | eu; aquosep o, (e
UOHeDIIE/\ sealy
spou}e paoonl sainseal nnssean seanoelqo

SGOHLAW ONY ‘SSYNSVAW ‘SSTSVINVA 'SSAILLOSrO ‘ey S1EVL

-sanoalqo yoseaseal ayloads ay} 0} puodsai 0} spouje pue Seay yInsay Aey ey) SezUeWLUNS E"p eunBl4


8Sl

JOpuean/builjas

Ayyioey ypasd-Oud1yy
suequiaw
Ajjusey Woy SeoueyIWEY
uolsued
sasuodsel Jaa}UNJOA
MAIA9}UI e Bulag Woy aouemolly
uo paseq juawAojdwa wolj |!
sjuepuodsal @WOOU! JO S8OINOS
Mal9}U| Jo a]youd Jo adA} ay} UO paseg SqO awoou|
yydaqg-u| | d1W0U0D9-0190g ayeway pue afew jo JequinN jo soinos (9
ayenpelb abayjoy IA
uoneonps Muemel uN “A
sesuodsal ayenpesg jooyss yBlIH “AN
Malay! | UoWeonpa Auepuoses YW *
uo peseq ayenpelg Aiejuewa|3
sjuepuodsal uoyeonpe Auewud yA |!
MAIA9}U] Jo ajyoud :saobaye9 Bulmo}jo} juowureye
ydag-u] | a1W0U09e-0190g | ay} UO pase SO Jo abejUEdI8q jeuoneonpy (S
sasuodsal
MalAayul
uo paseq
sjuapuodsa 49}}2q 40 sjulod g} juawssasse
MAIA2}U] Jo ajyoud | YM ‘Joo] jualussessy anyJuB0D anuboo
yjdeg-u | d1Wo0U0D9-0190g au} ul ‘xag Aq ‘SqO JO S209 Jo janeq (py
siequiew Ajiwiey papua}xo
— pue ‘uaipjiyopuelb ‘sjuased
uo}eoa/, sealy
‘spourelv 10 snow seinseal TRCN) seanoalqo


6S/

Runses 1ey161q

ouy Aunaag JeonOd
s,ueweeds Ayunoag Ayunwwog ‘A
pue Aunoeg jeuosiag ‘AI
asenbs-1yD Ayunoeg pood
Buisn — sj00} Ayundes yyeeaH
MAINA}U] jeonsieys Ayunoasg oiwou0sg |!
JUBWWOJU| oujaweled wNdaS URWNH Ayunsesg
Key -uou JO SUO|SUaLUIP a4} UO UOIUIdO, Anoag uewny uewny uo
wg | Woy syinsey ¢ Ayundasul JO [aAe7 UO S}UBLUOJU| senqoedsied
M2IA9}U] synsau ul Aunoag uewny Kay pue SdO au}
uydeq-u| Malnajuy «| Jo adoos ajqissod ay) uo uoIUIdO Jo sennoodsiddg aulMUajap OL (q
sesuodsal
MAIA9}Ul
uo peseq
sjuapuodsa
MalAa}U | JO alyoud 30] 24} UMO
udeq-u | a1W0U0D9-0190¢ | OYM sUOsIed Jo UOSJad palynUap| diyssaumo jo (g
sasuodsal
MalAayU! fs)
uo peseq asnods
sjuapuodsas wes.
MalAla}U] | JO ajyoud :Ajiuey Ou} JO} aploap Ajwusey
uydaq-uj | a1wWoUcIe-o190g | OyM suosiad Jo UOsIad payluep| ayyyo peay (2
sadinles uoepodsuel] A
Q10}S WeS-HeS UMQ IIA
uoHeoye/\ seal
| spoujow rar sainseal aeEE ne seanoelqo


ool

8 Bujyuswejdui] yoseeses pue
MAIAla}U| yenuuy) pue Buldojanep ul ‘goueuanob
juewuoju; | syuewnoop Joluas ayy Aq pa] ‘swes6oud sio}oe4 Buapuly ‘Kowyod

Kay IO « | pue saloyod payejai-qO jUeAZION ¢ pue Buyjewioe4 | ayy azAjeue o1 (Pp
SISHO
yneey jeqoj6
e Jo sobuayjeyo
au} Woy
puemioy aAowW
pue ‘yim edoo
‘o} puodsas
AyuNWWos ayy
pue sqO Moy
siso jeqol6 yoaye yorum
MalAa}U} $10}9R} e Japun uojenys seouaiedxe
yuewuoju| | Buepury pue sanss| payejas-olwapued yuadnd ay) YM pue
Kay | Bureyoey uo yyeey uo sanyoedsiad © | adoo 0} sanloedeo “‘suuslueyoou
g| sean oneweyl syeaJ4} 0} eunsodxg« ay) ooye yeUy
M@IA12}U| pue sioyoey Buepuly suojoe4 Buepuly f
ujdeg-uy | synsay maina}uy pue Buljey0e) Jo eQuasSalq pue Buyewioey | au) Ayquep! ol (9
“ajoym e se Ayndag ueWNY 24}
pue suolsuawig Aynsag uewny
usemjeg uoeI20sse jo jane] «
suo|suawiq
Ayunoeg uewny pue xg
udamjeg soueoyiuBbis Jo jane]
Aunsas jenyuids A
| spouje ean sounsea| nasi hen seanoefqo


LoL

wun

JUaLUUJ2A0S)

ylomawel4 12907

as jo lediorunyy pue

juswidojeneq AeBueseg ayy

ye suondeuip

x@pu| Aoyod asodoid

Aunses pue sdO

uewny jo 40} OMeWeI

juawdojaneq 1}994! juowdojeneq

Koyod (Z 1e190S

seay uonejaidiajyuj | xepul Ajunsag ueWNH pesodoid yomawel4 paseq-Ayunses

oljewey jo pue | a4} nu) Jaa] jedo] ay} ye AyNIeg juawidojaneq uewny e&
juawdojanag sishjeuy ejeQ uewiny jo uonezijeuonesedO Jeloog (1 | puawwose o| (a

SdO buowe

Ayundes

uewny

BdIYO JUBUdOJaAeq puke Jepues Bunjowod

au} pue ‘ye}s pue suojounoD
AeBueseg ‘suaziyig JolueS

jo uoHelepa4j ueuobueulg eu} ‘ueuobueulg

pue uojeloossy UaZi}!ID JO1UaS jo Ajediouunyy

ayy JO SEAWe}UaSaldal ‘SION ay} pue soued

uyeapy AeBueseg jo suoiuido sailunyoddo | ues Aebueseg

siskjeuy (uoday yun yUaWUJaA06 |e90| Burpying-Ayloedeo au) ul sdeb

juaUUNd0q | BOURWIOLed au} pue SUOHeID0SSY UAZI}ID pue saoies pue sanss!

UOHeIIa/\, sealy
spore | jo opow sounseal aE Vi saaoelqo


Z9L

HOUWASSY SHL JO MYOMAWVYS TWNOLLWeAdO 27 SYNOIS

SOY) NVS AVONVUVE YOd YYOMAWVYS LNINdOTSAIG IWIDOS GASVE-ALIYNIAS NVINH

i

SLNINOdWOD 8 NOLLINIS3G ALIYNDIS NVIINH ‘SdV9 ‘SW3YV DLUIWINSHL

I

SIS YEAH |eqo[D e Jo saw! UL
Ayundas analyse 0} s10}9e4 BUapulH pue BuNze}/19e4

s}eayy, ‘SANIIGesauINA ‘saquNsesu|

|

saniqoadssag Ayun2as uewnH

rt

ai

L

Mainay JUawWNI0g

MaIAsa}U] Y}dag-u]

suosiad JaP|O

saioedes ‘saijunyoddo
pue saaqueseny ‘Asojouypay ‘Ayjenquids “apuay


4.7 TIMEFRAME

The research activities were implemented between June to November 2021.
The schedule was heavily affected by the community quarantine declarations
within the research sites, including the availability of the respondents and key
informants. Deviations from the original schedule were managed so all
possible platforms were explored to carry out the data gathering activities.
There were also weather disturbances in July and August 2021 which caused
the scheduled data gathering activity cancellations. Nonetheless, the
assistance of the community partners made the data gathering possible, given
the necessary adjustments in the field. (See APPENDIX 4- TABLE 4.9)

4.8 RESEARCH BUDGET

This research was privileged enough as it was financed by the Department of
Science and Technology (DOST) through its Human Resource Development
Program (HRDP).

163

CHAPTER 5

DATA PRESENTATION
The level of community quarantine in the target research areas has affected
the timing of implementing this research. Extreme care and safety were
observed during the interviews to ensure that the researcher and respondents
were safe during the entire duration of the interviews. The use of qualitative
and quantitative approaches in this research has provided the breadth and
depth of presentation and discussion of results. The succeeding sections
present the major points gathered from the key informant interviews, in-depth

interviews, document review, and observations.

5.1 MUNICIPALITY PROFILE

Municipal Website, Facebook Page, Comprehensive Development Plan
(CDP) 2013-2022, Comprehensive Lands Use Plan (CLUP) 2013-2021,
Socio-Economic Profile (2021), and Annual Performance Reports (2016-2020)
are the main sources of information to understand the municipal profile. The

following sections present the gathered data from the said resources.

a. Demographics

Binangonan is the 5" biggest municipality in the province of Rizal in terms of
land area (approximately 66.34 km?) and population-based on the 2020
Census (313,361). Based on available data, the 17 island barangays of
Binangonan have a total population of 27,372, while the 23 mainland
barangays recorded 286,259 inhabitants. The mainland barangays occupy
78% (52.57 km?) of the municipality's total land area, while the island
barangays occupy 22% (14.48 km?) only. Barangay San Carlos occupies 1.13
km? only which is 19'" biggest barangay in Binangonan, out of the 40
barangays. (See Appendix 5 — Table 5.1)

164

For 10 years, there has been a steady increase in the number of older persons
in the municipality. The female OPs have categorically outlived the male OPs
based on the number of women who spend a longer life span or still live
beyond 80 years old. Based on the age groups, the fewer older persons are
found to have higher longevity given the drop in the number of OPs within the
age group of 60-69, compared with the 50-59 years old OPs. (See Appendix
5 — Figures 5.1 and 5.2)

The Socio-Economic Profile of Binangonan provided a comprehensive
presentation of the projected population of the municipality in a span of 10
years. Based on the data, the 2010 and 2020 projections were culled from the
matrix and computed for the percent difference between the younger and older
age groups. The male and female OPs (50 years old and above) have a
growth factor of 12.91% per year. This has been the factor used by the MPDO
to determine the projected population for this age group. In terms of Male vs.
Female OPs, the growth factor is 6.06% and 6.85%, respectively. (See
Appendix 5 — Table 5.2)

b. Competitiveness Ranking of Binangonan, Rizal

On the Department of Trade and Industry website, the municipalities and cities
were ranked based on four (4) dimensions: Economic dynamism, Government
Efficiency, Infrastructure, and Resiliency. Each dimension has several
indicators that constitute the overall rating for each dimension. In 2016, there
were only three (3) dimensions when the Competitiveness Ranking started:
economic dynamism, government efficiency, and infrastructure. These were
expanded in the succeeding years to note the emerging dimensions of
competitiveness. However, in 2018, “no data available” was reflected for all

dimensions — the reasons for this were not indicated. The overall ranking of

165

Binangonan marked a significant improvement from Rank 11 in 2016 to Rank
6 in 2020. (Department of Trade and Industry, 2021) (See Appendix 5 —
Table 5.3)

c. Physical Environment

The location of Binangonan, Rizal, is strategic as it is very close to Metro
Manila, where industries and commercial districts are found. The increase in
the municipal population was brought by the migration of people from the city
proper to the countryside for lower cost of housing facilities. Henceforth, the
population spillover from Metro Manila is already felt in Rizal Province,

including Binangonan, Rizal.

With 33 coastal barangays, 273 hectare-forest areas, mineral resources, and
commercial-residential areas, the Municipality of Binangonan offers diverse
development opportunities such as agricultural, industrial, commercial,
tourism, forestry, and institutional. Access to Laguna Lake and the Sierra
Madre creates more employment and commercial opportunities for
Binangonan residents and entrepreneurs, including the LGU, to expand
development interventions. (Municipal Government of Binangonan, 2021, pp.
28-29)

On the other hand, it cannot be construed that the municipality also faces
critical environmental challenges, such as the continuous degradation of
Laguna Lake water quality due to sedimentation, extremely high concentration
of nitrates, coliform, and other organic and inorganic substances, which are
continuously lodged into the lake.

Similarly, the upland and coastal areas are also prone to hazards such as

earthquake-induced landslides; and rain-induced landslides based on the

166

Hazard Maps of the Department of Science and Technology-Philippine
Institute Volcanology and Seismology (DOST-PHIVOLCS) through its online

platforms: www.hazardhunter.georisk.ph and

www.geoanalytics.georisk.gov.ph .

According to the Seismic Hazards Assessment, PHIVOLCS noted that “all
sites may be affected by ground shaking in an earthquake and can be
mitigated by following the National Building code and Structural Code of the
Philippines.” It was underscored in the report that the municipality is prone to
Intensity VIIl earthquakes. (DOST-Philippine Institute of Volcanology and
Seismology (PHIVOLCS), 2021)

According to the GeoAnalytics of DOST-PHIVOLCS, about 87% of the
population in Binangonan is susceptible to rain-induced landslides.
Furthermore, PHIVOLCS underscored that “areas with low susceptibility to
rain-induced landslides are gently sloping areas with no identified landslides.”
(DOST-Philippine Institute of Volcanology and Seismology (PHIVOLCS),
2021)

Other environmental challenges of the municipality have identified in the
Socio-Economic Profile (2021) are severe erosion due to slash and burn
practices, flooding, particularly in the coastal areas, pollution (air, land, and
water), waste management, poor sewerage system, and sanitation in informal
settlement areas, among others.

Land conversion in the municipality also poses a development and a threat. It

is part of the LGU’s development efforts to increase economic activities in the

area through job creation and expansion of commercial and residential

167

spaces. (DOST-Philippine Institute of Volcanology and Seismology
(PHIVOLCS), 2021)

According to the Municipal Planning and Development Office (MPDO), there
have been discussions in 2018 about the development of the tourism industry
in Talim Island and the tourist sites such as the Binangonan Community Water
Ecotourism in Mt. Tagapo and the Binangonan Theme Park. Energy
development-related projects have formed part of the pipeline projects as per
Municipal Ordinance 020, s. 2018, or the approval of the “Island Wind Energy
Corporation (IWEC) from production forest / Agricultural to mix-use, under the
approved Comprehensive Land Use Plan of the Municipality, situated in
different Barangays of Talim Island, Binangonan, Rizal.” (Bernardo, Quintana,
Sanchez, Laumond, & Galang, 2018)

(See Appendix 5 - Figures 5.3, 5.4, and 5.5)

d. Planning, Policy Development, Budgeting, and Reporting

The CLUP and CDP of Binangonan have the actual and standard contents as
the prescribed 12-step process by the Housing and Land Use Regulatory
Board (HLURB) Volume 1. The planning process in the municipality is headed
by the Municipal Planning and Development Office (MPDO), where all plans
are consolidated, assessed, and endorsed to Sandigang Bayan or Municipal
Council for approval. (Bernardo, Quintana, Sanchez, Laumond, & Galang,
2018, p. 19)

Participation of non-government organizations (NGOs) in the planning process
can be demonstrated by including the accredited NGO in the Local
Development Council (LDC). Said NGOs may be representatives of
fishermen, farmers, business groups, and other organizations in the

municipality. The alignment of the NGO’s priorities with the administration is

168

a critical factor that the LDC looks into before accreditation such groups as
part of the Council. This ensures that the planning will be facilitated and not
derailed by opposing views and interests. (Bernardo, Quintana, Sanchez,
Laumond, & Galang, 2018, pp. 20-21)

It has been a great challenge for many municipalities to ensure that the
barangay annual implementation plans (AIPs) align with the Municipal
Development Plans. The integration of the four (4) major plans in local
governance: CLUP, CDP, LDIP, and the AIPs —- serves as the key to
institutionalizing proper mechanisms in the planning, implementing,
monitoring, and evaluating the municipal to barangay interventions. Better
planning processes require more than just following the template of the
national government agencies. Nevertheless, it also requires an operational
framework to (a) guide the municipal and barangay personnel; and (b) build
the competencies of involved people in the process. Moreover, this has been
part of the initiatives of the Municipality of Binangonan, having gone through
intensive capacity-building activities year-in-and-year-out. (Bernardo,
Quintana, Sanchez, Laumond, & Galang, 2018, p. 19)

The MPDO already facilitates the planning and evaluation efforts — both for
strategic and operational planning. Strategic Planning begins at the beginning
of every administration. In contrast, the Annual Implementation Planning
process begins every 1° quarter of the year. The Barangay Councils submit
their Annual Implementation Plans (AIPs) to the Local Development Council
(LDC) for deliberation from April to May. The AIPs are approved around
November, in time for their implementation the following year. The said
process is aligned with the DILG Rationalized Local Planning Guide.
(Bernardo, Quintana, Sanchez, Laumond, & Galang, 2018, p. 22)

169

The Municipal LGU has proper documentation on its Municipal Resolutions
and Ordinances on policy development. All decisions of the Municipal Council
have been documented, including the approval of annual and supplemental
budgets of the Municipal and Barangay LGUs.

(SEE ANNEX 1 LIST OF RELEVANT MUNICIPAL RESOLUTIONS AND
ISSUANCES FROM 2018-2020)

The Chief Local Executive is being authorized to enter into a memorandum of
agreement (MOA) on certain infrastructure projects, including those which
initiated improvement of facilities, enhancement of disaster risk reduction and
management capabilities, the establishment of an innovation hub, and other

service facilities, acceptance of donations, among others.

When the Philippine Government has declared that the country was under a
global pandemic in 2020, 34 resolutions were issued to set the COVID19-
related guidelines, such as wearing masks and face shields and curfew,
including partnerships with the COVID19 testing laboratory with funeral service
providers. The Municipal LGU also waived certain fees within the Enhanced

to General Community Quarantine duration in 2020.

A specific provision for Senior Citizens was observed in 2018, pursuant to
Municipal Resolution No. 047, s. 2018 or the “Resolution is endorsing the
request of the Local Government Unit of Binangonan for fund allocation for the
proposed construction of the Senior Citizen Building under the Local
Government Support Fund (LGSF) in the amount of Five Million Pesos
(Php5,000,000.00)”.

It can be noted that the transactions of the Municipal LGU were covered by

the appropriate policy instruments (resolutions or ordinances). A compilation

170

of these issuances can be improved if a records portal is available online —
increasing the transparency and accountability of the municipality.
Nonetheless, the Office of the Mayor has easily granted access to MPDO
documents as part of this research. (Municipal Planning and Development
Office, 2020)

The Municipal Budget can be found in the Accomplishment Reports. However,
the entire municipality had no consolidation of budget allocation and actual
expenditure. There is an increase of 14% in the 2021 overall Municipal
Budget (Php 818M) from the 2019 budget of Php715 M. The said increase
has been intended for the municipality's response to COVID19-related
response. The Municipal Development Fund has increased in 2020 due to the
immediate establishment of quarantine facilities on top of the infrastructure
projects in Binangonan. Realignment of funds is also evident, particularly in
the GAD Program, to provide funds for financial assistance to individuals and
households heavily stricken by the pandemic. (Municipal Planning and
Development Office, 2020)

On GAD Budget, an increase in figures in 2019 was brought about by tagging
several activities from the various municipal units/offices as “GAD activity.”
The GAD Office handled only a portion of the reflected “Total Budget” to
facilitate flexibility in offices implementing their GAD-related activities identified
as a critical intervention in the Municipal GAD Plan. (Municipal Planning and
Development Office, 2020)

Regarding the FY2020 GAD Budget of Php 48.8M, the Municipal Government
decided to realign the GAD Budget to be used as financial aid for individuals
and families who were heavily affected by COVID19 in 2020. Thus, before the
1st quarter of FY2020 ends, GAD Office had to drop all of its planned activities,

171

given the strict mandate for non-face-to-face interactions. The GAD allotment
for other offices was pooled for realignment, which provided additional funds
for the Municipal Government for COVID19-related expenses. (Municipal

Planning and Development Office, 2020)

On the other hand, the suspension of GAD activities in 2020 had challenged
the GAD office on how to implement GAD-related activities given the
restrictions brought to the fore by the pandemic. It was challenging for all
municipal personnel when the restrictions were heightened due to the rise in
the number of cases and even the mortality rate due to COVDI19 infections.
This somehow slowed down the operations at the LGU due to decreased
personnel capacity, reduced working hours, reduced workdays, and limited
number of customers to be attended to within the day. (Municipal Planning
and Development Office, 2020)

5.2 MUNICIPAL SERVICES FOR SENIOR CITIZENS

The main sources of information regarding services for Senior Citizens were
the GAD Office, MSWDO, and the BFOSCA. Key Informant Interviews were
conducted with representatives of the GAD Office and BFOSCA. At the same
time, documents from MSWDO, thru the MPDO, were considered pertinent
inputs to this study.

Table 5.1 provides the summary of services available for older persons.
Certain services cover only the senior citizens, but for GAD Office and
MSWDO, they cater to almost all age groups. However, the data from these
offices only reflect the target groups with age disaggregation. As for age, this
information can be based on the groups they serve (e.g., children, youth,
women, adults, and senior citizens, among others).

172

TABLE 5.1 SERVICES AVAILABLE FOR OLDER PERSONS

Type of Service CaO | Msw00 | BFOSCA
1. Crisis Intervention and Assistance / /
to Individuals in Crisis Situation
(AICS): (medical, food assistance,
burial assistance, transportation
assistance)
2. Capacity Development /
3. Livelihood Training /
4. Health and nutrition program /
5. Welfare and Development Program: /
Provision of quality medicines
6. Physical wellness program /
7. Programs and Services for the
Elderly
a._ Information Dissemination /
b. Assistance for Physical /
restoration
c. Self and Social Enhancement /
Service
d. After-Care and Follow-up /
Services
e. Special Services for the Elderly /
8. Disaster Management and /
Capability Building
9. Food / Cash for Work /
10.Emergency Assistance Services /
(Shelter for fire victims, “Balik
Probinsiya,” Crisis Intervention for
AICS, Disaster Relief Service)
11.Issuance of Senior Citizens ID / /
Cards and Booklets
12.Assistance to “Pay-out” for social / /

pension for senior citizens

173


a.

Gender and Development (GAD) Office

Before 2016, gender-related concerns used to be part of the MPDO, in

coordination with the Municipal Social Welfare and Development Office

(MSWDO). It was only in 2016, under the administration of Mayor Ceasar

Ynares, that the GAD Office was established to focus on gender

mainstreaming and capacity-building activities, including the GAD planning

and budgeting requirements. (Lozada, 2020)

GAD Plans, Programs, and Activities

GAD Office follows the DILG template for GAD Plan and Budget
preparation.

The budgeting is based on the 5% of the Internal Revenue Allotment.
Binangonan is very strict in the implementation of the GAD percentage.
Furthermore, the plans are prepared 1 year ahead of the
implementation year to have ample time to prepare and deliberate the
GAD Plan.

All municipal GAD plans are reviewed and approved at the DILG
Provincial Office. There are 13 municipalities, one city, and one
provincial GAD plan, which are being reviewed at the province level. All
of these plans should be received every October for review before
approval.

The Municipal Planning and Development Office (MPDO) has oversight
on all types of plans that the Municipality of Binangonan has to prepare.
GAD Office also submits to MPDO for consolidation and review before
submitting to the provincial oversight office.

The GAD Office requests GAD plans from the individual units at the
Municipal Government level. These plans are then consolidated at the
GAD Office.

174

Regarding the budget, the units need to allot 5% of their budget for GAD
activity.

Part of the GAD-initiated activities is “Elderly Week” and “Persons with
Disabilities (PWD) Week” celebrations. These are considered
“advocacy activities.”

These gatherings form part of the pre-pandemic initiatives of the
Municipal Government to celebrate with the Senior Citizens and PWDs.
There were dance contests among senior citizens. Sometimes they
hold Bingo and Physical Fitness programs.

In 2020, physical face-to-face gatherings have been discontinued due
to the pandemic. Hence, most GAD budget has been realigned as
“ayuda” or financial assistance. Thus, the GAD office reach a point
where it has questioned its rationale as a unit in the Municipality, given
restrictions for “face-to-face” interaction with their constituents

The GAD Office is directly the Office of the Mayor. It has two (2) plantilla
positions, with two (2) job order personnel. This office caters services
to all 40 barangays of Binangonan, including all offices/units within the
Municipal Hall of Binangonan.

(Lozada, 2020)

GAD Trainings - Pandemic Edition

They request a budget of about 25 to 30 livelihood kits to be distributed
in the said barangays. GAD has conceptualized virtual training,
providing the materials for participation in all 40 barangays. The
participants have been limited to a manageable number of about 20-30
pax per session only.

They tap barangay partners, such as GAD Focal Point Persons and

Barangay Councilors, to facilitate the selection of respondents and the

175

distribution of kits. Some barangays with spacious covered courts or
offices hold 5 to 6 respondents holding livelihood training.

e Around February-March 2021, GAD Office implemented one (1) face-
to-face training for 20 respondents at the GAD activity center. This was
a pilot test only for the virtual training module. Tita Aya said they plan
to hold another training for 40 barangays through virtual instructions but
will be hosted by the respective barangay LGUs. The types of training
which they plan to hold are as follows: (a) Liquid Detergent, (b)
Dishwashing, (c) Fabric Conditioner, (d) Powder Detergent, (e) Hand
Soap, and (f) Sanitizer.

Challenges and Opportunities

Challenges Opportunities
1. Shift from face-to-face to virtual 1. Innovations on how to hold GAD
mode of GAD Activities given activities came out from GAD
the quarantine protocols. Office ideas.

“Sanay talaga ako sa face-to-face
interaction. Kaya kong magtraining
Sa maraming tao. Kaya noong mag-
pandemic at ipinagbawal ang face-
to-face, tumigil talaga ang mundo ko.
At Malaki ang problema naming. So,
ilang buwan kami, literally, walang
ginagawa. Lalo pa ang pondo
naming ay nare-align para sa mga
ayuda. Pero eventually, sabi ko,
hindi pwede ang ganito. Kaya
nagisip kami ng paraan para
magkaroon pa rin kami ng mga
activities. Mahirap talaga, pero mas
okay, kaysa wala.”

2. Virtual activities are impossible 2. Improved capacities in ICT and

on the island and in other explored new platforms for
remote areas with a poor

176

internet connection. Very few
can afford mobile data or high-
speed internet. Henceforth, the
digital divide is much higher.

. There was difficulty in getting

feedback from respondents in
the online livelihood training.

delivering services in
Binangonan.
Expanded livelihood training

since the approach is more on
online training. GAD Office can

The training session was teach out to 40 barangays with a
recorded and distributed to the complete set of training materials
barangays for actual training. — but for only 20 to 25
GAD Office has no information respondents per barangay due to

on whether the produced goods
were of quality. However, they
have photos of the training
outputs and reports that said
products were sold.

limited funds.

(Lozada, 2020)

On Human Security

Tita Aya has noted that her understanding of Human Security is on being
“safe.” He related this to Violence Against Women and Children (VAWC),
delegated to the Municipal Philippine National Police. The women’s desk
is at the MSWD, which used to be with the PNP.

He has mentioned that women were more organized now, unlike the
LGBTQ, which started just now. He also mentioned the enactment of RA
11313 or the Safe Spaces Act.

GAD Office is more on advocacy and capacity-building activities.

“Sa tingin ko, mahalaga ang usapin ng Human Security. Bago ito sa akin,
at ang unang intindi ko rito ay parang pagiging “safe” lang ng isang tao.
Gaya ng mga kaso ng violence na hinahawakan ng PNP, at nailipat na sa
MSWD. Pero bahagi rin palang Human Security ang kabuhayan ng mga
tao, na tinututukan din ng GAD Office.”

(Lozada, 2020)

177

Needs of the GAD Office

Given the tremendous workload of the GAD Office and the importance of
historical memory on how to manage the GAD Office, Tita Aya recognized the
need to increase the number of plantilla positions. He plans to retire in 2 to 3
years, and he worries about transferring know-how to his successor upon
retirement. He added that he has already recommended additional plantilla

positions under GAD Office and just waiting for its approval.

Investments in systems and operations, such as database and community-
based monitoring systems. These can help the GAD Office mainstream an
efficient and effective GAD programming, budgeting, monitoring and
evaluation, and assessment for all 40 barangays. Tita Aya noted, however,
the need to equip the barangay LGU personnel with ICT-based capabilities to
facilitate the operations at their level and not only the provision of technology
and equipment. The said system enables the GAD Office to organize its
documents and fast-track the preparation and submission of reports.

(ANNEX 12 HIGHLIGHTS OF THE INTERVIEW WITH GAD OFFICER)

b. Municipal Social Welfare and Development Office (MSWDO)

The KIl with the MSWD Officer, Ms. Ma. Jennifer T. Dilag has been postponed
due to urgent matters during the data gathering period within July - September
2021. Instead, the researcher has accessed the MSWD Accomplishment
Reports from the compilation of reports of the MPDO.

The MSWDO has 65 personnel, with only 8 permanent staff and 57 staff who
are either casual, job order, or volunteer. They are considered “frontline
personnel” providing administrative and technical assistance to all Municipal
Government units and Barangay LGUs in Binangonan. The services of

MSWDO include (a) family and community welfare; (b) women's welfare; (c)

178

child and youth welfare; (d) emergency assistance; (e) programs and services
for persons with disability and elderly; and, (f) other programs and services.
The summary of specific services under each category is presented in Table
5.2. (Binangonan Municipal Welfare and Development Office (MSWDO),
2020, pp. 5-6)

TABLE 5.2 SUMMARY OF SERVICES OF MSWDO

(a) (b) (c) (d) (e) (
Family and Women Welfare Child and Youth Emergency Programs and Conduct
Community Services Welfare Services Assistance Services for Program and

Welfare Persons with Services
Disability and Awareness
Elderly Enhancement
Activities
Parent 1. Women in 1. Child 4. Emergency 1. Information An initiative of
Effectiveness Especially Development Shelter Disseminatio LGU or the
Service (PES) Difficult (formerly Day Assistance non Disability National
Marriage Circumstances Care) Service 2. Issuance of Prevention Government
Counselling (WEDC) 2. Child in Need of Certifications |2. Assistance to deliver
Service 2. Counseling Special 3. Case for Physical specific
. Responsible 3. Productivity Protection Referrals Restoration services to
Parenthood Skills and 3. Community- 4. National 3. Self and identified
Service Livelihood based Program Government Social groups to
Family Case Development for Delinquent Program / Enhancement enhance
Work 4. Self- Youth and Project Service their
. Social enhancement Children in Implementati | 4. After-Care knowledge
Preparation for skills and Conflict with the on and Follow- and
People's development Law 5. Networking, up Services awareness.
Participation 5. Community 4. Supplementary Cooperation, |5. Special
. Community Participation Feeding and Services for
Volunteer Skills 5. Educational Collaboration the Elderly
Resource Development Assistance with Non-
Development Government
Social Welfare Organizations
Structure (NGOs)
Development
Special Services
for Solo Parents

(Source: MSWDO Accomplishment Report CY 2020, p. 9)

While there is a dedicated service or program for the Elderly, all other services
needed by the OPs are accessible through MSWDO. OPs just need to
proceed to MSWDO and bring the necessary documents prior to availing of
such a program. When visiting the MSWDO, it has been observed that

queuing was long outside its office. This is the usual daily scenario due to the

179


volume of individuals needing assistance from MSWDO despite the threat of
COVID19.

The number of solo parents who sought the Solo Parents Identification Card,
which is 1,128 (in 2020), is higher than the 2019 record of 1,029. Most solo
parents are Female, with the highest record for the “unwed” category. The
MSWDO noted that such observation showed that female parents reflect that

the responsibility of raising their children is greater among women parents.

Some of the MSWDO services have been suspended when the country was
declared under the Enhanced Community Quarantine in 2020. These services
mainly focus on Child Development or Day Care Centers, Feeding Programs,
and the like at the barangay LGUs where interactions are mainly face-to-face.
All other pieces of training have been postponed given the insufficient capacity
of MSWDO and the LGU to accommodate virtual-based activities and due to

the directive for realigning the portion of the budget for financial assistance.

MSWDO reports that 100% (10,083) of the needs of persons with disability
(PWDs) and the elderly will be addressed in 2020. The services include
assistance for physical restoration, after-care and follow-up services, special
social services for the elderly, and special social services for PWDs. For these
sectors, they receive free physical/occupational therapies at the Binangonan
Proper, in partnership with a non-government organization (NGO). The
available therapies have been designed to serve stroke-related disabilities.
MSWDO provides assessment and endorsement to the said facility so the
individuals can avail of the said treatment for free or at a lower cost.

180

MSWDO and BFOSCA

MSWDO serves as an oversight body to BFOSCA. BFOSCA is the umbrella
organization or the federation level of the municipal senior citizen association.
The issuance of senior citizen IDs is a joint venture between MSWDO and
BFOSCA. BFOSCA accepts applications for Senior Citizen IDs and turns
them over to MSWDO for issuance. (Binangonan Municipal Welfare and
Development Office (MSWDO), 2020, p. 18)

MSWDO reports that in 2020, 1,935 ID cards have been issued — both for new
IDs and replacement requests. It has been recorded that 6,000 Purchase
Booklets for medicines and groceries were released. (Binangonan Municipal
Welfare and Development Office (MSWDO), 2020, p. 18)

Project proposals from BFOSCA usually get funding from MSWDO, based on
the approved annual agenda for senior citizens. Sometimes, BFOSCA also
serves as the implementing arm of MSWDO in projects and activities for the
elderly. The two (2) offices are closely coordinating towards providing quality
services for the senior citizens.

MSWDO on COVID19 Response

The following sections are mainly based on reviewing available documents
such as the Municipal Annual Reports. The interview with the MSWDO
representatives has been canceled due to schedule conflicts and
overwhelming social welfare and development-related activities from July to
October 2021. Nonetheless, the MSWDO officer has expressed willingness
to provide additional information should the available documents

Based on the document review, the Municipality of Binangonan has

documented its efforts in responding to the COVID19-related challenges in

181

2020. “Complementation and augmentation” of resources and capabilities
have been observed in the entire experience and journey of the entire
municipality. MSWDO has accounted for 1,000 DSWD relief boxes and
28,808 food packs for 3-day sustenance in 40 barangays. (Binangonan
Municipal Welfare and Development Office (MSWDO), 2020)

Financial assistance with the total amount of P12M has been released to cover
some 6,337 beneficiaries under the Binangonan Cash Assistance Program to
augment the funds coming from the Social Amelioration Program (SAP).
(Binangonan Municipal Welfare and Development Office (MSWDO), 2020)

Based on the report, MSWD has processed the release of the first tranche
under SAP in the amount of Php191M for 26,400 families. Another
supplemental budget has been released through the efforts of Rizal
Representative Hon. Michael John R. Duavit in the amount of Php871,000.00.
(Binangonan Municipal Welfare and Development Office (MSWDO), 2020)

c. Binangonan Federation of Senior Citizen Association (BFOSCA)

BFOSCA is a registered organization under the Securities and Exchange
Commission (SEC). It aims to harness all Senior Citizen Associations (SCA)
efforts in Binangonan, Rizal. All 40 presidents of SCAs in the municipality
serve as members of BFOSCA and are elected as officers every 3 years. The
current president of BFOSCA is Mr. Oscar San Jose Sison. (Maminta, 2021)

There are 16 BFOSCA officers based on the following posts:

President

Vice President
Secretary
Treasurer
Auditor

00000

182

o Business Manager (Main Island)
Business Manager (Island)
Public Relations Officer
Marshall

Board of Directors (7 officers)

0000

BFOSCA has one (1) office secretary who attends to all the needs of BROSCA
and provides assistance in the issuance of Senior Citizen Identification Cards.
Based on her assessment, she needs to improve her competencies in office

management to facilitate better operations for BFOSCA.

During lockdowns in the municipality, she has noted the difficulties in providing
continuous delivery due to insufficient technology support and limited
computer skills. Nonetheless, she also points out that “payout” or distribution
of financial assistance to selected Senior Citizens per barangay is being
implemented in coordination with the MSWDO.

BFOSCA Budget

BFOSCA funds come from annual dues or “butaw” in the amount of P600.00,
which is collected from each SCAs; project funds from the municipal
government or Office of the Mayor; and MSWDO. They call the annual dues
as “butaw.” The SCA Presidents use their personal funds to pay the said
“putaw” annually. Unfortunately, the fees have been found insufficient to
sustain the BFOSCA operations. These are merely voluntary and not
mandatory among the SCA Presidents. According to observations, many SCA
Presidents could not afford to pay the fees due to financial incapacity. To
assist BFOSCA in its operations, the Municipal Government provides free
office space, supplies, equipment, and use of utilities, including the salary of
BFOSCA Staff. The office staff receives seven thousand pesos (Php7,000.00)
per month as a Job Order personnel of the LGU.

183

Regarding the legal identity of BFOSCA, it is registered as a non-profit
organization under the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC).
However, it failed to register under the Bureau of Internal Revenue (BIR). This
prevented the BFOSCA from processing its official receipts (ORs), making it
impossible to issue OR whenever cash donations have been given to
BFOSCA. In cases when BFOSCA receives cash from external entities, only
acknowledgment receipts are provided.

Systems and Operations

Based on documents, BFOSCA is a separate entity from the LGU. However,
since the LGU provided all resources of BFOSCA, some of LGU’s functions
concerning senior citizens were administered by BFOSCA. Based on the
interview, BFOSCA and MSWDO work hand-in-hand in implementing senior
citizen-related activities such as distribution of financial assistance, processing
of social pension, and issuing IDs. The said social pension at P500.00 per
month is released on a per-semester basis thru the Binangonan “Halfway
Building.”

On the filing of records, the BFOSCA documents are filed in folders without
proper labeling. Review of documents/records has been impossible at the
interview due to loose pages and lacking copies of documents, so support
minutes of the meetings, policies, accomplishment reports, and progress
monitoring documents, among other documents, prepared or issued by the
association. The BFOSCA staff has presented copies of the proposal for the
celebration of Elderly Week and a copy of the program during the interview.
In addition, the Key Informant has mentioned that the LGU approved
BFOSCA’s request for financial assistance to implement the activities for the
Senior Citizens.

184

BFOSCA does not keep or manage a database of senior citizens. The
MSWDO manages all senior citizen-related data. While BFOSCA assists in
issuing senior citizen IDs, it does not keep a list of senior citizens applying for
ID cards, requesting ID renewal, or even booklets. BFOSCA turns overall
applications to MSWDO, where the IDs are processed, registered, and
released. BFOSCA serves as a facilitating agent to assist the SCAs in their
needs, like the SC IDs.

The BFOSCA has no internet connection, which prevented BFOSCA from
continuing its services for senior citizens. All activities have been discontinued
due to the declaration of lockdowns in 2020. BOFOSCA has experienced a
sudden pause in BFOSCA’s office because their officers were not allowed to
roam around the municipality for being identified as one of the most vulnerable

sectors.

There is not much improvement in the systems and operations during the
lockdowns. The key informant has observed that her skills in office
management were not enough to institute some improvement in the
workplace. In addition, BFOSCA lacks internet connection, preventing the
office staff from accessing free online training that could have improved her
skills. BFOSCA heavily relies on face-to-face interactions, limiting its capacity

to expand its services for Senior Citizens.

Recommended Improvement in BFOSCA

a) How do you think the BFOSCA Management be improved?

“Siguro kung may internet connection ditto sa office, marami rin
akong matutunan, kahit sa YouTube. Mga libreng training, marami
Siguro sa internet. Hindi pa ako ganun kagaling din sa mga Word,

185

o ibang software. Kailangan ko pa talagang mag-aral. Tapos, sana
ay maging regular na po ang posisyon ko para mas pangmatagalan
na talaga ako dito. Although, ngayon mga 5 taon na rin naman.
kaso wala akong GSIS eh. Saying din iyong service. Mahirap din
pag-aralan ang pasikut-sikot ng trabaho, kaya tyinatyaga ko po,
dahil napamahal na rin ako sa mga senior citizens. Kabisado ko na
rin ang mga requirements na dokumento dito. Kapag may kailangan
na requirements para sa senior citizen ID, kahit pagphotocopy or
pagcheck ng requirements, tinutulungan ko na po sila at kawawa
naman magpabalik-balik.”

Again, she has reiterated the need for self-improvement to provide better
services for senior citizens. She has recognized her needs in terms of
ICT, the capacity of office staff, and the organizational capacity of
BFOSCA to develop, implement, monitor, evaluate, and assess past and
current initiatives toward providing better programs and services in the
future. According to the office staff, BFOSCA has yet to unleash its

potential to serve the municipality's senior citizens better.

BFOSCA discontinued its operations during the first months of the
pandemic, as everyone had to work from home and lacked adequate
equipment. Reaching out to senior citizens has become difficult due to

face-to-face interaction and mobility restrictions.

BFOSCA has encountered the following challenges in its current set-up:
(i) adaptation to a new work setting — the capacity to provide effective and
efficient services, whether with face-to-face interaction or virtual-only; (ii)
difficulty in adhering to health protocol; (iii) fear of getting infected when
dealing with different stakeholders.

The BFOSCA staff has acknowledged the need to improve the current financial
assistance for senior citizens by increasing the amount provided, reconfiguring
how their projects were designed and implemented, and service enhancement
for the senior citizens.

186

(ANNEX 13 HIGHLIGHTS OF THE INTERVIEW WITH BFOSCA
SECRETARY)

d. Barangay Services for Older Persons / Senior Citizens

The Barangay San Carlos has an active Senior Citizen Association, headed
by its President — Mr. Fernando Arriola. The oversight Barangay Councilor for
Senior Citizens is Mr. Francisco “Boy” Bernardo. Currently, the Senior Citizen
has its building behind the San Carlos Barangay Hall. Likewise, the allotted
budget for Senior Citizen Association in 2021 was P111,000.00, based on the
Php21 million approved barangay budget. (Arriola, 2021; Bernardo F. , 2021)

As per the policy of the barangay, the said budget for Senior Citizens can only
be utilized subject to project proposals submitted by the Senior Citizen
Association. The allowable expenses for the senior citizen budget are
medicines, burial assistance, and other special projects subject to the approval
of the Barangay Council. The priority projects of Mr. Arriola for 2021 include
the provision of free medicines and vitamins for indigent senior citizens.
(Arriola, 2021)

OSCA has been limited to this activity due to its recognized vulnerability to
COVID19. Since 2020, they did not report to the Senior Citizen office regularly.
Nevertheless, they were very active in processing the senior citizen
identification cards and facilitating the social pension and financial assistance
for senior citizens. (Arriola, 2021)

When asked regarding the services provided to Senior Citizens
“Nagbibigay kami ng gamot at vitamins sa mga Senior
Citizens. Gumagamit kami ng index cards para mailista
naming kada Senior Citizen ang mga na-avail na mga
gamot. Tinitingnan din naming ang vaccination cards para

malaman naming kung nakapagpabakuna na o hindi pa.

187

Nang sa gayon, makapagbigay kami ng tulong o marefer
natin kina kagawad...Mayroon din kaming _ burial
assistance, basta may Senior Citizen ID na ipakita sa
“Tajuna, Tayuman Branch”. Php7,000.00 lang ang

babayaran sa “service”...” (Arriola, 2021)

According to Mr. Arriola (2021), the Senior Citizen Association provides
services such as facilitation of free vaccines, provision of medicines, and
vitamins, facilitation of senior citizen IDs, and financial assistance. They also
have a partnership with Tajuna (funeraria, whose owner is a resident of
Barangay San Carlos) for Senior Citizen members to avail of the discounted

tate for services at Php7,000.00 only upon submission of senior citizen ID.

At the time of the interview, the Senior Citizen Association (SCA) officers have
become pre-occupied by the immediate need to finalize the list of beneficiaries
for “ayuda” (financial assistance) as part of the Municipality's COVID19-
response program. Only the SCA President and one of his Directors —
Mr. Eduardo G. Fillarya, have coordinated with the identified beneficiaries of
the “ayuda”. They said that the expenses on communication were charged to
their money. The most challenging part was organizing all documents
submitted to BFOSCA and DSWD.

The reality of being a President or an official of the SCA is a very rewarding yet
thankless job. Mr. Arriola has recalled his reason for running for office and his
intent to contribute to the betterment of the organization’s operations and
services for the elderly. With about 600 members and in partnership with
Kagawad Boy Bernardo, the SCA can still expand and maximize the limited

resources they have and the limited volunteer senior citizens.

188

(ANNEX 14 HIGHLIGHTS OF THE INTERVIEW WITH THE BARANGAY SAN
CARLOS SENIOR CITIZEN ASSOCIATION OFFICERS)

e. Perspectives from the Barangay Health Workers

BHWs have been identified as significant members of the LGU in providing
services to OPs. They are the leader in providing healthcare assistance to all
barangay constituents. They also serve as the municipality's arm whenever

there are directives from MSWDO to deliver such services.

The good thing about BHWs is that they serve all ages. Their services cover
everyone in the barangay who needs it. According to BHWs, the senior
citizens are taken care of by the San Carlos SCA; thus, they have separate
funds and supplies from BHWs. The BHWs no longer entertain requests for
medicines from senior citizens because the barangay already provides funds
to SCA. However, for vaccinations, only the BHWs coordinate this in the entire
barangay, in collaboration with MSWDO and the assigned barangay councilor.

The BHWs have mentioned the following services that the Barangay Health
Center provides to the barangay constituents, regardless of age: (i) free
consultation; (ii) free vaccines; (iii) free medicines/vitamins; (iv) facilitation for
free swab test at the Municipal Health Center in Pritil, Binangonan, Rizal; (v)
distribution of in-kind assistance or COVID19 assistance; (vi) free anti-tetanus
shots; (vii) monitoring of COVID19 positive; (viii) assistance to Dengue
patients; and (ix) free training (such as first aid, livelihood-related, capacity

building activities for BHWs and other barangay workers, among others).
As regards the understanding of Human Security, the BHWs have mentioned

the following major points related keywords: (i) safe from getting COVID19

infection when they do fieldwork visits; (ii) being free from any form of anxieties

189

because they noticed that the level of anxieties was high during the pandemic,
(iii) tenure in the barangay; (iv) fair or better compensation; (v) health

insurance; and, (vi) with complete benefits.
The highlights of the interview are presented in Appendix 5 - Table 5.15.

On the Barangay Health Center operations, each BHW has reported to the
center at least once a week. They have been assigned to 4 to 5 streets in the
barangay. Furthermore, even if they only report to the barangay at least once

a week, they have been expected to do fieldwork.

The maximum incentive that a BHW can receive is P1,650.00 per month. As
volunteers, the barangay has not provided benefits such as contributions to
Social Security System (SSS), PAGIBIG, or PHILHEALTH. According to
BHWs, the retired BHWs have failed to sign-up for SSS, PAGIBIG, and
PHILHEALTH while still active in service. Thus, most BHWs have no pension
after retiring as barangay volunteers.

The factors they have considered were: being happy with their work despite
the threat of COVID19 — no health problems since 2020; some said “just right”
— not so sad and not that happy, but those who responded “0” correlated their
rating to having nothing on their table when ECQ was declared in the 2020s.
However, they have experienced various coping mechanisms to survive the
lockdowns, which were new to them.

According to the BHWs, the pandemic has brought only negative things. The

workload of BHWs has become more difficult given the health risks they face

when they do fieldwork and the demands from them to administer financial

190

assistance, vaccination arrangements, monitoring of COVID19 optimistic

residents, and provision of COVID19 in-kind assistance.

Even if they have received COVID19 shots, some expressed doubts about
being 100% safe. One has expressed that the lockdowns have affected their
mental health and well-being in the early pronouncements of the pandemic in
2020. Nonetheless, they always say “Awa ng Diyos, buhay pa kami.” They
have acknowledged God for being alive and having good health conditions for

their entire family.

The allowances or incentives of being a BHW have not been enough to finance
the volunteers’ entire (1) month expenses. Sometimes, a portion of about
P1,650.00 per month is used to buy office supplies that the Barangay LGU

failed to provide.

The perks of BHWs include a priority list regarding vaccination and other
government programs. Nevertheless, besides these, the BHWs are
underpaid, given the gravity of their work and the health risks they are exposed
to.

They are considered “volunteers” and not an employee of the barangay. This
implies that they do not have the regular benefits of an employee such as
PAGIBIG, PHILHEALTH, and SSS. Because their status is only a volunteer,
they only get to report once a week. Technically, their allowance is only four
(4) days a month. However, according to the BHWs, even if their duty is only
once a week, they find themselves working on their off-duty days, particularly
when directives from the MSWDO such as vaccination, census/surveys, and

distribution of in-kind or financial aids, among others.

191

They have observed political favoritism in the Barangay LGU and even in the
Municipality of Binangonan. According to BHWs, in some barangays like
Taytay Rizal, they have good incentive packages for BHWs. Given this
observation, the BHWs have expressed a little dismay for not being prioritized
by the barangay.

(SEE ANNEX 15 HIGHLIGHTS OF THE INTERVIEW WITH BHWS)

5.3 HUMAN SECURITY IN BARANGAY SAN CARLOS BASED ON THE
PERSPECTIVES OF OLDER PERSONS

Under a pandemic situation, OPs have been regarded as one of the most
vulnerable groups who can be easily infected by COVID19. The pandemic
has doubled and tripled the burdens of OPs by the restrictions and limitations
in mobility which caused depletion of resources due to lost jobs and

inadequate alternative sources of income.

Reports show the increase in domestic violence has affected women's overall
well-being and OPs confined at home. In addition, women's reproductive work
has pressed so many burdens among women under the work-from-home set-
up having no more boundaries from the productive and community
responsibilities. Exposure to COVID19, plus the risks from being affected by
natural hazards and, in other areas, by political unrest, have placed both the
private individuals and the LGUs under threat and increased vulnerabilities
(UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, 2020)

The succeeding sections discuss the results from the in-depth interview with
OPs, with fair treatment for all three (3) research areas but with distinction on
the male and female respondents to note the sex-disaggregated data on
responses between males and females.

192

a. Research Respondents Profile

Seven (7) main questions provide information about the research respondents’
profiles. The said questions probed on the educational attainment, cognitive
assessment score, age group, area, sex, head of the family, and living
arrangements. (See Appendix 5 — Table 5.16)

Distribution of Respondents based on Age, Sex, and Research Area

A total of 60 individuals have participated in the research for the in-depth
interview. In each research area, 20 Respondents have been identified to
participate in this research.

Among the female OP respondents, the age group of 50-59 years old has the
highest participation percentage of 41.67%, followed by the age group of 60-
69 years old, and then the 70 years old and above at 5% only. The same
pattern has been observed among male OP respondents, with 16.67% for 50-
59 years old, 6.67% for 60-69 years old, and 1.67% for 70 years old and above.
(See Appendix 5 — Table 5.5 and Figure 5.6)

Results of Cognitive Assessment Test

Using the adopted tool for Cognitive Assessment, the OP respondents were
have been interviewed and requested to perform some gestures based on a
standard set of questions. Their scores are interpreted on a scale of 5, with 5
being the highest.

Based on the results, 1.67% receive a score of 2 or “below average” (15.00 —
19.99 points); 16.67% receive a score of 3 or “average” (20.00 — 24.99 points);
75% receive a score of 3 or “normal” (25.00 — 29.99 points); and, 6.67%
receive a score of 5 or “above normal” (30.00 points — perfect score). The

respondents in all age groups have been found in the “normal” range, with

193

scores between 20 to 24.99 points out of 30 points. This implies that all
respondents passed the cognitive assessment and were qualified to

participate in the research.

Number of Years Living in the Barangay

The number of years of OPs living in the barangay has been considered part
of the profile information because it can somehow provide an impression of
how the OPs were familiar with the characteristics of the community, including
their familiarity with the neighborhood within the respective research areas. It
has been assumed that the more years spent in the barangay, the higher the

level of familiarity of OPs with the community.

Among female OP respondents, 58% has reported living in the barangay for
more than 15 years; 7% within 11 to 15 years; 5% were within 6 to 10 years,
and 5% were between 1 to 5 years. The same trend has been observed with
the male respondents. The majority of respondents have spent more than 15
years in the barangay (23%), with only 2% attributed to 6 to 10 years. In total,
82% of the respondents have been living in the barangay for more than 15
years already. (See Appendix 5- Table 5.7 and Figure 5.8)

Education Profile of the Participant OPs

On the level of education among the OP respondents, 43% have indicated that
they have completed their primary education or grade 6 graduate. About 25%
of the respondents have also completed Secondary Education (High School
Graduate). Some OPs have indicated that they had reached any grade level
in elementary (8%) or any year in high school (7%), respectively. (See
Appendix 5 - Table 5.9)

194

Level of Education among OP Participants in
all three (3) Research Areas

Completed Tertiary Education

Completed or reached any level in the Tertiary
Education, but unable to graduate from College

Completed Secondary Education
Completed or reached any grade level in the
Secondary Education, but unable to graduate from
High School
Completed Primary Education
Completed or reached any grade level in the
Primary Education, but unable to graduate from
High School

Did not give any answer

™ 3%

i 5%

ee 25%

7%
| 43%
Ha 8%

Ga 8%

Percentage

FIGURE 5.1 GRAPH OF THE RESPONDENTS’ LEVEL OF EDUCATION IN
THREE (3) AREAS

Living Arrangements by Sex

The research respondents live in remote areas with low access to public
transportation. The most common modes of mobility include walking, biking,
personal vehicle, or commuting via tricycle at around P50.00 to P100.00 per
special trip. Challenged by their physical capabilities, the OPs were left at
home to manage the household responsibilities: taking care of grandchildren,

cooking, laundry, cleaning the surroundings, etc.

195


LIVING ARRANGEMENTS BY SEX
Female O Male

LIVING WITH EXTENDED FAMILY
MEMBERS (IN-LAWS, AUNTIE, UNCLE, 11.67% Po

COUSIN, NEPHEW, NIECE, ETC.)

LIVING WITH SIBLING, PARENTS,
GRANDCHILREN 18.33% [so

LIVING WITH BOTH SPOUSE AND
CHILDREN 18.33% | 8.33%

LIVING WITH CHILD/REN ONLY 15.00% 5.00%
LIVING WITH SPOUSE ONLY 5.00% sh

LIVING ALONE 6.67% |} 0.00%

|

PERCENTAGE OF HOUSEHOLDS

FIGURE 5.2 LIVING ARRANGEMENTS (IN PERCENTAGE) BY SEX

Among the respondents, 6.67% of female OPs are living alone. These OPs
are either survivors of their spouses, separated, or single women. Being
“alone” in their home haves not bothered them because their family members

live nearby or reside within a “family compound.”

196


Combining the households with the immediate family members only vis-a-vis
those with extended families, it can be noted that 54.66% of the respondents
are living with either their spouses & children (26,33%), with their children only
(20%) or with their spouses only (8.33%).

To note the total number of household members living with them, their
tesponses were classified based on the following categories: (1) Self; (2)
Living with spouse only; (3) Living with children only; (4) Living with spouse
and children (5) Living with siblings, parents, grandchildren, or extended family
members, i.e., in-laws, auntie/uncle, cousins, nephews/nieces, etc.

Out of the 60 households, there are 25 households with two (2) household
members. Three (3) household members followed this for 21 households.
Three (3) female OPs live alone but near their children and grandchildren. Six
(6) households have four (4) household members, and five (5) households
noted that they have five (5) household members.

Living Arrangements among Older Person
Respondents

PRPNNW
ounousd

°

Number of Households

5)
rE | |
1 2 3 4
Total Number of Household Members

5 or more

FIGURE 5.3 SUMMARY OF RESULTS ON THE TOTAL HOUSEHOLD MEMBERS

197

b. Human Security Perspectives
The perspectives of OPs on Human Security are categorized based on six (6)
items which refer to the following:
a) Level of difficulty in the current situation
b) Familiarity with the term “Human Security.”
c) Perception of being safe and secured
d) Perspective on the important things that matter to OPs, with respect to
the different dimensions of Human Security
(See Appendix 5 — Table 5.6)

Based on the numerical values, the responses of male and female OPs have
slim differences in their scores. With a critical value of p< .05, the Chi-Square
Statistic is 0.0889, and the p-value is 1.0901. The Chi-Square Statistic is also

cross-referred with Yates correction, where the value is 0; the p-value is 1.

The female OPs have been expressive of their opinions during the interview.
While choices in the questionnaire have facilitated the interview, the
tesearcher has documented additional statements to describe OPs’
experiences and responses. Some of the statements from the female OPs are
the following:

“Ang Human Security para sa akin ay walang pangamba, kapanatagan, ligtas
lahat ng oras, kasapatan sa lahat ng pangangailangan, edukasyon, malusog,
walang sakit, nagtitiwala ako kay Lord. Siya na ang bahala sa atin,
matatagalan itong pandemya kaya magtiwala lang. Sapat ang pagkain palagi

at walang magkasakit sa pamilya” - Nanay Lita (not her real name)

198

“Ang Human Security ay walang pangamba, ligtas lahat ng oras, kasapatan
sa lahat ng pangangailangan, walang sakit, kapayapaan sa lahat ng oras,
kayang solusyonan ang mga problema, walang kapanatagan kapag
bumabagyo kasi binabayo ng hangin ang aming maliit na bahay (makeshift);
nawawashout nga ang ilang bahay dito sa lugar namin. Walang ibang
tumutulong, hindi nakakatulong ang barangay. Kami-kami nagtutulungan

nalang dito.” - Nanay Doring (not her real name)

Ang Human Security ay “edukasyon, walang sakit, gumagaling kapag

nagkakasakit, hindi maabot ng COVID19.” Nanay Juliet (not her real name)

The female OPs are somewhat familiar with the term Human Security, as they
heard it on television. Some said they have not heard of such a term but a
little idea about human security as something related “with being safe, having
enough of what they need, being calm even if there were problems, no
sickness, and being able to resolve issues that may arise in their day-to-day

lives.”

During the interview, they have expressed the “lack of external help” in times
of crisis. They underscore their response to help one another in difficult times
or during calamities. However, they view the provided assistance as
insufficient to extend relief to alleviate their day-to-day needs, particularly
during the lockdowns. Their neighbors with “sari-sari stores” have become
their means to make ends meet in a day through credit. This set-up, later on,

has not been sustainable as the OPs cannot pay their debts anymore.

Table 5.3 and Figure 5.4 summarized the ranking of Human Security definition
based on the responses of OPs:

199

TABLE 5.3 RANKING OF HUMAN SECURITY DEFINITION BASED ON THE
RESPONSES OF OLDER PERSONS

Human Security Definition Count Rank
Kapanatagan, walang alalahanin, kapayapaan sa 44 1st

lahat ng oras (secured; calm, at peace)

Malusog ! walang sakit (in good health) = 27s 2nd
Ligtas sa lahat ng oras (safe) 25 3rd
Walang pangamba (no worries) 24 4th
Kasapatan sa lahat ng pangangailangan (enough 23 5th

with everything)

Edukasyon (education, being aware, access to 19 6th
information)

~Pananam palataya / dasal (faith) 10 7th
Being with family 5 8th
No answer 5 8th

200

Possible Definition of Human Security among Male and Female
Older Persons

Kapanatagan, walang alalahanin, kapayapaan
sa lahat ng oras (secured; calm, at peace)

Malusog / walang sakit (in good health)

Ligtas sa lahat ng oras (safe)

Walang pangamba (no worries)

Kasapatan sa lahat ng pangangailangan
(enough with everything)

Edukasyon (education, being aware, access to
information)

Pananampalataya / dasal

Being with family

No answer

FIGURE 5.4 GRAPH ON THE POSSIBLE DEFINITION OF HUMAN SECURITY

°

5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50

a:
a:

AMONG MALE AND FEMALE OLDER PERSONS

According to OPs, Human Security is about being safe, healthy, without
anxieties, with enough basic needs, with education, faith in God, and being
with their families. Safety has been referred to as having “no sickness or not
being infected by COVID19” and “being free from calamities such as typhoons

and landslides.” It can be recalled that the research areas are prone to

typhoon-induced landslides as per the GeoRisk map of PHIVOLCS.

The perspective on Human Security needs to consider the experiences and
current context of OPs. They relate it with being safe from COVID19-virus, or

201

with natural hazards, or being able to resolve the critical issues at hand. Every
day is a challenging experience for the OPs, even before the pandemic days.
They recognize the threats given their location (landslide-prone area) and the
economic insecurities that limit their access to quality education, health
services, and even quality food, shelter, and water. Nonetheless, their
collective strengths as one community create the positive spirit that keeps
them going and gives them the reason to live, survive every crisis, recover,
and respond to the emerging battles of life. After all, every day for them is like
a battlefield — trying so hard to keep their family alive, no matter what, no matter
if there is COVID19 or none. Poverty persists and remains to be the major

crisis that OPs experience in their later years.

On the other hand, OPs have expressed optimism in their situation, believing
that they are contented with everything that they have and that they are
COVID19 resistant — an irony the mainstream media as something serious and
detrimental to health if the spread cannot be controlled.

They have simple colds in the past months, particularly during lockdowns.
However, such simple sicknesses have not shaken their confidence about
their being resistant to COVID19. Thus, medical issues are not their main
concern but the food on their table, particularly when the OPs and their family

members are restricted from traveling to their workplaces.

Simple farming has not been very common in the research areas. Some have
a gift and passion for growing vegetables. However, most respondents do not
find farming worthwhile, even with the availability of vacant lots around the
vicinity.

202

c. Opinion on the significant factors that comprise Human Security
The last item in the interview questionnaire is about the OPs’ opinion on the
significance of the different factors of Human Security. Initially, there are only
eight (8) factors. However, the recurrence of “family” in their responses has
prompted the researcher to consider it as an addition to the list of factors in
the interview. (See Table 5.4)

TABLE 5.4 MEAN SCORE AND RANKING OF HUMAN SECURITY COMPONENT

Mean Rank
Human Security Dimensions Score based on
Importance

Pamilya (Family) 4.6 ist
Kalusugan (Health Security) 4.5 2nd
Spiritwalidad (Malayang pagpapahayag ng

pananampalataya o Spiritual Security) 4.3 3rd
Pansariling kaligtasan (Personal Security) 4.3 3rd
Panirahanan (Housing Security) 4.3 3rd
Panlipunang kapanatagan (Community and

Political Security) 4.2 4th
Panggastos or kabuhayan (Economic Security) 4.2 4th
Kapaligiran (Environment / Community Security) 4.2 4th
Pagkain (Food Security) 4.1 Sth
Gadgets (Digital Security) 4.0 6th

203

Mean Scores of Human Security Factors

Gadgets (Digital Security) [UN +0
Pagkain (Food Seaurity) [NNN 42
Kapaliran Eméronment/ Community em
Security) ”
Panggastos or kabuhayan (Economic
Security)
Panlipunangkapanstagan (Community eT 4,
and Political Security) .
Panirahanan (House) [NN 43
Pansariling kaligtasan (Personal Security) [NN 4.3

Spiritwalidad (Malayang pagpapahayag
ng pananampalataya o Spiritial Security)

3.7 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46

43

FIGURE 5.5 GRAPH OF THE MEAN SCORES AND RANKS ON HUMAN
SECURITY PERSPECTIVE

Item 69 in the questionnaire asks the OP respondents about their opinion on
the different dimensions of Human Security. OPs have ranked the provided
dimensions of Human Security based on their perceived importance. Other
answers are reflected in the “remarks” portion, which later on has been
classified. Then, later on, these were classified or reflected as an additional
Human Security perspective.

It turned out that “Family” ranked 1° in the list of OPs. The 2" dimension was
Health, which covered the access to health services within the barangay and
municipality. This was related as well to food security (ranked 6th). (See Table
5.4 and Figure 5.5)

204

Spiritual Security has ranked 3% as evident in all 60 respondents who
consistently expressed their need for God’s mercy (awa ng Diyos) to be safe
and secured at all times, given numerous limitations that they faced prior to
the pandemic. In this light, spirituality has been limited to “faith in God,”
expressed through praying, going to church, serving God, and serving other
people.

The two (2) dimensions at rank 3 included Personal Security and Housing
Security. Both can be considered one, but the OPs have expressed a separate
item for Housing Security since most do not own the lots where their houses
are built. Most of them were only caretakers by the private owner or a relative.
This poses uncertainty on how long they would be accommodated in the lot
that another person owned.

In the 4"" rank, three dimensions have a mean score of 4.2. Thus, the human
security dimensions include Personal Security and Housing Security. The
latter can be subsumed under the Personal Security. (See Table 5.4 and
Figure 5.5)

In the 4'° place, the OPs have identified Community and Political Security,
Environment / Community Security, and Economic Security. While OPs live in
remote areas of the barangay and even in areas where environmental threats
are present, they do not mind if there are present dangers in their community.
This can be observed in their expressions of being tough and having a certain
level of grit in surviving their day-to-day needs. Overwhelmed by the
challenges in life, OPs have shown to be composed even when typhoons hit
the areas.

Food Security has turned out to be in the 5'" place, which was unexpected

because it could have been in the top 3 answers. This can be due to the

205

current health concerns related to the pandemic. In addition, financial sources
have served as their means to buy food daily. Likewise, in other households,

OPs have nearby sources of food.

The least priority among the human security components is “Digital Security.”
The most common answer under this component reflected: “I do not know
how to use gadgets,”; “We do not have gadgets at home,”; “It [gadgets] is just

a waste of time,”; among others.

These are some of the responses from OPs who are less interested in using
mobile phones, the internet, and smartphones. On the other hand, some OPs
have adopted the technology and enjoyed the advantages of mobile phones
and the internet. According to them — mostly female OPs — they use gadgets
to communicate and connect with distant relatives. Those OPs with gadgets
seem amazed by the information technology — smartphones, the internet,
Facebook, and YouTube. In contrast, to other OPs, COVID19 has paved the
way for online buying and selling. Thru the advancement in social media
platforms, OPs and some younger family members have explored the
opportunities for additional economic opportunities. Others have taken
advantage of Facebook to communicate with relatives in other remote areas.
They added that through the internet, they could purchase online and even

help their children earn a living by providing transportation or courier services.

d. Economic Security

The Economic Security section, which consists of 10 questions, focuses on
the OPs’ length of stay in the area, type of housing ownership, daily
sustenance, vehicle ownership, transportation, support from family and

community members, and access to the market. (See Appendix 5 — 5.16)

206

The individual scores have been arranged based on sex and ranked from
highest to lowest. The median of all the scores is 21. Among female OPs, 25
OPs whose scores were rated as “high” and 20 OPs whose scores were rated
as “low.” Regarding the male OPs, 8 were rated as “high” and 7 as “low.” This
means that more than have of female OPs considered themselves in the
higher range of having economic security, based on the median scores.
However, this does not mean that they are well-off or have enough. The score

shows how the scores have been distributed based on the median score.

These numbers are plugged into an online chi-square calculator to determine
whether there is a significant difference between gender and economic
security. Based on the calculations, the chi-square statistic is 0.0224, with a
p-value of .880905, which is <.05. Accordingly, there is no significant
difference in the responses between the male and female respondents.

(See Appendix 5 — Tables 5.17 and 5.18)

Number of years living in the barangay (Q8)

The average number of years living in the barangay among OPs is around
4.50 to 4.87. This means that most OP respondents are already in the
barangay for more than 11 years. Based on their observations and stories, it
can be noted that the OPs have a high level of familiarity with their community.
Everybody knows everyone else. Similarly, helping one another in crisis is a
normal scenario for them.

The OPs have spent almost half or more of their lifetime in the area. They
have witnessed the changes which happened over the years. Some of them
have been active in volunteering in the past years or have served at the
Barangay Hall for quite some time. However, some OPs have remained within

the bounds of their homes, particularly the female OPs. However, this limits

207

their economic opportunities, causing them to be more dependent on the

productive members of their families.

Lot Ownership (Q9)

Housing is a cross-cutting component of Economic and Personal Security. It
forms part of the basic needs of individuals. The type of ownership raises
certain risks of being evicted from the barangay anytime the lot owners or the
government decide to use the land for other purposes. Very few OPs
expressed being secured in their homes, given the “temporary” and
“undefined” terms in using the privately-owned lots. OPs with no “rents” are
spared paying the monthly rental fees. For them, this is a form of “blessing.”
Nevertheless, to others, they have to pay “unregulated” rental fees, which
amount have not been revealed during the interview. According to OPs, the
rental fee is determined by the “lot owner,” with unmetered electric and water
bills.

The utilities, such as water and electricity, were another issue. Most of the
research areas' houses do not have a personal meter or electric meter
because they lack the documentary requirements and financial capacity to
apply for their water and electricity. Consequently, they are forced to resort to
“unmetered” connections from those houses with “water and electricity
meters.” Such arrangements facilitate easy connection from the main source,
as no documents were required. On the other hand, the “main source” rates
are unregulated and lack “sub-meter” readings. This results in the abuse of
power of the “main source” because it is they who dictate how much a

household should pay for water and electricity per month.

Some residents say that the electric charges were based on the number of

gadgets, light bulbs, and appliances a household uses in a month.

208

Nevertheless, they observed that they were being overcharged. However,
they could not afford to complain because of fear of being disconnected from

the “main source.”

Nanay Carmy (not true name), in one of the conversations with the researcher,
narrated how she became indebted because of excessive charging by the
“main source.” She pays P700.00 to P800.00 per month but with only one (1)
analog mobile phone and one (1) light bulb. The amount is only for a mobile
phone and light bulb. Any additional gadget will incur additional charges which

the “main source.”

Source of Income (Q10, Q11, Q54, Q55)

The main source of income (Q10) among OPs is “(1) employment” in the
informal sector, based on the mean, median, and mode values — 1.40, 1.00,
and 1.00, respectively. No OP mentioned that he/she was “permanently”
employed. The usual types of work among women OPs include household
helpers, shellfish (suso) cleaners, and vendors. Most of them are dependent
on their working household members if they cannot work, particularly during

the pandemic where OPs were advised to stay home.

Other sources of income include (2) allowance from being a barangay LGU
volunteer; (3) pension; (4) Remittances from family members; (5) selling as a
vendor; (6) and owns a sari-sari store.

There are complaints about increasing prices of essential commodities,
particularly when the pandemic hit the country in 2020. Their family members
lost their jobs, and the OP respondents also expressed a loss of income. Even
those with sari-sari stores complain about the increasing debts from five-six

facilities and other microfinance agents in the neighborhood. The term “gipit,”

209

or desperate, has become prevalent throughout the interviews. Due to
financial scarcity, the OPs cannot afford their maintenance medicines or

check-ups.

Family and community support systems are apparent in the responses of OPs.
They mentioned the different agencies which helped them in the difficult times.
Questions 11, 54, and 55 provided information about the persons or
institutions ready to help the OPs when they asked for help. Based on the
mean, median, and mode of scores (1.0 to 1.5) of male and female OPs’
responses, the major sources of financial assistance come from children,
spouses, and siblings.

An average of 2 individuals per household who work and earn a living has
been a common arrangement. Unfortunately, the pandemic has caused
layoffs and shutting down some industries/businesses. Given the no-work-no-
pay rule for informal workers, the lockdown declarations and quarantine
policies have greatly affected a household's income level, leading to either
more debts from lending institutions or agents or to other forms of low-cost

businesses.

On average (2.80), OPs generally receive assistance from relatives, local
government units, and friends. One striking point to highlight in the responses
is that OPs have resorted to a five-six lending system (Mode: 5, for both male
and female OPs) because they viewed it as the simplest and fastest way to
get financial help. They have recognized the high-interest rate, but they had
no other means for financial assistance besides the five-six lending system.
According to Nanay Vangie (not real name):
“Walang kung anong requirements ang five-six, kaysa

$a ibang micro-finance o lending agents dito. Kaya

210

sa five-six nalang kami nahiram, kahit malaki ang
interest, makakaraos rin.”

“Five-six lending offers access to financial assistance
without the need to submit many documentary
requirements. We prefer five-six. Even if the interest

was very high, this will all come to pass.”

Access to transportation (Q57)

In this research, access to public transportation and modes of transportation
forms part of the economic security. Question numbers 56 and 57 explored
these indicators.

The most common response among OPs was number “1” or “none”. The OP
respondents expressed that they do not own any type of vehicle for both males
and females. Very few households have noted that their family members own
bicycles, motorbikes, tricycles, or 4-wheeled vehicles. Walk or take the public
transportation available in the area like tricycle and jeepney have been the
regular modes of transportation or mobility.

With the limitations to OPs’ mobility under the quarantine declarations within
the barangay, OPs spend most of their time at home. They find themselves
exhausting all possible opportunities at home on how to still earn a living.
Some of them resorted to being “plantito and plantita” or being plant lovers.
They sell potted plants to joggers, bikers, or tourists within the area. Even
though the income was not stable, at least some money came in from time to
time. The limitations in mobility challenged the OPs to find their passion in
planting and improve their strategies on how to market their products. Some

OPs with young adult children even pursued the online selling of plants.

211

Access to Market (Q58)

The research areas are somewhat remote from public transportation, but by
“walking,” people can easily access stores and local markets. These areas
are about 2 to 3 km from the national road. The local markets are located near
the national roads. However, with the declarations of lockdowns, home-based
stores (mostly unregistered) appeared like mushrooms within the barangay.
All of a sudden, vegetable-meat stalls appeared in order to provide goods to
barangay residents and at the same time as an alternative source of income
for the store owners. With this phenomenon, there are more options for all,

not only for OPs, to buy the necessities. OPs become closer to the market.

On the other hand, the downside is that the small-scale markets mark up their
prices because they have captured customers within the barangay. The
reason for stall owners is that the transportation cost became high during a

pandemic, and there are many restrictions on public transportation.

Based on the scores provided by OPs under Question 58, the most common
response referred to “1” or sari-sari stores. They tend to resort to nearby
stores where they need not walk very far or depend on the availability of public
transportation. They choose to cook very simple meals according to what they
could purchase from the sari-sari stores. Lastly, these sari-sari stores allow
them to have a “credit line” where they pay only when their spouses or children

remit money.

Perspective on the Level of Financial Sufficiency among OPs (Q59)

The overall score of OPs under Question 59, or the level of financial sufficiency
among OPs, is around 1.0 to 3.6, or “very insufficient” to “cannot determine
whether sufficient or not’. The same scores are reflected by both male and

female OP respondents. Financially, the OPs lack the opportunities to earn

212

on their own. Therefore, they are limited by the amount of money being
remitted to them by their family members or kind relatives. They have been
trapped in debt due to increasing costs of commodities, insufficient or lack of
source of income, availing of five-six lending facilities, and unemployed family
members.
s

The overall average scores of male and female OPs are 21.07 and 21.82,
below the perfect score of 50 points and even below 50% (25 points).

It can be noted that the OPs score the highest on the number of years lived in
the barangay — almost “5”. However, for the rest of the factors under the
Economic Security, the mean scores ranged from 1.16 to 2.91 only —below “3”

or the minimum for the Economic Security. (See Appendix 5 — Table 5.18)

No. of years lived in the
barangay (Coded)

Financial resource

sufficiency Lot Ownership (Score)

Access to market Source of Income (Score)

Access to transportation Source of Income (Score)

lumber of individuals

hip of vehi
Ounershiplol vehicle working in the family

Source of financial help

Female —®=Male

213

FIGURE 5.6 ECONOMIC SECURITY AMONG MALE AND FEMALE OLDER
PERSONS IN BARANGAY SAN CARLOS, BINANGONAN, RIZAL

e. Social Security

In this research, the securities on health, food, and personal have been
clustered to form part of Social Security. There are no separate indicators or
questions for social security. Instead, it encompasses the three (3)
abovementioned securities under one umbrella security. The results are
discussed in the succeeding sections.

Health Security

Nine (9) questions were dedicated under Health Security which focused on the
exposure of OPs to any sickness in the last two months, frequency of exercise
in a week, access to healthcare services, perception of the current state of

health, and impressions on the COVID19 vaccination program.

The responses between males and females show no significant difference.
The Chi-square statistic of 0.5562 is less than the critical value of degrees of
freedom (df) 1 which is 3.841. The p-value also turns out to be less than .05.
Hence, the responses of OPs on the health security questions do not have
significant differences or do not show any association. On this note, it can be
inferred that the responses can be treated as one (1) group. (See Appendix
5- Table 5.19)

The scores of male and female OPs have very slight differences. The
responses of OPs in Question 16 showed that they did not have any sickness
in the past two months. Some said they could not remember if they contracted
any COVID19 symptoms. Other OPs said they have the “usual” age-related
conditions such as hypertension, weak knees, high uric acid, and the like.

However, the OPs have assured the researcher that no one in their community

214

has been diagnosed positive for the COVID19 virus. Similarly, the mean score
for female and male OPs are 2.53 and 2.60, respectively. These figures are

somewhere in between the “(3) No” and “(2) Cannot Recall” choices.

Question 17 is connected with Question 16. OPs will only answer Q17 if they
answer “yes” in Q16. In their responses, the male and female OPs
experienced 0 to 4 types of sicknesses in the past two (2) months. These are
minor sicknesses that include: fever, runny nose, flu, and cough. On the other
hand, one (1) male OP has agreed to be interviewed but was already bed-
tidden due to a stroke, making him physically immobile. While he was under
that condition, he was able to pass the Cognitive Assessment, which made

him qualified as a research participant.

It is also observed in some OPs that they mentioned some terms such as “na-
depress ako”, “nag-aalala ako”, “nakakapraning noong mag lockdown at i-
declare ang COVID19, ang hirap huminga,” “problemado kami sa araw-araw

na panggastos, lalo na kung may magkasakit sa aming pamilya’.

In this regard, the effects of COVID-19 and lockdowns among OPs on mental
health have been apparent. They express anxieties and depression from time
to time during the interview proper. Nonetheless, they have a cheerful
disposition and present happy faces despite the many challenges they

experienced before or during the pandemic.

Their closely-knitted neighborhood contributes to the mental health and well-
being of the OPs because they show care among their neighbors and look
after each other, particularly when they know that an OP is living alone. Day-
to-day chat somehow releases tensions experienced due to COVID19. Other

215

nouseholds with extended families still mingle with their neighbors but with

limited exposure time to avoid getting infected by the virus.

The terrain of the research area offers a conducive opportunity for regular
exercise among OPs (Question 18). The responses show that both male and
female OPs could engage in physical activities at least 3 to 4 times a week.
The physical activities include sweeping the streets, walking around the
community, doing household chores, taking care of their grandchildren,

cultivating plants, and harvesting vegetables.

The OPs have been asked about the immediate source of help (Question 19)
and responses whenever a family member was sick or needed medical
attention (Question 20). Both male and female OPs have at least 1 to 2
sources of help: self, spouse, child, grandchild, siblings/relatives/in-laws,
church leaders, barangay leaders, municipal leaders, and credit facilities. In
the same light, they have shown no worry at all, even with no means to pay
the cost of hospitalization because OPs believe in alternative treatments and
herbal medicines. Some still consult community health practitioners and the
traditional “hilot” or massage. It is interesting to note their belief in the

“herbolaryo or magtatawas’” or the community's so-called “traditional healer.”

The OPs also tend to self-medicate and buy over-the-counter (OTC)
medicines from sari-sari stores or nearby pharmacies whenever there are
simple sicknesses like cough, runny nose, and fever. As for their high blood
pressure and cholesterol maintenance, they have access to a local community
doctor — Dr. Ato Bernardo, who has been in practice for decades and is known
for very affordable treatments and consultation fees. According to narratives,
Dr. A. Bernardo charges consultation fees as low as P20.00 per patient. This

is why queueing takes a whole day, and residents from different parts of

216

Binangonan or those living in the island barangays choose to consult Dr. A.
Bernardo.

From the perspectives of OPs regarding the state of their health (Question 21),
their responses ranged between “(3) Just Right” and “(4) Healthy”. The mean
score of both male and female OPs of 3.73 and 3.98, respectively, with a
standard deviation of 0.88 and 0.89, show that almost all the respondents were
in good health conditions.

Given that this research has been conducted under a pandemic situation, it is
important to ensure the safety of both the researcher and respondents. Thus,
as soon as the COVID19 vaccination program the government has rolled out
at the national down to local level, the researcher has grabbed such an
opportunity to get vaccinated. In Binangonan, the LGU has efforts in
conjunction with the national vaccination efforts. Three (3) questions have
been dedicated to documenting the status of OPs on COVID19 vaccination
(Questions 22, 23, and 24), including the related issues and concerns about
getting vaccinated.

The overall rating on Health Security is illustrated in Figure 5.7.

217

Who provides assistance

hen a fam sick

H f . tions to cure or heal a
ow is your health no
sick family member

FIGURE 5.7 HEALTH SECURITY OF MALE AND FEMALE OPS IN BARANGAY
SAN CARLOS, BINANGONAN, RIZAL

Based on their responses, most male and female OPs were just waiting to get
vaccinated, given the mean score of 1.20 and 1.11, respectively. Few
respondents said that they have had their 1st dose. Nevertheless, several
females and male OPs have already received either 1st or 2nd dose based on
the mode. Some of the striking responses of OPs who are still not convinced
to get vaccinated are as follows:

e “Ang lakas lakas ko, kaya hindi ko kailangan ng bakuna.” (“I am very
strong. Ido not need any vaccine.”) - Nanay Estrella (not her real
name)

« “May balak naman magpabakuna, kaso hanggang ngayon, wala pa ring
iskedyul pa rin mula sa barangay. Wala naming impormasyon na
nakakarating dito sa amin.” (“| intend to get vaccinated but until now,

218

we have not received any information regarding our vaccination
schedule.”) - Nanay Mamerta (not her real name)

“Bawal daw po magpabakuna ang na-stroke.” (“They said, individuals
who have a history of stroke are not qualified to get vaccinated.”) -
Tatay Ricardo (not her real name)

“Bandang huli na lang ako. Mag-oobserve naang muna.” (“I will take
the last slot for vaccination. | will observe first.”) - Nanay Gema (not
her real name)

“Naghihintay ako na may pumunta dito sa bundok. Putol na nga ang
paa ko, hirap akong maglakad, wala akong kasama. Kaya paano
naman kami makakapunta pa doon sa vaccination center. Dapat iyan
sana dinadala talaga sa mga tao kung gusto talaga na magbakuna ng
barangay.” (| am just waiting for them to come here. | have physical
disabilities and it makes more difficult to go to the vaccination center
just to get vaccinated. | think that the barangay must bring the vaccines
to the people [if they really wanted 100% vaccination rate]). - Tatay
Rodolfo (not his real name)

“Mahirap sa amin mag-akyat panaog, alam mo naman dito sa bundok
kami nakatira, at nastroke ako tapos may kapansanan ang aking
asawa.” (“It is very difficult for me to go up and down the mountain just
to coordinate with the barangay for schedule. My husband has

disabilities.”) - Nanay Jocelyn (not her real name)

Other common reasons for not getting vaccinated are the following:

There is no means to do “online registration” — no smartphone, cannot
operate smartphones, and no money for internet connection.

No information reaches their community in the mountain

Fear of the vaccine, given the social media releases about the adverse
effects of vaccines

219

¢ Just nothing or no reason at all why they do not want to get vaccinated

Accurate information about the vaccination program is very important to
convince everyone, in this case, the OPs, to get vaccinated. According to
research respondents, there is no barangay information about the vaccination
program. Most of them get information through “word-of-mouth” or
“chismisan.” This term was not used negatively but more as a constructive
way to note that the information in the barangay can spread in the remote
areas through “chismisan.” The OPs identified that they have “informants” in
the community who get information from the barangay LGU or friends of the
barangay LGU.

While this community type of information system seems funny and candid, it
helps in one aspect that the information reaches the community members. On
the other hand, the accuracy of information is at stake. The flow of
communication from the LGU to the community members needs to be
enhanced to properly convey the government's programs and information to
the target constituents.

(See Appendix 5 — Table 5.20)

Food Security

Six (6) questions are dedicated to Food Security (Questions 25 — 30). These
have been patterned after the existing indicators on food security but modified
to fit into the context of OPs in Barangay San Carlos based on the pre-testing
activity. The male and female aggregate scores have been subjected to Chi-
square to test the association level. With a chi-square statistic of 0.0905, vis-
a-vis the chi-square at a critical value of .05 is 3.841. The responses of male

and female respondents have no significant difference. This can be further

220

supported with the p-value, with .763545 < .05 (significance value). (See
Appendix 5 - Table 5.21)

The OPs have noted that they regularly eat 3 times daily, based on their mean
score in Question 25. This is true for both male and female OPs. In addition,
they also identified the different types of food (Question 26) that they eat, such
as rice, vegetables, bread, and instant noodles. Occasionally, some OPs can
afford to eat chicken, pork, and beef. One female OP said that she has not
experienced any sickness or had not been hospitalized in her entire life with
her age of 75. She usually eats rice and kangkong (leafy vegetables which
can be bought at P10.00 per bundle).

Regarding the source of food among OPs (Question 27), all respondents
express that they cook their food instead of buying cooked food from nearby
food stalls. Some households practiced food sharing — nearby family members

provided cooked food to their parents whenever possible.

On their perception regarding the sufficiency of their food, the scores of both
male and female OPs varied from “(1) Strongly Disagree” to “(2) Disagree”.
Although OPs have expressed somewhat contented with the very simple
meals they eat daily, they recognize that the meals might not have enough
nutrients for their needs.

The household size has been affected the perception of OPs on the “level of
sufficiency” of food because of the number of individuals who will need to share
with limited food on the table. While most of them have stated that they eat 3
times a day, the next question is on the nutritional value of the food served per
meal. Nonetheless, the simple meals served them well because they have not

experienced critical diseases over the years. Skipping meals does not worry

221

them because they are used to it. Such practice can be translated to what the
well-off individuals call “intermittent fasting” — a diet regime to choose not to

eat.

In the interview, Tatay Rodolfo said they could survive with rice and adobong
toyo (an alternative viand, without any meat). He has been thankful for
everything, whether his family had something or nothing to eat. He has
attempted to plant vegetables for consumption but lost interest because others
have stolen his produce. He instead channeled his talent in planting to selling
ornamental plants. He mentioned that sometimes, their son facilitates the
online selling of plants for additional income.

Regarding the experience of OPs getting hungry within a week, OPs have
replied that they “(3) Disagree” (mean score). This is consistent with their
response to the previous question. This provides an impression that the OPs,
even if found in the remote areas, receive enough food for their daily
subsistence. (See Figure 5.8)

25 Number of meals per

30 Experience of hunger 26 Types of food served

29 Perspective on food

sufficiency 27 Sources of food

=@-Female =—®=Male

222

FIGURE 5.8 FOOD SECURITY AMONG OLDER PERSON RESPONDENTS IN
BARANGAY SAN CARLOS, BINANGONAN, RIZAL

Personal Security

Personal Security consists of eight (8) questions, considering the capacities of
OPs in times of challenges or trials; dreams or visions in life; interests in
participating in capacity-building activities; interests in actively participating in
community-based groups; roles in ensuring personal and family safety; and,

perception about being safe under a pandemic.

The individual aggregate scores for all eight (8) questions are summed up and
ranked from highest to lowest based on sex. Appendix 5 — Table 5.22 shows
that there are 27 female OPs in the “high” frequency range (67.5%) and only
18 on the “low” frequency range (32.5%.). As for the male OPs, 8 or 53% are
found in the “high frequency” range, and 7 or (47%) are in the “low frequency”
range. These figures are based on the Chi-square Table, which serves as the
basis of the computation for the chi-square statistic to test the level of
association between the scores of male and female OPs for Personal Security.
According to the computation results, the chi-square statistic of 0.8145 is lower
than the tabular chi-square value of 3.841 ata .05 critical value. Similarly, the
p-value was computed, resulting in .37, which is less than the .05 critical value.
Therefore, based on these computations, there is no significant association
between the responses of male and female OPs.

(See Appendix 5 — Table 5.22)

Question 33: Source of strength to survive life's challenges
The OPs have been asked to rate the frequency of assistance they get from a
list of agencies: family, neighbors, barangay officials, relatives, government

Officials/personnel, senior citizen association, and church / religious groups,

223

among other groups identified during the interview. Based on the overall
scores, most OP respondents have considered seven (7) sources of strength
that helped them in these critical times. There are additional sources of
strength and help that OPs identified. These are non-government
organizations (NGOs) and good Samaritans who have unexpectedly provided
simple assistance or “ayuda” such as rice, canned goods, and other food

items.

Based on the overall means scores of the respondents, the ranking of
agencies assisting with OPs based on the level of frequency of help received
in the most challenging times of pandemic are as follows: family, church
groups, barangay officials, government officials, relatives, neighbors, and

senior citizen associations. (See Figure 5.9)

Senior Citizen Association
AS 1.65

Church Groups \
3.08 2.5
Barangay Officials Government Officials

FIGURE 5.9 RANKING OF AGENCIES PROVIDING ASSISTANCE TO OPS

224

OPs also share other answers during the interview, and some of their remarks,
in no particular order, are the following:
¢ “I depend on myself because | need to be strong so we can survive
daily.” - Nanay Jocy (not her real name)
¢ “Faith in God is very important to carry on with our daily lives.” - Nanay
Lyn (not her real name)

Question 35: Most important capacities to respond to the challenges of
a global pandemic
This is an open-ended question where OPs enumerate at least five (5) most
important things for them. Based on their responses, the following are the top
10 in their list:

1. Pray, go to church, have strong faith, serve God
Physical activity
Clean environment
Work

Being resourceful / diligent (mapamaraan, masipag, mapagpursige)

oak oN

Recreational, like taking care of plants, Tiktok, among others
(mapaglilibangan)

7. Wise spending and settling all debts

8. Self-confidence

9. Food

10. Family and relationships (being generous to others)

It can also be noted that the most common Top 1 answer is “praying to God”
or any faith-related practices and capacities. This serves as an expression of
OPs’ leaning towards strong spiritual capacity given their current conditions
under a pandemic. Some OPs have underscored that they trust God on

everything, particularly in their daily responses to problems — given that their

225

lives are full of challenging experiences, from basic needs to medical needs.
This can be interpreted as a reflection of the Filipino culture that is hinged on

recognizing a Higher Being; in this case, it is “God.”

The dwindling opportunities for OPs under a pandemic have caused a sort of
a “pause” for them because of the limited mobility and work opportunities. This
draws them closer to God and provides them with more time to reflect on what
good things they can provide for their family and neighbors. The “relationships
and being generous to others” has been combined with “family” to highlight the
strong response of OPs on the importance of their family and good relationship
with their neighbors and friends within the community. Their being “kind and
helpful” to one another serves well in maintaining peace, happiness, and
positive vibes in their community.

Question 36: Dream / Vision

The OPs have shared their dream (pangarap) or what they still want to achieve
in life. Choices were initially given to OPs for ranking based on a scale of 1 to
10, with 10 being the highest. Table 5.5 presents the ranking of combined
responses from both male and female OPs.

TABLE 5.5 RANK OF THE DREAMS / VISION OF MALE AND FEMALE OPS

Rank Dream of OPs
1st _|matulungan ang mga anak (to help my children)
2nd__|humaba pa ang buhay (to have long life)

3rd |maging hindi pabigat sa pamilya (not to become a burden in
my famil

4th |makapag-alaga ng mga apo (to take care of my grandchildren)

4th |makapagsilbi sa simbahan (to serve in the church / to serve
God)
4th |wala na (no more dreams)

226


Rank | Dream of OPs

5th —|makapagtrabaho (to work)

5th |makapagtrabaho ang mga anak (for my children to have stable
jobs)

5th |Makapagtapos ng pag-aaral ang mga anak / apo (Education
for children / grandchildren)

Questions 37, 38, & 39: Interest in participating in capacity-building
training; types of Training; and interest in joining community-based
organizations

Based on the mean scores of female OPs (3.36) and the standard deviation of
scores (1.43), the level of interest among them ranges between “Disagree”
and “Strongly Agree” (Question 37); however, more women have expressed
their interest to still participate in training, particularly when these trainings are
held within their area to avoid long walks or the need to travel to the training
venue, like in the barangay hall of San Carlos. They need training, but only
those physically abled and who have access to training information from the

barangay have been favored to attend such opportunities.

In connection with their interest in participating in training (Question 38), OPs
have shared their responses on the type of training they need, which are
categorized in the following list:

1 Organizational building

Cooperative management and development
Entrepreneurship

Paggawa ng basahan (rug making)
Pagtatanim ng gulay (vegetable planting)
Pagkukumpuni ng telebisyon o mobile phones
(television / gadget repair)

Pagluluto ng ulam (cooking)

No answer / no idea

Not interested

Religion, spirituality, Christianity

OnhwNn

oon

=
rc)

227


11 Help one another

12 Basket weaving

13. Maglibang, Zumba (recreational)
14 Baking

Considering the mean scores, median, mode, and standard deviation of male
and female OPs, they have expressed their interest in joining community-
based organizations (Question 39). However, there were instances that some
OPs “strongly disagreed” with joining such an organization, particularly at this
time of the pandemic when health risks are very high. Like in the response of
Nanay Gema (not her real name), “Natatakot akong makisama sa mga tao
kasi nga sabi sa balita, madaling mahawa ang mga Senior.” (| am afraid to

mingle with other people because of the information we get from the news.)

Questions 62 and 63: How to relieve anxieties and ensure safety at this
time

Based on the responses of OPs on their manner or strategy in relieving
anxieties and stresses, the consolidated strategies are the following based on
the determined rank:

Rank Strategy in relieving anxieties and stresses
4st Nagdarasal (Praying)
and Nakikipagkwentuhan, hililibang: ang sarili (chatting with
neighbors and engage in recreational)
« Nakikinig ng balita sa radio (listening to the radio for
news)

34 ¢ Nagbabasa ng dyaryo (reading the newspaper)
¢ Gumagamit ng mobile phones (use mobile phones)
¢__Nanunuod ng television (watch television) |
4h « Nagaayuno (fasting)

Manatili sa bahay (stay at home)

228

The overall rating of OPs on their perception of their safety and security
(Question 63) ranges from 3 to 5 (Not Sure to Very Safe and Secured).

oS
Based on the Chi-Square statistic on the aggregate scores of the male and
female OPs, 21.60 and 21.62, respectively, there are no significant differences
in their responses regarding the questions under Personal Security (Figure
5.10).
(See Appendix 5 — Tables 5.22 & 5.23)

33 Source of
strength to survive
life's challenges
(e.g. pandemic)
5 35-12 Most
important
capacities to
espond to the
allenges of.

63 Level of
personal security,

62 Means of
relieving oneself
from anxieties and
problems

36 Personal vision

39 Level of intere: 37 Interest to

to join / participate participate in
in community capacity-building
organizations activities

38 Needed / Liked

Trainings
=—O—Female =@=—Male

FIGURE 5.10 PERSONAL SECURITY AMONG OLDER PERSONS IN
BARANGAY SAN CARLOS, BINANGONAN, RIZAL

f. | Community Security

Six (6) questions comprise Community Security in this research. These items
have been considered the source of information, cases of crime and violence,
the response of the barangay to crimes and hazards like fire, and the presence
of evacuation facilities.

229

The aggregate scores for all the dimensions of Community Security have been
determined per individual level and ranked from highest to lowest, based on
sex. The median value determines whether the rating is “high” or “low.” Based
on the results shown in Appendix 5 — Table 5.25.

26 out of 45 female OPs are considered in the “HIGH” category, while 19
female OPs are in the “LOW” category. Regarding the male OPs, 11 OPs are
in the “HIGH” category, and 4 OPs are in the “LOW” category.

Given the chi-square, the tabular value of 3.841 at a critical value .05, the
calculated chi-square of 1.1516 is less than the former. Likewise, the p-value
of .283217 is less than the p-value at .05; even with the Yates correction, p-
value .44337 is still p < .05. Therefore, the is no significant difference between
the responses of the male and female OP respondents. (See Appendix 5 -
Table 5.25)

Question 42: Source of information, news, or warnings

The same treatment to the responses of OPs is applied, given that this type of
question is “ranking”. Initially, the responses are categorized based on themes
and the pre-identified sources of information. Then, the weighted scores are
determined based on the overall ranking of each source of information.

Table 5.6 summarizes the common sources of information according to male
and female OPs.

TABLE 5.6 MAJOR SOURCES OF INFORMATION AMONG OPS IN BARANGAY

SAN CARLOS
Rank Source of Information
ist Television
2nd Radio & Family

230


3rd Internet & Relatives
4th Announcements from the Barangay LGU & posters
Sth Neighbors & letters from LGU officials

Questions 43, 44, & 46: Presence of crimes; violence against women &
children in the barangay; and the capacity of the LGU police to respond
in times of emergency

OPs know about what is happening in their community, given the number of
years they have lived in the area and their familiarity with almost everybody.
The presence of crimes and violence against women and children forms part
of the community security to denote “safety” from possible abuses or criminal
acts which can harm anyone. Based on their responses, there were about 1
to 3 crimes in a year within the area, given the male OPs mean score, median,
mode, and standard deviation of 1.07, 1, 1, and 0.70, respectively. As for
female OPs, mean score, median, mode, and standard deviation are as
follows: 1, 0.84, 1, 1, and 0.56, respectively. Said crimes only involve the
usual robbery or hold-ups; sometimes, missing plants or missing

vegetables/fruits.

Regarding the presence of violence in the area, most OPs have replied “wala”
(none) or “hindi ko alam” (| do not know). Thus, the scores appeared to be
between 0 and 0.53 only.

In terms of the response of the LGU police to assist in times of emergency
(Question 46), both male and female OPs' responses ranged from “(3)
somewhat agree nor disagree” to “(4) agree”. Since most of the OPs have not
experienced any need for police officers in their area, they are not sure
whether the police can respond to their needs or not. Some OPs have
expressed full confidence to the barangay police that they can immediately
respond once notified.

231

Questions 47 and 48: Barangay LGU’s capacity to respond to fire and to
accommodate people whenever there is a need for evacuation

Both male and female OPs believed that the Barangay LGU could respond to
fire whenever needed. However, in areas like Manggahan and Aida, where
streets are very narrow, and the terrain is quite steep and rocky, it will be very
difficult to respond to the community there is fire.

The OPs in these areas said that they have not experienced any fire incidents.
Their usual statement was, “Awa ng Diyos, hind pa naman nagkakasunog
dito.” (“By God’s mercy, we have not experienced fire.”)

Almost all OPs are aware that the Barangay LGU has an evacuation facility on
evacuation facility. However, there are remarks that even if there is advice for
evacuation, the male OPs decide to stay at home during times of typhoons to
ensure the safety of properties. At the same time, his entire family proceeds to
the evacuation facility at the Barangay San Carlos Covered Courts (Tatay Jose
and Tatay Rody) whenever deemed necessary.

(See Appendix 5 — Table 5.26)

Figure 5.11 shows the overall rating of male and female OP respondents on
the community security-related questions. This presents that the OPs have a
proper appreciation of the capacity of the barangay LGU to ensure security
and safety in the community in cases of crimes or calamities such as

earthquakes and fire.

232

42 Source of Information

48 Presence of
evacuation facilities in
the barangay

43 Presence of crimes in
the area

47 Capacity of police or
barangay LGU to

A A 44 Presence of violence
immediately provide

assistance when there is UNIS)
fire
46 Capacity of police or
barangay LGU to
immediately provide ——Female —®=Male
assistance in times of
trouble

FIGURE 5.11 COMMUNITY SECURITY AMONG OLDER PERSON
RESPONDENTS IN BARANGAY SAN CARLOS, BINANGONAN, RIZAL

233


g. Political Security

Political Security does not only refer to the politics present within the barangay,
but more so to a person's capacity to express his or her opinions freely, as well
as to his or her awareness of local policies and even on the local political
environment within the barangay or municipality. The interest in being involved
in the political processes like local policy development and planning-related
activities marks a person's first step to engaging with possible community
development initiatives. Without an empowered community, OPs can be
subjected to fear of getting rejected, despised, or threatened just by providing
honest-to-goodness statements or opinions for the betterment of a community,

and political security becomes impossible.

Under this component, there are four (4) questions that referred to the level of
interest in joining or participating in community organizations (Question 39);
awareness of local policies (Question 40); opinion on whether one should be
consulted when policies are made at the barangay LGU (Question 41); and,

the Capacity to express one’s opinion (Question 45).

On the overall responses of male and female OPs, the chi-square test shows
no significant association between the two groups. The chi-square value of
0.5612 is less than the chi-square tabular value of 3.841 at .05 critical value.
Thus, the responses of the male and female OPs do not have a significant
difference from each other.

(See Appendix 5 — Table 5.27)

234

Giuestion 39: Level of interest in participating in community
organizations

The responses of male and female OPs have varying opinions when asked
about their interest in participating in community organizations. The responses

were extreme “5” or “1 Thus, the mean score “3.4 — 3.5” expressed
“somewhat disagree or agree” or unsure about joining an organization. The
primary consideration is health risks due to COVID19. While they fully
tecognize the importance of community organizations, they are hesitant to

participate in these groups because of the high possibility of getting infected.

Questions 40 & 41: Awareness of local policies & opinion on the proper
consultation process for policy formulation

According to male and female OPs are very much aware of the local policies
(Question 40). They have scores of “4 to 5”, with a 0.74 standard deviation.
The policies being implemented in the barangay reach them through word-of-
mouth or community informants, or sometimes, through posters and barangay
announcements. These policies include financial assistance, curfew, garbage

management, vaccination schedule, and census, among others.

Those OPs with access to Facebook through their children and grandchildren
who own smartphones are more adept with social media and the internet. The
OPs are informed by their family members on updates from the Barangay
Facebook page. On the other hand, most respondents do not have access to
social media accounts as they cannot afford “data load,” for that matter.
Barangay San Carlos Facebook and other Facebook accounts linked with the
barangay. Usually, the related policies are posted on Facebook for

dissemination to barangay constituents. The downside of this strategy is that

235

rnore OPs have no access to Facebook or any social media, which tends to

eave them uninformed or misinformed, for this matter.

The same trend has been observed in the OPs’ responses to Question 41.
They strongly agreed that all barangay constituents must be properly
consulted prior to formulating any policy and even after a policy can be
developed and adopted. On the other hand, the location of these OPs
prevents them from participating in such a consultation process (if there would
be any) because the consultations are usually conducted in the barangay's

central area, which is about 2 to 3 kilometers away from the research sites.

Question 45: Capacity to express opinions freely
Expressing one’s opinions freely can be affected by gender, where female
OPs hesitate to express themselves freely within their family and the
community. Expressing is one, but another person's acceptance of such an
opinion is a different topic. While the Mean Scores of OPs in this question
show almost a perfect “5” for both male and female OPs, it should be noted
that the “0” to “1” scores which are very apparent from the responses of female
OPs. According to some female OPs:
¢ They are afraid to express their opinions or ideas because of fear; thus,
they do not want to meddle with politics (referring to barangay politics);
¢ Some do not care about politics; thus, their opinion does not matter at
all; and,

e Others cannot express themselves.
Female OPs with solid personalities have longer experience volunteering in

the barangay. They can share much information and political views,

particularly on how things are run in the barangay, how some informal settlers

236

were discriminated against in some of the barangay programs, and how some
barangay officials and volunteers provided favors to friends over other
barangay constituents; among others. As a strong woman, she is respected
in her area and serves as one of the trusted residents, particularly when
something goes wrong. There is a need for an immediate response from the
barangay. She was like the “Nanay’ of the neighborhood.

(See Appendix 5 — Table 5.28)

Figure 5.12 summarizes the responses of the male and female OP
respondents vis-a-vis the four (4) questions related to political security. It can
be noted that the responses were somewhat above average and expressed
OPs’ desire to be part of the policy development process or community
organizations. Most of the respondents also possessed the capacity to one’s
opinion.
= Female ~®=Male
39 Level of interest to join

participate in community
organizations

45 Capacity to express
one’s opinion (e.g. in
Political discussion)

40 Awareness on local
policies,

41 Opinion on whether
one should be consulted
when policies are made at
the barangay LGU

FIGURE 5.12 POLITICAL SECURITY AMONG OLDER PERSONS IN BARANGAY
SAN CARLOS, BINANGONAN, RIZAL

237

h. Digital Security

Digital Security consists of five (5) questions that deal with the accessibility
and know-how of male and female OPs to use the internet. The male and
female OPs have provided relatively low grades based on the mean scores
compared with other Human Security dimensions. The overall aggregate
scores under this type of security are ranked and grouped based on the
position of the score above or below the “median” with a value of “1” and also

the same value of the “mode.”

Appendix 5 — Table 5.29 shows 11 scores of female OPs found to be higher
than the median, while 33 scores were categorized as “low.” The same case
was observed with the male OPs with a 4 is to 11 (4:11) ratio for “high-low”
categories. It can be noted that this type of observation is unique under the
Digital Security, given that the opposite scenario has been observed in all the

test of the Human Security dimensions.

Looking at the chi-square calculation to determine the level of independence
or association between the male and female OPs on digital security, it turns
out that there is no significant difference between the two (2) sets of scores.
The chi-square value of 0.0164 is way below the chi-square tabular value of
3.841 at .05 critical value.

This is further validated through the p-value (.82953) and the chi-square with
Yates correction (0.0464); both result to a p that is less than the tabular value
at .05; hence, the responses of the male and female OPs have no significant
difference. (See APPENDIX 5 — Table 5.29)

Question 64: Gadgets present in the household
Almost all OPs admitted that there are gadgets in their households, mostly
“mobile phones” and/or “smartphones.” Similarly, “television” has been

mentioned as one example of a gadget, given the mean scores of the male
238

and female OPs, which are 2.93 and 3.47, respectively. On the other hand,

households also do not own any gadget, even a simple mobile phone.

Question 65: Family members using gadgets

There were some households with members who have the know-how in using
gadgets. Usually, the younger generation (children and grandchildren) can
learn new things, such as using gadgets. It is very rare to encounter an OP
proficient in mobile phones. The mean scores of male and female OPs are

2.93 and 2.78, respectively — these are almost equal.

Question 66: Status of internet connection or mobile data

The scores expressed in the responses of OPs in this question further
decreased. With the value of 2.93 and 2.78 for both male and female OPs.
The equivalent description of these figures is “(3) Not sure” and “(2) Unlikely’.
This is consistent with the lack of knowledge on mobile/smartphones among

OPs, as expressed in Question 65.

Questions 67 & 68: Advantages and disadvantages
The OPs expressed their opinions on the advantages and disadvantages of
gadgets. According to them, the advantages are the following:
¢ Great possibility for online buys and sell. This is a good platform,
particularly during the pandemic, where mobility is minimal.
¢ Source of information
¢ Source of recreational activitiy, e.g. TikTok, Facebook, and other social
media

e For educational purposes, grandchildren

On the other hand, OPs find maintenance of mobile data and internet use as

a luxury rather than a need at this time. They repeatedly mention that they

239

would rather buy food instead of cellphone load or mobile data load. Most the
OPs vary their opinions. Rather, they did not provide an answer, particularly
on Digital Security. It can be observed that the median and mode for both
questions 67 and 68 is “1”.

The typical answer among OPs in Question 68 is “1” or “no answer” or
“gadgets do not have any negative effects.” Although some have indicated
the following disadvantages:

¢ Poor eyesight

e Poor posture

¢ Negative effects on health

« Waste of time

« Waste of money

¢ Children will get addicted into the gadgets, making them lazy in doing

household chores

The responses of OPs under the Digital Security were quite alarming because
it just underscores the widening digital divide among OPs. Indeed the
pandemic has called for rapid advancement in digital technology, and it made
things possible under a non-face-to-face interaction; on the other hand, the
OPs continue to experience marginalization from such technology, given their
limited capacities and capabilities to own and learn how to use gadgets
including, the limited access to such technology. The digital divide before the
pandemic has not been a significant concern because of the many options
presented to OPs. However, when the pandemic hit the country, the increase
in demand for digital technology has continued to place OPs in a much-
disadvantaged corner. (See Figure 5.13)

240

—»—Female —®-Male

Gadgets present in
the household

Disadvantages of
using gadgets

Family members
using gadgets

/ Status of Internet
connection or mobile
data

Advantages of using
gadgets

FIGURE 5.13 DIGITAL SECURITY AMONG OLDER PERSONS IN BARANGAY
SAN CARLOS, BINANGONAN, RIZAL

i. Spiritual Security

The Spiritual Security does not only denote the “religion” of OPs. Spiritual
Security in this research encompasses how an OP extends one’s self to other
people (jpakikipagkapwa-tao); how an OP sees a higher being who provides,
guides, and protects all creations; and how an OP engages in spiritual or

religious acts such as serving the church, praying, and worshipping.

To many OPs, these beliefs and practices give them HOPE for a better future,
no matter how complex their situation is. For them, relying upon “God”,
“Diyos”, “Poong Maykapal” is not being “helpless or hopeless” or “no other
solution, so God is the way.” Believing in a Higher Being recognizes their

241

weaknesses and strengths as human beings connected to a bigger world;
thus, this “great designer” has stored a better plan. The OPs believe that “God”
holds the future for them, that their current sufferings are only temporary, and
everything shall come to pass. As they always express, “Bahala na ang Diyos
sa amin.” (Let Thy will be done.).

Among female OPs, their passion for serving the church has been evident in
their responses. They have expressed during the interview that before
lockdowns, they can attend Sunday masses or services and serve the church
in one way or another. However, given the restrictions, there are many
instances in which the church masses or services have been canceled to give
way to public safety. Some of them attended Sunday Masses or Services via
online streaming — for those with access to the internet. Those OPs without
access to the internet just pray or sometimes read the Bible. They still hope
that they can still go to the church soon.

There are six (6) questions from which the Spiritual Security can be drawn.
Initially, Spiritual Security has not been considered a major Human Security
Factor. However, because in the course of the interview and conversation with
the OPs, faith in God appears as one of the major dimensions of their Human
Security, then the said questions which can be tagged under this human
security component were clustered together to determine the possible score

and to analyze the OPs responses, as well.

The level of association or independence has been checked for Spiritual
Security. The aggregate scores of OPs in all six (6) items are considered, and
it turned out to be an almost 50-50 ratio between the low and high score range.
Based on the calculated chi-square value of 1.9036, it is below the tabular chi-

square value of 3.841. Thus, there is no significant difference between the

242

male and female scores. This, the male and female responses can be treated

as a homogenous sample. (See Appendix 5— Table 5.31)

Question 33: Helping Institution — the Church

When OPs have been asked about the presence of the different helping
institutions from which they receive assistance during the lockdown periods in
the barangay, almost all male and female OPs identified the church as one of
these institutions. However, only 82% (37/45) of female OPs and 67%

(10/15) of male OPs provided answers under this particular item.

This church has provided several gift packs (Ayuda)-giving days for all. In
particular, the Sacred Heart Church has been an active partner as it puts up
several community pantries for OPs from nearby barangays. Furthermore, the
OPs or their household members have experienced queueing at the church

gate to receive the gift pack: rice, canned goods, and sometimes eggs.

Other church groups directly visited the OPs in the research areas, but these
were not explicitly identified. The OPs only knew that these were “church

groups”.

Question 34: Things which OPs cannot do anymore due to pandemic
One of the things which OPs can no longer do due to the pandemic is going to
the church. This response was only expressed by 22% (10/45) female OPs
and 7% (1/15) male OPs. A score of 5 is automatically given for every “tick”
of OP on the “going to the church” option. The response in this regard is low,
as it has failed to reach 50% of the total respondents who chose “going to
church.”

According to some female OPs, they can attend church on youtube or other

internet sites, allowing them to attend masses or Sunday services virtually.
243

Because of the pandemic, churches also innovated and grabbed the available
opportunities to spread the Word of God via online platforms. Even the
collection of offerings and tithes were done via Gcash or bank deposits — which
does not require the physical presence of the churchgoers or Christians in the

true church.

During the pandemic, particularly under ECQ and MECQ, church services or
masses or mass gatherings have been prohibited. However, when the
vaccination program rolled out, many residents have availed of such vaccines.
Unfortunately, vaccination has not been popular in the research areas, given
their proximity to the vaccination area. Nonetheless, as soon as the
restrictions have eased out, the churches slowly brought back face-to-face
services, even for a limited number of individuals per service or mass.

Question 35: Top 5 capacities of OPs that helped them overcome
problems

There are 44% (20/45) female OPs and 47% (7/15) male OPs who have
expressed that “praying to God” helped them overcome their anxieties and
stresses caused by poverty and the pandemic. All respondents are Christians
—Roman Catholics or Protestants. There are no Muslim OPs who participated

in the interview.

A score of “5” has been assigned for every entry of “1” or praying or having
faith in God.” Because this is an “open-ended question,” where OPs freely
provide their answers, OPs would say “magdasal’ as their only answers.
Unfortunately, the number of OPs who have responded to this question only
reached 44% - 47% for female and male OPs. See Box 5.1 for the overall
ranking of scores.

244

BOX 5.1 CAPACITIES OF OPS WHICH HELP THEM OVERCOME PROBLEMS

Rank

1. Faith / Relationship with God 1st
2. Personal capacities: self-confident,

resilient, resourceful, hopeful, happy, funny,

and diligent 2nd
3. Earna living 3rd
4. Relationships (helping one another, unity,

community) 4th
5. Good health, physical fitness 5th
6. Family (grandchildren, family as a whole) 6th
7. Clean environment 7th
8. Spend wisely, settle all debts 7th
9. Recreational (watching TV, planting, Tiktok) 7th
10.Food 7th

Question 60: Good things brought by the pandemic

This has a low turnout also. Only 9% (4/45) of female OPs and 9% (2/15) of
male OPs have provided answers. “Praying or serving God” and “more time
with the family for bonding” has been the most common response from OPs.
The pandemic has brought the OPs closer to their “God,” giving them more
home time. While they cannot attend church physically, they continue to pray
at home. As for other OPs with access to the internet through their children
and grandchildren, they attend Sunday services or masses through online

platforms.

Question 62: Things that OPs do to be relieved from anxieties and
insecurities

This question is an iteration of Question 35. This time, the response turn-out
is very high, with 89% (40/45) of female OPs responding that praying is one of
the foremost things that relieves them from anxieties and insecurities. A score
of “5” has been assigned to every response of OP. This type of question is an

enumeration only and does not denote any rating for this matter.
245

As regards the male OPs, only 13% (2/15) has expressed their prayer
engagement. This somehow provides an overview of how females and males

differ regarding being vocal about their faith or relationship with God.

Question 69: Important things for OPs

In this question, OPs are asked to arrange a list of Human Security-related
dimensions based on the level of importance. One is “pananampalataya,
pakikipagkapwa tao” — representing spiritual security. Based on their
responses, 89% (40/45) of female OPs respond that spiritual security is an
important aspect of human security. This provides them hope and protects
them from any trouble. Their relationship with God provides for all their needs

daily; they keep praying.

As for Male OPs, only 60% (9/15) choose spiritual security as an important
aspect of Human Security and an important aspect of their daily lives as they
tread to survive the day-to-day challenges, even when COVID19 was not there
yet.

According to some OPs, their lives have not been meaningful and easy to carry
on without their “faith (oananampalataya) in God’. Some female OPs
expressed that they still manage to visit their church every Sunday, even with
the pandemic. Even if they could not get inside the church, it is enough for
them to hear mass or Sunday service. Catholic OPs used mass to describe
the Sunday religious gathering. In contrast, “Sunday Service” was used by
Protestant or Born Again Christian OPs.

246

Based on the overall aggregate scores of OPs (combined male and female
responses) in Question 69, Spiritual Security rank 3 as the most important

aspect of Human Security (kapanatagang pantao).

(See APPENDIX 5 — Table 5.32 and Figure 5.14)

—eFemale —*-Male

33-7 Church Groups
as a helping
institution

69-9 Spirituality /
Faith / Serving Gode

/ Serving Others church)
62-1 Praying
(Rating of 5 is given 35 35-1

to every "count")

60 Good things
brought by the
pandemic

FIGURE 5.14 SPIRITUAL SECURITY AMONG OLDER PERSONS IN BARANGAY
SAN CARLOS, BINANGONAN, RIZALFACILITATING AND HINDERING FACTORS
THAT AFFECT OLDER PERSONS’ HUMAN SECURITY

j. Human Insecurities among OPs

The human insecurities aspect of OPs has specifically covered four (4)
questions combining open-ended and close-ended questions to provide a free
flow of discussion while ensuring the ease in rating during the processing of
results.

247

The resulting chi-square statistic of 2.5633 is less than the chi-square tabular
value (at .05 significance level) of 3.784. The p-value is .109369 and is less
than the .05 critical value. Hence, it can be inferred that the level of insecurity
between the male and female OPs has no significant difference. Further, the
scores of male and female OPs can be treated as a homogenous sample.
(See Appendix 5 - Table 5.33)

Regarding the understanding of OPs on “insecurities,” their responses define
them as factors that refer to the internal incapacities or weaknesses that hinder
them from achieving their full potential or capacity to live a free, safe, and
secured life later. The human insecurities need to be addressed to ensure that
the OPs can lead their lives independently while recognizing the duties of the

LGU in carrying out the necessary programs and services for them.

Below is a brief discussion on how OPs responded to the insecurities-relevant

questions during the interview.

Question 31: What other factors cause OPs anxiety?
The responses have been categorized based on the following themes:

« Lack of financial resources in general — ‘walang panggastos sa araw-
araw”,

e Lack of financial resources to pay electricity and water — “walang
pambayad sa tubig at kuryente”; “wala kaming kuryente, nakiki-kabit
lang ng kuryente”,

e Lack of food sources, particularly during lockdowns where food costs
are so high — “Walang makuhanan ng pagkain lalo na Kung lockdown,
mahal ang bilihin’; although some OPs have planted vegetables in
some vacant lots — but these were only for personal consumption and
not for selling. Those OPs without skills to plant or could not engage in

248

agriculture they lacked the alternative sources of food, and they highly
depend on purchasing from the nearby markets;

¢ Being vulnerable to COVID19, and so they cannot visit the usual places
they go to;

¢ Some male OPs have lost their jobs or could not perform their skills
(carpentry) because senior citizens were prohibited from leaving their
houses. Some female OPs said their children do not allow them to
return to work as house helpers because their patrons were also afraid
of getting infected by the virus. Thus, they mainly stayed at home;

¢ Having a fear of getting infected by the virus, as they were worried
because of the high cost of medical care; and,

e¢ They cannot access free medicines because the OPs lack the

necessary documents, such as “medical prescriptions.”

While the threats and insecurities were separate items during the interview,
OPs highlighted that their exposure to natural hazards (such as landslides,
typhoons, and earthquakes) was part of their insecurities. They see these
threats as factors that hamper their capacity to recover immediately should

such natural hazards destroy their houses.

Tatay Randy (not his real name) said:

“Bagyo ang pinaka-nakaapekto sa akin, dahil madaling gumuho ang lupa dito
sa lugar namin. Ang COVID19 ay hindi naman gaano nararamdaman dito.
Simpleng sipon o sinat lang ang mga karaniwang sakit dito, pero walang
COVID19. Mas ramdam ang pandemic sa pagkawala ng trabaho at paghina
ng kita ko sa pagtitinda. Ganoon din, nang mawalan ng trabaho ang aking

mga anak dahil sa pandemyang ito. Walang naidulot na maganda talaga.”

249

(‘Typhoons affect us the most because our location is prone to landslides.
COVID19 is not much felt here because we only have simple runny noses or
colds, but not COVID19. Pandemic is much felt due to the loss of jobs and
sources of livelihood. Our income has been reduced due to weak profit from
retailing goods. Likewise, when my children have been laid off from their work,
this made us reach rock bottom. This pandemic has brought the worst to our

family.”)
Question 32: Response of OPs to anxieties
On the question, “What do you do to overcome your problems or anxieties?”

the responses of OPs are categorized as follows (Table 5.7).

TABLE 5.7 THEMES ON THE RESPONSES OF OPS TO ANXIETIES

Aggregate Scores aw English
8 (N=60) I Ua Translation
220 nagdararasal praying
66 just laugh at
finatawanan problems and do
not take them
seriously
30 Nagsusumikap striving very hard
7 en asks or looks for
Humihingi ng tulong assistance / help
6 hinahayaan lang let it be
4 nakikipagkwentuhan sa chat with
kapitbahay_ neighbors
1 Lt Walang sagot No answer

It appears that “praying” receives the highest scores — this means that
“praying” is the most common among the responses of OPs regarding their
mechanism to respond to the anxieties brought by the pandemic. Surprisingly,
none have resorted to isolation, even at their lowest point. Their neighbors
have become their support system during lockdowns. They tend to “just laugh

about their problems” because, after all, they encounter hardships every day.
250

There has not been much difference since the pandemic became a real
concern. The OPs have been used to typhoons and landslides only where
they can physically experience such hazards. However, the pandemic has
exposed everyone to an unseen virus that can only be experienced once a
person has been infected. OPs see the pandemic as prolonged exposure to
different types of shocks and insecurities, considering that the community
quarantine has not yet been lifted during the interview schedule (about 17
months from March 2020). There was just an added burden due to economic
shocks, but apart from that, the hardships were a regular part of OPs' lives in
the three research areas.

Some OPs have a happy disposition about life, even with the presence of
physical challenges due to stroke or weak legs. While there have been some
complaints about how hard life has been for them in the past days and weeks,
they said it funny, keeping smiles on their faces. They still have high hopes
that they will be able to overcome all of the hardships they currently
experience. Nonetheless, the OPs have continued to thrive in every
problematic situation.

Nanay Juliet (not her real name) has mentioned that helping one another
(pakikipag-kapwa tao at pagtutulungan) is an important characteristic of the
people living in their area. She underscores that the pandemic tested a
person's concern for others.

Question 33: Source of Strength and Help

The OPs have recognized their limitations — they cannot do everything by
themselves. They need help from their family members and friends within the
area for immediate relief should there be emergencies or special concerns.

The question already proposed fixed answers, from which the OPs rated

251

based on the level of assistance. The overall aggregate score per source of
help was determined and ranked (See Table 5.8).

TABLE 5.8 RANK AND AGGREGATE SCORE ON THE SOURCE OF HELP /
STRENGTH AMONG OLDER PERSONS

Rank Aggregate Source of Help / Strength
Score
1 247 Family
7 185 Church Groups
3 175 Brgy. Officials
4 159 Gov't. Officials / personnel
5 150 | Relatives _ 3
6 130 Neighbors or
iq GORE | Senior Citizen Association

The Senior Citizen Association (SCA) has been ranked last because of the
limited capacity of the organization to deliver its services to the entire
Barangay. Based on the interview with SCA President, the free medicines of
SCA can only be accessed at the SCA Center, behind the Barangay Hall of
San Carlos. Since the mobility of OPs has been restricted due to the
pandemic, no senior citizens are interested anymore in volunteering to keep
the SCA office open for anyone in need. Likewise, to access the free
medicines from the SCA, the organization requires a medical prescription that
OPs in the research areas cannot produce due to a lack of financial resources
to get a regular medical check and secure a medical prescription. The usual
medicines the OPs need address hypertension, diabetes, uric acid, and
infection.

The top three (3) sources of help include the family, church groups, and the
barangay officials. The strength of the family to help each other and think of
creative ways to earn a living is a very important Human Security factor. The

economic capacity of these OPs is probably very low, but their families are

252

intact, and they can find joy in their homes. The OPs, whether male or female,
serve as the leader in their own homes were taken care of their adult children.
Some OPs live in separate houses, while others live under one roof as
extended families. Nonetheless, the children and grandchildren look after their
OP family members — since the OPs also care for their grandchildren so their
children can look for work.

The Barangay Officials can be commended for being in 3 place. The
assigned barangay councilors have maintained their visibility in the research
areas, expressing their openness to assisting constituents. According to the
research respondents and community partners, the Barangay Officials have
been visible during lockdown declarations. According to OPs, assistance from
the barangay is either delivered to their homes or distributed through access
points where the recipients of all ages queue to receive the said assistance.
Most of the OPs said that no barangay official had ever visited them during the
pandemic to take note of their concerns. Likewise, the access point (usually
the Barangay Covered Courts) is somewhat far from their location, leaving the
OPs behind during assistance distribution.

There has been one (1) instance where selected OPs have been informed that
specific assistance would be provided to OPs at the Barangay Covered Courts.
Some OPs who could not physically walk to the access point have lost their
chance to receive such assistance. Other OPs have complained about the
insufficient documentary requirements to qualify for such assistance because
they have no valid ID cards or birth certificates, and they lack the means to
have these documents photocopied.

Relatives and neighbors have played a significant role in how OPs thrive under
the global pandemic. While to some, these people were not providing them

the help or assistance they needed — “Walang maasahan sa kanila” — as some
253

would say that; still, more OPs expressed that they could help from their
relatives and neighbors. The help can vary from the following: financial, chat
mates, informants, and source of vegetables, among others. Keeping a good
relationship with their neighbors has provided OPs a sense of happiness, safe

space, and relief that there were people who looked after one another.

Question 34: Things that OPs could no longer enjoy

Out of 60 OP research respondents, only 19 has responded to Question No.
34. The researcher has referred to the pre-identified choices based on the
narratives of the OPs. On the other hand, in the final analysis for this question,
only the overall impression of OPs has been considered for the general
perspective of OPs.

Based on the overall responses of both male and female OPs, the aggregate

scores were computed, and the results are presented in Table 5.9.

TABLE 5.9 THINGS THAT OLDER PERSONS COULD NO LONGER ENJOY
BECAUSE OF THE PANDEMIC

Things that OPs could no longer enjoy because Count Aggregate
of the pandemic Score
mamasyal (to visit different places) 19 114
makapagsimba (to go to church) 12 96
magtrabaho (to work) 14 56
magtinda (to sell, e.g. vendor) 17 51
magnegosyo (to put up a business) 9 18
makipag-ugnayan sa mga kaibigan (to spend time
with friends) 3 15
manood ng sine (to watch cinema) 2 14
wala na (| do not want anything more.) 1 9
mag-aral (to study) 1 41

Tatay Ricardo (not his real name) has been bedridden for months due to a

heart stroke. His spouse has been looking after him. His major improvement

254


includes the ability to sit by himself without any assistance. He has mentioned
that: “Marami akong nais gawin, per mas mahirap ang sitwasyon ngayon dahil
sa pandemya tapos na-stroke pa ako.” (| want to do so many things, but the
situation is very difficult now since it is a pandemic, and | had a stroke months
ago.)

According to Nanay Lolet (not her real name), “Hindi na ako namamasyal.
makapunta sa mga lugar na nais makita, makapagsimba. Bawal na ang senior
citizens eh. Kaya sa TV nalang nakakapagsimba.” (| cannot go around
anymore and see places. | cannot go to the church because senior citizens

are not allowed anymore. | just watch masses thru the television.)

Like other OPs, Nanay Moray (not her real name) said, “Wala na akong
gustong gawin pa. Ayos na ang buhay ko. Basta walang sakit.” (| do not want
anything more. |. am good with my life, as long as | don’t have any sickness.)
<
The mean scores of both the male and female OPs under Question 31 are
almost the same based on the computations. However, it can be noted that
the male OPs have a median score of 5, whereas the female-only have 3. The
number of insecurities among male OPs was somewhat higher than that of
females. (APPENDIX 5 - TABLE 5.34)

Regarding Question 32, the scores of males and females are almost identical,
with a mean value of 4.36. The types of responses and the number of
responses of OPs to their anxieties were almost the same. It provides a high
level of response for OPs, given their anxieties or problems. This cannot be
directly discounted from the overall score of human insecurity, but rather a
proxy score was computed where the actual score is deducted from the perfect
score of “5” to get the non-response of OPs. The resulting difference has been

added to the overall human insecurity score.
255

Referring to Question 33, the mean score, median, and mode of female OPs
were somewhat higher than that of the male OPs. This denotes that females
may be more expressive when it comes to asking for help; thus, they have

cited many sources for help and strength.

As for the male OPs, their mean score of 1.93 and median of 2.00 can be
interpreted as having hardly been receiving help from other people or having
hardly been expressing the need for help. Nevertheless, their main source of
help was their family. They rated at least 1 or 2 to other sources as mentioned
in the questionnaire.

The lowest scores can be observed in Question 34 on what OPs still want to
pursue. Based on the mean scores of male and female OPs with values of
0.80 and 1.11, respectively, this can be interpreted as the OPs do not want
anything more because they have 0 to 1 thing on their wish list. Their major
concern is “good health, without sickness, and continue to survive in this time
of pandemic and beyond.”

The human insecurity cluster has a perfect score of 20 points (5 points per
question). Based on the mean scores of male and female, which is 7.31 and
7.22, respectively, it can be noted that the percentage of human insecurity
among these OPs is only 36%. The overall percentage is slightly below the
50% level of human insecurity as determined in this research. The result
provides a low level of insecurity among the research respondents.

(See APPENDIX 5 - TABLE 5.34 and Figure 5.15)

256

Female —-—-Male —®=Female —®—Male

31 Other factors that
contribute to anxieties
of OPs

5

A,

Proxy Scores for Q32
Proxy Score (5 - Q32)
34-14 Things that This provides the level
OPs could no longer of non-response of
do or enjoy OPs, added to the
overall response of
Insecurities.

33 Source of Strength
and Help

FIGURE 5.15 SCORES OF OLDER PERSONS ON THE VARIOUS FACTORS
THAT CAUSE THEIR INSECURITIES

k. Exposure to Threats

Threats, as external shocks, affect the intensity and magnitude of efforts that
an individual needs to pour into his/her family to survive and bounce back from
an unfortunate event. Question 15 is a dedicated item for Threats. It outlines
the possible threats that OPs or anyone in the barangay may experience. A
total of 12 threats have been identified, based on the initial interviews with
some community representatives and the questionnaire pre-testing. Each
type of threat could be rated to a maximum of 10 if the OPs perceived it as the

most felt at this time or the most apparent or observable within their family and

257

community. Hence, for this question, the perfect score is 120 points. Major

remarks of OPs have been noted to document the actual statements of OPs.
Table 5.10 presents the ranking of threats based on the interview with the
male and female OPs in general. This research has mapped the possible

threats that OPs perceive they are exposed to.

TABLE 5.10 RANK AND LIST OF THREATS ACCORDING TO MALE AND

FEMALE OPS
Aggregate Scores Threats (in Filipino) Threats (in English)
431 pandemya pandemic
408 walang pangpagamot _| health insecurity
kawalan ng pagkain; food insecurity
365 kawalan ng makain
352 kawalan ng tubig water insecurity
350 kawalan ng kuryente energy insecurity

Kalamidad, gaya ng natural hazards
bagyo, lindol, landslide | (typhoons, lindol,

325 landslide)

309 kawalan ng matitirhan | house insecurity
pagkamatay ng emotional insecurity
miyembro ng pamilya | (dealing with death of

250 family members)
kawalan ng trabaho, economic insecurity (lack
kawalan ng or insufficient means to
makukuhanan ng earn a living)

217 panggastos

176 kamatayan fear of dying at this time
pag-aaway sa relational insecurity

pamayanan,; hindi
pagkakaunawaan ng
112 mga kapitbahay

99 aksidente Unsafe environment

For purposes of the chi-square test, the aggregate scores of male and female

OPs have been used, consistent with the rest of the Human Security factors.

Based on the results from the online calculation, the chi-square statistic of
258

0.0889 is less than the tabular value of chi-square (3.841) at .05 significance
level. This has been validated by the p-value of .765594. Hence, there is no
significant difference between the responses of male and female OPs on the
levels of threats. (SEE APPENDIX 5 — TABLE 5.35)

The OP scores per type of threat are added to determine the final scores.
These have been divided by the perfect score of 120 points multiplied by 100
to get the percent equivalent. The scores have also been rated in a scale of
5: 01 to 20 points = 1; 21 to 40 points = 2; 41 to 60 points = 3; 61 to 80

points = 4; and, 81points and above = 5.

The overall mean score of OPs is 56.57, with the median at 50 points and a
mode of 21. However, the standard deviation is 28 — this can be interpreted
as the real mean being 56.57 +/- 28. With a high standard deviation, the
scores are widely spread because there were OPs who did not give scores to

certain threats because they did not want to rate them during the interview.

Given the 120 total perfect scores for all 13 identified threats, it can be noted
that the overall mean score is 57 or 45%, the median is at 50 or 42%, and the
model is at 21 or 16%. At the same time, the standard deviation is 28 or 23%.
The scores are very much dispersed due to some OPs who have not provided
scores in identified threats or who have not recognized such threats as
common to them. In this regard, the threat level is found to be “from a low to
moderate level” based on the perspectives of the OPs. Nonetheless, there is
still a need to focus on those threats with the highest rating or likelihood of
occurring.

(See APPENDIX 5 — Table 5.36 and Figure 5.16)

259

—eFemale —®—Male

Exposure to natural

oo hazards
Anxieties caused by _3—~
the pandemic lock-

downs

Unemployment and
underemployment /

Conflict in the family /
and with neigh-bors

) ) No water

Lack of financial

. resources for medical
a needs
reat of being

— evicted from the
barangay

\
Road accidents

Fear of dying at thi
time

Death of a family
member

FIGURE 5.16 DIFFERENT INSECURITIES EXPERIENCED BY OLDER PERSONS

lL Perspectives on Pandemic-related issues

The male and female OPs have been asked six (6) pandemic-related
questions. These questions have introduced a discussion on the (Question
49) positive impact of the pandemic; (Question 50) level of awareness about
COVID19; (Question 51) Sources of Information; (Question 52) Level of
satisfaction in the process of availing of financial and in-kind assistance; (60)
List of positive things which the pandemic has brought — a reiteration of

Question 49; and, (61) Effects of the pandemic. (See APPENDIX 5- TABLE
5.37)

260

The aggregate scores for these questions have been subjected to a chi-square
test. Based on the resulting chi-square statistic of 8.2514 and p-value of
004072, there is a significant difference between the responses of the male
and female OPs on their perspectives on the effects of the pandemic. (SEE
APPENDIX 5 - TABLE 5.38)

This can be interpreted as the intense effect of the COVID19 virus and
pandemic phenomenon on the lives of male and female OPs. Relatively, there
is a significant difference between the male and female scores, making it a
valid observation that gender is important in understanding the pandemic-

related issues and concerns.

Questions 49 AND 60: Has COVID19 or the pandemic caused any
positive impact?

The response of OPs on the impact of the COVID19 virus to them, they
candidly answered, “Walang naidulot na maganda itong pandemya...”
(Pandemic did not have any positive impact...). Based on the responses of
male and female OPs, the Mode reflects that many respondents have
indicated a score of “1,” — which refers to “The pandemic brought negative
effects only” (Question 49). Even the mean scores for male and female OPs

were quite low, with values of 2.13 and 2.71, respectively.

As for Question (60), the mean, median, and mode of scores are very low,
ranging from 1-— 1.20. The adjectival values of these numbers indicate that
the pandemic has caused at least one good thing to their family. In this
question, the OPs are given the choices that somehow depict the pandemic's
possible positive effects. Based on their experiences and observations,
sometimes they answer openly and narrate how they view the pandemic in

various ways.

261

initially, the OPs have provided a freeflow statement in responding to the
questions, and the answers are grouped based on themes. The ranking has
been based on the overall aggregated frequencies per the theme. The top 3
positive responses include: (a) having more time with family, (b) more time to
pray, and (c) having the opportunity to start a new business. Similarly, 12 OPs
have believed that the pandemic brought negative things to everyone. The
said negative feedback from OPs consists of job loss and lack of means to
support their daily needs.

“Other” is comprised of responses such as “feeling okay” and “happy to receive
cash and in-kind donations or assistance.”

It can be noted that only one (1) OP expressed that “learning to use the internet

and smartphones’ was a positive effect of the pandemic. (See Table 5.11)

TABLE 5.11 POSITIVE EFFECTS OF THE PANDEMIC ACCORDING TO OLDER

PERSONS
CODE THEMES FREQUENCY

1 Nagkaroon ng oras sa pamilya (time with the

family) 35
3 nakakapagdasal araw-araw (more time to pray

everyday) 14
6 Wala (The pandemic did not give any

positive things) 12
5 nakakapagnegosyo (started a business) 7
7 Others 5
2 nakakapagsilbi sa simbahan (served the

church / God) 3
4 natututong mag internet o gumamit ng smart

phones (learned to use the internet or smart

phones) 1

262


Questions 50 and 51: Level of awareness of COVID19 and source of
accurate information about COVID19

The overall mean scores of female and male OPs for Question 50 are around
3.27 and 3.47, respectively. This refers to “somewhat agree or disagree,” or
they were unsure about their level of awareness of COVID19. The OPs have
opined that they only get information based on what they see on television.
Some of them still rely on transistors. Others still buy newspapers if they have

extra money.

Those households with younger members who own mobile phones also get
information from social media and news websites. Nevertheless, the OPs
expressed that they have difficulties determining which is true or not, given the
wide array of opinions found in the current streams of information and the
proliferation of fake news.

The most candid of the responses is the reliance on the so-called “Marites” or
“informants” who knew the latest information in the barangay. The OPs are
very firm when they say that “nothing beats the Marites” (“Walang tatalo sa
mga Marites ditto sa amin’). This term used does not denote a “negative
character’ as it can be translated into “gossiper’ or “nosy” to some. But for the
respondents, OPs have accepted the fact that the “Marites” have earned
credibility in their area as they bring accurate and up-to-date information from

the barangay hall or central sitio of the barangay.

Based on the conversations with the OPs, they find it funny yet unusual for a
barangay that could not properly communicate the updates on the programs
of the barangay through official channels. Thus, the residents just rely on

informal channels such as the informants or “Marites ng barangay.” The OPs

263

further added that the “Marites” do not fail them regarding accurate and timely

intormation. (See Table 5.12)

The OPs have difficulties covering a certain distance just to get updates from
the Barangay Hall. Thus, the informants who reside within the research areas
make it a point to bring accurate information from the barangay. These
informants were usually volunteers or personnel of the San Carlos Barangay
Hall.

TABLE 5.12 SUMMARY OF SOURCES OF INFORMATION AMONG MALE AND
FEMALE OPS
D ot
Oo¢ c a o
> Own. tS Pye of
22 a5? ole lel 2) eed See
s BO 2 © ce S so c
eisFoa | >|s eles EE oo
eee Sas ie | 9 Ce eo ae = os50
cxXsoco 4 Se lac ii Eo ss
eS QO ® = ot Ss a
Pa tae cs Silene le aacis
gee <s
Count 45 | 16 8 6 5 4 4
Rank 1 2 3 4 4 5 5

Question 52: Level of satisfaction with the process involved in providing
financial and in-kind assistance

Based on the Mode of male and female scores, the overall rating is “5”.
According to OPs, they are very satisfied with how the barangay distributed
the financial and in-kind assistance with very few occasions when such
assistance has been initiated. Some OP respondents form part of the 4Ps
(Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program) who regularly receives the
appropriated assistsance from the LGU.

264

Some remarks from OPs find the processes on the provision of assistance
quite “unfair” and “tedious” given the observed “favor” on some residents and
the lengthy list of documentary requirements in order to qualify for financial

assistance.

Tatay Rody (not his real name), for instance, has underscored his experience
of non-availment of assistance from the barangay in terms of medicines due
to lack of medical prescription. In addition, he finds it difficult to get a medical
prescription with no means to pay for a medical doctor and no means to go to
a clinic, given his inability to walk (his left leg has been amputated for years).
With no means to provide the required medical prescription, Tatay Rody
cannot enjoy the free medicine program of the Senior Citizen Association and
the Barangay Health Center.

Nanay Mina (not her real name), likewise has mentioned that “hindi sapat ang
tulong na natanggap. Kung doon lang aasa, siguradong magugutom kami.”
(The assistance that we received was not enough. If we would only depend
on this, surely, we would go hungry.)

Question 61: Effects of the pandemic

The Mean scores for Question 61 are almost perfect. This denotes that
generally, OPs have identified only at least one (1) problem caused by the
pandemic that hindered them from doing the things they previously could do.
While some OPs mentioned a combination of problems encountered during
the pandemic, most respondents only mentioned at least one (1). Further,
Table 5.13 provides the summary of responses of OPs on the various

hindering factors of the pandemic to them.

It can be noted that the top three (3) things that OPs missed from doing are:

(1) going to different places; (2) selling around the barangay or even in other
265

places; and (3) work-related. The mobility restrictions are most effective
among OPs because they are on the priority list of the most vulnerable groups
to COVID19. While the restrictions somehow have eased out in 2022 due to

the massive rollout of vaccines.

Table 5.13 presents the Top 9 Themes on the responses of OPs regarding the
effects of the pandemic in their lives.

TABLE 5.13 TOP 9 THEMES ON THE RESPONSES OF OPS AS REGARDS THE
EFFECTS OF THE PANDEMIC IN THEIR LIVES

Identified themes based on the responses

Code of OPs Frequency

1 Hindi makapunta sa gustong puntahan 41
(cannot go to the places | want to visit)

3 Hindi makapagtinda (cannot sell anything) 10

6 Nawalan ng trabaho, hindi 9
makapagtrabaho (work-related restrictions
/ limitations)

4 Hindi makasimba (cannot go to church 9
physically)

2 Hindi makapagnegosyo (cannot put up my 7
own business)

5 Hindi maka-attend sa training sa barangay 4
(cannot attend trainings in the barangay)

8 walang sagot (no answer) 3

7 Nagkasakit (got sick, became sickly / 1
weak)

9 takot dahil sa COVID19 (fears getting 1
infected by COVID19)

Based on the individual responses to the pandemic among the male and
female OPs, it can be noted that there have been varying types of problems

they encountered, classified in the thematic areas as presented in Table 5.13.

266

In summary, the OPs have a different appreciation of the degree of pandemic
effects, where they responded with either “positive effects only” or “negative
effects only. Capturing their responses, the Mean score of 2.71 points only
leans toward the “negative effects” of the pandemic. This is related to their
responses on Item 60 where they have viewed the pandemic as having no

positive effects on their lives. (See Figure 5.17)

—eFemale —®-Male

49 Degree of
effects that the
pandemic had
caused
5

61 Types of 50 Enough
problem knowledge on
encountered COVID19

60 Type of positive
things from the
pandemic

51 Source of
information

52 Satisfaction in
the services and
assistance received

FIGURE 5.17 EFFECTS OF THE PANDEMIC AMONG MALE AND FEMALE
OLDER PERSONS IN SAN CARLOS, BINANGONAN, RIZAL

Likewise, the very high response on the types of problems encountered during
the pandemic showed the presence of hardships among OPs, coupled with
267

the very limited knowledge and source of information about COVID19 and the
existing services they could avail to least ease the level of difficulties they were

encountering.

268

CHAPTER 6

DATA ANALYSIS

Human Security, like social development, can be considered an eclectic and
evolving development framework. It is impossible to push for social
development without addressing insecurities. It is inevitable not to engage in
Human Security discourse if one advocates for social development. After all,
both schools of thought place people at the development discourse and
initiative center. Although Human Security has been a buzzword since 1990s,
the varying development contexts continue to challenge the scope, definition,
and operationalization of Human Security.

As the discourse on social development under a global pandemic continues to
challenge the development frameworks and paradigms, it is an opportune time
to document what has been and what is the existing conditions of older
persons as the basis of post-pandemic policies and initiatives. The Theoretical
Framework, as shown in Figure 2.18, showed how Human Security began as
a pre-pandemic concept with its four principles: universal, participatory,
interdependent, and people-centered and based on the Hobbesian Social
Contract Theory, the dimensions of Human Security (environment, political,
personal, economic, health, community, and food) were challenged by the
shocks which resulted from the unreadiness of the people, particularly the

older persons as they faced the pandemic.

Human Security is a Human Right. Older persons cannot move forward
towards addressing their Human Security needs without first acknowledging
their basic human rights. In the same manner, the government cannot defend
Human Security without first upholding the human rights of its people. Long
after human rights has been established and recognized, the Human Security

269

concept has emerged in the latter part of the development era with a great
leap to form part of the social development paradigms. Human Security has
taken a central stage in armed conflict and DRRM discourses. With this
research, it is imperative to call for the mainstreaming of Human Security in
the local and national development plans and policies, particularly in the light
of the Older Persons and managing crises in the later years., taking a central

stage in the recovery discourse after the pandemic.

It is the right of every person to feel safe and secure at all times, considering
all facets of Human Security. It is the right of every older person to experience
that their needs are met, even up to the acceptable minimum of having a life
with dignity.

6.1 HUMAN SECURITY AMONG OLDER PERSONS

a. Gender, Spirituality, Technology, Opportunities, and Capacities

The GSTOC factors have expanded the Human Security framework further,
placing OPs at the core of such intersectionality. These five (5) factors have
been used to look at the experiences of OPs in the selected areas of Barangay

San Carlos, focusing on the Human Security dimensions.

Gender has covered only the assigned sex at birth among OPs and Key
Informants, with sex-disaggregated data. Moreover, Chi-Square tests, and as
per the presentation in Chapter 5, there is no significant difference in the
fesponses between the male and female respondents, except on the
“pandemic-related effects” (Refer to Chapter 5). As such, perspectives on
Human Security as a whole are taken as one. The results have been affected
by the very small number of participating male respondents due to the

availability and willingness to participate in the study. The perspectives on

270

Human Security, insecurities, and needs during the pandemic have

similarities. They can be interchanged based on the understanding of OPs.

Spirituality, particularly in their faith in a Higher Being (God), is evident in the
responses of OPs, particularly among the female respondents who used to be
active in the church before the onset of the pandemic. Initially, spirituality was
identified as only one of the factors that affected OPs in their journey during
the pandemic. However, during the interviews, Spirituality has emerged as
one of the important factors that positively affected the response of OPs to the

negative impact of the pandemic on their lives and families.

Technology has been considered one of the major factors during the
pandemic, given its capabilities to facilitate communication, commerce, and
delivery of public services, among others. At the same time, it has taken a
central stage regarding public service continuity at almost all levels of the
government. Various ICT advancements have also provided learning and
earning opportunities to individuals who can afford the gadgets and data

connections and are adept at using ICT.

The research on OPs has affirmed that the digital divide in society persists,
particularly among the poorest of the poor OPs. The hardware or access to
gadgets has been identified as a major factor in addressing the digital divide

and promoting inclusivity in the use and access to technologies.

In a nutshell, gadgets are part of the priorities of OPs compared with the
necessities in life such as food, health, and personal security. Nonetheless,
technology appears necessary at the Barangay LGU and Municipal LGU to
make these units more effective and efficient in delivering public services.

These different perspectives on Technology can be detrimental later on

271

because as the government aims to improve its technological capacity towards
improving its systems and services, the OPs are left behind because of the
inability to cope with the digital transformation of the government. The current
complexities in availing of the services due to the lack of documentary
requirements among OPs will become more complicated because OPs will
eventually deal with the use of and access to technologies. Thus, the digital
divide will be widened, and social exclusion will worsen rather than be
resolved.

Opportunities and Capacities focus on opportunities for OPs and capacities
to facilitate their survival during the pandemic. It is such a skill to witness how
OPs have managed to overcome the mobility restrictions and yet, be able to
have hope for a better life as the days go by. Responses from the Key
Informants have been considered in understanding the opportunities and
capacities for OPs.

b. Defining Human Security

According to the informants, Human Security is a relatively new concept.
Based on their basic knowledge of the term and what they heard on television,
Human Security is about being safe and secure. Safety was linked with having

no sickness or not infecting by the COVID19 virus.

Financial security is one of the major concerns during the pandemic because
of the high cost of commodities. The pandemic restrictions in the Municipality
of Barangay and nearby towns and cities have affected people's capacities to
earn a living and support their families. The vendors, who used to earn daily
sustenance for their families, have been restricted from entering barangays
due to lockdowns and the implementation of the bubble environments. The

“talipapa” or small-scale markets also stopped their operations due to

272

restrictions in the major markets on the number of purchases and duration of
stay inside the public markets. Informal sector workers — transportation,
construction, and barangay health workers, among others — lack income
sources because most businesses have trimmed down their operations or shut
down during the pandemic. Those OPs whose livelihood has been
dependent on the daily commuters are also affected because of the
implementation of work-from-home arrangements that have reduced their
customers.

Human Security is also related to the capacity of the LGU to provide “Free”
services to its constituents, including access to opportunities such as livelihood

training, among other capacity-building activities.

Likewise, Human Security has been equated with the security of tenure —
particularly for those working in the LGUs. They are given contractual positions
or are just mere volunteers, dependent on irregular allowances and without
standard benefits such as PHILHEALTH, PAGIBIG, and SSS / GSIS.

For OPs and the key informants, Human Security refers to having “peace of
mind” despite the tremendous shocks during the pandemic. They found peace
when they released their anxieties to a higher Being or “God,” they found
peace. Their survival from the pandemic has served as a relief attributed to
their faith in God and grace and mercy (Awa ng Diyos”) from God. Most
respondents and informants in the study did not experience death within their
families due to COVID19.

Human Security among the key informants who are part of the LGU also
viewed it as having efficient operations that can readily shift to virtual

transactions. This has surfaced as one of the interview themes because of

273

the lull moments in the first months of lockdown. The barangay and municipal
LGUs have experienced difficulty adjusting their operations when face-to-face
interactions have been restricted. Ensuring the safety of the government
personnel and the constituents has become a critical concern of the
government. Likewise, the operations and systems have not been pandemic-
ready to adjust seamlessly in a virtual-based transaction.

With the participation of 75% of female respondents in the in-depth interview,
the responses have reflected the voices of women in the research areas. The
pandemic has prevented these older women from participating in economic
activities, given the need to ensure the safety of their families while the
spouses or male children have been away from home or have been stranded
in their workplaces due to lockdowns.

These women OPs have regular work in the informal sector — as a household
helpers, nannies, or vendors. They sometimes sell locally produced
vegetables in the streets of the barangay. However, due to mobility
restrictions, their economic activities were stopped — making them more
dependent on the productive members of the family. They were allowed to
travel or work elsewhere. Their employers have stopped hiring them due to
fear of getting infected by the COVID19 virus brought by the OPs in the
respective houses. Most employers have not allowed outsiders to enter their
homes during the declared heightened community quarantine periods. Thus,
the women OPs had no choice but to stay home and keep on hoping that the
restrictions would ease out so that they could return to their normal productive
activities.

(See APPENDIX 6 — FIGURE 6.1)

274

‘ng human secunty para sa akin ay walang pangamba, kapanatagan, ligtas
/ahat ng oras, kasapatan sa lahat ng pangangailangan, edukasyon, malusog,
walang sakt, nagtitwala ako kay Lord. Siya na ang bahala sa atn,
matatagalan itong pandemya kaya magtiwala lang. Sapat ang pagkain palagi
at walang magkasakit sa pamilya”

“Ang human secunty ay walang pangamba, ligtas lahat ng oras, kasapatan
$a lahat ng pangangailangan, walang sakit, kapayapaan sa lahat ng oras,
kayang solusyonan ang mga problema, walang kapanatagan kapag
bumabagyo kasi binabayo ng hangin ang aming maliit na bahay (makeshift);
nawawashout nga ang ilang bahay dito sa lugar namin. Walang ibang
tumutulong, hindi nakakatulong ang barangay. Kami-kami nagtutulungan
nalang dito.”

Ang Human Secunty ay ‘edukasyon, walang sakit, gumagaling kapag
nagkakasakit, hindi maabot ng COVID19."

The OPs are somewhat familiar with the term Human Security, as they heard
it on television. For others, they have no idea at all about the term human
security, but they associate it with being safe, having enough of what they
need, being calm even if there were a problem, having no sickness, and being

able to resolve issues that may arise in their day-to-day lives.

Human Security for OPs referred to the following:
¢ Relieved from anxieties
e No sickness or being health
e Faith in God
¢ Sufficient food every day

e Education

275

it is impossible to discuss Human Security without mentioning the insecurities
cf OPs. The insecurities during the pandemic have surfaced during the
interview were as follows:
e Lack of external help in times of crises
e Limited assistance from the government
¢ Limited mobility due to restrictions imposed by the community
quarantine protocols
¢ Very limited economic activities
¢ Insufficient financial resources to support the day-to-day needs — for
food, medicines, among others

c. Human Security Dimensions

Based on the responses of OPs on the Human Security dimensions, they are
most secure with their families. The OPs are very much family-oriented, and
their aspirations have been rooted in the welfare of their families. This is also
reflected in their responses: “prioritize being healthy at all times to avoid
additional expenses for medicines and hospitalization” and “take care of their
children and grandchildren.” These roles are like their contributions to their

family members who work and earn a living for daily sustenance.

Economic Security

Given that the ownership of lots among OP respondents is only temporary and
conditional, it can be noted that their security in terms of housing is extremely
low. Most of the OPs are either caretakers of a privately-owned lot or just
enjoying the free vacant lot in the barangay because no one has claimed the
said lot. The OPs are aware of the high possibility of having been evicted from
their current homes when the owner or the LGU will eventually need the lot or
the property where they have established their homes. This form of

uncertainty has added to their daily insecurities. The respondents’ uncertainty

276

on the length of their stay in the said community has been apparent given their

responses very low rate during the interview.

The most common response among OPs regarding the source of income
comes from employment by either the OPs or their family members. Because
the OPs most commonly live with their extended families, income and

expenses are shared among them.

Employment has been tremendously affected by the pandemic. Most
employers shut down their operations during the Enhanced Community
Quarantine (ECQ) declarations. Given the shortcomings in the employment
status of OPs and their family members, they have resorted to other possible
means to survive the ECQ, such as growing their food, offering household
services, volunteering in the barangay for a certain allowance, selling some
food/water to bikers/joggers in the area, among others. OPs cannot stop
worrying about their families and wondering how they could still be of help to

survive the pandemic.

One important lesson that can be learned from the economic resilience of OPs
is that they never stopped looking for possible sources of income. They still
managed to survive the hardships of the pandemic. After all, they have been
experiencing crises prior to the pandemic. But the OPs have pointed out that
the pandemic is the worst of the calamities they have encountered due to
prolonging the agony of being at home and waiting for the “bubble
environment” to ease out. Insecurities have become a mix of anxieties from
fear of getting infected, fear of being unable to pay for hospital bills, fear of
bringing the virus home and infecting the entire family, and fear of the invisible
enemy — the COVID19 virus.

277

Economic or financial security has received the highest mean score among all
other Human Security dimensions. However, when the overall mean score of
21 points as compared with the ideal or perfect score (45 points) for this
dimension, it still appeared to be just below 50% or 22.5 points. Using the
50% passing rate as a proxy indicator, this study can infer that the OPs and
their households have a low capacity to achieve the minimum economic

security during or even during the post-pandemic period.

Economic security, or the financial security of OPs, has been identified as one
of the top priorities in their needs to survive the pandemic. It can be noted that
during lockdowns, the economic activities in the barangay have been affected,
and most of the OPs and their family members cannot engage in the regular
economic activities then. Most have become dependent on donations (in-kind
and monetary), and many have resorted to “five-six loans” and other micro-
finance arrangements.

The insufficient financial resources of OPs have left them paralyzed to recover
from debt. Their financial security has worsened when the situation has further
restricted their economic activities.

Unfortunately, digital technology and social media opportunities have not yet
been appreciated as one of the alternative sources of income. Given their
present condition, technologies have a corresponding price that the OPs
cannot afford. They lack the means to afford such technologies, the know-

how to maximize social media, and the capability to engage in e-commerce.

With only about five (5) households that have expressed access to
smartphones and the capacity to engage in online selling or transport services,
closing the gap in the Digital Divide is still a far distant reality. The fast-paced

278

digital transformation that the pandemic has brought can further push the
poorest of the poor OPs away from the development discourse. With the
current issues of OPs complying with the documentary requirements to avail
of the government services, this will now be doubled with their lack of access
to proper know-how and access to the internet. The fast-paced technological
development can rapidly leave the poorest of the poor behind, given the
sluggish movement of progress in the local setting. Thus, this is more of a

policy issue than a household-based concern.

A household has been doing live selling plants and clothes during the
pandemic. This is a unique case where the OPs and their household members
have harnessed the benefits of technology during the pandemic. It is assumed
that the technology could greatly serve everyone when the pandemic halted
face-to-face interactions. However, research results provided otherwise.
Digital Security became the least dimension of Human Security identified by
the OPs. A more in-depth discussion on this dimension was presented in the
succeeding sections.

Another observed factor that made OPs survive the lockdowns was the
continuous assistance of their relatives, siblings, or children in other parts of
the country (also experiencing lockdowns). While they all had limited
resources, financial assistance came through electronic money (GCASH or
cash transfers). Any amount was already of big help. Other families
mentioned that their relatives provided rice and other food supplies and made
it possible for them to meet both ends or “mairaos man lang ang buhay”.
(See Appendix 6 — Figure 6.2)

This is where Social Pension Policy and Program must respond to the

predicaments of OPs. The respondents, while in their productive years, should

279

ave had the opportunity and guarantee to earn and, at the same time, save
for their later years through Social Security System (SSS). The P500.00 per
month social pension for Senior Citizens is insufficient to ensure that an OP
can survive a day without being dependent on their family members. This is a
sad truth that OPs suffer in poverty in their later years because of their inability
to process the documents for SSS while they were still actively working in their

younger years.

A community-based SSS kiosk or desk can be established to provide the
necessary services for all citizens, particularly the poorest of the poor, to apply
for SSS and be encouraged to work for a better retirement journey. This can
provide the OPs sufficient pension when they retire and more time as well for
them to enjoy life as they engage in recreational activities. The OPs become
more burdened in their later years because their responsibilities to earn for
their family continue. They hardly enjoy life anymore, given the multi-layered

and multi-dimensional problems that they have to deal with.

Social Security

HEALTH SECURITY

Based on their responses, the OPs are quite healthy given the proxy indicator
of having no serious sicknesses in the past three (3) months. There are,
however, some isolated cases where some of the respondents experienced
stroke or flu. Nevertheless, they have reported that none of them experienced
COVID19. Although there have been cases of experiencing COVID19-related
symptoms such as colds, flu, cough, and body ache, the OPs have viewed this
as “just a simple cough — that is not COVID19-related”.

Non-report of COVID19 cases from the research areas might be a good

indicator. However, it can be noted that none of the respondents have availed

280

oi the actual COVID19 tests, nor were they reported to the barangay to have
COVID19-related symptoms. Thus, they treated such symptoms as the usual
colds, cough, or flu and relied only on over-the-counter medications such as
paracetamol or traditional hilot or herbal medicines. Nonetheless, they have
not reported death in their families since March 2020.

This can be another research area that can be further explored to validate the
incidence of COVID19 virus in the area compared with the population with a
high incidence of COVID19 viral infection.

Their responses to such sicknesses have been limited by their financial
insecurity as they only resorted to over-the-counter medicines and self-
medication schemes instead of having checked by medical doctors. Most of
the OPs have also resorted to herbal medicines and even to quack doctors.
This can be a major concern by the LGU to ensure access to health facilities
for the poorest of the poor OP because quality health care is a right of every

person.

Aside from the lack of financial capacity to secure the proper treatment, there
have been questions regarding their understanding of COVID19 and the
available information on the services provided by the LGU. This somehow has
prevented them from availing of the free services from the LGU. The distance
of the barangay, coupled with the physical capacity to endure long walks, has

been a major factor for the OPs to avail themselves of the barangay services.

In addition to health services, it is worth mentioning also that the respondents
have not been fully vaccinated. Some even only had one (1) shot, while most
still did not believe in the efficacy of the COVID19 vaccines. Again, their

proximity to the barangay LGU and the vaccination center in Barangay

281

Tayuman has been mentioned as the major reasons for a low turnout of
vaccination against COVID19 in the area. In addition, the vaccination
schedule has been difficult in the barangay, which discouraged many OPs,
given their physical capacity to go up and down the mountain just to check
their schedule in the barangay. Their only option is to wait for the information
from the barangay.

Interestingly, OPs have mentioned that they refer to the information through
word-of-mouth or the community informants, or the locally emerging term
“Marites” — a social media term for individuals who get the latest information

and can easily spread such information in their communities.

Fear is one of the main causes of anxiety among OPs and one of the major
reasons why some OPs do not want to be vaccinated. This resulted from a
weak information drive within the barangay and a weak support system to filter
the news in the mainstream media. The OPs rely only on what they see on the
television and from the community chit-chats or informal talks, most commonly
known as “tsismisan.” With the varying source of information, the OPs have

difficulties determining which is true or fake information.

While the OPs have considered themselves generally healthy, their scores say
otherwise. Their overall scores were way below the 50% of the total possible

perfect score under the Health Security dimension.

The mental and physical health of OPs needs to be taken seriously by the LGU
to develop the appropriate healthcare services for OPs. Geriatrics and
gerontology are two (2) sciences that focus on the overall well-being of OPs.
As such, these sciences need to be integrated into the overall LGU

development plans, particularly in the health and social welfare dimensions, to

282

further provide quality healthcare facilities and services to OPs, particularly the

poorest of the poor.

FOOD SECURITY

Generally, OPs had reported that they could still eat 3x a day, with 1 to 2 types
of food. They cooked their food, which they usually buy from nearby markets
or homegrown vegetables such as bamboo shoots, malunggay, lubi-lubi, and
other leafy vegetables. It was disheartening to hear that the OPs strongly
disagreed with having sufficient food on their table during the pandemic. This
was apparent when the declarations of lockdowns affected their income and
mobility.

Based on their responses that they usually eat rice, vegetables, or sometimes
canned goods and fish; and validated by their opinion that their food has been
insufficient; it can be noted that the OPs lacked the proper nutrition as they
failed to meet at least the prescribed in the Pinggang Pinoy (Department of
Health, 2022). Given the insufficient resources to supply their daily
sustenance, it would be impossible for these OPs to complete the prescribed
food under the Pinggang Pinoy. While access to vitamins was a note part of
the questionnaire, this was asked randomly to some OPs as a follow-up
question. Moreover, they also did not have the means to avail of the said
vitamins.

Thus, the nutrition of OPs has become a serious concern that the National
Government must address. Poor nutrition can affect their capacity to have
better health later. A life cycle approach is necessary for the recovery phase
of the pandemic, given the important role of nutrition in ensuring that everyone
is in good shape. Itis only through a healthy mind and body that the resistance

283

to and recovery from COVID19 virus or other sicknesses can be achieved.
(See Appendix 6 - Figure 6.4)

PERSONAL SECURITY

The personal security of OPs reflects their support system in times of the
lockdown declarations in the community. Their families gave them the strength
to persevere. Their children and grandchildren have inspired them to strive to
survive every challenging day, whether there is a pandemic or not. Some

responded that the pandemic has brought them closer together.

For the OPs, the family’s health, well-being, and security are the most
important. As a family, they help each other. Based on the previous chapter,
family members in other parts of the country could extend assistance to the
OPs through digital platforms and the existence of courier services. For OPs,
their families served as the primary source of strength. OPs get up for their
families with high hopes that the COVID19 virus will infect no one. (See Figure
6.1)

OPs have identified church groups, neighbors, and barangay/government
Officials as their major sources of assistance during the pandemic. Although
in terms of frequency, they have received at least one to two in-kind assistance
from the LGU. They have had complaints about receiving the financial
assistance as announced on television. Some barangay LGU representatives
already have taken the requirements such as IDs and even requested the OPS
to sign some documents. Unfortunately, no assistance has arrived yet, and it
has been clear among OPs that such assistance will not reach them anymore
due to some hint of corruption.

284

!t was unfortunate to hear their stories, where the LGU has failed to provide
them with the promised financial assistance and that the confidence level
toward the government has been low. This has been in contrast with the side
of the LGU, with a promise that such assistance will still be distributed later.
The interview was around August and September 2021.

The low rating of the Senior Citizen Association as one of the sources of
support for OPs was understandable due to the mobility restrictions among
OPs and the vulnerability of OPs to the COVID19 virus. This has been
affirmed by the interview with the SCA officers who have suffered from some
forms of anxiety during the heightened community quarantine declarations,
such as: fear of getting infected by COVID19 and fear of having no means to
support hospitalization, among others. While the SCA officials experienced
said insecurities, they were forced to continue with their mandate to serve the
underserved OPs. They have facilitated the submission of names of qualified
OPs to the Municipal LGU to distribute social pensions, using their money for

transportation and photocopying services.

/ Relatives

Barangay Officials Government Officials

FIGURE 6.1 SOURCE OF STRENGTH AND SUPPORT BASED ON THE
RESPONSES OF OPS

285

Further, OPs have affirmed that they want to live longer to continue to provide
care for their family members. They have mentioned that the time spent with
their families allows them to share Filipino values and stories with their
grandchildren as their children look for work or work in a remote workplace.
The OPs have also strived to stay healthy and not become a burden to their
families.

Furthermore, the OPs believe that healthy living is more important any wealth.
They have maintained good health during the pandemic; the OPs look at this
as a “grace from God and a privilege that other people have failed to enjoy.”
The environment in the research area, with open spaces, has allowed the OPs
to breathe freely without any worry of getting infected by the virus unless they
are interacting with other people. The terrain has also provided the OPs the

opportunity to walk and exercise.

The OPs are more outward-looking and generous. They tend to give more to
their family members and other people rather than think of themselves. They
want to provide whatever they can for their families rather than consider how
they can comfortably live. The simplicity of their lives, even without the luxury
of food and material things, is already worth being thankful for. OPs have
“enough for a day” to live. (See Appendix 6 — Table 6.2)

Some OPs are no longer interested in training on capacity building.
Nevertheless, there are still OPs who want to improve their skills in organizing,
cooperative management, entrepreneurship, rug making, and vegetable
planting. It is important to note that the research areas have vast vacant lots
which can be used for vegetable farming. However, no planting resources are

available, and the know-how of OPs needs to be improved. Some female OPs

286

expressed their need or longing for recreational activities such as Zumba to

aliow them to relax for some time. (See Appendix 6 - Table 6.3)

They seemed very tired from the day-to-day work and exhausted from the
reproductive responsibilities they had to attend to. Their usual relaxation is
chit-chat in the afternoon. Sometimes, they engaged in occasional drinking of
“tuba” or “lambanog,” based on observations during fieldwork.

The responses of OPs have affirmed that in the later years, OPs already need
opportunities to learn, rest, leisure, and engage in creative-related activities.
These endeavors all contribute to the overall well-being of OPs in their later
years, considering their mental and physical health. Transferring their
knowledge to the younger generation can contribute to molding better citizens
for the next generation. As such, the LGU and other community organizations
can work together to develop creative avenues where OPs can have both

learning opportunities and knowledge-sharing platforms.

The caveat, however, is that the OPs can only participate in and engage in the
said activities if they have the assurance that they have enough financial
resources in their later years. A robust social pension policy must be in place
to pave the way for a happy, healthy, and active life among OPs when they
retire, without being forced to be more active in the productive aspect of life.
Otherwise, the poorest of the poor OPs will only be trapped in the vicious cycle
of poverty, deprived of their rights, rest, and leisure. OPs must achieve a state
where they have full control of their time, activities, opportunities, and money,
regardless of gender.

287

COMMUNITY and POLITICAL SECURITY

Community Security and Political Security are viewed as important dimensions
of Human Security. Individuals need to feel safe sharing their political views
and safe from violence in their communities. The Mean scores are quite low
because most OP respondents are not interested in engaging in the political
arena. Even if the OPs have recognized their need to be involved in the
development processes in the barangay, their proximity to the Barangay Hall
prevents them from doing so. The LGU needs to ensure the full participation
of its constituents in the development process: policy development, planning,
financial planning and monitoring, and implementing projects and activities,
among others. In particular, the marginalized sectors need to be prioritized.
Investing in organizing activities in the barangay area clusters is a must.
Through an organized community can, full participation of the people be
achieved. The notion of OPs that some of the processes in the barangay are
not open to the public needs to be corrected to raise maximum participation in

the administration and governance of barangay affairs.

Based on the opinion of OPs, they have never heard of any crimes in their
area. They expressed peace in their community with trust in the barangay to
assist should there be any crime or violence-related incidents.

Regarding the source of information, most OPs have televisions and radio
where they access news and information about what has been happening in
the country. The local media have aggressively reported the COVID19
situation for local and international conditions. At the same time, the
information about COVID19 vaccination. On the other hand, OPs have

288

difficulties determining which information is true and not. They depended on

ihe most available or most reported information in the mainstream media.

Other OPs with access to smartphones and the internet through their children
could access information from these gadgets via Facebook, YouTube, and
other social media platforms. The caveat is that not all information from this
online media platform has 100% accuracy.

It is best to receive COVID19-related information from the LGU
representatives to properly explain to the OPs the credible information about
government services, COVID19 updates and protocols, and vaccination,
among other information OPs, need during the pandemic. The LGU is fully
accountable and responsible for providing accurate and timely information to
OPs. This will increase the confidence level of OPs towards the LGU officials
and the system in place. Transparency and accountability are the major tenets
of any government office which need to be translated into action. Thus,
improvement in this regard can reach out to all sectors of the municipality
properly and increase the trust and confidence of the people in the LGU.
(SEE APPENDIX 6 — FIGURES 6.5 AND 6.6)

DIGITAL SECURITY

Based on the responses of OPs under the Digital Security, in some
households, it appeared that there were gadgets in every household. Usually,
these gadgets are owned by the children of OPs working already. Mobile
phones vary from analog models to smartphones—the majority-owned analog
phones did not have internet capabilities. Very few households report that

they have access to internet connections.

289

This only shows that the digital divide in Binangonan, Rizal, persists. There
are remote areas which cannot be reached by internet connection. In addition,
OPs also reflected in their responses that owning mobile phones was not their
priority. The OPs prioritize their basic necessities over “mobile data” or the
purchase of mobile phones.

During the pandemic, the government promoted the use of gadgets for
education platforms as DepEd pushed for non-face-to-face interaction.
However, in Barangay San Carlos, the public schools were forced to rely on a
100% module-based learning system due to digital insecurity observed in the
barangay. Should this form of learning continue, the effect on the learners’
capacity to learn and the family’s capability to support the child’s education
would be affected.

Most OPs said they assist their grandchildren in the current learning system.
They hardly know the answers to some modules, which is somewhat

worrisome if the students understand the lessons well.

Digital security can make or break the quality of the next set of older persons
in a community. Likewise, the digital platforms can also be an opportunity to
reach out to as many OPs in remote areas to provide quality services, accurate
information, and continuous learning. However, the detachment of
communities and OPs from the digital world serves as a major barrier to

maximizing digitalization's fruits.
At the beginning of the research, digital security has been identified as one of

the major dimensions of Human Security given the effect of COVID19, which

underscored the use of mobile technology to pursue development and support

290

Human Security. OPs, on the other hand, have opined that this is the least

they need to survive the pandemic.

On the part of the LGU, it has not maximized yet the opportunities that
digitalization can provide to improve the systems and operations of the LGU
in order to provide better services to all of the municipal and barangay
constituents. More funds and capacity-building investments are still necessary
to level up the operations and become resilient to untoward events such as
the pandemic.

The OPs remain disconnected from the world wide web, and the digital divide
is still apparent in the communities of Barangay San Carlos, particularly in the
upland areas. Lack of infrastructure is one reason for the digital disconnection,
but it is not the main one. The digital divide goes back to the basic poverty
issues of the lack of capacity to access, afford, and own a smartphone. For
OPs, digital security is the least priority for their basic needs. While there is a
recognition of the opportunities offered by ICT nowadays, negative
perspectives about the use of gadgets were manifested during the interviews
with OPs.

The use of ICT has facilitated the operations in the LGU. The use of social
media has become a common strategy of the LGUs to inform their
constituents. Unfortunately, this communication strategy has failed to reach
all barangay stakeholders, particularly the OP respondents, as they lack the
gadgets and know-how to surf the internet. Thus, it can be noted that with
such kind of information drive in the Barangay, the OPs continue to experience

being marginalized in terms of announcements and policies, among others.

291

in addition, the proliferation of fake news also affects the perceptions of OPs
and other constituents in the barangay. Thus, the LGU must build its capacity
to provide accurate and timely information to all of its constituents. Reliance
on the community “Marites” can create chaos later on, given the varying

interpretation of the word-of-mouth transfer of information.

SPIRITUAL SECURITY

The OPs also have expressed their faith in God as their primary responsibility
and coping mechanism to respond to daily challenges. This has been labeled
as Spiritual Security even with its incomplete sense. The sincere expression
of faith among OPs provides a sense of recognizing a higher Being who has

the power to protect them from anything.

Expression of faith is already considered part of spiritual security. However,
this needs further understanding because the spirituality dimension
encompasses more than just an expression of faith. For purposes of
documenting the spirituality context of the respondents, their responses about
their faith were noted as well. (See APPENDIX 6 — FIGURE 6.8)

The face-to-face relationships of OPs with their churchmates have been
teplaced by home-based praying and online participation in Sunday masses
or services. While some devoted OPs still visit the churches even with
heightened community quarantine, most OPs cannot attend masses and
services on Sundays. Most of these were female OPs who believed that their
sacrifices and devotion would keep their families safe. They said that none of
their family members had had COVID19 in the past two (2) years because of
the divine protection from God.

292

Churches in the barangay have complied with the community quarantine
declarations and the maximum allowable churchgoers. Like other churches, it
can be observed that these churches experienced closure during the
heightened quarantine protocols. Some OPs who were not allowed to enter

the church premises were contented outside the church gate.

For OPs, they have recognized that being old is a gift from God and a great
privilege to have reached such age. Other people are not given that
opportunity to live until more than 60 years old and have died at a very young
age. With such attribution to a Higher Being, even with the low turnout on the
responses, Spiritual Security has been considered one of the major
dimensions of Human Security, which can be nurtured by the community
towards holistic development among OPs and their families.

The values the OPs relay to their children and grandchildren are based on their
faith and relationship with God. As they look back on how they raised their
families, they are in awe for having survived the difficult times under a
pandemic and any difficult situation in the past. These are their inspiration as
they coped with the insecurities brought by COVID19 and all other calamities
that may come in the future.

d. Overall Human Security among Older Persons
The term ‘Human Security’ has originated from the post-war concept of “state

or military security.” “Human Security” emerged as a development paradigm
in the 1990s, and studies have begun to veer away from the conventional
security paradigms and recognize the need for an individual-level type of
security as part of the mechanisms to recover from deprivation,
marginalization, and poverty. The core of the said approach has hinged on

the root cause of instability and conflict around the globe. As such, it aims to

293

trace the individual insecurities and provide the strategies which can achieve
the well-being of an individual — now termed Human Security. (Britannica,
2021)

The evolving development issues and trends have also altered the
perspectives on development paradigms such as Human Security. With the
unprecedented shocks caused by the “global pause” or a “global reset,”
nations have been drowned in the abyss of the unknown — because the so-
called “black swan” has occurred beyond what humans could have predicted.
This calls for a more localized understanding of the Human Security aspects
to put forward strategies that can respond to and address the people's

immediate needs during a global pandemic.

The next set of questions refers to the “what is next?” or the “how can we
recover or how can we bounce back” from the severe shocks caused by the
pandemic. While in the first months of lockdown declarations, there have been
fears and anxieties, these can be translated into challenges that push the
governments and the people to their limits to transform the negativities into
positive opportunities for better mechanisms, better technologies, better ways
of adapting with the “new normal” and reconnecting once again with the rest
of the world.

Figure 6.2 presents the overall response of OPs to the various dimensions of
Human Security. This graph only provides a snapshot of the mean scores of
OPs. It can be interpreted vis-a-vis the overall perfect or ideal score for each
dimension. The lack of significant difference in the responses between the
male and female OPs denotes similarity in the experiences of both sexes; thus,
it can be treated as a homogenous response. Likewise, human security is for
all, regardless of age, sex, and gender.

294

OPs somehow have expressed the highest in their economic security, despite
tne financial insecurities during the interview. The household members’
shared responsibilities to earn a living and have facilitated their survival during

the pandemic by at least meeting their minimum requirements to live.

Further analysis of the quantitative results, the Mean scores were compared
with the ideal or perfect scores per Human Security Dimension to validate the
current status of OPs when the pandemic hit the country. In Figure 6.3, the
overall mean scores of OPs are slightly above the median score of 135 out of
the perfect score of 270 points. Such performance in the Human Security
dimensions is alarming. The level of Human Security among OPs is just an
inch from falling short of achieving the minimum of quality life. While the
numbers are only a representation, these somehow provide an indicator of
failures from the systems in the locality in upholding the right to development
of every OP; thus, affecting a person's ability to lead a safe and secured life in

the later years. (See Figure 6.3)

—e- Female _ice-Male
cconomic

Security (Q8, 9,

10, 11, 54, 55,

56, 57, 58, 59)
25

Spiritual Health Security
Security (Q33, (Q16, 17, 18,
34, 35, 62,69, 19, 20, 21, 22,

60) 23, 24)

Digital Security Food Security
(Q64, 65, 66, (Q25, 26, 27,
67, 68) 28, 29, 30)
, Personal
Political
Security on 36.37 38, 38
40, 41, 45) "a9'483,
ao 62, 63)
Community
Security (Q42,
43, 44, 46, 47,

FIGURE 6.2 OVERALL RESPONSE OF OLDER PERSONS TO HUMAN
SECURITY

295

OVERALL HUMAN SECURITY RATING OF OLDER PERSONS

te) 50 68 100 135 150 200 250

300

@ Overall (Mean Score) Female (Mean Score) Male (MeanScore) Perfect Score

FIGURE 6.3 OVERALL HUMAN SECURITY RATING OF MALE AND FEMALE
OPS VS. PERFECT SCORE

To validate whether the overall scores for the responses of male and female
OPs have a significant difference, these were also subjected to Chi-Square
Test, which resulted in no significant difference. This showed that it could be
statistically inferred that the Human Security levels and dimensions for male
and female respondents can be treated as a homogenous sample in this
research. (See Appendix 6 - Tables 6.4 and 6.5)

Maximizing the quantitative data of this research, the overall Human Security
dimensions are subjected to Spearman’s Rho (rs) test to determine the level
of “strength and direction of the relationship between two (2) variables” in the
( (Social Science Statistics, 2022).

Of the considered Human Security dimensions (Economic, Social,
Community, Political, Digital, and Spiritual), Digital Security appears to have
No statistical significance with the overall Human Security Aggregate Score.
This result has been further been affirmed by the low turnout of responses

from OPs regarding the questions related to Digital Security. It can be inferred
296


that the OP respondents, regardless of assigned sex at birth, do not view
gadgets or internet connection as something important in connection with
being safe or with their survival throughout the pandemic. Their appreciation
of gadgets varies and mostly reflects that mobile phones are not their priority.
They have viewed mobile phones as not so much of a necessity compared to
their basic needs, such as financial resources, food, medicines, and housing,
among others.

The illustration in Figure 6.4 provides a snapshot of the responses of the male
and female OPs in the interview, given the different Human Security
dimensions vis-a-vis the ideal perfect Human Security score. This can provide
a proxy indicator in determining the level of Human Security among OPs in the
Barangay San Carlos, in the Municipality of Binangonan, and even in other

areas with similar characteristics to the research area.

Further, the level of Human Security among OPs is supported by the
underlying insecurities based on the combined responses of key informants
and the OP respondents. Figure 6.5 summarizes insecurities among OPs
based on the Human Security dimensions.

297

862

(Valv GNV ‘NVHYSONVW ‘ONILNSTOL)
SOTUVS NYS AVONVYYE NI NOSY3d Y3010 SIVA ONV SIV JO SSYOOS NVAW ALIHNDAS NVWNH $9 SENSIS

80'ST weTL S8°ST €STl zt? €8°8T 80°17 €9T? (24095 Uea|) [124200 B

82ST 96TT 00°9T LUTT wT? 88'8T 9T IZ 7 Iz (21095 ued) ajewed m

00'€T O8'IT Ov'sT ti 9 09 TZ 89°8T L807 LOT? (24095 ueaw) aleW
of sz 02 OE SE SE sp os 4095 28}49d B

Aqunag Aunsas Aunoas Aunsas Ayunoas Angas Aunaas
Auunoas pooy
jenaisids eusiq Aiunwwoy —jeuosiad ea >1W0U0D3

:' . 0
ia s oz

os
(epiy pue ‘ueyessuey| ‘ouljuajOL) soe)
ues AeSueseg Ul SUOSJag JapjO ajewia4 pue aye JO Sas0ds Uea|\| AyNndas UEWINH

[a
}—|

oa asa a
Poe Laan

lo}
a)
91095 ued


662

SNOSU3d Y3010 SNOWY SAILINNOASNI S°9 SYNOIS

(wNOsuad
“‘HL1W3H
os ALINNNWOS
POO} JO SaduNOS payIwT + WIS0S TALS
uonUINU yua!dINsU| + oqwapued
pooj uMo aanposi au) JO S}oaya au) WO4; esado

0} Ayjoedeo ayenbapeu +
‘o}wapues
au) Buunp ND7 wosy
@9UR}SISSE JUD! ach UU +
Sad/Alas JUBWUTaAO!

N97 eu} Jo jes9UINA +

aaljuas a1qnd jo Auaa\jap
ay) panunuoss!
aun Aq ps

e ‘oluapued
IL O yuauidojenep
yenyuids 0} yoddns ayenbapey -

. sanianoe snoi6yjau ul ayedjonue.
pue Rronces “.. ‘ongnd jo Areayep mots ‘ S9UIOY J1atp Jo 3no Ob 0}
uoneuuosul ayenbapeul - UIM BAU UOMeUWOJUI Hea. = — PALO
SINSONVd ane "4 palejas sao|Alas pue swesboud payejas FnoiGyes uj Gupedionaed dios
40 S3WIL NI ~BulBe jauno pus 6.GINOD = do, snunues O1 sO) IeGISIUN 646 payuanaid SuON IISA! AIIGOW +

Mio Ayjiqesauina yeaH + 4

SNosdad =
430710 SNOWY \
S3ILIMNDASNI

. Slaquiaw pjoyasnoy
Bupiom uo aduapuadag +
1SUad |eI90S JO YOR +

POO} JO SadsNOs paywiy +
UORUINU JUaIDINSU| +

oueisisse jeloueuy \. ere

uo Saodn0s Jo AISJaAIp MOT] + uaspiiya
2 Pooulaat| aanposd 0} Asoudss eyenbepeul : Buowelaanoippe aq ued pue ‘UOISIA
Jo seuunos payouisal aiwapued au) buunp ay} UO $}9aJa eanebau ‘seounosal
= SUONUISAL AUIIGOW + NOVY solesisee US UINSUl : pure aun jo ajsem :syabpeb

“ diysuaumo , SSSIAISS TUS WIUSNO jnoge suondaziad aaneBen +

Jo] pue asnoy jo yor7 + pue“UONeUIIIEA "6 LAIAOD uoneleuab Jabuno( 40) Ajuo +
Suooul ynoge uoReuoju! ayenbapeu| - cioDped Oh och 6

Pjoyasnoy 0182.0} MOT + “Guise Mino bus. payejel Moy Bujwsea] Wiody 3Sasaju] Jo yOe7] +
quawAojdwiasepun sel A ‘a an eae uO2auUOD JeuJa}UI pue SaUOY

1 juawfojdueun . }oay A a uews pioye 0} suBaw Ua!oyNSUI «
| SINONOODS WOILIMOd TWOIDSOTONHOAL / WLISIG


6.2 SERVICES FOR OLDER PERSONS

Under a pandemic, particularly at the onset of the declaration of lockdown in
late March 2020, government services have been paralyzed. The lined-up
programs for 2020 have been canceled due to heightened community
quarantine protocols. In the same manner, the funds to implement certain
programs have been channeled to COVID19-related initiatives such as relief
operations, support to medical teams, health and safety of government
personnel, the establishment of quarantine facilities, immediate increase in the
hospital capacity and medicines, public service continuity projects, among
others.

Based on the interviews, the usual programs, projects, and activities of the
MSWDO, GAD, and BFOSCA have been stopped in 2020 due to the re-
programming of the budget to provide the municipal constituents with the
necessary assistance, particularly those infected by COVID19. The challenge
of redistributing the limited resources of the municipality has placed the
municipal officials and barangay leaders, including the municipal staff and
volunteers, in a very difficult situation.

Based on the 12 types of services as reflected in Chapter 5, it can be noted
that the said services have not been mentioned by the OP respondents aside

from the “issuance of Senior Citizen IDs,” “social pension,” and “relief goods”.
Access to the necessary services remains a blind spot among OPs, having
inadequate information about it. The proximity of the OPs from the barangay
hall and municipal hall is another concern that affects the efficient flow of
information and services to the OPs from the service providers such as the

LGU.

300

One of the interviews with the key informants has mentioned the lack of
honest-to-goodness monitoring and evaluation (M&E) of municipal programs
that consulted the municipal constituents or the beneficiaries themselves.
M&E can provide the necessary information to the municipal and barangay
LGU on how their services reach the target sectors and how the LGU can
improve the current systems and operations to serve the public better. The
LGUs need to invest in M&E to take note of the necessary adjustments or

improvement in a program, particularly for OPs.

The Senior Citizen Associations have been created to become the champion
in providing quality services to OPs in the respective barangays. The Senior
Citizens themselves led these organizations. With the detrimental effects of
COVID19 on Senior Citizens, the leaders are also restricted from delivering
the programmed services to the OPs in the barangay, such as in Barangay
San Carlos. The SCA officers also experienced various sicknesses during the
lockdowns, preventing them from providing senior citizens services. The
anxieties brought by COVID19 have affected their physical and mental well-
being. Thus, SCA operations have been discontinued for quite some time. As
a result, no other LGU arm can provide the necessary services to OPs,

particularly at the barangay level with the paralysis of SCA operations.

When there are “pay-offs” or distribution of financial assistance and social
pension schedules, SCA officers have been instructed to facilitate collecting
documentary requirements and preparing the list of beneficiaries. There are
very few (and not all target beneficiaries) OPs included in the said list, given
the limited mobility. The assistance from the Barangay LGU has also been
limited to providing transportation and budget for certain allowable activities
(medical assistance, medicines, recreational activities), subject to the approval
of the proposal by the Barangay LGU.

301

VVhile established by the law, the SCA has been considered a private entity
and a separate unit from the barangay. All senior citizen-related information
and programs have been delegated to SCA. This setup needs to be reviewed
because the Barangay and Municipal LGUs also need to consider the
voluminous documentary requirements that the SCA officers must comply with
during their leadership. The sustainability of programs and services would be
at stake should there be permanent staff, a community development officer, or
a social worker assigned to handle SCA's administrative, financial, and

logistical requirements.

Reaching out to the OPs in the remote areas of the barangay also needs to be
considered by the LGU officers because the OPs cannot be expected to
physically visit the barangay, given their limited capacities and given the high
probability of getting infected by COVID19. While ICT nowadays has been
identified as a critical tool in the pursuit of public service continuity in order to
still deliver the necessary operations in an LGU through electronic or web-
based portals, it is important to consider the reach of ICT-based platforms.
Blended strategies — a mix of ICT platforms, technologies, and face-to-face
strategies — are necessary for administering community-based programs,
projects, and activities. Sole reliance on ICT-based applications should not

teplace community-based strategies through face-to-face interactions.

It can also be observed that the Binangonan LGU has invested in ICT
infrastructure. However, based on the interviews, the LGU still needs more
investments in ICT to enhance the current systems and operations further.
Likewise, Barangay San Carlos needs to look into its systems and operations
to improve the programs and services for OPs and the rest of the barangay
stakeholders. The Barangay and Municipal LGUs need to be connected
seamlessly to achieve more efficient and effective operations, reporting,

planning, M&E, and assessment.
302

CHAPTER 7
CONCLUSION

The pre-pandemic social development and Human Security frameworks are
now challenged by the COVID19 phenomenon. The global pandemic and the
crises which COVID19 has caused to every nation have placed the dignity of
every person, specifically OPs, in this research. The international terms, such
as globalization and climate change, were somewhat abstract and could not
be easily grasped locally. The global health crisis or pandemic made a great
difference. Shocks that are caused by the pandemic are indeed felt by the
people at the lowest level of the community — given the implementation of
government policies, deployment of police and military, and observable rise of
COVID19 positive cases in a local community. COVID19 phenomenon has
served as a very good demonstration of globalization — this time, the global
conditions were very much present in the local communities of the Philippines.
This has made every person — every OP, aware of the fact that global threats
can affect every individual, even in the remote areas of the country.

The 2020 COVID19 phenomenon can be labeled as a “global pause” or a
“global reset” where almost all nations were overwhelmed by the bloating
numbers of COVID19 infected persons, by the uncontrollable rise in mortality
tates, by the In all of these changes, OPs were one of the most vulnerable of
all sectors, given the scientific studies and the IATF policies which stated that
COVID19 virus greatly affects the health conditions of OPs. As a result, the
community quarantine protocols had caused mobility restrictions and
unfreedoms among OPs. Insecurities have proliferated in the community,
creating fears and anxieties among OPs.

303

The succeeding sections provide the overall findings based on integrating data
gathering and analysis results.

7.1 CONDITIONS OF OLDER PERSONS IN BARANGAY SAN CARLOS

Given the experiences shared by OPs during the interview and the results from
the in-depth interviews, the OPs have difficulties managing the challenges and
insecurities during the pandemic, particularly in the early months with
heightened restrictions. The OPs have experienced different kinds of
insecurities, as presented in Figure 6.5, which can be classified based on the
Human Security dimensions.

Beyond these insecurities, OPs have expressed that they have no choice but
to pursue life, persevere, and strive harder to survive the pandemic. OPs have
to rely mostly on their faith in God, their families, and neighbors during the
most difficult times of the pandemic, where they have experienced the realities

of “global pause.”

OP respondents are located in water-induced landslides and other typhoon-
induced hazards, given their location in the upland portion of the barangay and
based on the DOST-PHIVOLCS reports. Even with the current threats from
natural hazards, the OPs continue to remain in their communities because they
cannot afford to pay for the rent in a safer place. The OPs are currently

enjoying a free stay in the vacant lots of the barangay.

The informal settlements continue to expand in the barangay without any plan
at all. The mushroom effect in these areas due to the expansion of the original
families in the area has become uncontrollable. As such, it can create an
additional threat to the environment because most houses do not have

sewerage systems. The disposal of garbage is also detrimental to
304

environmental integrity and the health of the informal settlers. The Municipal
and Barangay LGUs need to monitor the expansion of these settlements to
ensure safety for all.

The population in these areas is only estimated to be about 80 households,
with at least 4 members per household. There is no reliable information at the
barangay level regarding demographics due to weak technological and
knowledge management capacities. Accurate and reliable local demographic
information serves as a significant input in local planning and policy
development, resource management, program implementation and monitoring
and evaluation, and overall administration and governance of community
affairs and social services. It is very difficult for any local government unit to
account for all its constituents and prepare the necessary services and
programs without such information. Likewise, transparency and accountability
have become at stake given the incapability of the LGU officials to account
and report the resource utilization vis-a-vis the overall jurisdiction of
administrative powers.

Most of the OP respondents, about 43%, have completed primary education,
while only 3% reported being college graduates; and at least 25% said that
they have completed secondary education. This implies that the OPs, in their
younger years, have limited capacities and opportunities to pursue higher
education, given the availability of resources and the need to immediately work
for their own families.

The OP respondents have hardly accessed capacity development
opportunities because these are usually conducted either at the municipal hall
or barangay hall — which was quite distant. Aside from the distance of training

venues, they have physical challenges that limit their mobilities. In addition,

305

tnere are verbal accounts of the limited training slots that have already been
reserved for the families and friends of the training coordinators — leaving no
slots available for the OPs. This notion needs to be addressed to improve the
trust and confidence level of the barangay and municipal LGU officials/training

coordinators.

The living arrangements between the male and female OP respondents
somehow represent the overall living arrangements in the barangay. The
majority of the OP respondents’ households (54.66%) lived with either their
spouses or children. About 38% of the respondents live with extended

families, with 6% (among females only) living alone.

Noting the different living arrangements, the neighborhood within the research
areas serves as their support group — looking after one another. “Everybody
knows everyone else.” This can be considered one of the barangay assets,
demonstrating Filipino values of “kapatiran and damayan,” where one’s
concern with his or her neighbor becomes critical in experiencing safety and
assurance. The OPs look at one another within their households and
neighborhood. Such Filipino values need to be nourished, particularly during
this pandemic. Having more time together as a family, such values can be

communicated and passed on to the next generation.

OPs in Barangay San Carlos have expressed difficulties under a global
pandemic crisis. They generally described it as a notch higher than the usual
challenges they experienced. Before 2020, their difficulties are mostly on the
insufficient financial resources to provide for their daily needs. Given the
global health crisis, the restrictions in mobility among OPs greatly limited their

interactions among peers, their opportunities to earn a living, their access to

306

government services, and the development opportunities which could

somehow improve their capacities.

7.2 REDEFINING HUMAN SECURITY BASED ON THE RESPONSES OF
OLDER PERSONS

The experiences under a global pandemic are opportunities to reflect on the
“Human Security” development paradigm. Bringing such a term closer to OPs
served as a learning exercise given the minimal exposure of the respondents
to research activities. Some OPS remarked that they were glad that some
individuals still have an interest in them (referring to the researcher and
community partners). They appreciated the gestures of interviewing them and
considering them in the research. At the beginning of the research, it has been
made very clear not to expect anything grand and immediate effects from the
research. The OP respondents have been assured that the results would be
given to the LGU officials, both in the municipal and barangay, for the
appropriate policy development to address any critical issue which may arise
from the study, particularly to improve the quality of government services, the
presence of LGU, and further provision of learning and recreational activities
opportunities for OPs.

The development jargon that the United Nations continuously introduce to the
member countries has evolved and has been redefined from time to time,
based on specific global contexts. In 2016, the UN has provided a more
improved Human Security framework which highlighted the people,
empowerment, prevention, and context-specific as the core of Human
Security's three-pronged framework — Freedom from Fear, Freedom from
Want, and Freedom to Live in Dignity (See Figure 2.15). A very simple
framework has challenged many nations in operationalizing such dimensions

at the local level, such that the local plans can be based on Human Security.

307

Eriksen (2010, p. 285) presented a simpler Human Security Framework, which
only has four (4) dimensions — economic, political, existential or spiritual
beliefs, and environmental. This framework has acknowledged the indigenous
practices in his work and cited the need to understand the “insecurities” first
before Human Security can be well defined and understood because the two
(2) are very intertwined.

Human Security is an ever-evolving paradigm that is ever-changing and
redefined based on the context of the people. From armed conflict context to
climate change and now, the global health pandemic. The social development
challenges need better lenses to magnify what has been set aside due to many
development issues, particularly those which the global pandemic has caused
additional burdens to the OPs.

For instance, the priorities in Local Government Units (LGUs) need to be
revisited to consider improvement in government services and government
allocation of very limited resources — and not the usual infrastructure-centric
development plans where much of the budget is poured into building roads,
houses, and hospitals. It is high time that the LGU needs to invest in a more
strategic foresight planning, focusing on the people’s Human Security aspects.
Such thrust can create a more engaging and empowering platform for
everyone to return to Filipino values' roots while ensuring human dignity and
safety.

Realizing the necessary improvements in a public office opens up more
possibilities for technological interventions, streamlining seamless processes,
the institutionalization of knowledge management systems, and an immediate

shift to alternative work arrangements when disaster risks and crises hit the

308

localities. Given all these advancements, which are now being required by the
“business-as-usual” under the new normal, it is an imperative return to the
roots of community development, where organizing the community is key to
achieving community empowerment, hopefully, social development.
Enhanced social development strategies can include using digital platforms

and open spaces to ensure the safety of both the OPs and the organizers.

The impediments to face-to-face interaction in the current setting of 2022 are
not as strict as the 2020 quarantine protocols because of the vaccine roll-out
in many parts of the country. Although the vaccination program is not
mandatory for everyone and is only voluntary basis, there is a higher chance
of being protected from the virus and for manifestations of mild symptoms only.
Thus, there is a great likelihood that the face-to-face interaction will soon return
to normal conditions, but with adherence to the minimum health standards

such as wearing face masks and physical distancing.

In discussions with the OPs and Key Informants, the Filipino culture and values
have kept the OPs safe and hopeful amidst all insecurities and anxieties that

the country is currently experiencing.

On the other hand, “spirituality” has emerged as an important factor of Human
Security among OPs, where “faith” and “care for one another” provide hope
and looks forward to a better tomorrow. For OPs in the three areas, they live
one day at atime. Thus, Spirituality is a recognized factor of Human Security
among OPs but requires further studies to deepen its understanding in a global

pandemic context.

The global pandemic has transformed the transactions and interaction mode

by utilizing information, communication, and technology. In this regard, Digital

309

Security has been reflected in the questionnaire to capture the role of the
internet, smartphones, and social media applications in the thrust of the
government to address the challenges of COVID19 and to provide an
additional platform for OPs to communicate with their loved ones and for
exploring the alternative source of income.

Likewise, the non-face-to-face transactions in the government and private
sector have challenged the rise of various platforms to serve the public
continuously. There is no right mix of solutions yet, and everything was in
experimental mode. The patience among OPs and LGU officials has been
tested given the frustrations in government services due to delayed distribution
of assistance, poor management of records, or because people do not know
how to react or respond to the situation. Nonetheless, the learning pace took
a while before people were able to return to their normal routines.

Thus, given the existing Human Security Frameworks, Figure 7.1 provides the
eight (8) dimensions: health, personal, food, spirituality, economic, community,
political, and digital. These dimensions are attached to a black string to
illustrate that the components are interconnected. While the dimensions are
arranged in a linear form, this takes into account the intersectionalities which
exist between and among the said dimensions, such as age, gender, culture,
and beliefs.

To keep the Human Security dimensions intact, the stakeholders (represented

s “rest” in the framework) need to work together. These are OPs, Family,
Community, Government, People’s Organizations, and the Media. The
Government of the State has the highest level of accountability or the duty

bearer in ensuring that the mechanisms in place do not violate human rights —

310

jurther uphold Human Security at all times. (See Figure 7.1).

FIGURE 7.1 PROPOSED HUMAN SECURITY FRAMEWORK

a. Perspectives on Human Security

Based on the results and discussion, it can be noted that Human Security
among the key informant respondents has been understood as something
related to “violence and safety,” safe spaces for the LGBTQ (lesbian, gay,
bisexual, transsexual, and queer) community, where the members of the
LGBTQ community needs to feel safe at all times — free from discrimination.

The most common understanding of the term “Human Security is as follows:
e being safe
e Staying healthy
e With regular salary or income
e Free from crime and violence
e Being safe
¢ No worries
e Enough with everything
e Education
e Faith

311

¢ Being with family

Human Security does not only pertain to being safe. The OPs and the
research respondents have been unfamiliar with such terms. They have
exerted efforts in translating the term into Filipino and thought of the related
words which can best describe Human Security on how they have understood
it.

Human Security is an action-oriented term that provides an interface of the
different major players of development and the different policies, plans, and
programs to protect human rights. Basic to Human Security is upholding
human rights; thus, it is appropriate to say that Human Security cannot be
achieved without fulfilling human rights first. Human Security and human rights
have a thin line of distinction, making the two inseparable. Human security
combines the responsibilities of all the development stakeholders in the
community to maintain a level of peace and order, a level of development, and

a level of safety — without obscuring human rights.

b. Human Security Dimensions

The mainstream human security models propose different dimensions directly
linked with human rights. These dimensions serve as guides or indicators
which facilitate the measurement and understanding of human security in
various contexts and involving different sectors of society. It is not a question
of prioritization, but it should also be the goal of every the Government to
provide the necessary mechanisms - policies, programs, information, and
services — to the community members for them to enjoy safe and healthy life
while realizing their full potential to achieve a better quality of life and a life

which they can truly value.

312

There will always be a push and pull given the externalities that affect each
dimension of Human Security. Similarly, these externalities coexist within the
spheres of each dimension, making it a challenging and exciting journey for

every OP to always hope for a better tomorrow.

One major point that the OPs have shared in this research is the importance
of strong family ties and nurturing Filipino values. The OPs and some key
informants had more time with their families during lockdowns on many
occasions. The fear of getting infected by COVID19 when they go out of their
homes also nurtured their family ties. According to the research respondents,
there were ups and downs in their experience with COVID19. While they may
have no fixed income to support their daily needs, they have the most precious
and priceless resource — time.

The OPs in the research areas have reported no COVID19 cases in their
locality. When they have been asked about instances of COVID19-related
deaths in the area, they said there were none that they knew. They seemed
not so affected by the said virus, except for the economic aspect, which was
normal anyway.

The proposed human security framework also provides flexibility on the
indicators to consider in each of the human security dimensions, to give due
consideration to the context of the realities on the ground - the current social,
technological, environmental, economic, and _ political landscape.
Nevertheless, the proposed Key Result Areas (KRAs) per dimension can be
used by the LGUs in ensuring that their programs and services are redounded
to uphold the rights and welfare of their stakeholders, particularly the OPs.
Table 7.1 Proposed Human Security Key Result Areas (KRAs).

313

TABLE 7.1 PROPOSED HUMAN SECURITY KEY RESULT AREAS (KRAS)

Health Personal Food Spirituality
* Sickness in the past |¢ Source of strength in | « Frequency of |e Presence of the
two (2) months. times of pandemic meals per day church as a local
« Frequency of and life's challenges | ¢ Usual food institution providing
engaging in physical }* Important prepared for the assistance
activity or exercise characteristics to family « Attending church
« Person or institution overcome problems * Source of food services or masses
who provides help |e Dream or vision in life | * Opinion on food |* Praying or other
when a__ family |e Interest in sufficiency in a forms of
member is sick or participating in day worshipping are
hospitalized training * Opinion on being practiced
* Options for medical je Interest in joining civic experiencing « Capacities of
relief / treatment groups, such as hunger ina week | overcoming — self-
* State of health Senior Citizen confidence
¢ Status of vaccination Association, * Good things
« Access to Cooperative, etc. brought by the
vaccination + How the OPs relieve pandemic
opportunities themselves from ¢ Things that relieve
* Reasons if one had anxieties anxieties
not been vaccinated |* Level of security ¢ Important things for
OPs
Economic Community Political Digital
« Number of years * Access to information |« Interest in joining © Ownership of
living in the * Presence of crimes civic groups, such gadget
barangay and violence as Senior Citizen « Knowledge of
* Lot ownership * Capacity of the Association, using gadgets
« Financial Resources barangay LGU to Cooperative, etc. « Access to internet
* Persons or respond to reported |* Awareness of local connection
institutions providing crimes or disasters policies « Advantages of
financial assistance (e.g., fire) * Opinion on the using gadgets
+ Working members |* Presence of need for policy * Disadvantages of
of the family evacuation facil consultations using gadgets
* Other sources of * Capacity to
help in times of express one's
emergency or crisis political views or
* Vehicle ownership opinions
¢ Mode of
transportation
* Access to Market
* Level of income
sufficiency.

Similarly, the questionnaire and indices generated in this research can be
utilized by the LGU to measure the level of Human Security in the locality; thus,
it can also gauge the effectiveness and reach of the LGU programs and
services for OPs for the rest of its stakeholders.

314

The suggested model is based on Binangonan, Rizal, and other municipalities

with a similar context to Binangonan.

The scores based on the responses of OPs can be treated as “indicative”
scores only. These are indicative or representations of the realities on the
ground. Nonetheless, the limitations of the number on the scale can offer an
alternative way of measuring the Human Security level in the municipality of
Binangonan and its barangays. The scores have been sorted from lowest to
highest and determined that the Median at 153. Based on the possible perfect
score of 265 points that an OP can get from the In-Depth Interview Guide, a
5-rating scale has been developed to indicate an OP's level of Human

Security.

The scale presented in Table 7.2 presents the Human Security Index based
on the Overall Human Security Scores of OPs in Barangay San Carlos. On
the other hand, Table 7.3 presents the basis of the rating and color code

scheme in Table 7.2.

TABLE 7.2 PROPOSED HUMAN SECURITY INDEX BASED ON THE
AGGREGATE SCORES OF OLDER PERSONS IN BARANGAY SAN CARLOS,
BINANGONAN, RIZAL

Numerical Rating | Adjectival Rating | Color Code Range
5 Very High 230 & above
4 High 200 to 229
3 Moderate 150 to 199
2 Low 100 to 149
1 Very Low 99 & below

This Index can be used as a dashboard for monitoring the level of Human

Security among OPs or within the Municipality to gauge the performance of

315

the Municipal and Barangay LGU in terms of uplifting the quality of life of the
people in the Municipality. Likewise, this Index can help the Municipal and
Barangay LGU identify which area should be prioritized in terms of social
development interventions; further, the local officials can identify which human
security dimension should be strengthened at a particular time.

TABLE 7.3 PROPOSED HUMAN SECURITY INDEX

PROPOSED HUMAN SECURITY INDEX

RANGE

99 AND BELOW

100 - 149 45

316

PROPOSED HUMAN SECURITY INDEX

| See

HUMAN |
JRI

150 to 199

317

PROPOSED HUMAN SECURITY INDEX

| FREQUENCY
HUMAN BASED ON
SECURITY | ADJECTIVAL | NUMERICAL RANGE HUMAN
OVERALL RATING RATING SECURITY
SCORE OVERALL
SCORES
161
161
164
164
164
__ HIGH 200 to 229 0
230 & ABOVE i?)
This propose ity Index is only an instrument that can enhance

the existing planning, monitoring, and evaluation systems in place in the
Municipality of Binangonan and Barangay San Carlos. Should the LGU adopts
the said Index, it is imperative to consider the competency of the Team-in-
charge, the necessary minimum ICT requirement to store and analyze big
data, and the establishment of a knowledge management system to ensure
the sustainability of this initiative as this should not be a one-shot activity, but
a continuing intervention. With an effective knowledge management system,
the Municipal Government will be able to create trends for future planning and
policy development processes. Thus, improving the overall public
administration and governance of the LGU focused on the Human Security-
based Social Development Framework. Participation of the various sectors,
such as the Older Persons, is imperative in implementing such an initiative to
facilitate a more inclusive development process.

318

7.3. PUSH AND PULL: FACILITATING AND HINDERING FACTORS

a. Facilitating Factors

Available Municipal-led Services and Programs for OPs

Based on the interviews, the MSWDO, GAD Office, and BFOSCA are the three
(3) major units in the Municipality of Binangonan tasked with delivering social
services. In particular, the BFOSCA is a non-government organization that
serves as the accredited partner NGO of the municipal LGU to assist the
MSWDO and the senior citizen associations in delivering programs and

services intended for senior citizens.

The main functions of the BFOSCA are the issuance of Senior Citizen IDs and
the facilitation of social pension distribution among indigent senior citizens. In
charge of the social pension distribution. BFOSCA also prepares and submits

activity proposals for possible funding support from the Municipal LGU.

The COVID19 phenomenon had put a sort of “pause” in the operations of the
LGU and BFOSCA. Everything has stopped. This has allowed the
government and organizations to innovate and continue their mandate despite
the health risks posed by the COVID19 virus.

For instance, GAD Office had to reinvent. It has redesigned its training
packages to continuously provide learning and development opportunities to
every barangay. They have availed of the available online platforms and
provided a complete set of materials to around 40 respondents per barangay,
including recorded instructions for the training. This has augmented the
restrictions on face-to-face interaction and has allowed to implementation of
capacity-building activities in all 40 barangays of Binangonan. To date, the

available training modules are the following: (a) liquid detergent;
319

(0) dishwashing; (c) fabric conditioner; (d) powder detergent; (e) hand soap;
and (f) sanitizer. The training also offer possible income-generating
opportunities in case the participants decide to pursue mas production of the

abovementioned products.

Virtual activities have been made possible because of the ICT infrastructure.
Government and private resources have been poured into improving the ICT
infrastructure of the country. The need for higher bandwidth to support the
work-from-home arrangements and the virtual operations and services has
prompted the improvement of ICT in the country. Social media and video
conferencing applications have been developed and released for public
consumption. Unfortunately, it was evident in the research that many remote
areas have not yet experienced the low-hanging fruits of digital transformation.
Similarly, OPs have exposed the reality of broadening the digital divide where
they will be left behind in the advancement of ICT if the current policies and

mechanisms do not consider the OPs as an important sector in the country.

Through the MSWDO, Municipal Health Officer, and BFOSCA, the
municipality has pooled its resources from offices by realigning the budget for
fieldwork or face-to-face training to provide financial assistance to affected
families in every barangay. When ECQ or MECQ has been declared, the
Municipal Government has approved financial or in-kind assistance provided
to every household. Those individuals who have tested positive for COVID19,
including the family members who have been identified as close contact, are
given an “Ayuda” package: 5 kilograms of rice, canned goods, coffee, noodles,
vitamin c, and a face mask. Eventually, this assistance has been discontinued
due to easing out of community quarantine declarations and dwindling funding
sources for the LGU.

320

In particular, MSWDO has reported that it addressed all concerns of the
PWDs and Senior Citizens, which included the following services:

¢ Assistance for physical restoration

e After-care and follow-up services

¢ Special social services for the elderly

e Special social services for PWDs

« Free physical and occupational therapies

¢ Free medicines

e Endorsement of individuals to appropriate offices for additional

assistance

Systems and Operations

The Binangonan Municipal Government has poured in so many resources to
upgrade its ICT facilities to cope with the digitalization challenge even prior to
the global pandemic. Networking of computers in the different buildings;
improving the databases, such as filing records, reports, and policies; and
expanding the internet accessibility. However, the plight in the internet
connection and the non-face-to-face transactions further challenged the
Binangonan to go the extra mile in March 2020. The improvement in the
systems and operations was still insufficient to continue a more efficient public
service due to the poor quality of internet connections.

Some offices were not connected to the internet, such as BFOSCA. BFOSCA
has one (1) old model personal computer without an internet connection. This
somehow limits the possible expansion of services and operations of BFOSCA
to provide better services to the Senior Citizens. In offices such as BFOSCA,

knowledge management is an important system in order

321

in terms of office management, the BFOSCA staff expressed her need for
learning and development to organize the office files properly and provide the
necessary assistance to the Senior Citizen Association Presidents. While
training is available online, Ms. Maminta said that BFOSCA has had no internet
connection. However, this prevented her from availing herself of free online
learning materials to improve her skills and competencies as BFOSCA
administrative officer.

At the Barangay Level, the San Carlos LGU has also manifested some
improvements in the overall management of the barangay affairs. The
Barangay Administrator has so much potential in overseeing the totality of
operations of the Barangay. This can be harnessed to ensure the
sustainability of operations and administration after administration.

Similarly, the barangay has also upgraded its systems, as evident by personal
computers and know-how in the operations of the basic productivity tools. On
the other hand, the barangay LGU has a long way to go in terms of knowledge
management, given the unavailability of basic barangay information such as
demographics. This, however, is room for improvement, given the limited
budget of the barangay.

The Planning, Policy Development, Monitoring, and Evaluation processes of
the barangay and municipal LGUs may need to be assessed for further
improvement in order to provide efficient and effective check-and-balance
measures, as well as to increase the transparency and accountability in the
said offices, towards a much-improved provision of programs and services for
OPs and all of the municipal stakeholders.

322

Responses from OPs

OPs have responded to insecurities in various ways to survive the difficult

times during the pandemic. However, based on their responses, they do the

following:

Praying

Just laughing at the problems
Striving very hard to cope
Asks for assistance

Letting things be

Chat with neighbors

OPs and key informants also recognized the positive effects of COVID19 in

their lives, such as:

b.

More time with the family

More time to pray every day

Good timing for business

Serve the church

Volunteer

Explore new things

Planting vegetables and ornamentals

Learned new things, such as using mobile phones

Hindering Factors among OPs

The hindering factors among OPs can be traced from their responses

regarding insecurities and anxieties in life. The major points which can be

drawn from their responses are as follows:

Lack of regular source of income to pay for bills buy sufficient food, and
avail of medical care, among others;
Vulnerability to COVID19;

323

Loss of employment, both for OPs and their family members;

Lack of the necessary documents to avail of the government services,
such as free medicines and other financial assistance;

Physical challenges, particularly for those who had a stroke;

No available recreational opportunities due to mobility restrictions (i.e.,
visiting places, going to church, work, selling, putting up a business,
watching movies, among others);

Unfair distribution of in-kind assistance;

Felt neglected by LGU officials;

Fear of losing their homes because most of them were only caretakers
without any contract from the lot owner;

Strong typhoons can cause landslides and ruined houses, given that
most of them have make-shift houses only;

No other choice but to resort to five-six financing;

324

GZE

MYOMAWVYS LNAWdOTSARC WIDOS GAYALNSO-ALINNDAS NVWNH 22 Sends

‘SBILINMLYOddO.
‘UBdSNVUL SADIAYAS 8

39031MONX SWVu9O"d

syeauus -
GesUINA -
senunsesuyy -

2

nol

o

8
2S
aBo
nee
BSS
g35
225
° oO

Dp
Sze
ao

2

fo}

>

Es

MYOMAWVAS LNANdOTSAAG WIDOS GaASOdOdd #2

The Proposed Human Security Development Framework has been crafted
according to the gathered and analyzed data from the responses of OPs and
key informants. This framework is anchored on the experiences of OPs, the
LGU of Barangay San Carlos, and the Municipality of Binangonan under a
global pandemic. Likewise, the capacities, opportunities, and hindering factors
present in the community are factored into the proposed framework in order to

note the externalities that may, later on, produce unintended consequences.

Likewise, the spiritual security also made a difference in creating a hopeful
disposition. Most OPs always look forward to a better tomorrow and give their
best for their families. Nothing is more important for them during the pandemic
but the health and safety of the whole family. This has been affirmed in Table

56, where sources of help among OPs come from their families (Ranked 1°").

This brings everything back to the basics of development, where Filipino
culture and values system are nurtured and enriched. The numbers in the
survey questions have provided a snapshot of the realities on the ground. The
key informant interview results affirm them. However, the overall direction of
the OPs’ responses led to the importance of strong family ties, which led to the
collective strength of households within a community to survive the insecurities
and threats brought by the pandemic.

Figure 7.2 provides a Human Security-centered Social Development
Framework, focusing on Older Persons. This model provides an enhanced
version of the existing Human Security frameworks, recognizing Filipino
Families' role in creating a safe and healthy environment in the ageing

process. OPs serve as a light tower for the next generations. Moreover, they

326

serve as the torch bearer as they transfer their knowledge and experiences to

the younger generations towards a better ageing process.

The OPs mirror the time when they are the fruits of the years spent in a
community. The current conditions reflect the successes and failures of the
past LGU policies and programs. Thus, the OPs serve as a living dashboard
of human security, given their personal decisions, participation in the
community planning and policy development, family background, and the
different aspects of human security. Opportunities to participate in community
planning and policy development have not been popular in the barangay, given
the limited occasions where OPs and other representatives of marginalized
sectors are welcome. In the same manner, the success of government
initiatives to provide quality education, quality health care, learning
opportunities, economic-related activities, and quality of employment, among
others, can be assessed based on the quality of life of OPs.

The OPs, in this regard, are placed at the core of Human Security because of
the very characteristics of Human Security as “people-centered.” All eight (8)
dimensions of Human Security surround OPs, namely: Health, Personal,
Economic, Community, Food, Spirituality, Political, and Digital. The
dimensions are kept intact by a blue string to hold them close to OPs and be
in place at all times.

The second layer of the framework is four (4) squares representing the factors
affecting how OPs cope with the pandemic. The family, community,
government (from national to local), technology, and media provide varying
degrees of influence and support to OPs in their later years. The size of the
Government box denotes its duty to be in the lead to push for the achievement

327

of Human Security-related interventions, given the proposed eight (8)
dimensions.

The red arrow represents the push and pulls of the social currents. The OPs
are continuously being challenged by the insecurities, vulnerabilities, and
threats - which are all not within their control and can be experienced anytime.
These hindering factors can drag Human Security to the far left if not properly
addressed and managed. With strong collaboration between and among the
stakeholders, the hindering factors can be properly managed if they are not
eliminated.

OPs recognize that these hindering factors are likely to be there for life. The
degree, intensity, and magnitude may be the question of how these can
drastically affect the OPs. Nonetheless, the OPs are very much determined
to overcome such factors, given the strong presence of Filipino values,
aspirations, opportunities, and capacities. These qualities serve as a shield to
most of the insecurities, vulnerabilities, and threats.

Human Security among OPs needs to be grounded in the very context of the
community and social landscape. It needs social development to realize a
community's development goal. As Midgley (1995) framed it, social
development is a process and goal to achieve social well-being or the state or
condition that characterizes individuals, families, communities, and even
societies to effectively manage social problems and create opportunities for
opportunities for the people. Henceforth, the same framework principle is
embraced, represented by the long blue arrow.

It is also important to underscore the framework's focus on the significant

factors that need to be considered in instituting social change and may serve

328

as the driving forces of social development. Policies and plans, programs and
services, learning and knowledge transfer opportunities, and research and
development are the enabling factors that can build a robust foundation for
social development interventions intended for OPs. A family or household-
based approach to achieving human security is not enough. It is not the way
to go to pursue social development. Support from the government through the
institutionalization of appropriate policies can better address the shortcomings
of the current situation and advocate for a better quality of life among OPs in
the future.

The vision of this framework is to achieve an ACTIVE, HAPPY, HEALTHY,
SAFE, AND RESILIENT AGEING PROCESS - as the Philippines is nearing
the post-pandemic era. This future is characterized by the following:
¢ Safe community with empowered OPs and families, founded on
strong Filipino values
¢ OPs with higher hopes and dreams
e¢ OPs will create their opportunities, and at the same time, the
State will take full responsibility for developing opportunities for
OPs as well;
¢ Stronger family and community ties;

e¢ Human dignity and improved quality of life for all

Inclusive, empowering, and participatory processes are important elements to
ensure ownership of the process and its outputs and outcomes. The
interdependence of OPs, community partners, and LGUs offers another
innovative dimension. These agencies must work together to fully recognize
their capabilities in leading the development discourse. The LGU’s capacity
to open its doors for collaboration can create a different platform where OPs

and other marginalized sectors can be represented well in the development

329

process. A more focused approach to community development initiatives,
such as organizing and advocacy, must be seriously considered by the LGU
to ensure that the resources can be effectively and efficiently translated into
services, including people empowerment. Dependency on one's capacity to
provide everything the other person demands is not a sustainable way of
pursuing social development. Thus, a programmatic (not practical) and
systematic social development approach is key to sustaining the community's
development efforts. LGUs need to consider the creation of opportunities such
that the organized community can become self-sustaining and self-reliant
through community-based enterprises.

Human Security is a social development framework that places people (Older
Persons, in this case) at its core and capitalizes on the Filipino Family values,
hopes, dreams, opportunities, and capacities to achieve human dignity and
safety. The eight dimensions of Human Security (economic, health, personal,
food, community, political, digital, and spiritual) constitute the ideal
components of a social development plan for a municipality or barangay.
These dimensions also serve as the pillars of active, happy, healthy, safe, and
resilient ageing based on the perspectives of OPs, founded on the Filipino
values such as “Bayanihan, pananampalataya, pag-asa, bukluran,

pagsusumikap, paglilingkod nang tapat, kahandaan, at pagkamasayahin.”

Insecurities, vulnerabilities, and threats will continue to exist, and OPs cannot
avoid these things. Nevertheless, based on the research results, the
government and other members of the society need to create the appropriate
opportunities to develop one’s capacities and allow them to participate in the
community development initiatives, enrich Filipino values, and continue to
hope and dream for a better tomorrow, persevere as a family and as a
community.

330

Likewise, the pink shield serves as a protection of OPs from insecurities,
vulnerabilities, and threats. Such shield, if strong enough, can repel, deter, or
dilute the destructive impact of any kind of threats that magnify the insecurities

and vulnerabilities of OPs.

The Social Development goals and strategies, are founded on the four (4)
circles (policies and plans, programs, and services, learning and knowledge
transfer opportunities, and research and development), together with the
collaborative efforts of the government, family, community, science and
technology, and media, will be able to create a future for OPs that uphold their
human rights, given the following dimensions:

a) Rest, leisure, recreation, and tourism

b) Knowledge transfer platform

c) Learning opportunities

d) Creative work

e) Social pension

f) Mental and Physical Health and Nutrition

g) Spirituality

h) Safety

331

CHAPTER 8

POLICY RECOMMENDATIONS

This study has been made possible through the support the Municipal LGU of
Binangonan and the Barangay LGU of San Carlos. These LGUs have been
very open to research, particularly those contributing to knowledge building in
Binangonan, Rizal. One of the important contributions of this research is the
list of policy recommendations that intends to improve the overall
administration and governance in Binangonan and can serve as a model for
municipalities with similar characteristics to the said municipality. It is
envisioned that the research outputs can put forward a social development
lens as the municipality and barangay officials prepare the next local
development plans.

8.1 MUNICIPAL AND BARANGAY LOCAL GOVERNMENT

At the Municipal Level, it is important to improve the systems and operations
to continue delivering public service to all the people in Binangonan, Rizal.
The Government needs to prepare for the worst-case scenario. In doing so,
Public Service Continuity Plan is important at this time. It is also important to
consider the proposed Human Security-centered Social Development
Framework so that the people are placed at the center of the strategic plan,
giving premium on the people's overall well-being and considering the eight
(8) dimensions of Human Security.

This, however, shall not replace the existing planning format or the usual
planning schedule and framework of the Municipality. Understandably, the
LGUs follow certain reporting and planning standards the Department of
Interior and Local Government set forth. Nonetheless, it is important to ensure

332

that the Planning Team of the Municipal Government will try to mainstream the

said framework in crafting the plans and targets.

The evidence-based planning and policy development is also an area that
needs to be looked into by the Municipal Government. This is founded on a
very good knowledge management system, where municipal and barangay
statistics and information are well managed, sorted, and can be easily
retrieved. Likewise, in Barangay San Carlos, the information for public use,
such as demographics, budget, and issuances, can be easily shared with the

public, increasing transparency and accountability.

In order to facilitate the efficient and effective delivery of public services, it is
only proper to observe the standard salary grades among LGU personnel,
particularly in the Barangay. The benefits are mandated by the laws to be
provided to employed personnel. Unfortunately, the Barangay Health Workers
were treated only as “volunteers,” receiving about P1,650.00 per month, with
physical reporting at least once a week to the Barangay Health Center. It was
highlighted during the interview that the work of BHWs does not end at the
Barangay Health Center but continues even while they are off-duty.

Most of the BHWs have no Social Security System (SSS) Benefits, PAGIBIG,
and Philhealth. They have not facilitated such benefits at the time of the
interview. In this regard, to raise the level of services in the Barangay, there
is a need to look at how the Barangay personnel are valued. This can be
expressed by providing standard benefits, as stipulated by the law. At the
same time, assistance to BHWs to facilitate the documentary requirements to
enroll in SSS, Philhealth, and PAGIBIG, such as transportation and the like.

333

Hence, it is recommended that the Municipal LGU adopt the following policies:

Adopt a Human Security-based Municipal Strategic Plan, considering
all eight dimensions of Human Security;

Improve the Public Service Continuity Plan, with the corresponding
investments in community organizing, capacity building, infrastructure,
and communication facilities, among others;

Develop and implement a monitoring and evaluation system for all
programs, projects, and activities at the Municipality and Barangay
Levels;

Increase the number of plantilla positions in the LGU in order to boost
the morale of public servants towards improving the quality of public
services;

Improve the communication channels and dissemination strategies to
reach out the remote communities and the marginalized sectors;
Strengthen the community development capacities of Barangay
workers and officials in order to ensure that the needs and concerns of
the various sectors in their localities are properly addressed;

Create plantilla positions for the Barangay Health Workers (BHWs),
providing the standard minimum wage and benefits. This recognizes
the hard work and genuine services of BHWs to their communities. As
health workers, they also need protection and healthcare assistance in
order to ensure their physical, emotional, and mental well-being at all
times so that they can also provide quality care to those who need it the
most in the barangay;

Develop a knowledge management system for both the barangay and
municipality to ensure that all data collected are properly stored,
processed, and easily retrieved anytime. This can provide an evidence-
based planning and policy development for better public administration
and governance;

334

Exhaust all possible partnerships with the National Government
Agencies (NGAs), Non-Government Organizations (NGOs), Private
Sector, and Media in generating additional resources to push for social
development initiatives in the area. The Municipal LGU needs to be the
champion in this regard towards creating more programs and services
that are effective, efficient, and relevant to OPs and the rest of the
stakeholders (e.g., Community Empowerment thru the Science and
Technology Program of the Department of Science and Technology);
Bring the programs and services to the people. This response to the
mobility restrictions among OPs is due to their physical capacities and
distance from the barangay and municipal halls. Recognizing the value
of OPs and their contributions to the community, it is only worth noting
that their welfare has become one of the top priorities of the LGU.
Further, it should be underscored that the programs and services for
OPs should be accessible to them. As such, the following programs
can be considered:

o Use of Tele Medicine, or distribution of Xbox in every sitio of each
of the Barangay, considering the distance and terrain of the
locality;

o Invite newly graduated nurses and doctors to practice in the
barangay and serve the people;

o Invest in transportation (including regular supply of fuel,
maintenance, and budget for drivers), bring the health
practitioners or workers into the remote areas of the barangay,
and provide services to OPs who would need special care in the
health care providers or hospitals; and,

o Implement continuous learning activities in every sitio or barrio
or community within a barangay to ensure equitable distribution
of learning opportunities.

335

o Designate a dedicated staff to assist the Senior Citizen Groups
in each barangay. Said staff must hold a plantilla position to
maintain all records intact properly and ensure the sustainability
of efforts supporting the rights and welfare of older persons in
the barangay. This can somehow relieve the Senior Citizens
from the administrative requirements and rechannel their efforts
to more significant projects and activities that can deliver better
services for the Senior Citizens and the incoming Senior
Citizens.

Improve facilities in the municipality and barangay levels to provide OP-
centered spaces where OPs can be safe and enjoy resting at their own
pace. Social development policies need to consider the rights of OPs
to rest and leisure, including their access to recreational activities and
tourism. The OPs need to enjoy their later years after having been
working so hard during their younger years;

The municipal LGU needs to consider a dedicated gerontologist and
geriatrician to ensure that the mental and physical health and nutrition
of OPs are well taken care of. This can prevent the tendency of OPs to
self-medicate whenever they have some sickness or are not feeling
well:

Opportunities to learn and transfer knowledge can be created through
BFOSCA and MSWDO. This can also be implemented at the barangay
level to express the community's appreciation for the OPs as they are
valued even in their later years. The mode of learning opportunities
also needs to consider the location of OPs and their capacities to
access such training. A localized capacity-building program that brings
the training to the location of OPs can be considered in the project

design to ensure that the LGU reaches its constituents effectively.

336

The safety of OPs is part of the responsibilities of the Government. It
is important that the Government, thru the LGUs, will develop and
implement the development plan in order to properly manage the
vacant lots and to have a strong basis for policy development.

Engage OPs to participate in “creative work,” where they can discover
their artistic side and remain active in their later years through arts. This
is an alternative activity aside from the economic activities that pre-
occupy most of the OPs these days.

The Social Pension policy of OPs needs to be reviewed. The LGUs can
consider bringing into the communities a kiosk that can bring the
services closer to the people. The deficiencies in the documentary
requirements among OPs have hindered them from applying for and
contributing to the Social Security System (SSS). This is also an
opportune time for the National Government to review the SSS policies
and perhaps can give exemptions to indigent individuals to facilitate
their SSS and prepare for their retirements when they reach 60 years
old.

8.2 CHURCH GROUPS

Faith in God provided hope to all OPs with this basic understanding of
spirituality. The church's role during the pandemic has been highlighted. This
has given the OPs a reason to look forward to a better tomorrow, despite the
terrible things that happened during a global pandemic. The Church Groups
have decided to serve the community during the pandemic where their leaders
have set up a similar Community Pantry to that of Maginhawa Street. Others
have looked up to the churches as a symbol of hope that somehow
strengthens their faith and connects them to “God.”

337

in this regard, it can be recommended that the Church Group Leaders consider

the following:

Organize groups within the communities to improve support groups and
enrich the family and Christian values;

Develop outreach mechanisms that use blended strategies (online and
face-to-face) to promote spiritual development among OPs and their
families;

Continue creative formats in support of an individual's spiritual
development;

Make church teachings up-to-date in order to reflect the current context
in the society;

Ensure that the Church only provides accurate information to the OPs
and the rest of the community members;

Collaborate with other church groups, community organizations, and
LGUs, in order to put forward more organized community-based
activities such as relief operations, medical missions, and other “bring-
to-the-people” programs; and,

Extend help to non-church members through capacity-building activities
to contribute to the lifelong learning process among OPs and their
household members.

8.3 SENIOR CITIZEN GROUPS OR OLDER PERSON ORGANIZATIONS

Development opportunities for OPs are not very common among the research

respondents because of their distant location from the central part of the

Barangay. According to the research respondents, those located near the

barangay hall benefit from the barangay programs. They longed for capacity-

building activities or even recreational activities (e.g., Zumba) to be held in

their respective areas. There were even suggestions that organizing women

338

into cooperatives could help them pursue the alternative source of income and,
at the same time, enhance unity within their community.

In this regard, the barangay and municipal LGUs need to take more aggressive
steps in carrying out more area-specific programs. The mobility restrictions
and minimum health standards remain a great challenge to the local officials
because of the possible spread of the COVID19 virus due to social gatherings.
Nonetheless, Binangonan and Barangay San Carlos have vast open spaces
where activities can be safely held not to disrupt the flow of development

opportunities to the communities, particularly in remote areas.

The development opportunities may include the following:
¢ Spiritual development
e Livelihood and skills development
e Leadership and Organizational Development
¢ Community organizing, advocacy, and planning

e And other learning and development opportunities

This research has affirmed the importance of spiritual security or spirituality
where the male and female OPs have acknowledged their “faith in God” or
“belief in a Supreme Being” as one of the sources of hope among OPs. This
gave them a sense of drive to persevere and strive harder to survive life's
battles. With the pandemic, OPs labeled it as the most difficult of the
calamities they had experienced in the past due to the mobility restrictions,
overall effects on livelihood, health, and safety, and invisible opponent
(COVID19). This can be taken as part of Filipino values, which binds the family
members together through thick and thin.

339

The approach to address the challenges of the ageing population is through
an integrative approach where there are multi-level and multi-dimensional
social development strategies and interventions based on the human security
dimensions (health, personal, food, spirituality, economic, community, political,
and digital). Social Development Policies and Plans are important instruments
in order to address the issues of OPs at different levels: individual, family,
community, local government, and up to the national government. Finally, this
research has underscored the importance of strong family ties, which serve as
the support system of OPs, that is founded on Filipino Values, hopes and

dreams, opportunities, and capacities.

340

EPILOGUE

It has been such a great honor and privilege to serve various sectors and
community groups, particularly the OPs, since 2006, when | enrolled as a
student at the College of Social Work and Community Development under the
Master of Community Development program. At first, | was looking for my
niche in the community development arena — getting involved in various
sectors and development issues. However, as | began to understand the world
of the OPs through the Coalition of Services for the Elderly (COSE), and with
the guidance of my mentors, parents, professors, and community partners, |
was inspired by the passion of these OPs that they have dedicated for their
families and communities even in their later years. This, perhaps, is my major
push why | decided to focus on OPs, creating a space for them in the
community and social development discourse.

Others wonder why | was so enthused about working with and serving the
OPs. My passion for the OP groups can be rooted in how my family raised me
in a compound surrounded by my relatives. | have witnessed various cases
of OPs who have further inspired me to pursue this subject as a dissertation
topic, in how my family brought me up, being exposed to extended family
arrangements - living with my grandparents, uncles, and aunties. | learned

how to value respect for the elderly.

Getting exposed to the various facets of life, | realized that such value we have
at home for the elderly was not present in certain communities where poverty
persists. The inequalities, discrimination, and violence against the elderly
were indeed real. The most striking reality for me was to see the
underprivileged and marginalized OPs in the communities of Bagong

Silangan, Quezon City, but with an intense passion for serving the

341

communities and co-OPs during the time of Typhoon Ketsana (Ondoy) in
2009. Since then, | look up to these OPs as a source of inspiration to put
forward more studies that can give them the space in the development
discourse, the space where they can be heard, and the opportunity to learn
from one another through research activities and exchange of know-how
through FGDs, workshops, and training.

This dissertation serves as my hallmark of love for my parents, grandparents,
and all the OPs in Binangonan. | almost discontinued finishing my pursuit of
the degree in Doctor of Social Development when | experienced a tremendous
shock between 2020-2021 — during the height of the global pandemic. It was
so hard to pull all my energy and be inspired again to do the data gathering,
analysis, and writing when | already hit rock bottom.

The pandemic made me realize that my family needs to be the priority, and my
well-being must be on top. Otherwise, nothing will be left of me. Thus, in mid-
2021, | decided to get on my feet again and move on from the greatest loss
our family had experienced when my “Nanay,” mommy, mentor, and best
friend, passed away. This paused for some months but pushed me back on

track again to write the story of OPs in our barangay.

This personal experience is instrumental in working again with OPs and
listening to their stories and experiences. | believe this work is a pioneer study
for OPs in Binangonan, Rizal — in the context of a global pandemic. Capturing
this very rare moment is rewarding and enriching both on my part and the part
of OP respondents and the community partners. By merely participating in the
interview, OPs already felt they are still valued as an important community
member.

342

In almost ten (10) long years, | hope to impart my learnings and realizations to
my children, my community, the OP groups, and LGU officials to recover and
bounce back from the pandemic or any other disaster or calamity which may

strike again in the future always begin within every home.

The interventions need to consider the household level, highlighting the
importance of Filipino values and respect and value for the OPs. Said
interventions must be supported by adequate and appropriate policies and
plans, at least at the Municipal Level if not at the National Level. If the LGU
wants to push for a better quality of life among OPs, it needs to improve its
services that cater to allages. The quality of life of OPs highly depends on the
existing programs of the LGUs for them, and, likewise, on the quality of
development policies and opportunities that have been made available for the

younger generations.

Younger generations with respect and great appreciation for OPs can aim and
achieve a better future because of their firm grasp of how hard it is to gain
more years but with fewer means to live, leading to poor quality of life. In the
same manner, if LGUs will also appreciate the continuum of the ageing
process, the LGU officials and planners will be able to develop plans and
policies that will support better programs and services that can facilitate
healthy and safe ageing and, at the same time, laying the foundation for a
better quality of life in the later years.

This research has affirmed that with weak community organizing efforts, the

development opportunities for OPs will be very limited. | missed the COSE-

developed community Leader — Tatay Rosing, who passed away in 2021. He

used to be my partner when we visited various OP groups in Tayuman and

Barangay San Carlos to raise awareness of the rights of Senior Citizens and

the importance of organized groups for OPs. He was keen to see this
343

dissertation's outputs as we had been working together since 2018.
Nonetheless, | still carry his ideals of serving the poorest of the poor OPs in
our barangay.

The conduct of social development research under the threat of a global
pandemic posed a high risk to the researcher and the respondents. While
there were health protocols observed throughout the research process, a
tremendous fear of getting infected by COVID19 was real. The accountability
and responsibility for a safe research process had put so much pressure on
me, creating different layers of anxiety. This challenged me to think of ways
to alleviate such anxieties and perform the research tasks in a manner that
would not compromise my health and the health of my respondents and

informants.

| was hesitant at first to begin the data gathering. However, the timing was
perfect when the community quarantine protocols eased out little by little and
when the vaccination program had rolled out for more than six months. It was
a relief that the barangay and the municipal LGU allowed me to carry out the
research process to ensure that the health safety protocols were strictly
followed.

At first, | planned to maximize the use of information technology to gather data.
Nevertheless, | found it not feasible due to the area's remoteness and lack of
connectivity. | also learned that most OPs did not own smartphones and were
not fond of using social media. Thus, it would be very difficult to depend on
technological intervention in data gathering. While the opportunity for online

interviews was available, | could not maximize it because of the limitations.

Nevertheless, what worked well was the availability of open space in the
community, which allowed face-to-face interviews and interaction with the
344

OPs. The questionnaire was written in Tagalog — the local dialect in the area,
and the respondents’ familiarity with the research partners facilitated the
conversation among OPs. The familiarity of the OP respondents with my
community researcher partners facilitated the respondents’ confidence to
engage in the research activities. | felt grateful for the hospitality shown by

OPs as they welcomed the interview in the middle of a pandemic.

| witnessed how OPs expressed the hardships they have experienced in the
past few months during the pandemic's peak. Beyond all the insecurities
documented in this research, there was a sheer hope that everything would
come to pass and they would survive the pandemic as a family and as a
community.

They seemed frustrated about the weak presence of government assistance
in their area. However, they were strong-willed individuals who never stopped
looking for opportunities to survive. Such survival instincts were seen in their
efforts to earn a living and look for alternative recreational activities. These
included selling plants, interacting with their peers every afternoon, selling
water bottles or snacks during weekends, and offering different services to
households in the central barangay (cleaning, repairs, gardening, among
others).

| want to mention the group of women who persistently processed shellfish
despite the difficulties of roving around the community and selling. These
women are hardworking mothers who have high hopes that in the little profit
they earn from selling their products, they will be able to survive week after
week. While they feel helpless during the height of the lockdowns, they enjoy
their daily routines of cleaning and selling the shellfish. They expressed

exhaustion and longed for some recreational activities such as Zumba.

345

Nevertheless, | am proud of these women who relentlessly work hard for their

families.

| really appreciate the response of OPs when they surrender their experiences
to God and still continue to survive all adversities in life in the middle of
uncertainties. They said the pandemic was one of a kind, and unlike typhoons,
they could see and feel it. Unlike natural hazards, OPs can properly respond
to them. In their experience, the effects of natural hazards did not go beyond
a month. They can easily put up their houses again. However, with the
pandemic brought by COVID19, the effects are different. They felt helpless,
with heightened anxieties and insecurities, knowing they did not know what to
do. They only knew the unknown - that one day, everything would be back to
normal again — where they could freely travel and work again; where they could
sell again; where their grandchildren could go to school; and where their
families could live again without the threat of COVID19. OPs had nothing to
hold on to but their faith. They were calm during the interview. Some OPs

burst into tears when they looked back in 2020, during the height of lockdowns.

Indeed, this pandemic can be considered a “black swan” where no one can
predict that such an event would shake both the developed and
underdeveloped countries. This research may not answer all the necessities
to prepare for another black swan. Nevertheless, hopefully, this research can
open research and development opportunities that can empower the OPs and
the rest of the community members towards becoming deeply rooted in their
culture, spirituality, and values as they closely knit their ties as one community
to survive any hardships along their way.

Everything goes back to the basics of ensuring that Filipino values continue to

transcend every Filipino household. These become our foundation as we face

346

iife's challenges and extend our helping hands to those in need in this day and
age of challenging times.

Uncertainties have overshadowed the OPs, their families, and the entire
barangay and municipality. Nobody knew in 2020 how to react or make the
first move to alleviate the hardships brought by the pandemic. | will not judge
how the LGUs responded to this pandemic because | believe that they have
just performed the best of their efforts to assist their constituents.
Nevertheless, due to limited funds and human resources, the LGU could not
teach everyone. Slowly, OPs and LGUs sorted things out and initiated actions
to counteract the effects of the pandemic.

Recognizing that LGUs could not provide everything because of their limited
resources, OPs and their families were creative enough to earn a living and
survive even under high community restrictions. Private individuals, churches,
and civic groups emerged as a bridge to assist OPs and communities who
needed food on the table when the community was confined within its “bubble
environment.” While mobility restrictions prevented everyone from working
elsewhere to earn a living, the people strived harder to place food on their
tables and continue to live. The saddening part would be that OPs in the
research areas remain either below the minimum or slightly above the
identified human security level. Moreover, such a reality resonates with the
fact that many households in the barangay continue to experience poverty in
all aspects of human security. While their hope and determination were
somewhat high, they had no choice but to experience the same cycle of
poverty. Furthermore, this remains the greatest challenge of the LGU — to
institutionalize policies, plans, and programs that can provide opportunities for
development and guarantees for OPs towards ensuring that they become

empowered, self-reliant, and resilient individuals.

347

So many lives were lost during the years 2020-2021. Some died at a young
age, and most were in their senior years. It is indeed a grace and a gift to
reach the age of at least 60 years old today, given the threat of COVID19 and
possible new variants or other kinds of health risks or another climate-induced
disaster. With this research, | hope to inspire the younger generations to do
their best to strive harder in life to prepare for their later years and be ready to
care for their parents and grandparents. | also hope to inspire the current OPs
in our community to persevere in any crises that may come, continue their will
to learn, and contribute to the development process to institute change in the

current administration for a better future for the next generation.

| pray that in all of the uncertainties that the communities and the OPs may
experience in the future, the various groups and sectors can set up a
mechanism to respond to the needs of one another immediately. Moreover,
such a response is best nurtured in the respective homes and communities
through enrichment of Filipino values and institutionalization of policies and
seamless mechanisms to respond, rebuild, and recover from such
uncertainties. All of these are founded on participatory, inclusive, human
tights-based, and empowering strategies and processes for a seamless

response, rebuilding, and recovery action

In closing, | look up to the wisdom of OPs in my social development journey.
My parents, grandparents, church elders, DOST retirees, retired personnel,
COSE, OPOs, and OP leaders all served as my inspiration as they continue
to enrich and enculturate the Filipino values in the next generation. | hope to
pay it forward to the future generation ahead of me through this research and
the future social development endeavors.

Mabuhay po ang lahat ng mga nakatatanda at ang mga susunod na
henerasyon para sa mas ligtas, malusog, malaya, at matiwasay na
348

kinabukasan, nang may paggalang, pagtutulungan, pag-asa, at
pananampalataya!

349

REFERENCES

Bytheway, B. (1995). Ageism. Bristol, Philadelphia: Open University Press.

Cameron, R. (2014). Chapter 10: A more 'human' Human Security - The
importance of existential security in resilient communities. In C.
Hobson, P. Bacon, & R. Cameron, Human Security and Natural
Disasters (pp. 157-180). New York City: Routledge.

Dye, T. R. (2017). Understanding public policy - Fifteenth edition. Florida, USA:
Pearson Education Inc.

Enarson, E. (2014). Human Security and disaster. In C. Hobson, P. Bacon, &
R. Cameron, Human Security and natural disasters (pp. 37-56). London
and New York: Routledge: Taylor and Francis Group.

Eriksen, T. H. (2010). Human Security and social anthropology. In T. H.
Eriksen, E. Bal, & O. Salemi (Ed.), A world of insecurity: anthropological
perspectives on Human Security (pp. 1-19). New York: Pluto Press.

Estes, C., Biggs, S., & Phillipson, C. (2003). Social theory, social policy and
ageing. United Kingdom: Bell & Bain Ltd, Glasgow.

Featherstone, M. a. (1995). Images of Aging. London and New York:
Routledge.

Fredvang, M., & Biggs, S. (2012). The rights of older persons: protection and
gaps under human rights law. Center for Public Policy. Melbourne:
Brotherhood of St. Laurence and University of Melbourne.

Heijmans, A., & Victoria, L. (2001). Citizenry-Based & Development-Oriented
Disaster Response: Experiences and Practices in Disaster
Management. Quezon City: Center for Disaster Preparedness.

Hillier, S. M., & Barrow, G. M. (2015). Aging, the Individual and Society: 10th
Edition. Stamford: Cengage Learning.

Jones, J. F., & Pandey, R. S. (1981). Social development: Conceptual,
methodological and policy issues. New York: St. Martin's Press.

Luckham, R. (2010). Chapter 27: The discordant voices of security. In A. C.
Eade, Deconstructing development discourse: Buzzwords and

350

fuzzwords (pp. 269-277). Warwickshire, United Kingdom: Practical
Action Publishing Ltd.

Manalili, A. G. (1990). Sama-samang pagpaplano at pamamahala ng mga
proyektong pangkaunlaran tungo sa kaunlaran mula sa tao at para sa
tao (participatory project development and management). Manila:
Kapatiran-Kaunlaran Foundation, Inc.

Midgley, J. (2014). Social development: Theory and practice. Singapore: Sage
Publications.

Nussbaum, M. C. (2011). Creating capabilities: the human development
approach. Cambridge, Massachusetts and London, England: The
Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.

Phillipson, C. (2013). Ageing. Cambridge, United Kingdom: Polity Press.

Sen, A. (1999). Development as freedom. New York: Oxford University Press.

Todaro, M. P., & Smith, S. C. (2007). An introduction to economic
development, Ninth Edition. Singapore: Pearson Education South Asia
Pte Ltd.

Wisner, B., Blaikie, P., Cannon, T., & Davis, |. (2004). At Risk: Natural hazards,
people's vulnerability and disasters, 2nd Edition. London: Routledge.

Atienza, M. E. (2015, February). People's views about Human Security in five
(5) Philippine municipalities. Disaster Prevention and Management,
24(4), 448-467. DOI 10.1108/DPM-12-2014-0277.

Avers, D. e. (2011, December). Editor's message: Use of the term "Elderly".
Journal of Geriatric Physical Therapy, 34(4), 153-154. DOI:
10.1519/JPT.0b013e31823ab7ec.

Carandang, R., Asis, E., Shibanuma, A., Junko, K., Murayama, H., & Jimba,
M. (2019, October 04). Unmet needs and coping mechanisms among
community-dwelling senior citizens in the Philippines: A Qualitative
Study. International Journal of Environmental Research and Public
Health, 16(3745), 1-16. doi:10.3390/ijerph16193745.

Casper, D. (2007). Human rights, human needs, human development, Human
Security: Relationships between four international 'human discourses.’

351

Forum for Development Studies, 34(1), 9-43, DOI:
10.1080/08039410.2007.9666364.

Madruefio-Aguilar, R. (2016, May). Human Security and the New Global
Threats: Discourse, Taxonomy, and Implications. Global Policy, 7(2),
156-173. doi:10.1111/1758-5899.12290.

Mandigma, M. S. (2016, March). Retirement preparedness of middle-income
Filipinos. World Journal of Social Sciences, 6(1), 170-187.

Villegas, J. A. (2014). Graying Matters: Ageing in Contemporary Philippine
Society. Philippine Sociological Review, 62(1), 139-158.

Commission on Human Rights - United Nations. (2006). Specific groups and
individuals, other vulnerable groups and individuals ageing and the
rights of older persons. Statement to the 62nd Session of the
Commission on Human Rights United Nations. Geneva, Switzerland:
United Nations.

Cruz, G. T., Cruz, C. P., & Saito, Y. (2019). Ageing and Health in the
Philippines. Jakarta, Indonesia and Quezon City, Philippines: Economic
Research Institute for ASEAN and East Asia (ERIA) and Demographic
Research and Development Foundation, Inc.

Municipal Government of Binangonan. (2021, November 28). Socio Economic
Profile. Retrieved from Municipality of Binangonan - Province of Rizal:
https://binangonan.gov.ph/wp-content/uploads/202 1/02/binangonan-
socio-economic-profile.pdf

Municipal Planning and Development Office. (2020). Accomplishment Report
of Binangonan. Binangonan, Rizal: Binangonan Municipal Planning and
Development Office.

UN ACC INter-Agency Committee on Women and Gender Equality. (1999).
Women's empowerment in the context of Human Security. Bangkok:
Office of the Special Adviser on Gender Issues and Advancement of
Women Department of Economic and Social Affairs.

UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitariat Affairs. (2020, July 13). COVID-
19: UN and humanitarian partners lending a hand to the most
vulnerable Filipinos - Op-ed by Gustavo Gonzalez, UN Resident and
Humanitarian Coordinator in the Philippines. Retrieved from Reliefweb:

352

https://reliefweb.int/report/philippines/covid-19-un-and-humanitarian-
partners-lending-hand-most-vulnerable-filipinos-op

UNESCAP. (2012). Building Sustainable Ageing Societies: The world's most
aged country and the world's fastest ageing country are both in East
and North-East Asia. Retrieved May 2020, from United Nations
Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific:
https://www.unescap.org/ageing-asia/did-you-
know/359/world%E2%80%99s-most-aged-country-and-
world%E2%80%99s-fastest-ageing-country-are-both-east-and

United Nations. (1969, December 11). Declaration on Social Progress and
Development - Proclaimed by General Assembly resolution 2542
(XXIV). Retrieved October 20, 2015, from United Nations: Office of the
High Commissioner on Human Rights:
http:/Awww.ohchr.org/Documents/Professionallnterest/progress.pdf

United Nations. (2016, January). Human Security handbook: An integrated
approach for the realization of the sustainable development goals and
the priority areas of the international community and the United Nations
System. Retrieved from United Nations Human Security Trust Fund:
https:/Awww.un.org/humansecurity/wp-content/uploads/201 7/10/h2.pdf

United Nations Research for Social Development. (2011). Social Development
in an Uncertain World: UNRISD Research Agenda 2011-2014. Geneva:
United Nations.

United Nations-Department of Economic and Social Affairs. (2017). United
Nations. Retrieved 30 April 2020, from World Population Ageing:
https://www.un.org/en/development/desa/population/publications/pdf/a
geing/WPA2017_Highlights.pdf

United Nations-Department of Economic and Social Affairs. (2020). World
Population Ageing 2019. Retrieved 01 May 2020, from United Nations:
https://www.un.org/en/development/desa/population/publications/pdf/a
geing/WorldPopulationAgeing2019-Report.pdf

Villar, F. R. (2013, October 1-2). The Philippine social protection framework
and strategy. Mandaluyong City, Philippines: Department of Social
Welfare and Development.

World Health Organization. (2000). Social Development and Ageing: Crisis or
Opportunity? Geneva: World Health Organization.

353

World Health Organization. (2007). Global Age-Friendly Cities: A Guide.
France: World Health Organization.

World Health Organization. (2017). 10 Priorities towards a decade of healthy
ageing. Switzerland: World Health Organization.

Abbott, L. (2021, January 20). Global COVID-19 Responses Through a Critical
Studies Perspective. Retrieved 05 March 2021, from https://www.e-
ir.info/pdf/89475

Baclig, C. E. (2020, March 12). Inquirer - Nation. Retrieved from Inquirer:
https://newsinfo.inquirer.net/1406004/timeline-one-year-of-covid-19-in-
the-philippines

Barkan, S. (.-C. (2010). Flat World Knowledge. Retrieved February 15, 2012,
from Sociology:Understanding and changing the social world - Chapter
9: http://Awww. flatworldknowledge.com/pub/1.0/sociology-
understanding-and-ch/51712#web-51712

Britannica. (2021, December 14). Britannica. Retrieved from Human Security:
https://www. britannica.com/topic/social-welfare-program

Cuenca, J. S. (2016, February). Social protection in APEC: In pursuit of
inclusive growth. Philippine Institute for Development Studies.
Philippine Institute for Development Studies. Retrieved September 29,
2017, from Philippine Institute for Development Studies:
https://dirp3.pids.gov.ph/websitecms/CDN/PUBLICATIONS/pidsdps16
03.pdf

DataLEADS/ANN. (2018, February 14). News>World - How Asia's population
in aging, 2015-2030 scenario. Retrieved 06 May 2020, from 37th The
Jakarta Post: https://Awww.thejakartapost.com/news/2018/02/14/how-
asias-population-is-aging-2015-2030-scenario.html

de Vera, B. O. (2017, April 10). Headlines: "Infrastructure spending up 42.8%
in 2016". Retrieved from Inquirer.Net:
https://business. inquirer.net/227613/infrastructure-spending-42-8-
2016. Accessed on 13 January 2020.

de Vera, B. O. (2019, October 16). Headlines: "Review of ‘Build, Build, Build’
to yield expanded, more comprehensive list. Retrieved from
Inquirer.Net: https://business.inquirer.net/281167/review-of-build-build-

354

build-to-yield~-expanded-more-comprehensive-list. Accessed on 13
January 2020.

Department of Health. (2018, October 19). Retrieved 11 April 2020, from
Health and Wellness Program for Senior Citizens:
https://www.doh.gov.ph/Health-and-Wellness-Program-for-Senior-
Citizen

Department of Trade and Industry. (2021, November 28). Cities and
Municipalities Competitiveness Ranking - Binangonan. Retrieved from
https://cmci.dti.gov.ph/lgu-profile.php?Igu=Binangonan

Diaz, J. (2019, March 06). Philippine Star - Global. Retrieved 11 April 2020,
from P67 _ billion allotted for expanded health care:
https://www.philstar.com/headlines/2019/03/06/18991 13/p67-billion-
allotted-expanded-health-care

Dominguez, J. C., Orquiza, M. S., Soriano, J. R., Magpantay, C. D., Esteban,
R. C., Corrales, M., & Ampil, E. R. (2013, September). Adaptation of
the Montreal Cognitive Assessment for Elderly Filipino. East Asian
Archives of Psychiatry, 23, 80-85.

DOST-Philippine Institute of Volcanology and Seismology (PHIVOLCS).
(2021). Seismic Hazards Assessment for Binangonan, Rizal. Quezon
City: DOST-PHIVOLCS. Retrieved October 11, 2021

Fabonan, E. (2019, July 30). Growing old and poor in the Philippines.
Retrieved from OneNews: Today's news Explained:
https://onenews.ph/growing-old-and-poor-in-the-philippines

Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. (2006). The right to
food. Retrieved December 02, 2017, from Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations:
http:/Avww.fao.org/righttofood/about-right-to-food/human-right-
principles-panther/en/

Galvez, D. (2021, May 10). Inquirer.Net. Retrieved May 2021, from Palace:
NCR Plus' shift to GCQ after 14 May ‘possible’ but IATF has final say:
https://newsinfo.inquirer.net/1429699/palace-ncr-plus-shift-to-gcq-
after-may-14-possible-but-iatf-has-final-say

Gozalo siblings. (2021, May 15). COV/D019 Philippines-Tracking SARS-CoV-
2 cases in the Philippines. Retrieved from
https://covid1 9stats.ph/stats/by-location/calabarzon

355

International Labour Organization. (2020). COV/D-19 labour market impact in
the Philippines: Assessment and national policy responses. Retrieved
from https://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---asia/---ro-bangkok/--
-ilo-manila/documents/publication/wcms_762209.pdf

International Monetary Fund. (2020, March 23). International Monetary Fund.
Retrieved from IMF Press Release No. 20/98: The great lockdown:
Worst economic downturn since the Great Depression:
https:/www.imf.org/en/News/Articles/2020/03/23/pr2098-imf-
managing-director-statement-following-a-g20-ministerial-call-on-the-
coronavirus-emergency

Merriam-Webster. (2020, May 01). resiliency. Retrieved from Merriam-
Webster since 1828: https:/Awww.merriam-
webster.com/dictionary/resiliency

Municipality of Binangonan. (2020, June 06). Municipality of Binangonan.
Retrieved from Municipality of Binangonan:
http:/Awww.binangonan.gov.ph/

Muramatsu, N., & Akiyama, H. (2011, May 24). Japan:Super-aging society
preparing for the future. The Gerontologist, 51(4), 425-432. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1093/geront/gnr067.

Nafziger, E. W. (2006, February). Research Paper No. 2006/20 - From Seers
to Sen: The meaning of economic development. Retrieved February
2020, from United Nations University:
https://www.wider.unu.edu/sites/default/files/rp2006-20.pdf

National Economic and Development Authority. (2017). Retrieved February
2020, from Abridged-PDP-2017-2022_Final:
http:/Avww.neda.gov.ph/wp-content/uploads/2017/12/Abridged-PDP-
2017-2022_Final.pdf

Nishikawa, Y. (2010). Human Security in Asia. New York, USA: Routledge.

OpenStreetMap. (2021, December 04). OpenStreetMap. Retrieved from
OpenStreetMap:
https://www.openstreetmap.org/#map=13/14.4987/121.1399

Oro-Josef, C. P. (2014, November 09). The national laws for senior citizens.
Retrieved December 17, 2017, from Business — Mirror:
https://businessmirror.com.ph/the-national-laws-for-senior-citizens/

Ortigas, L. (2021, August 05). Administrator, Barangay San Carlos. (D. M.
Bernardo, Interviewer)

356

Peet, R., & Hartwick, E. (2015). Theories of development: Contentions,
arguments, alternatives - Third Edition. London: The Guilford Press.

PhilAtlas. (2021, December 04). San Carlos, Municipality of Binangonan.
Retrieved from PhilAtlas:
https://www. philatlas.com/luzon/r04a/rizal/binangonan/san-carlos.html

Philippine Health Insurance Corporation. (2017, September 15). Philippine
Information Agency - News Center. Retrieved from PhilHealth cares for
the elderly population: http://pia.gov.ph/news/articles/1000268

Philippine Statistics Authority. (2015, December 29). Population Projection
Statistics. Retrieved 07 May 2020, from Philippine Statistics Authority:
https://psa.gov.ph/statistics/census/projected-population

Philippine Statistics Authority. (2016, June 02). Population of Region IV-A -
CALABARZON (Based on the 2015 Census of Population). Retrieved
08 May 2020, from Philippine Statistics Authority:
https://psa.gov.ph/content/population-region-iv-calabarzon-based-
2015-census-population

Philippine Statistics Authority. (2021, December 17). Proportion of Poor
Filipinos Registered at 23.7 Percent in the first semester of 2021.
Retrieved from https://psa.gov.ph/content/proportion-poor-filipinos-
registered-237-percent-first-semester-2021

Purnell, K. (2019, January 16). Senior citizen perks around Metro Manila.
Retrieved from MB: The Good Life: http://thegoodlife.com.ph/senior-
citizen-perks-around-metro-manila/

Social Science Statistics. (2022, January 10). Social Science Statistics.
Retrieved from Spearman's Rho Calculator:
https://www.socscistatistics.com/tests/spearman/default2.aspx

Tavanti, M. (2013). Sustainable Human Security. Retrieved January 2020,
from Sustainable Human Security: http:/Awww.weinstitute.org/human-
security.html

Tomacruz, S. (2020, March 16). Duterte places Luzon on lockdown to battle
coronavirus. Retrieved 05 April 2020, from  Rappler:
https://www.rappler.com/nation/254726-luzon-total-lockdown-battle-
coronavirus-outbreak

Walker, A. (2007). Editorials: Why involve older people in research? Age and
Ageing(36), 481-483. doi: 10.1093/ageing/afm100.

357

World Bank. (2018, October 17). Nearly Half the World Lives on less than
$5.50 a day. Retrieved from https://www.worldbank.org/en/news/press-
release/2018/10/17/nearly-half-the-world-lives-on-less-than-550-a-day

Bernardo, D. M. (2015). Research with older persons. Quezon City:
Unpublished work - Submitted for SD 398 UP College of Social Work
and Community Development.

Bernardo, D., Quintana, I., Sanchez, D., Laumond, C., & Galang, C. (2018).
Critique of the Local Planning System in Binangonan, Rizal.
Unpublished work submitted for the completion of Plan 210A - UP
School of Urban and Regional Planning.

Binangonan Municipal Welfare and Development Office (MSWDO). (2020).
Annual Accomplishment Report, CY 2020. Binangonan, Rizal:
Municipality of Binangonan - Municipal Planning and Development
Office.

Campanano, D. J. (2005). 1st Foundation Celebration - Barangay San Carlos.
Binangonan, Rizal: San Carlos Foundation Council.

Campanano-Bernardo, D. R. (2012, March 31). Tagsibol Hanggang sa
Pagtanda: Exploring Older Persons' Assets and Capacities in
Community-Centered Disaster Risk Reduction and Management.
Graduate Thesis. Quezon City, Philippines.

Campanano-Bernardo, D. R. (2018). Transforming soon-to-retire public
servants into beacons of science, technology and innovation.
Unpublished work - Submitted for SD399 UP College of Social Work
and Community Development. Quezon City.

Republic of the Philippines. (2017). National Security Policy 2017-2022 for
change and well-being of the Filipino people. Manila: Republic of the
Philippines.

Republic of the Philippines - Congress of the Philippines. (2007, May 15).
Republic Act. No. 9457 - An Act Creating a Barangay to be known as

358

Barangay San Carlos in the Municipality of Binagnonan, Province of
Rizal. Manila, Philippines.

Republic of the Philippines. (1992, April 12). Republic Act No. 7432: An act to
maximize the contribution of senior citizens in nation building, grant
benefits and special privileges and for other purposes. Manila,
Philippines.

Republic of the Philippines. (2007). Senate of the Philippines - Republic Acts.
Retrieved 10 June 2020, from RA 9372:
https://www.senate.gov.ph/republic_acts/ra%209372.pdf

Republic of the Philippines. (2009, July 27). Republic Act. 9994: An Act
granting additional benefits and privileges to senior citizens, or the
Expanded Senior Citizens Act of 2010. Manila, Philippines.

Republic of the Philippines. (2014, July 28). Republic Act No. 10645: An Act
providing for the mandatory PhilHealth coverage for all Senior Citizens,
amending for the purpose of Republic Act No. 7432, as amended by
R.A. No. 9994, otherwise known as the "Expanded Senior Citizen
Expanded Act of 2010. Manila, Philippines.

Campanano-Bernardo, D. R. (2012, March 31). Tagsibol Hanggang sa
Pagtanda: Exploring Older Persons' Assets and Capacities in
Community-Centered Disaster Risk Reduction and Management.
Graduate Thesis. Quezon City, Philippines.

Arriola, F. (2021, August 09). President, Senior Citizen Association. (D. M.
Bernardo, Interviewer)

Bernardo, F. (2021, August 16). Councilor, Barangay San Carlos. (D. M.
Bernardo, Interviewer)

del Rosario, R. (2021, August 28). Councilor, Barangay San Carlos. (D. M.
Bernardo, Interviewer)

359

Fillarya, E. (2021, August 09). Director, Barangay San Carlos Senior Citizen
Association. (D. M. Bernardo, Interviewer)

Lozada, R.". (2020, August 31). Binangonan Gender and Development (GAD)
Officer. (D. M. Bernardo, Interviewer)

Maminta, M. (2021, August 20). Secretary, Binangonan Federation of Senior
Citizen Associations (BFOSCA). (D. M. Bernardo, Interviewer)
