Effect of Body Image Perception and Skin Lightening Practices on Mental Health of Emerging Filipino Adults: A Mixed Methods Approach

Zypher Jude Garcia Regencia

University of the Philippines Manila

Doctor of Philosophy in Health Sciences (by Research)

June 2024

ABSTRACT

Using an explanatory-sequential mixed-methods approach, this dissertation
examines the interrelationships among body image perception, skin-lightening
practices, and mental health in a cohort of 3,127 emerging Filipino adults. Quantitative
data, analyzed through generalized structural equation modeling, revealed that positive
body image significantly predicts better mental health outcomes. Higher scores on body
appreciation and esteem scales were linked to lower incidences of depression, anxiety,
and stress. The study also found that body image perceptions influence skin-lightening
practices, with a greater understanding of the active ingredients in skin-lightening
products (SLPs) associated with a more positive body image. This suggests educational
interventions could improve body image perception and reduce reliance on SLPs. Qualitative insights among 16 informants highlight significant societal
pressures and the impact of media portrayals of beauty standards, exacerbating mental
health challenges, especially among young women. These pressures often lead to higher
levels of anxiety and depression associated with negative body image. The concept of
body politics, which refers to how societal powers regulate the human body, plays a
crucial role in sustaining the white beauty standard influenced by historical colonialism
and perpetuated by contemporary media and societal norms. This dissertation adds to body image literature by providing specific insights
into the Filipino context, where Western beauty standards heavily shape local
perceptions. Unlike previous studies focusing predominantly on Western populations,
this research sheds light on the impact of global beauty standards on mental health in
an Asian post-colonial society. The mixed-method approach offers a comprehensive
understanding by combining statistical associations with personal narratives, revealing cultural nuances that influence body image and mental health. Building on existing theories, such as the Sociocultural Theory, this study
proposes the Culturally Informed Body Image Theory, emphasizing the importance of
considering historical contexts and sociocultural factors in understanding beauty
standards. The findings advocate for culturally sensitive interventions addressing body
image and skin-lightening practices, promoting mental health resilience and body
positivity while challenging harmful beauty norms to foster a healthier perspective among Filipino youth.

Chapter I
Introduction
Background of the Study

The rampant distribution of idealized images on media platforms may lead the
general public, particularly vulnerable individuals, to try to improve their appearance
in a way that is excessive, compulsive, or detrimental to different aspects of their lives.
Human behavior towards achieving beauty and a sense of attractiveness is centered on
socio-cultural factors. They believe there are several advantages to attaining beauty,
such as social and cultural benefits, including better job opportunities and higher
chances of having a relationship and marriage. A previous study pointed out that black
men are often attracted to women with lighter skin tones. In addition, these men also
seek socioeconomic advantages by marrying fair-skinned women of color (Charles,
2011). These motivations drive consumers to use skin-lightening products (SLPs) and
related practices to achieve their desired skin tone. The cosmetic use of SLPs is evident
in Asia, Africa, and other parts of the world. A recent meta-analysis showed a global
pooled lifetime prevalence of using SLPs of 27.7%. In comparison, 30.7% was the
estimated prevalence, specifically for Southeast Asian students (Peltzer & Pengpid,
2017). The cross-sectional study also highlighted the association between SLP use and
poor mental health from this large sample of Southeast Asian students. The results
served as a warning, posing a detrimental global public health problem.

Despite recent research documenting that dermatological threats are on the rise
globally, efforts to prevent skin injuries or safety are among the most understudied areas
of public health (Jardine et al., 2012; Krejci-Manwaring et al., 2006). Exposure to
ambient solar/ultraviolet radiation among vulnerable populations accounts for a large

Proportion of skin traumas in the form of cancer (Armstrong & Kricker, 2001). Other

potential skin hazards also exist, including occupational-related skin exposures,
community skin exposures (Tamene, 2021), and skin damage resulting from practices
such as skin lightening. In addition, comparatively little research has been given to the
widespread global practice of dangerous skin-lightening practices, considering the
potential harms of exposure to hazardous chemicals (Jacobs et al., 2016). Numerous
potentially life-threatening consequences of skin-lightening practices have been
identified in the literature (Boyle & Kennedy, 1986; Mahe et al., 2003; Mahé et al.,
2007; Ramsay et al., 2003). Moreover, dermatologic consequences include skin lesions,
epidermal atrophy (thinning of the skin), exogenous ochronosis (bluish-black tissue
discoloration), eczema, bacterial and fungal infections, dermatitis (skin inflammation),
scabies (contagious skin disease), warts, acne, sun damage, and body odor (Ajose,
2005; Mahe et al., 2003). Furthermore, skin-lightening practices may also lead to fragile
skin, poor wound healing, scarring, and the need for corrective surgery (Ajose, 2005).
These harms extend from the acute or chronic long-term exposure to the often-
hazardous chemical agents present in SLPs.

The understudied field of skin-lightening practices accentuated the need for
more epidemiologic research, particularly in underrepresented countries (Sagoe et al.,
2019). The global phenomenon of using SLPs is based on the perception that lighter
skin tones may result in more opportunities in life. This perception led to the growing
epidemic of the consumption of SLPs between and within ethnic/racial groups
(Gwaravanda, 2011). Among men and women worldwide, the motivation for skin
lightening is multifactorial, with the interplay of historical, cultural, sociopolitical, and
psychological influences (Blay, 2011; Charles, 2011; Kpanake & Mullet, 2011; Lewis
et al., 2011). Many international cosmetic companies have capitalized on these

motivations from consumers. Companies manufacturing SLPs utilized different

is)

marketing strategies, such as the internet, to capture racial or colorized norms and
values as well as the class and gender differences within the White and non-White
market (Charles, 2011).

Studies examining the association between the use of SLPs and mental health
problems are a relatively new field of study. However, it has been recently reported that
SLP use is significantly associated with body image disturbances, including Body
Dysmorphic Disorder (BDD), based on narrative research and previous exposure to
trauma, based on a cross-sectional study (Alaa et al., 2021; Charles & McLean, 2017;
James et al., 2016). In addition, cross-sectional research focused on skin-lightening
practices and identified associated psychological factors. There are related
psychological problems that have been highlighted and are categorized as (1) self-
esteem-related factors (Rusmadi et al., 2015; Swami et al., 2013; Thompson & Keith,
2001), (2) body image-related factors (Buchanan et al., 2008; Sahay & Piran, 1997;
Swami et al., 2013), and (3) other potential psychological factors, such as a history of
trauma and depressive symptoms (Buhlmann et al., 2012; James et al., 2016).

Aside from the use of SLP, the proliferation of social media in this digital age
has also established other social and psychological issues in the current media
landscape. These issues also aggravated existing trends. Over the last decade,
psychologists and researchers have been interested in body image matters. However,
they are now exploring these issues in the new media landscape. Communication and
social psychology researchers have commenced investigating the interplay between
body image, social comparison, and social media. The association of social media use
with negative issues relating to the body, such as low body esteem, is not new. Several
research reports documented the negative impacts of idealized body image on the

female body. The same idealized body image portrayed in social media may have

similar effects. A previous study presented that social media posts relating to
fitspiration goals negatively affected body image rather than inspiring the participants
to switch to healthier lifestyle choices (Tiggemann & Zaccardo, 2015). A national
survey from the United Kingdom showed that 1 out of 20 men and 1 out of 10 women
were reported to appear dissatisfied with their body (Park et al., 2014). This may be
slowly changing due to social pressures around weight and shape. A cross-temporal
meta-analysis spanning 30 years reported that the motivation to be skinny among girls
and women gradually decreases over time. However, the basis for being muscular
among boys and men and girls and women has been consistent across the three-decade
research (Karazsia et al., 2017).

Among emerging adults, there is an increasing trend of observations of body
dissatisfaction being linked with depression symptoms (Gavin et al., 2010;
Goldschmidt et al., 2016; Jackson et al., 2014), psychological distress (Griffiths et al.,
2016), and eating disorders (Dakanalis et al., 2015; Goldschmidt et al., 2016; Swami et
al., 2013). On the other hand, positive body image was also linked with better overall
well-being and quality of life (Griffiths et al., 2016; Nayir et al., 2016; Swami et al.,
2013). Measurements such as body appreciation and body esteem are linked to a
positive association with mental well-being (Coyne et al., 2021; Marta-Simées et al.,
2016).

Factors associated with body image among adults differ from one population to
another. These factors depend on the degree of what constitutes the “ideal” body type
and the likelihood of how individuals compare themselves with others based on
appearance. In both men and women, the idealized body image seen on social media
and other platforms, such as television, print, or movies, is significantly linked with

higher internalization of ideal body type and higher levels of body dissatisfaction

(Blond, 2008; Grabe et al., 2008; Holland & Tiggemann, 2016; Mingoia et al., 2017;
Tiggemann & Zaccardo, 2015). Numerous types of research have also linked these
body image concerns to unhealthy weight control behaviors that can be excessive,
compulsive, or detrimental (Gentile et al., 2007; Neumark-Sztainer & Eisenberg, 2014;
Olivardia ct al., 2004). Unhealthy weight control behaviors include vomiting for weight
control, laxative and diet pill use, severe food restriction, excessive exercise, abuse of
anabolic steroids, and fasting (Neumark-Sztainer et al., 2012).

This study was conceptualized owing to the past literature and a growing body
of evidence concerning the effect of body image perception and skin-lightening
practices on the mental well-being of both men and women. The interplay of body
image and skin-lightening practices is anchored on the history of racism and modern
world globalization in the contemporary context where social media (mediascapes)
dictate a hegemonized body image and skin color, affecting a person’s mental health
status. In the modern context, globalization and social media have intensified these
pressures. Appadurai’s concept of mediascapes elucidates how global media flows
shape cultural perceptions and identities (Moinuddin, 2017). Social media amplify
these effects by rapidly disseminating and normalizing beauty standards across
different cultures (Elias & Gill, 2018). Consequently, individuals internalize these
ideals, impacting their body image and mental health. Platforms like Instagram and
TikTok often promote Eurocentric beauty ideals, creating a homogenized standard of
beauty that glorifies lighter skin. This has significant mental health implications, as
individuals who do not meet these standards may experience low self-esteem and
psychological distress. Studies have shown that social media can exacerbate body
image issues by constantly exposing users to idealized images and reinforcing the desire

to conform to these ideals (Levine & Santos, 2021). Race-based negative evaluations

of black physicality led to race-related concerns and preoccupations with skin tone,
facial features, hair texture, and race-related body shape and weight (De Maynard,
2013). White people, compared to black people, showed (1) greater dissatisfaction with
their appearance and body weight, (2) greater internalization of Western standards of
beauty, and (3) a significant relationship between body dissatisfaction and media
comparisons (Jefferson & Stake, 2009). Based on a mixed-method study in Florida,
Black and Asian students showed less weight-driven body image disturbance than
Latinos and Whites. However, Blacks had the highest positive general appearance
regarding body image (Altabe, 1998). However, cultural perceptions still impact body
image across ethnic groups. For instance, there is a prevalent preference and mentality
for lighter skin tones within Filipino culture, which often leads to skin-lightening
practices (Lasco & Hardon, 2020). The interaction between body image and skin-
lightening practices among Filipino emerging adults and its overall effect on the mental
well-being of emerging adults remained understudied. Therefore, extensive research
examining various factors conceming this unfolding field of study is needed in these
social-media-induced trying times when mental well-being is greatly affected by the
COVID-19 pandemic (Graupensperger et al., 2022).
Statement of the Problem

The Philippines has recently passed the first law concerning the mental health
of Filipinos, the Mental Health Act (Republic Act no. 11036). The Act seeks to
establish access to comprehensive and integrated mental health services while
protecting the rights of people with mental disorders and their family members (Lally
et al., 2019). However, mental health programs remain poorly funded by the Philippine
government. It is estimated that only 35% of the total health budget is spent on mental

health, while 70% is spent on hospital care (Maravilla & Tan, 2021). The scarcity of

epidemiologic evidence on mental health disorders in the Philippines is also evident,
but some essential information is available. A report estimated that 14% of the 1.4
million Filipinos with disabilities were recognized to have mental health disorders
(Dominguez et al., 2018). The Philippine Statistics Authority reported that mental
illness is the third most prevalent form of morbidity. However, only about 88 clinical
cases of mental health problems are reported for every 100,000 population. This finding
underestimates the number of mental health cases in the country (Martinez et al., 2020).
Reports also showed that 6 million Filipinos are estimated to live with depression
and/or anxiety, making the Philippines the country with the third-highest rate of mental
health problems in the Western Pacific Region. Suicide rates are estimated at 3.2 per
100,000, possibly higher due to underreporting or misclassifying suicide cases as
“undetermined deaths” (Redaniel et al., 2011).

The topic of mental health has received a remarkable increase in global
attention. Over time, trends showed an increasing number of people suffering from
depressive disorders (Lépine & Briley, 2011; Levinson et al., 2010; Saxena et al.,
2013). The global rise in the incidence of mental health disorders prompted researchers
to investigate more this phenomenon. A growing body of literature outlines the
undesirable mental health consequences of body image issues, including poor body
image and skin-lightening practices. Previous studies have outlined the problems of
body appearances leading to unhealthy weight control behaviors that are sometimes
excessive or detrimental to one’s mental health (Gentile et al., 2007; Neumark-Sztainer
& Eisenberg, 2014; Olivardia et al., 2004). In addition, reports have suggested an
association between poor mental health status and the use of SLP (Dlova et al., 2015;

Gwaravanda, 2011).

Similarly, the explanation speculated behind the psychological determinants of
skin-lightening practices suggests that symptoms of poor mental health are interlinked
with deficits in self-esteem or body image (Gwaravanda, 2011). The psychological
effect for many people to lighten one’s skin to fit within the larger society’s definition
of beauty is now more rampant than ever. Moreover, using SLP gives people a sense of
belongingness in the community where acceptance of beauty standards is inevitable.
Hence, the use of SLP may also be viewed as a form of destressing and coping
mechanism. However, little is known about the interaction of these factors relating to
body image. In the Philippines, this emerging scientific topic and field of research has
not been fully explored. For example, previous local cross-sectional studies only dealt
with body image and mental health (Aquino et al., 2009; Brebante & Cagas, 2015;
Dionisio, 2016; Elsayed et al., 2021; Javellana, 2014), or skin-lightening practices and
mental health (David & Nadal, 2013; Tuazon et al., 2019). The link between body
image, skin-lightening practices, and the mental health status of emerging Filipino
adults is not fully understood. This research will also explore other factors contributing
to the prevalence of mental health disorders brought about by the overall interaction of
body image and skin-lightening practices.

Objectives of the Study
General Aim
This study aims to assess the direct and indirect relationship between body image
perception and mental health as mediated by skin-lightening practices of Filipino
emerging adults.
Specific Aims:

1. To describe the study population's characteristics, stratified by their mental

health status:

2. To describe the body image perception of the study population, including levels
of body appreciation, levels of body esteem, and their positive rational
acceptance, stratified by their mental well-being status;

3. To describe the skin-lightening practices of the study population, including their
knowledge, perception, and use of skin-lightening products, stratified by their
mental health status;

4. To estimate the associations of body image status, skin-lightening practices, and
levels of media exposure with mental health among Filipino emerging adults;

5. To investigate the structural relationships among body image, the status of skin-
lightening practices, and the mental health of Filipino emerging adults by testing
a structural model;

6. To determine the stressors and facilitators among emerging Filipino adults that
modified their mental well-being status as influenced by their body image
perception and skin-lightening practices; and

7. To explain the quantitative survey data results about the associations of body
image and skin-lightening practices with the mental health of emerging Filipino

adults using the qualitative findings.

Significance of the Study

This study focused on the overall interplay of body image perception and skin-
lightening practices and their relationships with the mental health status of emerging
Filipino adults.

On an individual level, this study may increase the awareness of emerging
adults as to the influence of body image perception and skin-lightening practices on

their mental health status. Furthermore, it may help emerging adults understand how

this phenomenon is affected by various culturally sensitive factors to Filipinos. On a
societal level, explicit actions are needed to build and promote positive body image and
safe skin-lightening practices to support good mental health and well-being concerning
their bodies. In addition, the results of this study may provide the Education Department
at both secondary and tertiary levels the foundation to include and promote positive
body image, safe skin-lightening practices, and better mental health and well-being
status in the current curriculum through the inculcation of body and skin tone diversity
at early ages of the students. The study results may also call for training/s of frontline
mental health practitioners and the early childcare workforce. These trainings would
include information about how parents and guardians can positively influence their
children’s feelings about their bodies and skin tone from a very early age through their
behaviors and attitudes. In addition, through this research, public health policies may
be developed to address the consequences of body image and skin-lightening practices
on mental health status.

The government may address harms related to promoting unhelpful or idealized
body image and skin-lightening practices online (Al-Sarraf, 2022). An improved
approach to how social media platforms promote healthy imaging should be enforced
(Ventola, 2014). Moreover, standards on advertising should consider pre-vetting high-
teach broadcast advertising from high-risk industries — such as cosmetic surgery
companies and weight-loss products and services — to ensure all advertising on body
image and skin-lightening abides by its codes.

Furthermore, social media companies may agree on new ways of using their
platforms to promote positive body image and to ensure that diverse body types and
skin tones are presented positively to their users (Dwivedi et al., 2021). Lastly, policies

on public campaigns on nutrition and obesity should avoid the potential to create stigma

10

and indirectly contribute to appearance-based bullying. Campaigns should focus on
healthy eating and exercise for all population members, regardless of weight (Hunger

et al., 2020).

Chapter II
Theoretical Background
Review of Related Literature
Body Image
Identity Development

Adolescence emphasizes the fast development of physical, emotional, social,
and psychological changes. Most adolescents acquire knowledge and information to
develop healthy attitudes (Saunders & Eaton, 2018). Peer groups have an essential role
in molding the social norms of these adolescents, including their values and perception
of body appearances (Nelson et al., 2018).

Identity Development is the centralized process among adolescents and
emerging childhood to develop a coherent understanding of oneself (Erikson, 1968).
Among adolescents, this phase is characterized by the beginning of puberty,
advancement in cognitive abilities, expansion of social territory, and growth in socio-
cultural influence to discover one’s societal niche (McAdams, 2013; Natsuaki et al.,
2015; Syed & McLean, 2016). Identity confusion often accompanies puberty, when the
body of an adolescent undergoes a rapid change (Erikson, 1968). Identity exploration
follows this confusion that can lead to incorporating the personal identity into a
coherent whole (Erikson, 1993; Schwartz et al., 2009). Factors including the timing of
puberty, body mass index changes, sexual experiences, and sexual maturation affect
how adolescents perceive themselves and their bodies (Frisén & Holmqvist, 2010;
Natsuaki et al., 2015). In Westem societies, the ages 18 to 29 of the emerging adulthood
developmental phase often experience profound changes in some aspects of their lives
(Amett, 2000). Emerging adulthood is a concept that is gaining recognition and

attention in Asian countries, as scholars and researchers seek to understand this unique

12

developmental stage. While the idea of emerging adulthood is not new, its study in
Asian cultures is still in its early stages. As such, there is much to learn about how
cultural variations may impact this phase of life (Wang et al., 2021).
Perceived Body Image

In both sociology and psychology, body image received a substantial amount of
interest and attention. Research on body image gained prominence in psychology
during the mid-20th century. This was particularly due to body image dissatisfaction
becoming a significant concern in clinical psychology and psychotherapy (Smith,
2019). At the same time, sociologists began exploring body image within the broader
context of societal norms, cultural expectations, and social identities (Turner, 2008).
According to the two pioneers in the psychology of physical appearance, body image
is a multidimensional self-attitude toward the size, shape, and aesthetics of one’s body
(Cash & Pruzinsky, 1990). Two components comprise body image: the physical and
the psychological aspects. The first one constitutes bodily features or movements such
as the cheeks, weights, stamina, etc. The latter represents the thoughts, feelings, or
personal qualities demonstrated by each particular bodily trait or movement, such as
what one thinks or feels about one's cheek or weight (Van der Velde, 1985). In addition,
“body esteem” has been utilized synonymously with body image. Moreover, body
esteem is a person’s attitude toward their body and is believed to relate to general self-
esteem. Therefore, the evaluation of the body in terms of specific aspects or dimensions
constitutes the measurement of bady esteem (Franzai & Shields, 1984).

Figure drawings or questionnaires usually assess body image. Results are
generally categorized based on satisfaction with one’s own body (Thompson et al.,
2005). Body dissatisfaction can be as high as 71% among adolescents. This finding is

often observed in cross-sectional studies among female and overweight subjects (Finato

13

et al., 2013). In developed countries, the prevalence rate for body image dissatisfaction
ranges from 16% to 55% among males and 35% to 81% among females (Lawler &
Nixon, 2011).

Body Image Assessment

Research has already advanced the understanding of measuring body image,
giving a wide range of scales. There are two types of hady image assessment — a
positive body image scale and a negative body image scale.

However, measuring positive body image gives a comprehensible
understanding of body image compared with the negative body image scale. This
understanding can potentially present unique and underutilized resources for
maximizing the well-being of the patients (Cook-Cottone et al., 2013).

The scale for body appreciation was the first measurement ever developed. It
represents intentional choices to accept body image regardless of its imperfections or
size, respect the body by taking care of needs through engagement in health-seeking
behaviors, and safeguard the body by enduring the influence of narrow beauty standards
promoted in the media (Cash, 1997). In addition, researchers have reviewed the
resources centered on body acceptance (Maine, 2011; Tribole & Resch, 1995) and
efforts specifically developed to protect body image from sociocultural influences
(Levine & Smolak, 2001).

Body Appreciation Scale (BAS) was developed, and four research have been
implemented to examine its properties among American female respondents (Avalos et
al., 2005). It is a 13-item that extensively assesses aspects of body appreciation. The
researchers also provided solid evidence about the BAS’s psychometric properties with
internal consistency reliability (as = .91-.94) and stability over three weeks (r = .90).

‘n addition. BAS also acquired validity through positive relationships with body esteem

14

and appearance evaluation and its inverse relationships with body preoccupation, body
dissatisfaction, disordered eating, body surveillance, and body shame. After extracting
shared variance with appearance evaluation, body preoccupation, and body
dissatisfaction, the questionnaire correlates with some well-being traits, including self-
esteem, proactive coping, and optimism (Avalos et al., 2005). Despite these strengths,
BAS has its limitations. It was developed from theoretical notions constituting a
positive body image. However, researchers have not examined whether these
theoretical notions are likewise evident among women with positive body image. It is
hypothesized that women with a positive body image may posit other characteristics
than the BAS currently examines. Hence, a comprehensive qualitative study is needed
to address positive body image to understand the complexity of this body image
construct (Cash, 1997; Freedman, 2002; Maine, 2011). Thus, this study utilized this
scale.

Another type of body image measurement is the Body Esteem Scale (BES). The
BES for adolescents and adults is widely utilized to assess cognitive and affective
features of body image (Mendelson et al., 2001). BES has three subcomponents:
Appearance (10 items), Weight (8 items), and Attribution (5 items). The first
component, Appearance, is centered on the feeling about the person’s physical
appearance. The Weight subcomponent focuses on feelings about the person’s weight.
And lastly, the Attribution subcomponent measures the person’s views of how others
see their appearance and body. The BES questionnaire was found to have good internal
consistency, test-retest reliability, and convergent validity (Mendelson et al., 1996).
Moreover, the BES’s Weight and Appearance subcomponents are frequently used in
scientific research (Diedrichs et al., 2015; Hayfield et al., 2017; McLean et al., 2017).

it was observed since the Attribution subcomponent is frequently “distinct from self-

15

evaluation of weight and appearance” (Mendelson et al., 2001). In addition, the
Attribution subcomponent is a psychometrically weaker subscale compared with the
other two (Olenik-Shemesh & Heiman, 2017).

Lastly, another well-accepted body image scale measures positive rational
acceptance coping. One researcher presented the dynamic arrangements undertaken
among distal socio-developmental predisposing factors that led to a person’s current
experience of body image (Cash, 2012a). There is, therefore, a need to emphasize the
connection between constant exposure to body image-related challenges (distal
factors), cognitive and behavioral coping response styles that emerge from these
challenges (proximal mediating variables), and body image (Cash et al., 2005). There
are three body image coping response mechanisms to manage body image-related
challenges. The first is the avoidant style, in which one tries to escape body image-
related challenges. The second one is appearance fixing, wherein the person engages in
actions to change appearance. Lastly, positive rational acceptance is wherein the person
accepts the stressful life moments and tries to act toward self-care and rational self-
communication (Cash et al., 2005).

Researchers have designed the Body Image Coping Strategies Inventory
(BICSI) to evaluate these three coping mechanisms. However, the focus will only be
on the third one, which is the positive rational acceptance subcomponent. It is an 11-
item questionnaire with a 4-point rating scale (Cash et al., 2005). The psychometric
properties of this subcomponent demonstrated internally consistent scores for men (a
= 0.85) and women (a = 0.80). In addition, the subcomponent’s convergent validity
was observed among women test subjects.

Furthermore, positive rational acceptance positively correlated to increased

body image, quality of life, self-esteem, and perceived social support. Positive rational

16

acceptance was also correlated with perceived social support in an adaptive direction
for men. This outcome may relate to the different gender socialization processes
associated with rerouting distress from body image-related challenges (Cash et al.,
2005).

Body Image and Media Influence

Media, social media, and peer pressures influence how emerging adults see
themselves. As a result, their mental perception of their appearance can become
distorted, leading them to engage in risky behaviors when they feel they do not measure
up to the impossible goal set. The media’s effect on body image can cause self-image
issues, leading to poor mental health conditions, eating disorders, drug and alcohol use,
cutting, bullying, and sexual risk behaviors (Gurari et al., 2006).

Years of research have documented the negative impact traditional tri-media,
including print, radio, and television, has on people’s body image issues (Barlett et al.,
2008; Grogan, 2021; Huang et al., 2021). However, given the increasing popularity of
social media and other forms of media, researchers are now commencing to examine
the possible consequences of these new media formats on body image. Many unique
features of social media differentiate it from traditional media and may contribute to
any effects it has on body image. First, social media features the users (as opposed to
models and celebrities). Second, people often present an idealized version of
themselves on social media, uploading only the most attractive images of themselves
(which can be edited and enhanced) to their profile and removing any photos that they
deem to be unattractive (Manago et al., 2008; Zhao et al., 2008). Third, although social
media contains images of various types of people (e.g., friends, family, strangers,
celebrities), it is generally used to interact with peers (Hew, 2011). Research suggests

that appearance comparisons to peers may particularly influence body image (Carey et

17

al., 2014). Finally, in addition to images, people often post other appearance-related
content and comments on social media, which could also impact how users feel about
their appearance. According to communications theories, repeated exposure to media
content leads viewers or consumers to accept media portrayals as representations of
reality (Brown, 2002; Gerbner et al., 2002). It is believed that the media’s consistent
depiction of a thin ideal leads women to see this ideal as normative, expected, and
central to attractiveness. However, because media presentations of women’s bodies are
so skewed, showcasing a standard that is out of reach to most, adopting this reality may
lead to decreased satisfaction with one’s own body and to behaviors aimed at meeting
this ideal, behaviors such as dieting, bingeing and purging, and skipping meals (Levine
& Harrison, 2004).

A meta-analysis of women and adolescents exposed to various media showed
that they spent more money improving their body appearance and were more
susceptible to eating disorders (ED). Specifically, those who frequently used media
(television, magazine, and other generalized media) were more susceptible to develop
ED. This conclusion was observed because they were unsatisfied with their body image
(Grabe et al., 2008). The vulnerability to developing inappropriate eating behaviors
may be attributed to the attempts to achieve the type of body advertised by social and
mass media. Subclinical symptoms for these behaviors were identified, including
exercising obsessively, skipping meals, using laxatives or diuretics, and vomiting (Stice
et al., 2008). For girls, the period of adolescence is a phase of vulnerability due to
numerous developmental changes. These changes can determine a higher risk of
developing ED or poor mental well-being due to the desire to become thin for girls or
muscular for boys, as adolescents begin to work on their body image during this stage

as a result of changes related to puberty, including a sudden weight increase (Rawana

18

et al., 2010). Previous studies have demonstrated that body dissatisfaction is one of the
most consistent risks for developing eating disorders, specifically Bulimia nervosa
(Paxton et al., 2006; Tiggemann, 2005). Different variables may influence body
dissatisfaction and eating disorders and are strongly associated with social and cultural
norms and ethnic groups (Keel & Klump, 2003). Eating behavior disorders, including
anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa, are mental health problems that affect
individuals of both sexes, but principally young women (Franko et al., 2013).
Empirical Evidence of the Directional Effects of Body Image on Mental Health

Recent longitudinal studies provide critical insights into the directional effects
of body image on mental health by tracking individuals over extended periods. For
example, a study by Ramos et al. (2019) analyzed the influence of body image
satisfaction on internalizing symptoms such as anxiety and depression in Spanish
adolescents. This study found that body image satisfaction was a significant predictor
of mental health outcomes, with lower satisfaction linked to higher internalizing
symptoms (Ramos et al., 2019). Another longitudinal study examined the impact of
body image on mental health in Norwegian adolescents and found that body
dissatisfaction predicted increases in depressive symptoms and anxiety over time
(Oinonen & Bird, 2012).

On the other hand, recent interventional studies have shown that targeted
programs can significantly improve body image and, consequently, mental health. For
example, a study by Alleva et al. (2018) evaluated a body image intervention program
and found that participants showed significant improvements in body image and
reductions in depressive symptoms and anxiety (Alleva et al., 2015). Another study
implemented a self-compassion intervention for adolescents, finding that increased

seif-compassion was linked to improved body image and reduced depressive

19

symptoms, demonstrating the efficacy of such interventions in promoting mental health
(Rodgers et al., 2018).

Meta-analyses synthesize findings from multiple studies to comprehensively
understand the relationship between body image and mental health. A recent meta-
analysis by He et al. (2020) reviewed gender differences in body appreciation and found
that greater body appreciation was consistently associated with better mental health
outcomes, including lower levels of depression and anxiety (He et al., 2020). A
systematic review and meta-analysis reviewed school-based interventions designed to
enhance media literacy to reduce body dissatisfaction and promote a positive body
image. The findings demonstrated the effectiveness of these interventions in improving
body image and reducing mental health issues such as anxiety and depression (Kurz et
al., 2022).

Interventional research has also shown that body dissatisfaction is associated
with various physical and mental health issues (Yarborough et al., 2016). In addition,
individuals with obesity often experience mental health conditions such as depression,
body image disorders, stress, and low self-esteem based from another interventional
study (Juchacz et al., 2021). Various dimensions of body image have been also found
to impact physical and mental well-being based from a meta-analysis (Bassett-Gunter
et al., 2017). Psychotherapeutic approaches, including group therapy and supportive
psychotherapy, have been effective in addressing weight loss and mental health
concerns in individuals with obesity (Juchacz et al., 2021). Adolescents arc particularly
vulnerable to body image issues, with body dissatisfaction being prevalent among this
group (Barkhordari-Sharifabad et al., 2020). Additionally, individuals facing health

challenges such as cancer may experience changes in body image due to treatments like

20

chemotherapy, highlighting the need for psychological support to cope with these
effects (Di Giacomo et al., 2021).

Integrating findings from recent longitudinal, interventional, and meta-analytic
studies provides a robust evidence base supporting the relationship between body image
and mental health. Longitudinal studies illustrate how negative body image can lead to
adverse mental health outcomes over time. Interventional studies demonstrate that
improving body image through targeted programs can enhance mental health,
highlighting the potential for effective interventions. Meta-analyses confirm the

robustness of these findings across different contexts and study designs.

Skin-Lightening Practices

Darkness or whiteness of skin color is considered an essential factor in most
cultures regarding beauty management because most people think white people are
more attractive (Sahay & Piran, 1997). The use of SLP is globally prevalent among
men and women and is perceived to lighten the skin's complexion (Engler, 2005; Peltzer
et al., 2016). SLPs are typically lotions, creams, soaps, or treatments designed to lighten
the skin tone or color by reducing melanin production, the pigment responsible for skin
color. These products often contain ingredients like hydroquinone, corticosteroids,
mercury, or other chemicals that may the production of melanin (Prakash & Majeed,
2009). There is a high demand for SLP because of its worldwide promotion through the
media and advertising (Gwaravanda, 2011; Mendoza, 2014).

The obsession with fairer and lighter skin has been reported worldwide. Since
the 16% century, European women have been famous for lightening their skin tone.
Women from the upper status in Egypt, Greece, and Rome have been known to use a

concoction comprising of mercury and lead to reassert their aristocratic level in society

21

(Goon & Craven, 2003). However, skin lightcning as an industry in some developing
countries is far more expansive than in Western countries (Mendoza, 2014; Priigl,
2015). For example, it is estimated that 18% of women in Japan and Hong Kong, 30%
in China, and 20% in Taiwan utilize SLP every day or weekly (Nielsen, 2007). In 2008,
the Asia-Pacific sun crew market increased by 4.4%, valued at USD 1.2 billion
(Nielsen, 2007). One of the contributory factors driving men and women to believe that
whiteness or lightness of skin tone is more powerful is the colonial legacy brought by
the Western culture in Asia, including the United States and the United Kingdom
(Shankar & Subish, 2007).

The cultural phenomenon of skin lightening has become widespread in Asia,
and it may affect the mental well-being of SLP consumers. In the Philippines, the
phenomenon of skin lightening is also prevalent. Similar to many other countries in
Asia, there exists a cultural bias towards lighter skin tones that is often associated with
beauty standards influenced by historical colonialism and media representation. This
preference can be observed across various aspects of society, ranging from
advertisements to entertainment (Lasco & Hardon, 2020).

There exists a positive perception regarding skin lightening. It is believed to
increase self-esteem, make one healthier, and expand social engagements (Hamed et
al., 2010; Rusmadi et al., 2015). In addition, poor mental health conditions, including
symptoms of depression and trauma, are linked to the frequent use of more SLPs (James
et al., 2016; Peltzer et al., 2016).

Factors Contributing to Skin Lightening Practices

Driven by the desire to whiten or lighten their skin tone, women use SLP more

often than men (Dadzie & Petit, 2009; Hardwick et al., 1989; Hunter, 2011). Moreover,

:t is a global phenomenon affecting many diverse countries, including Africa, North

22

America, Europe, Asia, and the Middle East (Dadzie & Petit, 2009). For example,
several languages have described the skin-lightening practices in South Africa,
including “ukucreamer” in isiZulu (applying creams on the skin), “hokgantsa
sefatlhego” in Setswana (to lighten the face) and “ukutsheyisa” in isiXhosa (‘to chase
beauty’). Moreover, about 75% of the Nigerian population, 35% of the people in
Pretoria, South Africa, and 52-67% of the Senegal population use SLP (Adebajo, 2002;
Blay, 2011; Wone et al., 2000).

In some Asian communities, the lightening of the skin tone increases the chance
of being married to people in higher social classes (Hamed et al., 2010; Li, Min, &
Belk, 2008). In addition, using white-toned or fair-skinned models as an attractant in
most cosmetic advertisements on television, in fashion magazines, and on social media
magnifies the desire for both men’s and women’s desire for lightened complexion
(Malik, 2007; Olumide et al., 2008; Perrotta, 2004).

Some people use SLP to manage and treat conditions relating to dermatology,
including hyperpigmentary melasma, age-induced darkening, and acne. These
treatments and managements involve the utilization of hydroquinone (HQ)-containing
products such as imiquimod under strict medical and clinical supervision. Some use
SLP to lighten the skin tone, enhance radiance or luminescence, improve the skin
texture, cope with peer pressure, gratify their partners, attract partners, and increase
their chances of career opportunities (Hamed et al., 2010). Previous studies have shown
the influence of the endorsement of black celebrities on using SLP in the market.
Musical artists, including Rihanna, Nicki Minaj, and Beyonce, present the impression
that a whiter or lighter skin tone is more attractive (Glenn, 2008). These celebrities can
afford to buy the expensive SLPs in the market. However, average consumers tend to

purchase SLP from local SLP suppliers who sometimes do not comply with local health

23

regulations (Dlova et al., 2012). Homemade formulations using household items
combined with SLP are now rampant among consumers. The unregulated and
unsupervised mixing of SLP with household items may bring dangerous effects such
as ochronosis (Dlova et al., 2012). Ochronosis is characterized by blue-black
hyperpigmentation in the epidermis, dermis, and subcutaneous layers of the skin. The
progressive darkening in areas of the skin where hydroquinone-containing cream is
applied may be observed (Glenn, 2008).

Biological and Psychosocial Aspects of Skin Lightening

The biological and psychosocial phenomenon of skin lightening involves the
observed interaction among three essential factors in skin-lightening: the motivation of
doing it, the different practices and their effects, and even in the prevention and
treatment (support) processes (Santiago-Delefosse, 2002). The human body is
developed as a biological entity built on every individual's psychological and social
events. In the social sciences, the skin is a metaphor that personifies the different
aspects of the world, including aesthetic, political, economic, social and cultural,
genetic and phenotypic, and psychological facets (Le Breton, 2011).

From the perspective of anthropologists, the physical and social realities are
present in human skin. Across different cultures, the skin is considered a physical entity
that communicates the status of an individual in a society. For the exposed parts of the
body, clothes that touch the skin serve as a protector. The social function of the skin of
the human body is built on the foundation of the skin features, including its shape, size,
and surface (Helman, 2007). According to Turner’s concept of “social skin,” the skin
represents a person’s political, cultural, and social identity. The essence of classification
through skin color, stigma, and preferences for lighter skin tones was accentuated

through the rampant increase in SLP available in the market. Turner further discussed

24

that society delineates one class from the other. On a macro-social level, the social skin
determines the classes of each individual, particularly the modified skin tones. In
essence, Turner considered skin an identity marker that gives an individual an element
of belongingness, classification, recognition, distinction, and pride (Turner, 2012).

SLP and its related practices may suggest negative influence on body image and
self-image. It may be deeply embedded in a person’s overall cognitive and emotional
evaluation of their self-esteem, summation of beliefs about his/herself, and other factors
or drivers that affect their thoughts, personality, and behavior (Hamed et al., 2010).
Sometimes, the extreme dislike or hatred against oneself drives one to lighten the skin.
The transgenerational residual after-effects of discrimination, apartheid, and
colonialism still drive many people to lighten their skin. Many women still consider
white or light skin tone attractive, and darker skin may be associated with negative
subtexts, including ugliness, evil, disease, and dirt (Fanon, 2008).

Most people imitate other people’s attitudes and perceptions and are optimistic
about being like them (Jablonski, 2012). Many women liken themselves to artists or
models and use SLP to lighten their skin tones and satisfy themselves. This thinking is
under the notion that they may be as successful as their idols because of SLP use (Dlova
et al., 2012). The use of SLP and its related practices can be recognized as a social
factor that drives the beauty standards in society because having a lighter skin tone is
telated to elegance and attractiveness toward the opposite sex. Insecurity and low self-
esteem are likely the main drivers of SLP use and related practices in some people
(Fanon, 2008).

Role of Media in Skin Lightening Practices and Mental Well-being
Social media is one of the increasing and fastest sources of information in this

digital age. Local and international celebrities use these platforms extensively to

25

express beauty and ideas. However, people who desire to be like their idol celebrities
are more likely to be inspired and influenced by their behavior or attitude that they tend
to mimic (Motseki & Oyedemi, 2017).

Consumers' consumption of unregulated SLPs is overly affected by the media's
contribution to promulgating SLP information. Media has an essential role in
encouraging consumers to buy and use SLPs (Lewis et al., 2011). The media portrayed
the lightness of the skin tone as an epitome and a standard for beauty. Therefore, SLPs
are being promoted as both beauty and health products. In Africa, the advertisement of
SLPs using billboards is widely utilized, which presents fair-skinned models as the
standard of beauty, which was also seen in electronic media and prints.

In addition, the use of media to promulgate information is the fastest way to
affect how people live their everyday lives and make a connection to how these people
think and act. The essence of body image, beauty, and fair skin tone is the central theme
of information dissemination and product advertisements portrayed in television,
magazines, newspapers, and on social media platforms, including Facebook, Twitter,
Instagram, and TikTok (Dukut, 2022; Glenn, 2008; Hamed et al., 2010; Kpanake &
Mullet, 2011; Mahsan et al., 2020). These platforms highly motivate and inspire
consumers to use SLPs due to the self-selection effect built into these platforms’
algorithms. The visual presentations on these platforms involved models with fair skin
tones perceived as more attractive and more likely to succeed. This perception fortifies
society and the general public by teaching that lighter skin tones are related to social
success. Furthermore, female respondents were encouraged to use SLP to lighten their
skin tone because television promotes SLPs (Hamed et al., 2010; Lewis et al., 2011).

Print and visual advertisements and commercials for SLPs promise a lighter

skin tone. To promote the use of SLPs, advertisements on television or social media are

26

usually expensively produced, featuring celebrities or supermodels with lighter skin
tones and presenting traditional and Westernized visual signifiers to evoke atmospheres
of cleanliness, purity, sophistication, and beauty (Leong, 2006). Sometimes, these
commercials and advertisements suggest that having dark or black skin tones equates
to being sad and ignored by men, leading to low self-esteem (Olumide et al., 2008). In
addition, the use of SLPs being promoted equates to higher chances of finding the
dream job or a suitable partner. Visual stimuli from these media have prompted women
to develop a sense of insecurity and anxiety, which may lead to dangerous practices of
beautification of the body (Julien, 2014). It is also observed that consumers tend to
follow the regimen of their favorite artists or celebrities. Celebrities have this prestige
and credibility portrayed in the media, and consumers perceive celebrities who use
SLPs as an acceptable practice (Glenn, 2008).

Consequently, SLP and its related practices will become an obsession for some
consumers; it is related to the results obtained and the positive well-being they
experience (Lewis et al., 2011). Social media platforms, particularly Facebook, Twitter,
Instagram, and TikTok, have become an increasing source of influence and
information. Local and international celebrities extensively use these platforms to
present ideologies of beauty standards and ideas on the acceptable body type. Young
people, particularly emerging adults, want to be like celebrities or influencers. Hence,
some mimic their idol’s attitudes and model their actions and behaviors (Dukut, 2022;
Glenn, 2008; Hamed ct al., 2010; Kpanake & Mullet, 2011; Lewis et al., 2011; Mahsan

et al., 2020).

27

Empirical Evidence of the Directional Effects of Skin Lightening Practices on Mental
Health

Skin-lightening practices have garnered attention due to their potential impact
on mental health. While the literature does not directly address the specific combination
of skin lightening and mental health, it offers valuable insights into related areas that
can be synthesized to provide a comprehensive understanding of the potential
implications.

Body contouring surgery has been shown to lead to improvements in physical
functioning, psychological well-being, and social functioning (Toma et al., 2018).
These improvements in psychological well-being could potentially be linked to aspects
of self-esteem and body image, which are crucial components of mental health.
Similarly, a meta-analysis on cosmetic surgery in South Korea, including skin-
lightening, highlights the psychological aspects of individuals seeking such procedures,
shedding light on the relationship between cosmetic interventions and self-esteem
(Yoon & Kim, 2020). Furthermore, a study on conditions like vitiligo, as explored had
indicated a connection between dermatological conditions and mental health issues
such as depression (Lai et al., 2017). This suggests that skin conditions, including those
targeted by skin lightening practices, can have psychological implications that may
impact an individual's mental well-being. Additionally, the meta-analytic review by
emphasizes the high comorbidity of anxiety among patients with vitiligo, underscoring
the importance of addressing psychological impacts in dermatological conditions (Liu
et al., 2021).

The empirical evidence accentuates the multifaceted relationship between skin-
lightening practices and mental health. While direct research on this specific

combination is limited. studies on related cosmetic and dermatological interventions

28

provide valuable insights. The improvements in psychological well-being and self-
esteem following body contouring and cosmetic surgerics, as well as the mental health
challenges associated with dermatological conditions like vitiligo, highlight the
significant psychological dimensions of skin-lightening practices. These findings
suggest that individuals engaging in skin-lightening may experience both positive and
negative mental health outcomes influenced by their self-esteem and body image
perceptions. Therefore, it is essential for future research to directly examine the mental
health effects of skin-lightening practices to develop a comprehensive understanding
and inform public health interventions aimed at promoting psychological well-being
among those who seek such cosmetic modifications.

Synthesis

The synthesis of prior research has provided valuable insights into the intricate
interplay among cultural norms, body image perceptions, and mental health.

Through prior research, a better comprehension of the complex nature of
concerns regarding body image, particularly in various cultural contexts, has heen
achieved. The literature emphasizes the widespread impact of societal beauty standards
and cultural ideals on individuals' perceptions of their physical appearance.
Additionally, the examination of skin-lightening practices has shed light on the intricate
relationship between appearance-related behaviors and mental well-being, emphasizing
the importance of nuanced approaches in addressing body image issues. These insights
have significantly informed the conceptualization of this study, guiding the formulation
of research inquiries and the development of theoretical frameworks. By expanding on
the existing literature, this study aims to contribute to the existing body of knowledge

by exploring the same.

29

Conceptual Framework

Figure 1 shows the conceptual framework of the study. As seen in the figure,
the primary exposure variable, body image perception, directly and indirectly affects
mental health status. The direct effect is a straight line from body image to mental health
status. On the other hand, the body image perception that affects skin-lightening
practices, which in tum affects mental health disorders, is the indirect effect. In
addition, socio-demographic variables (age, sex, sexual orientation, household income,
working status, relationship status, residence, and highest education attainment) and
levels of media exposure directly affect both the exposure variable (body image
perception) and the outcome variable (mental health status), making them the

confounders.

rp

(Body image
Perception
NN oa

Levels of Media
Exposure
NO

Figure 1. The study's conceptual framework: The model of the effect of body imag:

perception on mental health status as mediated by skin-lightening practices.

30

Operational Definition of Terms

1.

Body Image - the combination of your thoughts and feelings about your body.
Body image may range between positive and negative experiences, and one
person may feel different times, positive or negative, or a combination of both
(Cash, 2000).

Body and Beauty Standards - Body and beauty standards refer to societal
norms dictating the preferred physical appearance, including body shape, size,
skin color, and facial features. These standards are influenced by cultural,
historical, and social factors and vary widely across different societies and
periods (Berry, 2007).

Emerging Adult — individuals 18 to 29 years old undergoing the transitional
period between high school and young adulthood, marked by forming identity,
establishing more mature interpersonal and intimate relationships, and
transitioning to new adult-type roles (White & Jackson, 2004). According to
Amett, there are two types, the early (18 to 24 years old), and the late (25 to 29
years old) emerging adults (Amett, 2023).

Mental Health - includes our emotional, psychological, and social well-being.
It affects how we think, feel, and act. It also helps determine how we handle
stress, relate to others, and make healthy choices (North & Pfefferbaum, 2013).
Skin Lightening - skin whitening or skin bleaching- involves using various
cosmetic products such as creams, soaps, and lotions to whiten or lighten dark
skin tone or color. Other products include gel, toothpaste, bleach, washing
powder, and battery acid. It is believed that the most common reason for using
skin-lightening products is the notion of colorism, meaning the preference for

lighter skin and a social hierarchy based on skin tone (Levine et al., 2016).

31

6. Skin Lightening Products - typically lotions, creams, soaps, or treatments
designed to lighten the skin tone or color by reducing the melanin production,
the pigment responsible for skin color. These products often contain ingredients
like hydroquinone, corticosteroids, mercury, or other chemicals that may the
production of melanin (Prakash & Majeed, 2009). For this research, using
sunscreen is not considered a skin-lightening practice. Sunscreen is primarily
intended to protect the skin from harmful UV rays, preventing sunburn and skin
damage and reducing the risk of skin cancer. Sunscreen works by either
absorbing or reflecting UV radiation, and many formulations include sun
protection factor (SPF) to indicate their effectiveness in blocking UVB rays
(Saraiya et al., 2004). Although sunscreen blocks UV rays that would otherwise
cause the skin to darken, it does not change the skin's natural pigmentation like
SLPs. Consequently, a sunscreen with an SPF that keeps skin from darkening
in the sun would not be regarded as a skin-lightening lotion. Rather, it serves as
a safeguard against solar damage.

Skin Tone - is generally used to denote skin color (Draelos, 2014).

32

Chapter III
Methodology
Study Design

This study utilized a mixed-method approach with a triangulation design.
Specifically, the explanatory sequential design addressed the study's objectives due to
complex interactions among body image perception, skin lightening, and mental well-
being. It gained a comprehensive and in-depth overview of this topic narratively and
numerically (Creswell & Tashakkori, 2007). The primary purpose of mixing
approaches is to understand the research problems thoroughly. Therefore, it provides
researchers direction to capture the complexity of human phenomena, such as the main
interests of this research — body image and skin-lightening practices (Granikov et al.,
2020; Nagpal et al., 2020). In addition, using a mixed-method approach will allow for
greater validity in this study by seeking corroboration between the gathered quantitative
and qualitative data. Moreover, this approach will illustrate the quantitative findings
using the qualitative results; and help elaborate a better understanding of the
phenomena under investigation (Frost & Bailey-Rodriguez, 2020; Granikov et al.,
2020; Tashakkori et al., 2020).

The triangulation design in mixed-method is the most common and well-known
(Ghiara, 2020). In an explanatory sequential design, the researcher first collects and
analyzes quantitative data; then, the findings inform qualitative data collection and
analysis. Finally, the qualitative data is used in the subsequent interpretation and
clarification of the results from the quantitative data analysis. A generic qualitative
design is often used in explanatory approaches because the quantitative design is
emphasized. This two-phase approach is beneficial for a researcher interested in

explaining the findings from the study's first phase with the qualitative data collected

33

during Phase 2. However, either the qualitative or quantitative data (or both equally)
may be the primary focus of the study (Headley & Plano Clark, 2020).

For this study, the mixed-method approach included (1) a Quantitative Part, a
cross-sectional study involving an online survey among the intended study population,
and (2) a Qualitative Study involving in-depth interviews of purposively selected
participants.

The cross-sectional study design is appropriate for investigating psychosocial
exposures to mental health status. In this cross-sectional study, all the measurements
from the sample population was obtained at a single point in time. However,
recruitment may occur over an extended period (Sedgwick, 2014). The qualitative case
study is a research methodology that aids in exploring a phenomenon within some
particular context and undertakes the exploration through various lenses to reveal
multiple facets of the phenomenon (Baxter & Jack, 2008). A case study explores a real-
time phenomenon within its naturally occurring context, considering that context will
create a difference (Kaarbo & Beasley, 1999). A case study design should be considered
when: (a) the focus of the study is to answer “how” and “why” questions; (b) one cannot
manipulate the behavior of those involved in the study; (c) one wants to cover
contextual conditions because they are relevant to the phenomenon under study; or (d)
the boundaries are not clear between the phenomenon and context (Yin, 2003).

Study Setting

Data gathering occurred from October 2022 until March 2023. Since this is the
Philippines' first study that will look at the overall effect of the interplay between body
image perception and skin lightening on emerging adults' mental health in the country,
the online survey methodology was utilized for the quantitative part of the study. In

addition. in-depth interviews were done via an online platform.

34

Population and Sampling Technique
Study Population

Recent studies on body image and mental health status focused on emerging
aduits as a sample population (Aimé et al., 2020; Rodgers et al., 2017; Shagar et al.,
2017). The phase of emerging adulthood represents a developmental period that follows
adolescence and precedes adulthood. Various changes will be experienced during this
developmental period, including weight gain. These body changes put them at risk of
dissatisfaction with their appearance (Amett, 2000; Amett et al. 2014). The
developmental research on positive body image is scarce. However, emerging adults
may be at particular risk of failing to experience their bodies positively (Rodgers et al.,
2017). Recent papers on skin-lightening practices also focused on emerging adults as
this population also tends to experience social comparison as part of their
developmental stage (Kaur et al., 2022; Ramesh, 2019). This study focused on
emerging Filipino adults as the sample population. Previous reports marked them as a
vulnerable population for being at risk for issues of the body, including body image and
skin tone. In 2019, it was estimated that about 18.8 million Filipinos are 18-29 years
old, comprising the country's youth sector (CNN, 2019).
Sample Size Calculation and Sampling Technique

For the online survey part, using the Error Function, Lower-Bound Sample Size,
and the Normal distribution Cumulative Distribution Function formulas for sample size
calculation of structural equation models with a priori variables previously described
(Cohen, 2013; Westland, 2010), a total sample size of 1,258 emerging Filipino adults
was required. An anticipated effect size of 0.10, a desired statistical power level of 80%,
three latent variables, 18 observed variables, and an a-level of 0.05 were used to

caiculate the sample size. In addition, convenience sampling was employed for this

35

nationwide survey among the study population, and online tools were utilized to
disseminate the questionnaire.

In qualitative studies, the sample size was based on the number of participants
needed to achicve concept saturation. Saturation is the point in the data collection when
little or no relevant information emerges, and collecting more data will not add new
understandings to identified concepts (Glaser, 2007; Patrick et al., 2011). The saturation
of the concept depends on the study design, research questions, and the heterogeneity
and number of possible participants (Turner-Bowker et al., 2018). For example, studies
have shown that as few as 12 participants can be sufficient to explore common
experiences within a group (Guest et al., 2006), with 25 informants achieving 99%
saturation of concepts (Turner-Bowker et al., 2018).

This study has 16 informants as theoretical samples to investigate body image
perception and skin-lightening practices as saturation was reached. The informants
included those that have extreme levels of depression, anxiety, and stress as measured
during the quantitative survey. Purposive sampling was employed to select participants
for the in-depth interview using the previously described criteria. To minimize selection
bias in the study, randomization was utilized for those who were purposively chosen
based on their outcome scores in the survey (e.g., extremely depressed informants,
extremely anxious, etc.). thereby utilizing extreme cases of each mental health
outcome. In addition, recruitment was done by selecting the respondents who answered
the online survey. If the participants were uncontactable, failed to join, or declined to
participate, they were replaced by other informants who were also randomly selected.
Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria
For the survey part, the following criteria were utilized:

A. Inclusion Criteria

36

1. 18-29 years old and
2. Filipinos residing anywhere in the Philippines and
3. Male or female and
4. Can understand English and/or Filipino and
5. Have internet access
6. Provided a signed informed consent form
B. Exclusion Criteria
1. Less than 18 years or more than 29 years old.
2. Refused to provide a signed informed consent form
For the in-depth interview, the following criteria were utilized:
A. Inclusion Criteria
1. 18-29 years old and
2. Filipinos residing anywhere in the Philippines and
3. Male or female, and
4. Can understand English and/or Filipino and
5. Have internet access (for the virtual interview)
6. Had severe or extreme cases of depression, anxiety, or stress, and
7. Participated in the online survey and
8. Provided a signed informed consent form
B. Exclusion Criteria
1. Refused to provide a signed informed consent form or
2. Not willing or
3. Do not have internet access for a virtual interview
Data Collection Procedure

Quantitative Part: Cross-Sectional Survey

37

The study involved creating and distributing a Self-Administered Questionnaire
(SAQ). The SAQ comprised the following sections of demographic data (age, sex,
sexual orientation), socio-economic status (average monthly household income,
occupation, highest educational attainment, residence), the levels of media exposure
(television, movie, social media, and internet), relationship status (single, in a
relationship), cxposurc asscssment (body image perception and skin lightening), and
outcome measurements (levels of depression, anxicty, and stress). The online survcy
was distributed in English using the Qualtrics XM™ platform. Informed consent
detailing the purpose, risks, benefits, methods, and other ethical considerations was
included before the participants could answer the survey. Before the release, the SAQ
underwent pilot testing among twenty (20) emerging Filipino adults not involved with
the study. It aimed to measure total respondent satisfaction and understandability of
questions. The survey was edited according to the pilot test participants’ responses.
Moreover, according to the Philippines' Data Privacy Act of 2012, all the answers were
accessible and used only for research purposes.

Exposures Assessment

Body image perception was the primary exposure while skin lightening was the
mediator of this study. Body image perception was considered a latent variable in the
hypothesized structural model, while three observed variables will comprise the skin-
lightening component. Three observed indicators were used to build a measurement
model around body image: Body Appreciation Scale (BAS), Body Esteem Scale (BES)
(comprised of three domains), and Positive Rational Acceptance Scale (PRAS). Three
observed indicators were also used for the skin-lightening variable: Knowledge (K),
Perception (P), and Use (U).

A. Body Image Perception

38

1.

Researchers have utilized the BAS to understand features, correlates, and
potential outcomes of positive body image. Previous reports support the
distinctiveness of body appreciation in research using the BAS. For example,
one study found that body appreciation predicted additional variance in US
college women’s psychological well-being, such as self-esteem, optimism, and
proactive coping after controlling for body preoccupation, body dissatisfaction,
and self-perceived attractiveness (Avalos et al., 2005). In addition, another
study found that the strength of the link between body appreciation and body
dissatisfaction for women became significantly weaker with age. Therefore,
body appreciation is not simply the absence of negative body image or the
experience of self-perceived attractiveness (Tiggemann & McCourt, 2013). The
BAS-2 was used in this study, which was improved by rewording certain BAS
items to remove sex-specific versions and body dissatisfaction-based language.
Additional items based on positive body image research were also developed,
making it a more psychometrically sound positive body image measure
applicable for research and clinical settings (Tylka & Wood-Barcalow, 2015).
It is a 10-item BAS-2 questionnaire with two key advantages over the previous
BAS. It contains one form for both women and men, and its items more closely
Tepresent current knowledge on positive body image. BAS-2 is easy to
administer and score. For each item, the following response scale was used: ] =
Never, 2 = Seldom, 3 = Sometimes, 4 = Often, 5 =Always (Tylka & Wood-
Barcalow, 2015). Previous research found a unidimensional factor structure,
strong internal consistency (Cronbach’s a= 0.97), construct validity, and test-

retest reliability (r= 0.90) in community and college samples of men and

39

women. Additionally, the internal consistency of the BAS-2 in a study was
excellent (Cronbach’s a. = 0.954, McDonald’s w = 0.956) (Atari, 2016).

BAS-2 tool showed excellent composite reliability among emerging
adults across eight countries, in which Confirmatory Factor Analysis (CFA)
goodness-of-fit statistics presented loadings were substantial (Ma = 0.815;
ranging from 0,717 to 0.896) (Aimé et al., 2020). In addition, the internal
reliability measure for BAS-2 using our sample population was 0.925. In
addition, the total BAS-2 scores were categorized into quartiles, and the
quartiles were the exposure categories of the study participants.

BES was designed for emerging adults, both men, and women, and was
validated among college students (Franzoi & Shields, 1984). The scale
represents multiple dimensions that differ for men and women (Pifieiro et al.,
2016). These factors included “physical attractiveness” for men or “sexual
attractiveness” for women; “upper body strength” for men or “weight concern”
for women; and “physical condition” for both men and women. This study will
employ 19 out of the original 35 BES items. The 19 items were selected to
include all items about the “physical condition” and “weight concern/upper
body strength” factors. The “sexual attractiveness” items were excluded, which
had the majority of “physical attractiveness” items for men. The items
tepresented a list of body parts or characteristics. Participants were instructed
to indicate their feelings about their body using a 5-point scale: “Have strong
negative feelings” to “Have strong positive feelings” scale (Sagone et al., 2018).
In addition, the total BES scores per subcategory or domain were categorized

into quartiles, and the quartiles were the exposure categories of the study

40

participants, with higher quartiles indicating higher BES levels. In addition, the
internal reliability measure for BES using our sample population was 0.957.
PRAS, in particular, has been conceptualized and designed as an
adaptive affect regulation mechanism when the body is exposed to body image
challenges (Cash et al., 2005). These body image challenges include but are not
limited to being teased about weight, suffering from pressure to alter one's
appearance, observing unrealistic appearance-related images, or comparing
one’s appearance with attractive others (Webb et al., 2014). Generally, PRAS
involves positive self-talk, such as reminding oneself of the transience of
experiencing negative body image-related feelings in the aftermath of a threat,
and is positively associated, although weakly, with more general adaptive
emotional regulation strategies (Hughes & Gullone, 2011). With these reports,
PRA may bridge the link between nature exposure and positive body image.
Specifically, nature exposure may facilitate or enhance PRA by allowing one to
distance oneself from the source of threats to body image and restore the
emotional balance that promotes adaptive coping mechanisms (Kaplan, 1995).
Participants were asked to complete an 1 1-item PRA subscale of the body image
coping strategies inventory (Cash et al., 2005). This subscale assessed how
individuals depend on cognitive and behavioral activities that focus on using
positive self-care, rational self-talk, and acceptance of one's experiences when
facing threats to body image. All items were rated on a 4-point scale, ranging
from 1 (definitely not like me) to 4 (definitely like me). Scores on the BICSI
have been shown to have adequate factorial and construct validity and internal
consistency. McDonald's w and Cronbach's a for PRA scores were 0.85 (95%

CI =0.83-0.87) (Cash et al., 2005). In addition, the total PRAS scores were

41

categorized into quartiles, and the quartiles were the exposure categories of the
study participants, with higher quartiles indicating higher PRAS levels. Lastly,
the internal reliability measure for PRAS using our sample population was
0.773.
. Skin Lightening
The questionnaire on skin lightening was adapted from a previous study
conducted in Southeast Asia, including Indonesia, Malaysia, Myanmar,
Thailand, and Vietnam (Peltzer & Pengpid, 2017). In addition, the internal
reliability measure for this tool using our sample population was 0.648.
. Knowledge of SLP was questioned about the active ingredients in SLP (Hamed
et al., 2010).
. Perceptions about a lighter skin tone and SLP were assessed with eight items.
Examples of the questions included: “A lighter skin tone is more beautiful.” and
“The way SLPs are advertised on TV has an influence on one’s preference for
a lighter skin tone.” Response options ranged from 1 = strongly agree to 4 =
strongly disagree (Cronbach alpha 0.78). For the internal reliability of the
questionnaire, we calculated a reliability coefficient of 0.809.
Responses were coded to 1 = strongly agree and agree and 0 = disagree and
strongly disagree. They will be summed up to create a skin tone index, ranging
from 0 to 7, with higher scores reflecting higher desirability for the perceived
benefits of a lighter skin tone (Hamed et al., 2010). The perception scores were
cut into quartiles, with higher quartiles indicating higher scores.
. SLP was assessed with one question, “How often have you used SLPs in the
past year?” Response options ranged from 1 = never to 4 = at least once for the

jast three months. respectively (Peltzer et al., 2016).

42

Outcome Measurements

The validated Depression Anxiety Stress Scales - 21 (DASS-21) was used to
assess the mental health status of the respondents. It was developed to measure the
constructs of depression and anxiety and to address the failure of earlier emotional
measures in discriminating between anxiety and depression (Osman et al., 2012).
DASS-21 has been previously used in Americans (Norton, 2007), Europeans
(Gonzélez-Cabrera et al., 2019), and Asians (Cheung et al., 2016; Ho et al., 2019; Quek
et al., 2018; Tee et al., 2020). The three DASS-21 scales contain 7 items, divided into
subscales with similar content. The depression scale assesses dysphoria, hopelessness,
devaluation of life, self-deprecation, lack of interest/involvement, anhedonia, and
inertia. The anxiety scale assesses autonomic arousal, skeletal muscle effects,
situational anxiety, and subjective experience of anxious affect. Finally, the stress scale
is sensitive to levels of chronic non-specific arousal. It assesses difficulty relaxing,
nervous arousal, easily upset/agitated, irritable/over-reactive, and impatient. The
DASS-21 is based on a dimensional rather than a categorical conception of
psychological disorder. The assumption on which the DASS-21 development was
based (and which was confirmed by the research data) is that the differences between
the depression, anxiety, and stress experienced by normal subjects and clinical
populations are essentially in degree (Kirana et al.; Oci et al., 2013; Osman et al., 2012).

DASS-21 tool was previously used among emerging adults and showed internal
teliability of 0.878, 0.877, and 0.738 for the depression, anxiety, and stress subscales,
respectively (Kuang et al., 2023). Furthermore, studies conducted in the Philippines
have shown that the DASS-21 can effectively screen and monitor the severity of
different categories of symptoms over time (Bengwasan et al., 2022; Simon, 2022).

This current study computed internal reliabilities of 0.876, 0.790, and 0.823 for the

43

depression, anxiety, and stress subscales, respectively, while the overall internal
reliability measurement for DASS-21 was 0.929.

Socio-Demographic Variables and Levels of Media Exposure

The socio-demographic variables were also ascertained and were selected a
priori based on previous literature, including age (Aimé et al., 2020; Kaur et al., 2022;
Ramesh, 2019; Rodgers et al., 2017; Shagar et al., 2017), sex at birth (Peters & Phelps,
2001; Ramos et al., 2019; Sohn, 2010), sexual orientation (Boroughs & Thompson,
2002; Frederick & Essayli, 2016; Tsunokai et al., 2019), household income (Masub &
Khachemoune, 2020; Ramos et al., 2019), working status (Mahé et al., 2007; Ramos et
al., 2019), highest educational attainment (Mahé et al., 2007; Ramos et al., 2019),
relationship status (Lehmann et al., 2016; Olatunji et al., 2019), and type of residence
(An et al., 2022; Prioreschi et al., 2017)

Lastly, the level of media exposure was ascertained using a questionnaire
adapted from a study done in the Philippines with a few modifications (Javellana,
2014). The instrument included questions on the influence of movies, television, the
internet, and social media platforms on the participants’ body image perception and
skin lightening. The scores were cut into quartiles, where higher quartiles indicated
higher usage. This current study calculated an internal reliability of 0.814 for this tool.
Qualitative Part: Case Study

Concept notes were developed on extraneous factors affecting the participants’
body image, skin-lightening practices, and mental health status. Some salient topics
included current stressors (e.g., personal, social, familial), emotional reactions to these
stressors, and facilitators enabling the participants to achieve their current motivations

to modify their bodies and/or lighten their skin.

The primary researcher facilitated the in-depth interview, which was done using
Zoom. All the in-depth interviews were recorded and transcribed for analysis.

Data Processing and Analysis
Quantitative Part: Cross-Sectional Survey

Descriptive statistics were calculated and presented in frequencies and
percentages to answer Specific Aims 1-3. Effect estimates were calculated to evaluate
the relationships between body image perception, skin-lightening practices, mental
health status, levels of media exposure, and socio-demographic variables to answer
Specific Aim 4.

Body Image measurements included the BAS, BES (Domains 1, 2, and 3), and
PRAS. The 10-item BAS-2 uses a 5-point Likert scale with responses ranging from 1
(Never) to 5 (Always). Higher scores indicate higher Body Appreciation. To calculate
one’s final BA score, item responses were summed, resulting in a score between 5 and
50 (Atari, 2016). For BES, to determine a participant’s score for a particular
subscale/domain of the BES, the individual scores for items on the subscale were added
up (Franzoi & Shields, 1984). Lastly, for PRAS, an overall score was computed as the
mean of all 11 items, with higher scores reflecting greater PRA. The knowledge,
perception, and frequency of use subscales measured skin lightening practices domains.
Responses were recorded to 1= strongly agree and agree and 0 = disagree and strongly
disagree and were summed up to create a skin tone index, ranging from 0 to 7, with
higher scores reflecting higher desirability for the perceived benefits of a lighter skin
tone (Peltzer & Pengpid, 2017). For DASS-21, scores were calculated based on
previous studies (Lovibond & Lovibond, 2013; Wang, Pan, Wan, Tan, Xu, Ho, et al.,
2020; Wang, Pan, Wan, Tan, Xu, Mclntyre, et al., 2020). The total score was summed

up, and higher scores indicated more negative experiences in the past week. For

45

descriptive analysis, the total depression subscale was divided into normal (0-9), mild
depression (10-12), moderate depression (13-20), severe depression (21-27), and
extremely severe depression symptoms (28-42). The total anxiety subscale score was
divided into normal (0-6), mild anxiety (7-9), moderate anxiety (10-14), severe
anxiety (15-19), and extremely severe anxiety symptoms (20-42). The total stress
subscale score was divided into normal (0-10), mild stress (11—18), moderate stress
(19-26), severe stress (27-34), and cxtremely severe stress (35-42).

For Specific Aim 4, associations between exposures (body image perception
and/or skin lightening) and mental health status were estimated using ordinal logistic
regression models since the outcome measures were ordinal. Ordinal logistic regression
models were fitted with parallel lines assumptions to account for the heterogeneity in
the respondents’ exposure (body image perception and skin-lightening practices)
(Brant, 1990; Erkan & Yildiz, 2014; Harrell, 2015; Kleinbaum & Klein, 2010).

There are several occasions when the outcome variable is polychotomous. Such
outcome variables can be classified into two categories: multinomial and ordinal. While
the dependent variable is classified according to their order of magnitude, one cannot
use the multinomial logistic regression model. Several logistic regression models have
been developed to analyze the ordinal response variables (Armstrong & Sloan, 1989;
Bender & Grouven, 1997; Greenland, 1994). A specific multivariate analysis for
ordinal data is preferred when considering multiple factors. Different techniques are
available, such as implementing mixed models or utilizing other model classes like
probit. However, prior research shows that ordinal logistic regression models have been
extensively used (Birkner & Vuorre, 2019; Gutiérrez et al., 2015). The most frequently
used ordinal logistic regression model in practice is the constrained cumulative logit

model called the proportional odds model (POM) (Harrell, 2015). The POM is

46

extensively utilized in epidemiology and biomedical research. However, the POM
relies on certain assumptions that, if not met, can result in incorrect conclusions
(Birkner & Vuorre, 2019; Kleinbaum & Klein, 2010).

In all the models, we controlled for age (in years, as continuous), sex at birth
(male or female), sexual orientation (heterosexual, homosexual, bisexual, asexual, or
preferred not to say), average monthly income (in Philippine Pesos), working status
(yes or no), highest educational attainment (elementary, high school, college, post-
graduate studies, vocational course or did not go to school), relationship status (single
or in a relationship), type of residence (urban or rural), and different media use (low or
high use of movies, television, internet, and social media). These confounding factors
were chosen a priori as potentially significant predictors of mental health outcomes.

Effect size estimates were reported as proportional odds ratio (POR) with a 95%
contidence interval (95% Cl) tor the effect of the different exposures on the mental
health status of the respondents. STATA 17 BE was used in the statistical analyses
(www.stata.com/statal7/). P-values of < 0.05 were considered to be statistically
significant. Furthermore, sensitivity analysis assessed the effect of unmeasured

confounding and expressed as E-values (https://www.evalue-calculator.com/evalue/)

(Mathur et al., 2018; VanderWeele & Ding, 2017).

For Specific Aim 5, a structural model was built based on the literature review.
The specified model was grounded in a sound theoretical framework of body image
perception and skin lightening regarding their expected relationship among key
constructs and mental health status outcomes. Generalized structural equation modeling
(GSEM) was used to estimate the effect of the exposure to the outcome in the
hypothesized structural model. Combining SEM and the Generalized Linear Model

(GLM) creates a statistical framework known as GSEM, which possesses significant

47

capability. GSEM is a modeling technique that allows for the simultaneous modeling
of continuous and discrete variables under different probability density and distribution
assumptions. It is beneficial for observational studies as it can model the direct and
indirect effects of interacting factors. GSEM can also model binary response, ordered
or count data, multilevel data structure, and factor variable notation. In addition to the
advantages mentioned above, GSEM can be used as a likelihood function. Therefore,
this study considers it the most appropriate tool for modeling the interplay among body
image perception, skin-lightening practices, and mental health status (Barmar et al.,
2018; Huber, 2013; Rabe-Hesketh et al., 2004).

The structural model (Figure 2) measures the importance of the relationship
between latent constructs and the relationship among other measured variables. If the
hypothesized and observed models' data match, the GSEM can explain the
hypothesized model. The nature of the research hypothesis provides the rationale for
using structural equation modeling as a data analysis technique (Ullman & Bentler,

2012).

48

Knowledge on
Perceptions on Frequency of Use ‘Sidn Lightening
Monthty Skin Ughtening | [1 8Kn Lightening) | pe oicte active
Household cae ingredients
income
Depression
“ ~~ .
_ Mental Health | Anxte
; ‘Status / ty
Stress
Lavela of Media
Exposure
Acceptance ™
ighost 1 zy
Education Relationship: Residence Working
Attainment | | Stes mm
Movies Television Internet | |Soctal Media

Figure 2. Generalized structural equation model for the exposure, mediators,

confounders, and outcome variables.

As seen in Figure 2, the endogenous variable Body Image Perception has five

observed constructs: Body Appreciation, Body Esteem Domain 1, Body Efficacy

Domain 2, Body Efficacy Domain 3, and Positive Rational Acceptance. Scores from

these observed variables were cut into quartiles to develop four increasing orders of

scores. The exogenous variable Mental Health Status comprises Depression, Anxiety,

and Stress constructs. Each construct has five levels with increasing severity (normal,

mild, moderate, severe, and extreme). For the mediators, the skin-lightening variables

were not grouped into one latent variable since the variables were of different types of

data and distribution, which may result in the estimation technique's non-convergence.

The perception of the benefits of SLP used an ordinal logit distribution.

49


In contrast, the frequency of SLP use utilized a multinomial logit distribution
(Level 1), and the knowledge of the active ingredient of SLP used a binomial logit
distribution. Confounders also followed different types of data distribution: age
(Gaussian Identity), sexual orientation (multinomial logit distribution, Level 1), highest
educational attainment (multinomial logit distribution, Level 1), monthly household
income (ordinal logit), relationship status (binomial logit), working status (binomial
logit) and residence (binomial logit). The sex variable was removed as a confounder
since it was causing a quasi-separation phenomenon. Quasi-separation can cause
numerical instability and bias in parameter estimates because the likelihood function
becomes extremely steep, making optimization algorithms struggle to converge (Clark
et al., 2023). Hence, the said variable sex was removed.

To obtain the variance-covariance matrix of the estimates for all specified paths
in the model, the default estimator in STATA 17.0 BE, the Maximum Likelihood
estimation (ML), was used (Cain, 2021). ML is a statistical method used to estimate a
given model's parameters. The technique involves finding the values of the parameters
that maximize the likelihood function, which represents the probability of observing
the given data under the model (Cole et al., 2014). In the context of GSEM, ML is used
to estimate the parameters of a structural equation model by finding the values that
maximize the likelihood of observing the data. This approach helps to ensure that the
model accurately represents the relationships between the variables and that the model's
predictions are as accurate as possible (Cain, 2021; Cole et al., 2014; Gould et al.,
2006).

Results were presented as standardized loadings, interpreted as ordered log-
odds (logit) regression coefficients. The standard interpretation of the ordered logit

coefficient is that for a one-unit increase in the predictor, the response variable level is

50

expected to change by its respective regression coefficient in the ordered log-odds
scale. In contrast, the other variables in the model are held constant. Interpretation of
the ordered logit estimates is not dependent on the ancillary parameters; the ancillary
parameters differentiate the adjacent levels of the response variable (Spiess et al.,
2020).

Qualitative Part: Case Study

This part answers Specific Aim 6. After transcribing the interviews, the data
transcripts were analyzed using NVivo 1.6.2 software (Hilal & Alabri, 2013) using the
inductive logic approach in thematic analysis: familiarizing with the data, generating
initial codes, searching for themes, reviewing the themes, defining and naming the
themes, and producing the report (Braun & Clarke, 2006). Data familiarization
consisted of reading and re-reading the data while noting initial ideas. Additionally,
interesting data features were coded systematically across the entire dataset while
collating data relevant to each code. Moreover, the open coding of the data was
performed to describe the data into concepts and themes, which were further
categorized to identify distinct concepts and themes (Williams & Moser, 2019).

Data analysis of the interviews was carried out according to the steps described
by previous literature using a coding technique wherein early data analysis is a critical
step in the overall interpretation of the case studies (Yin, 1994). The primary researcher
began by coding each line of each patient participant’s transcript. Similar codes were
then grouped to form subcategories, and within these subcategories, categories were
identified. The primary researcher then grouped the categories to develop a theory
related to informants’ experiences of body image, skin-lightening practices, and mental
health status. The data collection process continued until each category was saturated

and no new data emerged.

51

The analyses were compared and contrasted to develop a thematic map. The
final thematic map of the analysis was generated after checking if the identified themes
work about the extracts and the entire dataset. In addition, clear, persuasive extract
examples that connect the analysis to the research question and literature were selected,
and a scholarly report on the investigation was reviewed before it was produced.
Additionally, the themes and sub-themes generated were assessed and discussed in
relevance to the study's objectives. Furthermore, the data was gathered and analyzed
until saturation was reached. Saturation was achieved through iterative analysis of the
qualitative data collected. The process involved systematically reviewing and coding
the data to identify recurring themes, concepts, or categories. As analysis progressed,
new data were compared to existing findings to identify points where no new themes
or insights emerged. After interviewing Informant 12, no new information was added
to the data-gathering procedure, and the interviews continued until Informant 16. Once
no new themes or insights emerged from the data until the Informant 16 interview, it
was concluded that data saturation had been reached and that the sample size was
sufficient to capture the range and depth of experiences related to the research aim.

Finally, pseudonyms were used to present quotes from the qualitative data.

Data Integration from Quantitative and Qualitative Findings

This part of the study answers Specific Aim 7. A contiguous narrative approach
was implemented to report and integrate the mixed-method results, reporting results of
the quantitative strand followed by results of the qualitative strand in different
subsections. Data triangulation integrated the two separate data sources by examining
the various aspects of the research and comparing them for convergence. Quantitative

and qualitative data integration at the interpretation and reporting level occurred

52

through joint displays (Lee et al., 2021; Zhou et al., 2020). When integrating through
joint displays, the primary researcher brought the data together visually to draw out
new insights beyond the information gained from the different quantitative and
qualitative results. This joint display can occur by organizing related data in a figure,
table, matrix, or graph (Classen et al., 2007; Shaw et al., 2013; Zickmund et al., 2013).

The data triangulation part of the analysis required listing all the relevant topics
or findings from each study component and considering where each method's results
converge, offer complementary information on the same issue, or contradict each other.
It is crucial to look for disagreements between findings from different data collection
methods because exploring any apparent inter-method discrepancy may better
understand the research question (Denzin, 2017; Wilson, 2014). Figure 3 shows this

study's implementation matrix of the explanatory sequential design.

53

© :DataCollection —

=< Image,-Skin Lightening,
‘Mental Heatih,:& other
“i2factors) =

In-depth interview (salient

=.-topics, such as current
‘Stressors, emotional
Teactions to these
stressors, and facilitators
that enable them to
achieve their current
Motivations to modify their.
body and/or lighten their.
skin)

Phase 2: Qualitative Part
(Case'study) ~~

Data Analysis

=Descriptive Analysis.
=Ordinal Logistic: a
Regression with Parallel =
Lines Assumption:
“Generalized ‘Structural
Equation Modelling

Thematic analysis using
inductive approach:

Figure 3. Implementation matrix of the study.

Data Management Plan

The primary researcher was responsible for quality assurance, undertaking

specific activities to ensure quality control. Quality was assured through routine

54

monitoring of data collection procedures and periodic cross-checks against the
approved protocols. Transcribed interviews and the online survey questionnaire were
used to record data for each participant in the study. The primary researcher ensured
the data's accuracy, completeness, legibility, and timeliness. Data captured from the
online survey or in-depth interviews were consistent, clarificd, and corrected. Each
participant had a complete source of documentation of records. The primary researcher
prepared appropriate source documents. In addition, the primary researcher extracted
all data collected in the interview notes or survey forms. These data were secured and
kept accessible only to the primary researcher. Data entry and cleaning were conducted,
and final data cleaning, data freezing, and data analysis were performed. The primary
researcher checked through each transcript for consistency with agreed standards.
Handling Missing Data

Missing data is a common problem in research, mainly when data collection
involves self-report measures. In self-report measures, data can be missing at either the
item or variable level. Item level missingness occurs when subjects omit one or more
items within a multi-item instrument that measures an abstract concept or variable (e.g.,
depression). Variable level missingness occurs when all items on a multi-item
instrument are missing. Missing data are rarely missing completely at random (MCAR).
They can be due to many factors, including respondents’ email address changes, death,
inability (too ill) to respond, or refusal to answer the survey. In addition to reducing the
study's statistical power, missing data can lead to bias in the study results, skewing
estimates away from the true parameter values the investigator is trying to measure.

The usual method for handling missing data was done. The observations or
survey forms with missing data for any variables used in the analysis were removed.

Rough guidelines for this approach suggest that if less than 10% of study participants

55

have missing data for one or more of the analysis variables, the study results should not
be significantly affected. If more than 40% of observations have missing values, then
variables with the most missing values should be removed from the analyses (Fox-
Wasylyshyn & El-Masri, 2005; Perkins et al., 2018). Only participants with complete
responses to the survey form were included in the final analysis.

Ethical Considerations

Ethics approval

The study shall abide by the Principles of the Declaration of Helsinki (2013). It
was conducted along with the Guidelines of the International Conference on
Harmonization-Good Clinical Practice (ICH-GCP), E6 (R2), and other ICH-GCP 6 (as
amended); National Ethical Guidelines for Health and Health-Related Research
(NEGHHRR) of 2017. Furthermore, the University of the Philippines Manila Review
Ethics Board has approved this protocol (UPMREB 2022-0407-01; See Appendix 1 for
a copy of the ethical approval), and the Primary Research declared no conflict of
interest.

The main concems for ethics are consent, data privacy, and subject
confidentiality. The risks, benefits, and conflicts of interest are discussed in this section
from an ethical standpoint.

Recruitment

The participants were recruited using different online platforms to answer the
online SAQ voluntarily. The recruitment of participants for the in-depth interview was
chosen through random sampling utilizing a list of those who answered the online SAQ;
this minimized the risk of sampling bias. Through random sampling of informants with
high levels of depression, anxiety, and stress, the sample population would include

different “cases” that may not have the same experience of the subject under study. In

56

addition, none of the participants in the study had prior contact or association with the
primary researcher. Moreover, power dynamics was not used to recruit respondents.
The research objectives, methods, risks, benefits, voluntary participation, withdrawal,
and respondents’ rights were discussed with the respondents in the consent form before
conducting the in-depth interview. Appendix 2 contains the informed consent for the
survey and in-depth interview parts. At the same time, Appendix 3 is the SAQ exported
from the Qualtrics XM™ platform, and Appendix 4 shows the in-depth interview guide
and discussion questions. Moreover, Appendix 5 shows the sample recruitment poster
used on various social media platforms.
Responsibilities of the Respondents/Informants

Participation was purely voluntary. The respondents gave information on their
demographic data (age, sex, sexual orientation), socio-economic status (average
monthly household income, occupation, highest educational attainment, residence), the
levels of media exposure (television, movie, social media, and internet), relationship
status (single, in a relationship), exposure assessment (body image perception and skin
lightening), and outcome measurements (depression, anxiety, and stress). On the other
hand, the informants gave information on salient topics, including current stressors
(e.g., personal, social, familial), emotional reactions to these stressors, and facilitators
that enable them to achieve their current motivations to modify their body and/or
lighten their skin. The survey took about 10 to 20 minutes, while the in-depth interview
lasted 30 to 45 minutes. Participants may access the study results upon sending a
Tequest to the primary researcher.
Consent

The potential respondent signified informed consent by ticking a box in the

online informed consent form and the voluntary participation of the potential

57

respondent in the study after a thorough discussion of the research details. The
participant’s consent was voluntary and may be recanted by the participant at any time
s/he chooses.
Callback
The primary researcher did not have a second round of asking respondents/informants.
Data Privacy

All digital data were stored in a cloud drive and were accessible only to the
primary researcher. In addition, subject confidentiality was upheld by assigning control
numbers and not requiring participants to divulge their name, address, and other
identifying factors unnecessary for analysis.
Compensation

No monetary compensation was given to the participants.
Risks

This research may pose risks to data privacy, as discussed and addressed above.
In addition, there was also a risk of social exclusion should data leaks arise due to the
stigma against mental health. This risk was mitigated by properly executing the data
collection and analysis plan, excluding personal details and tight data privacy measures.
Moreover, there may be a risk of psychological distress due to sensitive questions asked
and information disclosed. This risk was addressed by adequately discussing with the
participant that data were protected and treated with the utmost confidentiality. The
trained primary researcher facilitated the in-depth interview to ensure the participants’
appropriate handling; there was a briefing and debriefing before and after the in-depth

interview, respectively.

58

Benefits

Participation in this study entailed health education and a voluntary referral to
a psychiatrist if necessary. Moreover, this study would contribute to modifications in
targeted mental-health campaigns for the 18-29 age group brought about by the effect
of body image and _ skin-lightening practices. Summarized findings and
recommendations were channeled to relevant stakeholders for their perusal.
Disposal and Destruction of Participant's Personal Data

After the study, the personal data gathered from the participants were deleted
from the system and wiped out from the hard drive where the data was stored.
Dissemination

The results were disseminated through conference presentations, peer-reviewed
journals, social media, print and broadcast media, and various stakeholder activities.

The published peer-reviewed protocol in BMJ Open is attached in Appendix 6.

59

Chapter IV
Results

Quantitative Part
Specific Aim 1: To describe the study population's characteristics, stratified by their
mental health status

Data collection was done from October 2023 to March 2024. A total of 3,127
valid responses were included in the final analysis. The mean age (+SD) of the
respondents was 20.91 (+ 2.97) years old, which were primarily females (67%). The
majority of the respondents identified themselves as heterosexuals (36%), while the rest
were homosexuals (16%) and bisexuals (15%), and 31% did not disclose their sexual
identity. In addition, most were currently not working (82%) and single (72%).
Moreover, the majority of the respondents had low usage of movies (80%), television
(96%), and social media (77%). However, almost half had high internet use (44%).
Table 1 details the characteristics of the study population, including their socio-
demographic characteristics and usage of different media, stratified according to the
levels of depression, anxiety, and stress.

As shown in Table 1, results of the outcome measurements showed that
approximately 1 out of 4 respondents had severe to extreme levels of depression, 5 out
of 8 respondents had severe to extreme levels of anxiety, and 1 out of 8 respondents

had severe to extreme levels of stress.

Specific Aim 2: To describe the body image perception of the study population,

including levels of body appreciation, levels of body esteem, and their positive

rational acceptance, stratified by their mental well-being status

60

For this current study, body image perception consists of three measurements:
Body Appreciation, Body Esteem (Domains 1, 2, and 3), and Positive Rational
Acceptance. Table 2 shows the results of the quartile scores for the three body image
measurements of the respondents, stratified according to their levels of depression,
anxiety, and stress.

For the BAS-2 scores, it can be noticed that 15% (n=129) of those who got
Quartile 4 scores had severe/extreme levels of depression, while half (54%) of those
who got high BAS-2 scores (Quartile 4) had severe/extreme levels of anxiety (n=466).
Lastly, only 10% who got BAS-2 Quartile 4 scores had severe/extreme stress levels.
Trends in increasing BAS-2 scores also showed decreasing proportions of respondents
having severe/extreme levels of depression and stress. However, for anxiety, consistent
proportions of the respondents were observed across all BAS-2 quartiles.

In terms of the BES, three domains were analyzed: Domain 1 - Physical
Attractiveness (males) or Sexual Attractiveness (females), Domain 2 - Upper body
strength (males) or Weight concem (females), and Domain 3 - Physical condition
(males and females). For Domain 1, severe/extreme levels of depression were observed
among 18% (n=159) of those who are in BES Quartile 4 scores, while severe/extreme
levels of anxiety among half (52%; n=475) among those who are in BES Domain 1
Quartile 4 scores. Finally, severe/extreme stress levels were observed among 12%
(n=107) of those who got BES Domain 1 Quartile 4 scores. Similar to the BAS-2 scores,
trends in incrcasing BES scorcs also showed decreasing proportions of rcspondcnts
having severe/extreme levels of depression and stress. However, for anxiety, consistent

proportions of the respondents were observed across all BES quartiles.

61

ce

LZ) ¥6 (E18) L¥9 (S79) BLb (masse) 9% | (%6'Lz) LOT _| (%I'ZL) HES (b'€2) el 00°000‘0€ & 00°100‘0I
(SEI) 1ve_| (%S'98) pst | (%o'ss)Bsi't | (%o'se) S79 _| (%I'sz) Brr | (MHL) SsE‘I | (%0'LS) EBL‘I 00°000‘01>
dud Surosuy Apqya0py aBesaay
(%o'vl) €$1 (%0'98) 678 (%S'99) 19 (ms'€€) EzE_| (%I'9Z) 7SZ_| (MO'EL)TZIL | (%B'0E) 196 Aes 0} jou pousayoud |
rg 6 (%6'€8) Le (%6'L9) 8E (IZ) 81 (%L'SE) 07 (%E'p9) 9€ (%8'1) 9¢ Tenxesy
(%b'81) 98 (%H9'18) 18€ (%8'69) 97€ (%z'0E) Ivl_ | (%L'v€) Z9I_| (M%E'S9) SOE (%0'S1) Lov Tenxesig
(%z'€1) 89 (%8'98) 9b (%z'9S) 687 (%p'er) stz_| (E'Sz)OEL | (%L'bL) BE (%vy'91) vis Jenxesowoyy
(%L'01) 071_|_(%8°68) 900‘ (%L'8S) 199 (Ely) Sov | (yz) zsz_| (%I'LL) LB | (%0'9E) 9zI'T Tenxesossjo}
WOHBUILIO [VNxIg
(%l'€1) Eb1 (%E'98) L68 (%9'SS) BLS (b'vr) 79p_| (0°82) 16z@_| (%O'%L) 6rL_| (%E'EE) OFO'T arn
(ME) SLz_| (898) ZBI | (%O'99)LLET | (o'vE) OIL | (%z'sz)Szs_| (%8'bL) Z9S‘I | (%L'99) L80'7 ayeweg
L quid 38 xag
(%8°21) 09 (%17'L8) 60r (%0'8p) SzZ (HO'%s) vee | (Mz'Sz)BITL_| (%8'PL) ISE (%0'S8) 69b (62.01 $2) aNpe BupBs9ws 367
(%s'E1) ase_| (%S'98) 00% | (%I°S9) OEL'T (6've) 876_ | (%E'9Z) 869_| (ML'LL) 096'I | (%O0'ST) 859'7 (7 91 81) 3INpe Supssouse Arey
(ds ‘uopepap
LOT ¥ 16°07
Pivpueys + uve) svat ‘aby
amayxy ayesapoyAl awayxy ayerapoy] emaynxy ESB CT Ng
0} a1aAag 0} [BULION 0} 243A9g 0} [BULLION 0} a29Aa5 0} [BULION: (% ‘u)
6
SJPAa] $89.05 sjeaay apy S]aAay uoyssardaq ToL siaietintaih 3)
SNQBIS WIA [BIU2TAL

“(LT71‘€=0) ssous pue ‘Aorxue

‘uolssoidap Jo s[aAs] 0} SuIpsos.e poyneys ‘oBesn erpoul pue os1ydesZowep-o1sos Burpnjout ‘uoyejndod Aprys aq} Jo sonsudjoReYD “T aqeL

£9

STBEIS |IRAH 1902]

asus BIpaW
(MEI) Ov~ | (%ou'se) Lert _| (8:09) 6I0'r_ | (%z6E) B59 | (%9'8z) 6Ly | (%b'IL) B61'I | (%9'ES) us't | vore weqin
(ETD BLT |_ (%L'L8) ZL2'1 (%9'b9) 9€6 (sis) vis | (rer) LEE | (%8'9L) EII'T | (%b'9b) OSH'T bore ey
aouapises yo adAy,
(%L'91) 9¢1 (E'E8) 97 (%0°€9) OSs (Morte) 7zE_| (u'9z) EE | (%E'EL) 6E9 (%6'LZ) ZB dyqsuonejes & Uy
(iz) tLz_| (M6rL8) ZR6'T_|_(ME'Z9) por't_| (Yox'Le) OSB | (%6'sz) EBs | (%I'vL) IL9'I | (%I'ZL) ssz'z seas |
srye7g drysuonejay yueLInD
(%0°02) z (%0'08) 8 %0'0S) $ (%0°0S) ¢ (0°01) 1 (%0'06) 6 (%€'0) 01 seudap [eUOeOO A,
(%r'L) 01 (%9'%6) S71 (ob'yy) 09 (%9'SS) SL (%E'€1) 81 (%L'98) LUT (%E'p) SEI Somprys syenpesd-1sod
(SEL) pOE | (%S'98) ZS6T_| (%6'79) OZH'T (lee) 9€8 | (%I'9z) 68S | (%6'EL) LUO‘ | (M2'ZL) 957C 2891109
(HE El) 66 (%7'98) 619 (%S'9) 9b (ms'se) ssz@_|_ (%9°82) sOz_| (Ms IL) EIS | (%0'EZ) BIL Tooyss yatH
(%0'0r) z (%0'09) € %0'08) 7 (%0'02) 1 (%0'0b) Z (%0'09) € (%z'0) § Areyuomaigy
(EEE) I (%L'99) 7 (20°01) € (%0'0) 0 (EEE) (%L'99) Z (HOE Jooqos puane 100 pid
JUsMIUyeYHY [eUopEINpy 3s9qdTT
(LZ) EL (%eL8) 105 (%0'€s) POE (%0'Lr) OLZ_ | (%L'92) EST (EEL) ev (%v'81) pls Sox
(HSE) Sve_| (%S'98) 8O7'%_| (Yu'v9) IS9'L_ | (ME'SE) 706 | (%0'9Z) E99_| (%O'bL) O6BT | (%9'18) ESS‘z ON
SNyBIg DUppION,
(%821) Ip (%7'L8) 6LZ (%S'2S) 891 (%S'Lp) ZS1 (%o'9z) $8 | (Mb'EL) SEz_ | (%z'01) OzE 00'000‘0s<
(Eb) eH (%z'S8) Iz (%p'€s) IST (%9'9b) ZEL (%6'9Z) 9L (%lEL) LOZ (16) €87 00°000‘0s % 00° 100‘0E
Boi 3b) ccf 2}B1IPOA] amoOxy a}BIIPO] sry d}B1IPOYA]
0} 319A9§ 0} [BUION Q} 349A9§ 0} [BULION 0} 819A9g 0} BULION (% “u)
SONSlI9j;IBIBGD
SJPAa‘T 883.36 spaay Aaxuy s]aaa'] woyssardeq 130],


v9

SIBEIS [IPH 109,

(pe Biv | (%9°98) 60L'2 | (M%S'29) Sso'L_ | (MS'LE)ZLIT | (I'9z) 918 | (6'EL) 11E'% TVLOL
(%S'92) 161 (SEL) OES (%z'LL) LES (48%) v9T_ | (HEE) ZIE | (%L'9S) 60r (AVEC) IL Wat
(%ob'6) Lzz_|_(%9°06) 6LI'Z_| (%I'8s) 6E'L_ | (%E'Ir) 800'I | (%6'0z) bOS | (%1'6L) ZBI | _(%6'9L) 90H'7 MoT
28() IPO [e}0g
(%L"61) 7LZ_ | (%E'08) TINT (%s'1L) 86 (%S'82) voE_ | (M9'SE) EGF | (%b'¥9) 068 | (%E'b) EBE'T 31H
(%b'8) 91 (%9'16) 86S (%er'ss) 996 (%9'vr) BLL_ | (MS'81) EZE_| (S18) IZb'T | (%L'SS) PHL'T MOT
987) oUINUT
L (%1'0b) ss (%6'6S) 78 (%6'€8) SUL (i'91) 7 (%l'LS) 6L (HET) BS (eb'y) LEL ast
(Morzi) E9¢_| (%6'L8) Lz9'? | (MoI9) ovs'T | (s'BE)OSI'T | (%9'pz) LEL | (ob'sL) Esc’ | (%9'S6) 0667 MOT
UOISIAS[OL
(%4t'v2) ¥S1 (%8'SL) 8b (%8'SL) €8b [ (Hee) s1_| (ese) Eve | (%619) EE | (%b'0Z) LED 31H
(%9'01) 9% _| (%b’68) 977'7_| (%I'6S) ZLH'L_| (%6'Or) BIOI | (MoO'EZ) ELS | (OOO'LL) LIG'T | (%9°6L) O6b'Z MOT
SoLAO,
amenxg ESUS CDTi) 1g ema.nxy ayB1apoyAy amayxy azwrapoyy
0} a13Aag 0} [BUION, 03 a12A9g 0} [BULIONT 0} a19A9g 0} [BULION, (% U)
SPAI‘T 889.95 sjeaay Aanuy 249] UoIssoidag 1830], Se EL 3)


$9

(seqemiay)
WI99U09 3Y9]9A4 JO (SaTeMI)

W3u018 Apog saddp :7 uyemog

(%eZ1) £01 (%8'L8) OLL (%z09) 87s (see) bre | (%I'BI 6ST | (%6'18) BIL (A182) LLB y anTeNd
(lO) 18 (%0'06) 2L (%9'09) 88h (peer Lie | (MeEst)sst | (%8'08) 059 | (%L'sz) S08 € aInTENd
(%S'Z1) 86 (%S"L8) 889 (%0°29) L8b (0's) 66%_| (%I'Lz)E1z | (%6'eL) ELS (I'S?) 984 7 a1pIENO
(%0'02) ZE1 (%0'08) Lzs (%9'89) 7S (eb'1€) LOz_ | (%B'Ev) 682_| (%z'9S) OLE (112) 659 La]psend
(seyeuray)

$S909A198.1}}Y [BENXI 10 (sayBu)

sSIUIAHIBIyy [eosdyg 2] UpEMIOG

r $a109g wl9a3sq Apog
(%E'6) 08 (%b'06) 9LL (%eb'vs) 99b (9'sy) 06€ | (%I'SI)6ZL_| (%6'p8) L7L (%b'L2) 958 [Aaltesaie)
(%z'01) LL (%8'68) 089 (%9°29) pL | (op'Le) €8%_ | (%8'B1) HI | (%zI8) S19 (%e'v2) LSL € angen
(%6'01) 68 (%e1'68) €89 (%7'29) LLb (%8'LE) 067_| (Mrz) HOT | (%9'8L) E09 (%S"bZ) LOL ZaqENd
(Yel €2) LLI (E'9L) OLS (%0'ZL) BES (%0'82) 60% _| (%0'IS) I8€ |_(%0'6») 99¢ (%6'E2) LoL Loqarend
sai0sg uopeeiddy Apog
EINER ED Sc § agBlpoyl awe.yxy ESUB CT Ng awa.jxy aye1poy
0} a19A3g 0} [BULION 03 d12A0g 0} [BULLION 0} 319A95 0} [BULLION (% ‘u)
S]2AaT 889.95 spaay Gonay s]aaa’] uorssaadaq 130], 18)
SNYBIS WITBAH [eU2TA|

‘(LZI‘€=U) ssoys

pur ‘Ajarxue ‘uorssasdap Jo sjaag] 0} Surproooe poyyens ‘syuepuodsar Apnys oy Jo Soros oftyenb yuowamseoul suondooiod aseun Apog °*z a1quL

99

STE WTBAH TeyUITAL

(S'ED 11 (%S'98) E1L (%S"19) Los (mss) LIE | (eb'oz) 891_| (%9'6L) 959 (%S'92) v7B yarprend
(61) U1 (%1°88) $78 (%E'6S) SSS (%L'0v) 18E_| (HET) 60% | (LLL) Lz | (%6'62) 9€6 € a1nTENd
(%S'21) 6L (%S"L8) sss (%z'y9) LOv__| (Ma's) Lzz_| (L92) 691 | (%E'EL) SO” | (%E'02) HED ZaipTENd
(%O'91) LI (%0'v8) 919 (%£'99) 986 (%u'€€) Loe _|_ (%B'9E) LZ | (%z'E9) Edy | (%r'Ez) EEL L9jprend
§2109§ aounjdas0y Jeuopey sapisog
(%8'11) LOI (%Z'88) 108 (METS) SLO (%u'Lv) cep | (MEI E61 | (%L'8L) sw | (%0°62) 806 parprend
(%6'8) 69 (%I'16) 999 (%l'€9) vsb (mo'9e) 99%_| (Meet) 6er | (%L'08) 185 | (%0'Ez) Oz € aIBTENd
(ETL 66 (%l'L8) OL (%E's9) ves (YoL'v€) 6L7_| (ME'He)S6I_| (%L'SL) 809 (%l"SZ) £08 Za1pIENo
(ETD BPI | (%L'8L) Bos (%VZL) 20s (6:12) 61_| (%S"Ih) 68% _| (%S'8S) LOP_| _(%E'ZZ) 969 Laiprend;
(sayeuiay pus saya)
WopIpuos jws1skyg :¢ UyeMIOG
(%0'01) €6 (%0'06) 8€8 (%0'79) Lis (worse) se | (MILI) HOT | (%b'z8)L9L_| (%8'6z) 1€6 y a1nzend
(%L'01) 8L (%£'68) 0S9 (%8'19) Ost (morse) 8L2_| (ete) eT | (%BLL)99S | (%E'EC) BZL € aprend
(%6'b1) 211 (%1'S8) 09 (%9'09) 9S (Mv'6e) 96% | (%z'9z) Lor | (HB'EL)Sss | (%I'pz) ZSL Z91pIENO
(%6'81) SEI (%z'18) 185 (%6'S9) @Lb (lve) yee | (%6'Or) E67 _| (%I'6S) Er (6°22) 91L 1 21p7enO
PLU ERED df apB1IPO|L sma.Oxy ajB1IPOTA, ELUCB YD cc § a3B1apoy]
0} 319A3§ 0} [BULION 0} 813A3g 0} [BULLION 0} 349A3g 0} [BULLION (% ‘a)
SOpspiajzIeIeyD
S[PAaT SS8a.5 spear] Aarxay S]2Aa"] Uoyssaadaq [0],


In terms of BES Domain 2, about 18% (n=164), 62% (n=577), and 10% (n=93)
were in severe/extreme levels of depression, anxiety, and stress, respectively, for those
respondents who were in BES Domain 2 Quartile 4 scores. Similar to BES Domain 1,
there was a consistent trend of increasing BES Domain 2 scores and decreasing
proportions of respondents having severeé xtreme levels of depression and stress.
However, for anxiety, consistent proportions of the respondents were observed across
all BES Domain 2 quartiles. Lastly, for BES Domain 3, about 21% (n=193) had
severeé xtreme levels of depression, and about 12% (n=107) had severeé xtreme levels
of stress among the respondents who were in BES Domain 3 Quartile 4 scores. Half of
the respondents (52% ,n=475) from the BES Domain 3 Quartile 4 group had
severeé xtreme levels of anxiety. Contrary to other body image measurements, no
consistent trend was observed on BES Domain 3 quartile scores vis-a-vis the
respondents' mental health status.

Moreover, for the PRAS scores, those who got high scores in Quartile 4 were
about 20% (n=168), 62% (n=507), and 14% (n=115) of the respondents having
severeé xtreme levels of depression, anxiety, and stress. Similar to other trends in the
body image measures, trends in increasing PRAS scores also showed decreasing
proportions of respondents having severeé xtreme levels of depression and stress.
However, for anxiety, consistent proportions of the respondents were observed across

all PRAS score quartiles.

67

Specific Aim 3: To describe the skin-lightening practices of the study population,
including their knowledge, perception, and use of skin-lightening products, stratified
by their mental health status

The three different domains of the respondents' skinJi ghtening practices were
measured. The questionnaire on skin lightening was adapted from a previous study
conducted in Southeast Asia (Peltzer & Pengpid, 2017). Table 3 shows the
measurements of SLP knowledge, perception of SLP benefits, and frequency of SLP
use by the respondents.

As seen in Table 3, regarding knowledge and perception of SLPs, the majority
(65% )pf the respondents knew the active ingredients in SLPs and had a high index
(Quartiles 3 and 4) (63% )f perceived benefits on lighter skin tones. Most respondents

used SLP at least once daily (34% pr at least once weekly (28% ).

68

69

(%6°91) ZS (%l€8) 987 (%6'S9) €07 (I 'v€) S01 (el'€€) ZOT (%6'99) 907 (8'6) 80€ sqjuow sep ysed am 12A0 9009
(%s"11) 0€ (%S"88) 1€z (%L'9) 691 (MES) 76 (%v'é2) 19 (%9'9L) 007 (y'8) 197 qyuow e 2000 ysz9] 1V
(%9'0I) L9 (%ev'68) £95 (%z'99) LI (%s'ee) EIz | Mel've) 7st | (%6'SL) BLb (oz) 0¢9 yoom B 2000 3Se9] IV
(%z'S1) 791 (%8'b8) £06 (%S'S9) L69 (Mo've) 89€ | (%S'S7)ILZ | (%9"PL) vOL (o'v€) s90°I Avp 8 9000 seo] 1W
(Ye Z1) LOT (%9°L8) 9SL (%v'vs) 69¢ T (%l'Sb) p6E_| (%9°97Z) 0€7_| (%b'EL) EE9 (Lz) €98 J0A2N
asn g'TS jo Asuanbaay
(%8°91) 981 (%z€R) 126 (%l'99) ZEL (ores) SLE | (pte) Le | (%9'89)09L | (%b'SE) LOI‘T y aipTend
(%z11) 001 (%8°88) £64 (%8"€9) OLS (Wege) Eze | (ME) LIZ | (%L'SL) 9L9 (%9°82) £68 €2TnENy
(%€'6) 9€ (%L'0@ ZSE (%8'6s) ZEz (%z'0v) 9$1 (Hs6tLL | (MTOR) IIE | (%y'TZI) 88¢ Z91BTEND
-—< + poe
(%0'E1) 96 (%0'L) £9 (%O'LS) Izy (o'er) BIE | (el'ez) SLI_| (%E'9L) ws_| (%9°€2) GEL Loqprend
xepuy}
900} Ups 193939) ‘JO 8} J2U9q PdAjad10g
(%G'E1) BLZ_| (eb'98) S9L'1_ | (%9'€9) 662'I (ev96) ree | (Heese) vIs | (%B'rL)6zs‘'I | (€'S9) Ev0'r Sox
(%6'21) OFI (%I'L8) v6 (%$'09) 989 (S68) 8tH | (MELA) ZOE | (%I'ZL) ZL (L'v€) 980° oN
Bop PN
‘SATS Uy SpUa;pasdoy aayoe ay} sMouyy
awenxy ayelapoyy awanxy ayelapoyy EL ERED cf ayB1apoyy
0} a13A3g 0} [BULLION 0} 319A9g, 0} [BULION, 0} Q19A9g, 0} [BULION, (% ‘u)
SOQSLII}IBIEY
S[2Ad] 883.95 spaaa'y Aapxuy S]2Aa"] Uoyssaidaq Teo],
S981 WITEAH 1BIUATAL

*(L71‘€=0) ssays pue ‘Ajorxue ‘uorssaidep Jo sjoAs]

0} BuIpioooR pores ‘syuapuodsal Apmis ayy Jo asn gS Jo Aouonbayy pur ‘s}youeq q7JS Jo uoNdeosod ‘g]g Uo a3 pojMoUy Jo somsvoyy ‘¢ aIquL

Specific Aim 4: To estimate the effect of body image status, skin-lightening practices,
and levels of media exposure on mental health among Filipino emerging adults

The link between body image perceptions and mental health status of the
respondents was assessed using ordinal logistic regression. Three questionnaires,
namely the BAS2, BES, and the PRAS were used to determine the influence of body
image on depression, anxiety, and stress levels.

Our regression analyses showed inverse trends wherein increasing BAS2
scores decreased the risk of having high levels of depression, anxiety, and stress.
Notably, the odds of being in a higher category of depression, anxiety, and stress are
approximately 01 3 times (95% CI: 011 — 01 6), 0.38 times (95% CI: 0.31 — 04 6), and
024 times (020 — 0.30), respectively, lower for each unit increase in BAS2, compared
to the Quartile 1 of the BAS2 scoring. Moreover, all other effect estimates were also
statistically significant (see Table 4 for details). The E-values for the point estimate and
the CI resulting from the sensitivity analysis of the unmeasured confounding were also

summarized in Table 6. Appendix 7 shows the STATA output for this estimation.

Table 4. Adjusted proportional odds ratio prevalence ratios (POR) with 95%
confidence interval (95% CI) for the association between Body Appreciation Scores
(BAS) and mental health outcomes.

Mental Health Outcome/ Effect Estimates | E-values
BAS Level POR (95%CI) p-values Ecst? Ect
For Depression

First quartile 10 a

Second quartile 02 7 (023 — 0.33) <0001 326 2.88

Third quartile 020 (01 6 — 024) <0001 390 35

Fourth quartile 01 3 (011 —01 6) <0001 499 444
For Anxiety

First quartile 10

70


Mental Health Outcome/ Effect Estimates E-values
BAS Level POR (95%CI) p-values Est? Eci
Second quartile 059 (049 — 0.72) <0001 193 1.64
Third quartile 055 (045 ~ 0.67) <0001 203 1.74
Fourth quartile 0.38 (031 — 04 6) <0001 2.63 2.31
For Stress
First quartile 10 |
Second quartile 04 3 (035 — 052) <0001 242 242
Third quartile 0.37 (031 — 04 6) | <0001 2.67 2.31
Fourth quartile 024 (020 — 0.30) <0001 350 305

"Effect estimates reported as the risk of having severe/extreme levels of depression, anxiety, and stress.
All the models were adjusted for age, sex at birth (male or female), sexual orientation (heterosexual,
homosexual, bisexual, asexual, or preferred not to say), average monthly income (in Philippine Pesos),
working status (yes or no), highest educational attainment (elementary, high school, college, post-
graduate studies, vocational course or did not go to school), relationship status (single or in a
relationship), type of residence (urban or rural), and different media use (low or high use of movies,
television, internet, and social media); » E-value (point estimate); ° E-value (confidence interval)

The results of the estimation of the association between the BES Domains 1 to
3 quartile scores and the levels of depression, anxicty, and stress arc presented in Tables
5.1 to 5.3. For the domain of physical attractiveness (males) or sexual attractiveness
(females), our regression model showed a strong negative association with the
outcomes, wherein significantly decreased odds of having higher levels of depression,
anxiety, and stress were observed as the BES Domain 1 quartile scores increased by
one unit. Specifically, the odds of being in a higher category of depression, anxiety,
and stress were lowered by approximately 0.23 times (95% CI: 0.19 — 0.29), 0.47 times
(95% CI: 0.38 — 0.58), and 0.42 times (0.34 — 0.52), respectively. It is in comparison
with the BES Domain 1 Quartile 1. The £-values for the point estimate and the Cl

resulting from the sensitivity analysis of the unmeasured confounding were also

summarized in Table 5.1. Appendix 8.1 shows the STATA output for this estimation.

71

Table 5.1. Adjusted proportional odds ratio (POR) with a 95% confidence interval
(95% Cl) for the association hetween Body Esteem Scale (BES) Domain 1: Physical

Attractiveness (males) or Sexual Attractiveness (females) and mental health outcomes.*

Mental Health Outcomes/ Effect Estimates E-values
BES Domain 1 Level POR (95%CI) p-values | Eest” Eci
For Depression
First quartile 1.0
Second quartile 0.47 (0.39 — 0.58) <0.001 2.28 1.95
Third quartile 0.30 (0.24—0.36) | <0.001 [ 3.05 | 2.72
Fourth quartile 0.23 (0.19 — 0.29) <0.001 3.59 3.12
For Anxiety
First quartile 1.0 |
Second quartile 0.69 (0.56 — 0.84) <0.001 1.70 1.41
Third quartile | 0.59 (0.48 — 0.72) <0.001 1.93 1.64
Fourth quartile 0.47 (0.38 — 0.58) L <0.001 2.28 1.95
For Stress
First quartile 1.0
Second quartile 0.65 (0.53 — 0.79) 0.002 1.79 1.50
Third quartile 0.48 (0.40 — 0.59) <0.001 2.24 1.93
Fourth quartile | 0.42 (0.34 — 0.52) <0.001 | 2.46 2.12

“Effect estimates reported as the risk of having severe/extreme levels of depression, anxiety, and
stress. All the models were adjusted for age, sex at birth (male or female), sexual orientation
(heterosexual, homosexual, bisexual, asexual, or preferred not to say), average monthly income (in
Philippine Pesos), working status (yes or no), highest educational attainment (elementary, high
school, college, post-graduate studies, vocational course or did not go to school), relationship status
(single or in a relationship), type of residence (urban or rural), and different media use (low or high
use of movies, television, internet, and social media); ® E-value (point estimate); ° E-value
(confidence interval)

For the domain of upper body strength (males) or weight concern (females), our
Tegression model showed a strong negative association with the outcomes, wherein
significantly decreased odds of having higher levels of depression, anxiety, and stress

were observed as the BES Domain 2 quartile scores increased by one unit. Notably, the

odds of having higher depression, anxiety, and stress levels were reduced by

72

approximately 0.18 times (95% CI: 0.14 — 0.23), 0.41 times (95% CI: 0.32 — 0.52), and
0.27 times (95% CI: 0.21 — 0.35), respectively. It is in reference to the BES Domain 2
Quartile 1. The E-values for the point estimate and the CI resulting from the sensitivity
analysis of the unmeasured confounding were also summarized in Table 5.2. Appendix

8.2 shows the STATA output for this estimation.

Table 5.2. Adjusted proportional odds ratio (POR) with a 95% confidence interval
(95% CI) for the association between Body Esteem Scale (BES) Domain 2: Upper body

strength (males) or Weight concern (females) and mental health outcomes.*

Mental Health Outcomes/ Effect Estimates E-values
BES Domain 2 Level POR (95%CI) p-values | Eest® Ec
For Depression
First quartile 1.0
Second quartile 0.43 (0.36 — 0.53) <0.001 2.42 2.09
Third quartile 0.26 (0.21 — 0.33) <0.001 3.33 2.88
Fourth quartile 0.18 (0.14 — 0.23) <0.001 4.15 3.59
For Anxiety
First quartile 1.0
Second quartile 0.69 (0.56 — 0.84) <0.001 1.70 1.41
Third quartile 0.51 (0.40 — 0.65) <0.001 2.15 1.79
Fourth quartile 0.41 (0.32 — 0.52) <0.001 2.50 2.12
For Stress
First quartile 1.0
Second quartile 0.56 (0.46 — 0.69) <0.001 2.01 1.70
Third quartile 0.37 (0.29 — 0.47) <0.001 2.67 2.28
Fourth quartile 0.27 (0.21 — 0.35) ~<0.001 L 3.26 2.77

“Effect estimutes reported us the risk of having severe/extreme levels of depression, anxicty, and stress.
All the models were adjusted for age, sex at birth (male or female), sexual orientation (heterosexual,
homosexual, bisexual, asexual, or preferred not to say), average monthly income (in Philippine Pesos),
working status (yes or no), highest educational attainment (elementary, high school, college, post-
graduate studies, vocational course or did not go to school), relationship status (single or in a
relationship), type of residence (urban or rural), and different media use (low or high use of movies,
television, internet, and social media); * E-value (point estimate); * E-value (confidence interval)

73


For the domain of physical condition for both males and females, our regression
model showed a strong negative association with the outcomes, wherein significantly
decreased odds of having higher levels of depression, anxiety, and stress were observed
as the BES Domain 3 quartile scores increased by one unit. Specifically, the odds of
having higher depression, anxiety, and stress levels were decreased by approximately
0.17 times (95% CI: 0.13 — 0.21), 0.36 times (95% CI: 0.28 — 0.46), and 0.27 times
(95% CI: 0.21 — 0.34), respectively. It is in reference to the BES Domain 3 Quartile |.
The £-values for the point estimate and the CI resulting from the sensitivity analysis of
the unmeasured confounding were also summarized in Table 5.3. Appendix 8.3 shows

the STATA output for this estimation.

Table 5.3. Adjusted proportional odds ratio (POR) with a 95% confidence interval
(95% Cl) for the association between Body Esteem Scale (BES) Domain 3: Physical

condition (males and females) and mental health outcomes.*

T

Mental Health Outcomes/ Effect Estimates E-values
BES Domain 3 Level POR (95%CI) p-values | Ecst? Eci
For Depression

First quartile 1.0

Second quartile 0.50 (0.41 — 0.60) <0.001 2.18 1.90

Third quartile 0.29 (0.24-0.35) | <0.001 3.12 | 2.77

Fourth quartile 0.17 (0.13 — 0.21) <0.001 4.28 3.79
For Anxiety

First quartile 1.0

Second quartile 0.72 (0.59 — 0.87) 0.001 1.64 1.35

Third quartile 0.57 (0.47 — 0.70) <0.001 1.98 1.68

Fourth quartile 0.36 (0.28 — 0.46) <0.001 2.72 2.31
For Stress

First quartile 1.0

Second quartile 0.61 (0.50 — 0.74) <0.001 1.88 1.60

74

Mental Health Outcomes/ Effect Estimates E-values

BES Domain 3 Level POR (95%CT) p-values | Eest® Eci
Third quartile | 0.41 (0.34—0.50) | <0.001 2.50 | 2.18
Fourth quartile | 0.27 (0.21 — 0.34) <0.001 3.26 2.82

* Effect estimates reported as the risk of having severe/extreme levels of depression, anxiety, and stress.
All the models were adjusted for age, sex at birth (male or female), sexual orientation (heterosexual,
homosexual, bisexual, asexual, or preferred not to say), average monthly income (in Philippine Pesos),
working status (yes or no), highest educational attainment (elementary, high school, college, post-
graduate studies, vocational course or did not go to school), relationship status (single or in a
relationship), type of residence (urban or rural), and different media use (low or high use of movies,
television, internet, and social media); E-value (point estimate); ° E-value (confidence interval)

Similar to the BAS-2 and BES associations with mental health outcomes, our
regression model showed strong negative associations between PRAS and the
outcomes. Significant reductions in higher levels of depression, anxiety, and stress were
observed as the PRAS quartile scores increased by one unit (see Table 6). For those
participants who got scores in Quartile 4, the odds of having higher levels of the
outcomes were decreased by 0.37 times (95% CI: 0.30 — 0.44) for depression, 0.72
times (95% CI: 0.60 — 0.87) for anxiety, and 0.60 times (95% CI: 0.49 — 0.72), in
comparison to the Quartile 1. The E-values for the point estimate and the CI resulting
from the sensitivity analysis of the unmeasured confounding were also summarized in

Table 6. Appendix 9 shows the STATA output for this estimation.

Table 6. Adjusted proportional odds ratio (POR) with a 95% confidence interval (95%
CI) for the association between Positive Rational Acceptance Scale (PRAS) scores and

mental health outcomes.*

| Mental Health Outcomes/ Effect Estimates | E-values
PRAS Level POR (95%CI) p-values | Ecs® Eci
For Depression
First quartile 1.0
Second quartile 0.59 (0.49 — 0.72) <0.001 1.93 1.64
Third quartile 0.51 (0.43 — 0.61) <0.001 2.15 1.88

75

Mental Health Outcomes/ Effect Estimates E-values
PRAS Level POR (95%CI) p-values | Ecst” Ec{
Fourth quartile 0.37 (0.30 — 0.44) <0.001 2.67 2.38
For Anxiety
First quartile 1.0
Second quartile 0.82 (0.67 — 0.99) 0.050 T 1.44 1.08
Third quartile 0.74 (0.62 — 0.90) 0.002 1.60 1.29
Fourth quartile 0.72 (0.60 — 0.87) 0.001 1.64 1.35
For Stress
First quartile 1.0
Second quartile 0.75 (0.63 — 0.92) 0.006 1.58 1.25
Third quartile | 0.64 (0.54 — 0.77) <0.001 1.81 1.54
Fourth quartile 0.60 (0.49 — 0.72) <0.001 1.90 1.64

* Effect estimates reported as the risk of having severe/extreme levels of depression, anxiety, and stress.
All the models were adjusted for age, sex at birth (male or female), sexual orientation (heterosexual,
homosexual, bisexual, asexual, or preferred not to say), average monthly income (in Philippine Pesos),
working status (yes or no), highest educational attainment (elementary, high school, college, post-
graduate studies, vocational course or did not go to school), relationship status (single or in a
relationship), type of residence (urban or rural), and different media use (low or high use of movies,
television, internet, and social media); > E-value (point estimate); E-value (confidence interval)

The influence of skin-lightening practices on the mental health status of the
respondents was also determined, particularly the knowledge of SLP, perception of SLP
benefits, and frequency of SLP use.

As shown in Table 7.1, those who knew the active ingredients of the SLP had
the odds of having higher levels of depression reduced by 0.84 times (95% CI: 0.73 —
0.96) compared to those who did not know the active ingredients of SLP. No significant
association was noted for both anxiety and stress. The E-values for the point estimate
and the CI resulting from the sensitivity analysis of the unmeasured confounding were
also summarized in Table 7.1. Appendix b10.1 shows the STATA output for this

estimation.

76

Table 7.1. Adjusted Proportional Odds Ratio (POR) with a 95% confidence interval
(95% Cl) for the association between knowledge of SLP active ingredient and mental

health outcomes.*

Mental Health Outcomes/ Effect Estimates E-values
Knowledge of SLP active
ingredient POR (95%CI) p-values | Ecst” Eci
For Depression

Did not know 1.0

Know 0.84 (0.73 — 0.96) 0.009 1.41 1.17
For Anxiety

Did not know 1.0

Know 0.99 (0.86 — 1.14) 0.936
For Stress

Did not know 1.0

Know 0.89 (0.78 — 1.03) 0.110

* Effect estimates reported as the risk of having severe/extreme levels of depression, anxiety, and stress.
All the models were adjusted for age, sex at birth (male or female), sexual orientation (heterosexual,
homosexual, bisexual, asexual, or preferred not to say), average monthly income (in Philippine Pesos),
working status (yes or no), highest educational attainment (elementary, high school, college, post-
graduate studies, vocational course or did not go to school), relationship status (single or in a
relationship), type of residence (urban or rural), and different media use (low or high use of movies,
television, internet, and social media); ® E-value (point estimate); © E-value (confidence interval)

In addition, the perception of SLP benefits among the respondents was
measured, and its influence on mental health outcomes was determined (see Table 7.2).
Results showed that those who were in Quartile 2 in PRAS scores had reduced odds of
having higher depression by 0.71 times (95% CI: 0.57 — 0.89) compared to those who
were in Quartile 1. Moreover, those who were in Quartile 4 in PRAS scores had
increased odds of having higher levels of depression by 30% (POR: 1.30; 95% CI: 1.09
— 1.54) relative to those who were in Quartile 1. No significant association was
observed between anxiety and perception of SLP benefits. Lastly, a higher perception
of SLP benefits (Quartile 4) had increased odds of having higher stress levels by 24%
(POR: 1.24; 95% CI: 1.03 — 1.49) compared to those in Quartile 1. The E-values for

77


the point estimate and the CI resulting from the sensitivity analysis of the unmeasured
confounding were also summarized in Table 7.2. Appendix 10.2 shows the STATA

output for this estimation.

Table 7.2. Adjusted proportional odds ratio (POR) with a 95% confidence interval
(95% Cl) for the association between perception of SLP benefits and mental health

outcomes.*

Mental Health Outcomes/ Effect Estimates E-values
Perception of SLP benefits POR (95%CI) p-values Eest Eci
For Depression

First quartile 1.0

Second quartile 0.71 (0.57 — 0.89) 0.003 1.66 1.31

Third quartile 0.91 (0.76 — 1.09) 0.311

Fourth quartile 1.30 (1.09 — 1.54) 0.003 1.54 1.26
For Anxiety

First quartile 1.0

Second quartile 1.05 (0.83 — 1.32) 0.672

Third quartile 1.09 (0.91 — 1.31) 0.358

Fourth quartile 1.16 (0.97 — 1.39) 0.111
For Stress

First quartile 1.0

Second quartile 0.81 (0.64 — 1.02) 0.076

Third quartile 0.96 (0.79 — 1.15) 0.632

Fourth quartile 1.24 (1.03 — 1.49) 0.020 1.47 1.26

* Effect estimates reported as the risk of having severe/extreme levels of depression, anxiety, and
stress. All the models were adjusted for age, sex at birth (male or female), sexual orientation
(heterosexual, homosexual, bisexual, asexual, or preferred not to say), average monthly income (in
Philippine Pesos), working status (yes or no), highest educational attainment (elementary, high
school, college, post-graduate studies, vocational course or did not go to school), relationship status
(single or in a relationship), type of residence (urban or rural), and different media use (low or high
use of movies, television, internet, and social media); > E-value (point estimate); ° E-value
(confidence interval)

78


The influence of the frequency of SLP use on the mental health of the

respondents was also assessed. Our regression model showed reduced odds of having

higher depression by 0.79 times (95% C:I: 0.65 — 0.96) for those who were using SLP

at least once a week compared to those who did not use SLP. Moreover, increased odds

of anxiety by 23% times (POR: 1.23; 95% CI: 1.00 — 1.50) were observed for those

who used SLP at least once a week compared to those who never used SLP. The E-

values for the point estimate and the CI resulting from the sensitivity analysis of the

unmeasured confounding were also summarized in Table 7.3. Appendix 10.3 shows the

STATA output for this estimation.

Table 7.3. Adjusted proportional odds ratio (POR) with a 95% confidence interval

(95% Cl) for the association between frequency of SP use and mental health outcomes.*

Mental Health Outcomes/ Effect Estimates E-values
Frequency of SLP use POR (95%C]I) p-values Est? Ect
For Depression
Never 1.0
At least once a day 0.90 (0.76 — 1.07) 0.219
At least once a week 0.79 (0.65 — 0.96) 0.018 1.50 1.17
At least once a month 0.85 (0.66 — 1.09) 0.208
Once over the past three
months 1.26 (0.99 — 1.04) 0.059
For Anxiety
Never 1.0
At least once a day 1.19 (1.00 — 1.41) 0.051
At least once a week 1.23 (1.00 — 1.50) | 0.040 1.46 1.00
At least once a month 1.20 (0.92 — 1.56) 0.176
Once over the past three
months 1.35 (1.05 — 1.73) 0.17
For Stress

79


Mental Health Outcomes/ Effect Estimates E-values
Frequency of SLP use POR (95%CI) p-values Ect? Ect

Never 1.0

At least once a day 0.93 (0.78—1.11) | 0.447 |

At least once a week 0.86 (0.71 — 1.05) 0.150

At least once a month 0.94 (0.72 — 1.22) 0.637

Once over the past three

months 1.25 (0.97 1.60) 0.079

* Effect estimates reported as the risk of having severe/extreme levels of depression, anxiety, and
stress. All the models were adjusted for age, sex at birth (male or female), sexual orientation
(heterosexual, homosexual, bisexual, asexual, or preferred not to say), average monthly income (in
Philippine Pesos), working status (yes or no), highest educational attainment (elementary, high
school, college, post-graduate studies, vocational course or did not go to school), relationship status
(single or in a relationship), type of residence (urban or rural), and different media use (low or high
use of movies, television, internet, and social media); * E-value (point estimate); ° E-value
(confidence interval)

The influence of the four media on the mental health outcomes of the
respondents was also assessed. The tables below summarize the results of this
examination.

Table 8.1 gives the results for the influence of levels of movie usage on mental
health outcomes. As the level of movie usage increases, the odds of having higher levels
of depression, anxiety, and stress. Specifically, those who were in the highest movie
usage (Quartile 4) had increased odds of having higher levels of depression (POR: 2.04;
95% CI: 1.69 — 2.46), anxiety (POR: 2.39; 95% CI: 1.98 — 2.90), and stress (POR: 2.45;
95% CI: 2.02 - 2.98) by two times compared to those who were in the lowest movie
usage (Quartile 1). The E-values for the point estimate and the CI resulting from the
sensitivity analysis of the unmeasured confounding were also summarized in Table

10.1. Appendix 11.1 shows the STATA output for this estimation.

80

Table 8.1. Adjusted proportional odds ratio (POR) with a 95% confidence interval

(95% Cl) for the association between movie use and mental health outcomes.*

Mental Health Outcomes/ Effect Estimates E-values
Movie Usage POR (95%CI) p-values Eest® Eci
For Depression

First quartile 1.0

Second quartile 1.14 (0.92 — 1.43) | 0.237

Third quartile 1.36 (1.14 — 1.63) 0.001 1.61 1.34

Fourth quartile 2.04 (1.69 — 2.46) <0.001 2.21 1.92
For Anxiety

First quartile 1.0

Second quartile 1.09 (0.88 — 1.37) 0.404

Third quartile 1.35 (1.12 — 1.61) | 0.001 1.60 1.31

Fourth quartile 2.39 (1.98 — 2.90) | <0.001 2.46 2.16
For Stress

First quartile 1.0

Second quartile 1.13 (0.90 — 1.43) 0.273

Third quartile 1.42 (1.19 1.72) <0.001 1.67 1.41

Fourth quartile 2.45 (2.02 - 2.98) <0.001 2.51 2.20

* Effect estimates reported as the risk of having severe/extreme levels of depression, anxiety, and
stress. All the models were adjusted for age, sex at birth (male or female), sexual orientation
(heterosexual, homosexual, bisexual, asexual, or preferred not to say), average monthly income (in
Philippine Pesos), working status (yes or no), highest educational attainment (elementary, high
school, college, post-graduate studies, vocational course or did not go to school), relationship status
(single or in a relationship), and type of residence (urban or rural); ° E-value (point estimate); ° E-
value (confidence interval)

The influence of television usage levels was also determined (Table 8.2). An
observed trend of increasing televising usage and increasing odds of having higher
levels of depression, anxiety, and stress was noted. Particularly, those in highest levels
of television usage (Quartile 4) had increased odds of having higher categories by two
times for depression (POR: 2.20; 95% CI: 1.76 — 2.74), 80% for anxiety (POR: 1.80;
95% CI: 1.44 — 2.26), and two times for stress (POR: 2.12; 95% CI: 1.68 — 2.67),

Telative to those who were in the lowest quartile of television usage (Quartile 1). The
81

E-values for the point estimate and the CI resulting from the sensitivity analysis of the

unmeasured confounding were also summarized in Table 8.2. Appendix 11.2 shows the

STATA output for this estimation.

Table 8.2. Adjusted proportional odds ratio (POR) with a 95% confidence interval

(95% Cl) for the association between television use and mental health outcomes."

Mental Health Outcomes/ Effect Estimates E-values
Television Usage POR (95%CI) p-values Ee? Ec{
For Depression |

First quartile 1.0

Second quartile 0.91 (0.72 — 1.15) 0.433

Third quartile 1.23 (0.99 — 1.52) 0.061

Fourth quartile 2.20 (1.76 —2.74) | <0.001 2.33 | 1.98
For Anxiety

First quartile 1.0

Second quartile 1.04 (0.83 — 1.33) 0.692

Third quartile 1.16 (0.93 — 1.44) 0.170

Fourth quartile 1.80 (1.44 — 2.26) <0.001 2.02 1.69
For Stress

First quartile 1.0

Second quartile 0.99 (0.78 — 1.26) 0.956

Third quartile 1.28 (1.02 — 1.60) 0.033 1.52 1.11

Fourth quartile 2.12 (1.68 — 2.67) <0.001 2.27 1.92

* Effect estimates reported as the risk of having severe/extreme levels of depression, anxiety, and
stress. All the models were adjusted for age, sex at birth (male or female), sexual orientation
(heterosexual, homosexual, bisexual, asexual, or preferred not to say), average monthly income (in
Philippine Pesos), working status (yes or no), highest educational attainment (elementary, high
school, college, post-graduate studies, vocational course or did not go to school), relationship status
(single or in a relationship), and type of residence (urban or rural); ° E-value (point estimate); ° E-
value (confidence interval)

A strong positive association between internet use and mental outcomes was

observed across all quartiles of internet usage (see Table 8.3). Our regression analysis

showed that for those in the highest internet use quartile (Quartile 4), the odds of having
82

higher levels of depression were increased by three times (POR: 3.17; 95% CI: 2.54 —
3.94) compared to those who were in the lowest internet use quartile scores (Quartile
1). On the other hand, the odds of having higher levels of anxiety were increased by
four times (POR: 4.05; 95% CI 3.23 — 5.07) for those with high internet use (Quartile
4) compared to those with low internet use (Quartile 1). Lastly, the odds of having
higher levels of stress were increased by five times (POR: 5.22; 95% CI: 4.13 — 6.60)
for those who used the internet heavily (Quartile 4) relative to those with low internet
use (Quartile 1). The E-values for the point estimate and the CI resulting from the
sensitivity analysis of the unmeasured confounding were also summarized in Table 8.3.

Appendix 11.3 shows the STATA output for this estimation.

Table 8.3. Adjusted proportional odds ratio (POR) with a 95% confidence interval

(95% CI) for the association between internet use and mental health outcomes.*

Mental Health Outcomes/ Effect Estimates E-values
| Internet Usage POR (95%CI) p-values Ee? Eci
For Depression
First quartile 1.0
Second quartile 1.46 (1.18 — 1.82) 0.001 1.71 1.39
Third quartile 1.74 (1.39 — 2.17) <0.001 1.97 1.64
Fourth quartile 3.17 (2.54 — 3.94) <0.001 2.96 2.57
For Anxiety
First quartile 1.0
Second quartile 1.76 (1.41 - 2.19) <0.001 1.98 1.66
Third quartile 2.58 (2.06 — 3.23) <0.001 2.59 2.23
Fourth quartile 4.05 (3.23 ~ 5.07) <0.001 3.44 2.99
For Stress
First quartile | 1.0
Second quartile 1.74 (1.39 — 2.19) <0.001 [ 1.97 1.64
Third quartile [ 2.59 (2.04 — 3.28) <0.001 2.60 2.21

83

Mental Health Outcomes/ Effect Estimates E-values
Internet Usage POR (95%CI) p-values Es” Eci
Fourth quartile 5.22 (4.13 — 6.60) | <0.001 4.00 | 3.48

* Effect estimates reported as the risk of having severe/extreme levels of depression, anxiety, and
stress. All the models were adjusted for age, sex at birth (male or female), sexual orientation
(heterosexual, homosexual, bisexual, asexual, or preferred not to say), average monthly income (in
Philippine Pesos), working status (yes or no), highest educational attainment (elementary, high
school, college, post-graduate studies, vocational course or did not go to school), relationship status
(single or in a relationship), and type of residence (urban or rural); > E-value (point estimate); ° E-
value (confidence interval)

A strong positive association between social media use and mental outcomes
was observed across all quartiles of social use (see Table 8.4). Our regression analysis
showed that for those in the highest social media use quartile (Quartile 4), the odds of
having higher levels of depression and anxiety were increased by three times (POR for
depression: 3.89; 95% CI: 3.17 — 4.78, POR for anxiety: 3.69; 95% CI: 3.00 — 4.53)
compared to those who were in the lowest social media use quartile scores (Quartile 1).
On the other hand, the odds of having higher levels of stress were increased by five
times (POR: 5.08; 95% CI: 4.10 — 6.29)) for those who heavily used social media
(Quartile 4) relative to those with low social media use (Quartile 1). The E-values for
the point estimate and the CI resulting from the sensitivity analysis of the unmeasured
confounding were also summarized in Table 8.4. Appendix 11.4 shows the STATA

output for this estimation.

Table 8.4. Adjusted proportional odds ratio (POR) with a 95% confidence interval
(95% Cl) for the association between social media use and mental health outcomes.*

Mental Health Outcomes/ Effect Estimates E-values
Social Media Usage POR (95%CI) p-values Est? Eci
For Depression

First quartile 1.0

Second quartile 1.71 (1.39 — 2.09) <0.001 1.94 1.64

84

Mental Health Outcomes/ Effect Estimates E-values
Social Media Usage POR (95%CI) p-values Est? Eci
Third quartile 2.30 (1.82 — 2.92) <0.001 2.40 2.04
Fourth quartile 3.89 (3.17 — 4.78) <0.001 | 3.36 2.96
For Anxiety
First quartile 1.0
Second quartile 1.62 (1.33 — 1.98) <0.001 1.86 1.57 |
Third quartile 2.27 (1.79 — 2.89) <0.001 2.38 2.01
Fourth quartile 3.69 (3.00 — 4.53) <0.001 3.25 2.86
For Stress
First quartile 1.0
Second quartile | 1.87 (1.52 — 2.31) <0.001 2.08 1.77
Third quartile 2.50 (1.96 — 3.20) <0.001 2.54 2.15
Fourth quartile 5.08 (4.10 - 6.29) <0.001 3.93 3.47

* Effect estimates reported as the risk of having severe/extreme levels of depression, anxiety, and
stress. All the models were adjusted for age, sex at birth (male or female), sexual orientation
(heterosexual, homosexual, bisexual, asexual, or preferred not to say), average monthly income (in
Philippine Pesos), working status (yes or no), highest educational attainment (elementary, high
school, college, post-graduate studies, vocational course or did not go to school), relationship status
(single or in a relationship), and type of residence (urban or rural); » E-value (point estimate); ° E-
value (confidence interval)
Specific Aim 5: To investigate the structural relationships among body image, the
status of skin-lightening practices, and the mental health of Filipino emerging adults
by testing a structural model

Generalized structural equation modeling was done to estimate the relationships
among body image perception, skin-lightening parameters, and mental health status.
See Fig. 3 and 4 for the crude and adjusted models, respectively, and Tables 9.1 and

9.2 for the full details.

85

"$0'0 > anjea-d ye
yUROyIUSIg, ‘TONNUASIP No] [erWoUTg B PaMoT}o} s}onpoid Surua;ySI] ULYs Jo eSpayMouy pur ‘UONNgLASIp 3130] [eMMOUTTNU e PaMoT[oy
asn sjonpoid Sujuaqy31] unys Jo asn yo Aouanbay aq) ‘uounquysip 3130] [euTpIo ue pemo|[oy SurUaq3I Urs Jo UoNdeoseg ‘UoNNgUNSIP
130] [eUIpIo we PomoT[oy s}orysuOD smyeys MIBIq [eJUSW pue UoNdaored a3eun Apog [Ty ‘Ajorxue pue souRjds00e JeUOHe! aAlIsod
are sdnox8 sousijoy ‘smyeis [ey [eUsW pue “(asn jo Aouanbay pue ‘uoydaosed ‘a8pajmouy) soonoeid Zuraayyst] urys ‘uondeoied
adeun Apog Snowe uoHstoosse ay} JO WOEUNYsSa 3130] Japour UoHeNbe [eons paztjesouad Jo soyes Sppo apni aeLeANINY *["p 21nd

eujewog
weajsg Apog
SSANS
Zujewog
weas3 Apog
smeis uondaced | ujewog
uojeseudeg UNBSH [BUN e6ew) Apog weaisg Apog
EI
uonsjeddy
Aaixuy Apog
<<, souridesoy
jeuoney
syuajpai6uy syOnNpoldg
aanoy SIONPold Gujuayy6i7 Guyuayy6yy ups} @ARISOd
Buyuayy6r) UNAS ups 40 88) uo suojdeoied
uo aBpajmouy yo Aouanbely


48

100°0> ¥6'6 sss er 99677 IvIZ'T £S00°7 SSous
100°0> Is" See 16'€ £LOs'I C817 879€'1 uorssaidaq
00'T 00° Apiary
SNjDIS YyvaH jojuap
100'0> IZ'T Ly'l 6ST 9ves'0 9S8€'0 O19¢'0 € wleMog weesq Apog
|__100°0> 9L'01 Ls'9 Iv’8 9SLET €788'T 06717 7 wleulog wseysq Apog
100°0> L9'7E 86'E1 LEI S98b'E SLE9'T 0790°€ [ wrewiog waasq Apog
100°0> SEL So's 609 | _ZS66'L 9819'T 6908'T wonerosiddy Apog
00'I 00'T sourjdeooy JeuonEY eAnisog
uoydarsag asvuy Apog
Sa[qulIwA jUazB'T
punog | punog (ao) punog punog
aoddn aMoT | ONBYSppO | sz9ddQ T2aMOT
SONTBA-d syUIIIYJa0D PPO ILALS: |
(10) 18A19;0] sopeUysy (ID) 18421990]
aauapyuod %S6 pea aauepyuor %S6

“snye}s yy]eoY [BUSOU pue ‘(asn jo Aousnbay pue ‘Uondsoied ‘o¥patMouy) soonovid SurusjySt urys

‘uondaorad o8eun Apog Suoue uoreroosse oy} Jo VOKeUINSe 1130] Jopour UoLENbo jeIMjonYs pozt[esouad Jo Soe SPpo apnio dJeLUeAYIN “1°6 AGEL

88

“S00 > anjea-d ye pomseoyl, ‘WONNGLSIp }190] JeIWIOUIG & paMmojfoy s}onpoid Buru9;q31] UDYs Jo oBpoymouy,
pue ‘connqinsip 1130] [eMOoUNTMU e pamojjog asn syonpod Suruajq3y] UPYs Jo asn Jo Aouanbay op ‘BoNNgiAsIp 1180] [eUTpso ue pomoy[oy Buraajy3I UNys Jo uondaoleg
“GONNGINSIP 130] [eUTPIO UB PaMoTfo} s}orAsUOO snyRIS YIBOY [eUEW puB UONdeoIed oBeuN Apog [Ty ‘AjoIxUE pue souR;dac0e jeUONBI SANIsod ose sdnosd souDI939y

€L7'°0 aul 08°0 orl SIl'0 L@Z‘0- 0860°0 28/ dS Jo Aouenbesy
080°0 vl 68°0 LUI 8s1Z'0 LOZI‘0- ILst'0 Syuarparsut qs uo e8pejmoury
100°0> BUT €0'I al 1991'0 LL20°0 €b77'0 syyoueqg dS Jo uondeoieg
100'0> €9°0 6v'0 950 bb9b'0- UZL'0- LS8S°0- uondsorsg eSewy Apog
Sauorjno Yyyoay] joiuapy
9660 80'T £60 00°T 97L0°0 6ZL0'0- Z000'0- uondesieg edeu] Apog
as dTS fo Couanbasy
100°0> Or'l 0z'1 Ol 68EE'0 e810 $197'0 uondeoieg adewy Apog

Sjuaipas3ui qTS uo aspajmouy

1610 col 06°0 96°0 0120'0 $S01'0- t7H0'0- uondeoreg deur Apog
sitfauaq dT fo uoydarsag

SPUIMIIANSVIM IIIA

punog | punog (ao) punog punog
aoddq, MOT | onsysppo | szeddy DMOT
4Sonyea-d syuatoyja0_ s19jauBleg
(1) reasaquy sayemysy (10) feazapuy

adUaPYWOD %SG paya aouapyuord %S6


68

“$0'0 > ones-d ye yuRoyTUsig,, “(erpout jetoos puke jauI9,UT ‘UOISIAS|9} ‘SolAoW Jo asn YysTY
Jo Mo}) asn eIpaul juorayy-p par “(jem Jo ueqm) souapisas Jo adAy ‘(drysuonejas & UI 10 a]BuIs) sryRs drysaonejes ‘(jooyos 0} OF jou PrP JO asmMoo [eUOHeIOA
‘sorpnys ayenper3-jsod ‘a8o-]09 ‘jooyos yBry ‘Arejuawaja) yuauTUTeHe [eUONONpe yseqTry ‘(ou 10 Saf) smyEIs BuD{JOM ‘(sosag ourddryjryg ur) ewoou! ATUOW
aBeloae ‘(Aes 0} 30U paLazamd Jo Jenxase ‘enxasiq ‘enxasoulog ‘Jenxaso19}9q]) UOHEIUaTO jenxas ‘ode 10} poysn{pe a1oM SayeUTISY “VONNGUYSIp 3130] [erwWoUlg &
PeMoT]oj sionpord Sarua;cSq] UNS Jo espa; mouy pur ‘uoynquysip 1190] [erWOUNTMU e paojjoy asn sjonpoid Zurua;Yysq] UTys Jo asn Jo Aouanbay ayy ‘uoHNGLNSIP
Woy [eurpso ue pomoyjoy FaruajyS1] urys Jo uoNdaoseg ‘vONNgUASIP 1130] [eUIPIo we PaMo][os s}NAsUOO snyejs YA[eOY ]eJUOW pu UoRdedied eBeumt Apog ||¥
“Morxue poe sourjdaose jeunes aanisod ase sdnosB soualajoy ‘snaeis Tpjeey |EUeW pur ‘(asn Jo Aouanbay pue ‘uondaosad ‘oSpajmouy) sooyoesd SuruayqSt]
Upjs ‘uondeosed aSeu Apog Sucure uoHEIDOsse oy] JO VOHLUITSA 1130] Japow LoNENba jemmMoNAs pezteseusd Jo sone sppo paysnipe aeLEAnINY| ‘Z"p 2aNdp

€ ujswiog
waajsg Apog

SS8NS
Zujswog

wee}sq Apog

snes uondesieg | ujewog

uojssaudaq WUB9H 1B]UAW a6ewy kpog waa1s3 Apog
q o uoyepeddy
Aaixuy Apog

sourjdeooy
leuopey
squajpas6u} SJONPOld
annoy sjanpoig Gujusy6y7 Guyjuayy6yy ups SARISOd
Buyuayy6y) US upis 40 as, uo suondeosag
uo eBpajmouy, jo Aouanbeug


06

SPUIWIIAINSBIT JID
1G0'0> 69°6 €I's SOL IIL77 ZS€9'T TES6'1 ssang
100'0> 9E'b 67 6L'E v7Ly'l e16l'l 6IEE'l worssordaq

L 00'T 00°T Aprxuy
yyveaH [ojuayW
100°0> z9°1 Or'l os'I @8b'0 Ir€€'0 Z80b'0 € WleuIog woasq Apog
100°0> SO'ST €€'8 Oz TIL 7 4 4 BsIv'Z 7 WeMIog wse\sq Apog
100'0> ve'bz 80°71 SLI [ O@6I'E 616b'7 61b8'% [ uremog waeisq Apog
T00'0> S8'L oe's sv’9 6090°7 1199'T 7981 aoneroeiddy Apog
00'T 00°T sourjdsooy Teuoney sAuisod __ |
uoydarsag advuy Apog
S3[qQUlIvA 30938]
punog punog »(4O) punog punog
xySonyea | saddq JMOT | ONBYSppO | s9ddQ 1aM0T S}UaTIgJ20D
$19}9WIB1g
ad (1D) Teasezu] sayeuysy QD) reasej0] was)
sauapyuoy %S6 PIyy aoUapyuOy %S6

“sTyR is Yy]eoY [ejUSUL pue ‘(asn yo Aousnbay pure ‘uondasosed ‘e8paymouy) saoyoexd Suruayy3I] urys ‘uoydaosod

a8eun Apog Suowe uoHeIoosse oy} JO UOeUISe y1Z0] [opour UoyEeNbe [emjonys poztfesoues Jo soyel sppo paysnf[pe seUeANMY *7°6 AGEL

16

#0'0 > on[ea-d ye pamseay], JUs!0Yza09 1130] poyenuouodxg, ‘(erpew [BID0s pue YoULO,UT ‘HoIsIAg9} ‘saLAOUI JO asn SIq JO MOT) Asn eIpaUt
quasayZIP Pu ‘([esm 10 Ueqm) aouapisas Jo ad4y ‘(diqsuonejar e ut 10 a[BuIs) smyRIs drysuoNETaL ‘(Jooyos 0} 08 10U PIP JO asmod [eUONEOOA ‘saIprys ayenpesS-jsod ‘aBayjoo
‘Jooqps Wary ‘Areyuouwaja) juowTUTEye jeEMONBONpe ysayIY “(ou 40 sa) sryRs SuDAIOM “(Soseg auIddrryq Ur) ewooUT A[qUOW oBer—IA8 “(Aes 0} JOU powtazoid JO ‘fenxose
‘enxasiq ‘Jenxesowloy ‘Jenxasol9}oq) UONRUSLO [BNxas ‘oBe 10y poysnfpe a1om SayBUNSA “VONNGUSIP 1130] [eIWONIG e paMmoyjos syonposd Surmaq431 urys Jo o8poymouy
Pur ‘uoEnqinsip 130] [erWoULNUI & pemorjoy asn syonposd SuyasyqS1] UT¥s Jo osn Jo Aousnbay o— ‘uoNNguAsIp 1130] [euTpIo Ue posoT[oy Suruay|Sy UPjs Jo uoNdaoreg
“WORNgUISIP 130] [eUTpI0 UE PaMmoT[oy sjorAsUOS snye}s *IBoq [eUIW pue uoNdaosed oBeun Apog [Ty “Ajelxue pue souejdecoe jeuoNw oAnIsod ase sdnosd sousayoy

6zS°0 (ame 08'0 $6'0 Svlt‘o LUC7'0- 1¢S0'0- 98 ATS Jo Aouanbery

08s'0 v1 68'0 So'l 8S1Z'0 LOZI‘0- SLv0'0 Suarpaidul q’1¢ uo a8pajmouy

900°0 stl €0'1 orl 199T'0 LL20°0 6960'0 syyeueq dS Jo uondesieg

100'0> €9'0 6r'0 ss‘0 vb9v'0- LIZL'0- 876S'0- uondeoieg eseuy] Apog
SNIDIS YyNvaH joluay

860 80'1 £60 001 1LL0°0 22L0'0- $700'0 uondeoieg esewy] Apog
asp d7S fo fouanbasy

100'0> Iv'l 071 oer SOve'0 €781°0 v197'0 woydeoieg eeu] Apog
iz | Sjuatpas3ui q TS uo adpajnouy

rse0 €0'1 160 160 1p£0'0 ¥S60'0- 90€0'0- uondaoieg a8ewy Apog

siifauaq dT fo uoydasiag

punog punog «(HO) punog punog

xySonyea | ssddq JMOT | ONBYSppO | s9ddQ 10M0'T syua1syya0—D
al (1D) feasajuy Soyeulysy (1D) Teasayay was

auapyuoD % C6 paya aouapyuoD %S6

S19}IMIVIe


The crude ORs were estimated from the GSEM model without the confounders
(see Fig. 3 and Table 11). For the exogenous variable, Body Image Perception, all
observed constructs were significantly associated with the mental health status of the
respondents in reference to Positive Rational Acceptance. Specifically, for every one-
unit increase in Body Appreciation, the odds of Mental Health Status decrease by a
factor of 6.09 (95% CI: 5.05 - 7.35). Moreover, for every unit increase in Body Esteem
Domains 1, 2, and 3, there were decreased odds of Mental Health Status by factors of
21.37 (95% CI: 13.98 - 32.67), 8.41 (95% CI: 6.57 - 10.76), and 1.59 (95% CI: 1.47 -
1.71), respectively. Similar to the endogenous variable in the crude model, all observed
constructs for the endogenous variable Mental Health Status were significant. For every
one-unit increase in Depression levels, the odds of experiencing mental health issues
increase by a factor of 3.91 (95% CI: 3.38 - 4.51) in relation to Anxiety. Lastly, the
odds of having mental health issues were increased by a factor of 7.43 (95% CI: 5.55 -
9.94) for every unit increase in Stress levels. For the direct effect of Body Image
Perception on Mental Health Status, our adjusted model showed that for every one-unit
increase in Body Image Perception, the odds of experiencing Mental Health issues
decrease by a factor of 0.55 (95% CI: 0.49 - 0.63).

Considering the mediators of skin lighting in the crude model, the effects of
knowledge, perception, and use on mental health and the effects of body image
perception on these skin lighting parameters were also determined. Our model showed
that for every unit increase in Body Image Perception, the odds of knowing SLP
ingredients increased by a factor of 1.30 (95% CI: 1.20 - 1.40). Lastly, for every unit
increase in Perceptions of SLP benefits, the odds of having Mental Health issues

increased by a factor of 1.25 (95% CI: 1.25 1.03 - 1.18). This observation indicated

92

that no mediation effects of indirect effects given that lack of significant associations
of the mediators with both the exposure and the outcome.

Overall, the crude model suggests that Body Image Perception significantly
affects Mental Health, with higher levels of Body Image Perception associated with
lower odds of experiencing Mental Health issues.

After adjusting for confounders, the GSEM model yielded different effect
estimates (Fig. 4 and Table 12). For the exogenous variable, Body Image Perception,
all observed constructs were significantly associated with the mental health status of
the respondents in reference to Positive Rational Acceptance. Specifically, for every
one-unit increase in Body Appreciation, the odds of Mental Health Status decrease by
a factor of 6.45 (95% CI: 5.30 - 7.85). In addition, for every unit increase in Body
Esteem Domains 1, 2, and 3, there were decreased odds of Mental Health Status by a
factor of 17.15 (95% CI: 12.08 - 24.34), 11.20 (95% CI: 8.33 - 15.05), and 1.50 (95%
CI: 1.40 1.62), respectively. Like the exogenous variable, all observed constructs for
the endogenous variable Mental Health Status were significant. For every one-unit
increase in Depression levels, the odds of experiencing mental health issues increase
by a factor of 3.79 (95% CI: 3.29 - 7.05) in relation to Anxiety. Lastly, the odds of
having mental health issues were increased by a factor of 7.05 (95% CI: 5.13 - 9.69)
for every unit increase in Stress levels. For the direct effect of Body Image Perception
on Mental Health Status, for every one-unit increase in Body Image Perception, the
odds of experiencing Mental Health issues decrease by a factor of 0.56 (95% CI: 0.49
- 0.63).

Considering the mediators of skin lighting in the adjusted model, the effects of
knowledge, perception, and use on mental health and the effects of body image

perception on these skin lighting parameters were also determined, taking into account

93

the confounders. Our model showed that for every unit increase in Body Image
Perception, the odds of knowing SLP ingredients increased by a factor of 1.30 (95%
CI: 1.20 - 1.41). In addition, for every unit increase in Perceptions of SLP benefits, the
odds of having Mental Health issues increased by a factor of 1.10 (95% CI: 1.03 -
1.18). Appendix 12 shows the STATA output for estimating the crude and adjusted

GSEM models.

Qualitative Part
Specific Aim 6: To determine the stressors and facilitators among emerging Filipino
adults that modified their mental well-being status as influenced by their body image
perception and skin-lightening practices;

The qualitative part of the study included 16 informants, the characteristics of
whom are shown in Table 10. Pseudonyms were used as substitutes for their real

identities.

Table 10. Characteristics of the informants (n=16).

Informant Code Age (in years) / Age Sex Level of Mental
(Pseudonyms) Group Health Status

IDI 001 23 / Early emerging Male Severe depression

(Angelito) adult

IDI 002 19 / Early emerging Female Extreme depression

(Aida) adult

IDI 003 27/ Late emerging adult | Female Severe depression,

(Brenda) extreme anxiety,
severe stress

IDI 004 22/ Early emerging adult | Female Extreme depression,

(Carla) severe anxiety, severe
stress

94

Informant Code Age (in years) / Age Sex Level of Mental
(Pseudonyms) Group Health Status
IDI 005 24 / Early emerging Female Extreme depression,

(Danica) adult extreme anxiety,

|= stress

IDI 006 25 / Late emerging adult | Female Severe depression,

(Erlinda) extreme anxiety,
extreme stress

IDI 007 19 / Early emerging Female Extreme depression,

(Fe) adult extreme anxiety,
severe stress

IDI 008 20 / Early emerging Female Severe anxiety

(Gloria) adult

IDI 009 24 / Early emerging Female Extreme depression,

(Heidi) adult severe anxiety, severe
stress

IDI 010 26 / Late emerging adult | Male Extreme depression,

(Badong) extreme anxiety,
severe stress

IDI 011 26 / Late emerging adult | Male Severe depression,

(Chris) severe anxiety

11012 19 / Early emerging Male Severe depression,

(Dingdong) adult extreme anxiety,
severe stress

IDI 013 20 / Early emerging Female Extreme depression,

(Intiang) adult extreme anxiety,
severe stress

IDI 014 23 / Early emerging Female Severe depression,

(Joy) adult severe stress

IDI 015 18 / Early emerging Female Extreme depression,

(Kylie) adult severe anxiety

95

Informant Code Age (in years) / Age Sex Level of Mental

(Pseudonyms) Group Health Status
IDI 016 27 / Late emerging adult | Male Extreme depression,
(Eduardo) extreme anxiety,

severe stress

The majority of the informants were females (n=11) and belonged to the early
emerging adults group (18 to 24 years old) (n=11). The levels of depression, anxiety,
and stress were also included in the table above, wherein the majority of them were
observed to have multiple high-level outcomes.

The first part of the qualitative phase concerns body image perception, while

the second part describes skin-lightening practices.

Qualitative Phase: Body Image Perception
Five main themes and subthemes were identified in body image perception.
The table below summarizes the themes and subthemes generated from the

discussion on body image perception.

Table 11. Themes and subthemes for body image perception.

Themes Subthemes

Theme 1: Ideal Body Type e Female body standards

e Large body type

e Skinny ideal body type
Theme 2: Sources of beauty standards e Filipino culture on body image

e Influence of Asian culture on
body image

e Western culture and body image

e Marketing and Body Image

96

Themes

Subthemes

Media use

Social media and body image

Theme 3: Feeling about meeting the
standards

Comparison of body appearance
Fecling towards the current
body type

Fitting the standard body type
Health concern

Pressure to meet the standards
Perception on body image
Reality in meeting the standard
Reasons for wanting to be

thinner or in shape

Theme 4: Effect of body image on Body Image to Depression
well-being Body Image to Stress
Theme 5: Coping with negative Body dysmorphia

reactions towards the body

97

a ee oi

101.004

O- a Ideal body tys
Large Body Type via ee

aie 2 OQ

ID101 11.005, Body Type

Female body
standards

Figure 5. Diagram for the theme: Ideal Body Type

The "Ideal Body Type (Theme 1)" theme emerged from the qualitative data
through a spectrum of perceptions and expectations regarding physical appearance.

The informants shared varied and nuanced views on the ideal body type,
reflecting cultural and personal ideals of beauty and fitness. Carla believed that the ideal
body for women was balanced, not too thin or chubby, and she accepted muscularity as
a positive trait.

“I think for women. Okay. Yeah. For women. Not too thin. Okav. Not

chubby. With muscle is okay.” — Carla, 22 years old.

Gloria described her ideal body type as having a normal BMI, within a specific

range, lighter complexion, clear skin, and a sharp nose. She highlighted the importance

98

of maintaining this without excessive effort, preferring a look that was not oversized or

overweight.
“Like for example, you can see on my Instagram that you should have a
body type that is not too thin or fat like a normal BMI. And that ranges
from 39 to 49, I guess. And then, you have a lighter complexion, clear skin,
and a sharp nose, I guess. You have a sharp nose. [...] Like, not oversized
nor overweight, they can take care of themselves without exhausting too
much.” — Gloria, 20 years old
Badong envisioned the ideal male body as one sculpted through gym training,
with a toned appearance, prominent chest, and biceps. He emphasized the importance
of a well-trained body without it appearing overly muscular.
“The ideal body type is more like trained in the gym. You have a toned

muscle, you have a big chest, you have a big bicep. Basically, a body that
is not too muscular per se but a body that is trained in the gym to do

weightlifting, etc.” - Badong, 26 years old

On the other hand, Danica valued comfort and personal style over conforming
to external expectations. She felt that an ideal woman should dress in a way that makes
her feel comfortable and confident rather than trying to meet societal beauty standards.

“I personally, I think an ideal female looks like, you know, I just think

someone that person should be like me. And her clothes are, you know,

something that she's comfortable wearing, not something that she thinks

other people would like on her. So I think that's something that I would see

in that kind of person.” — Danica, 24 years old

The "Ideal Body Type" theme reveals a complex interplay of cultural, personal,
and societal influences shaping the perceptions of body image among young Filipino
adults. The diverse perspectives highlight the tension between traditional ideals of
beauty and individual expressions of identity and comfort. Carla's appreciation for a

balanced and muscular female physique, Gloria's emphasis on maintaining a normal

BMI and lighter complexion, Badong's preference for a gym-trained male body, and

99

Danica's focus on personal comfort and confidence over societal expectations
underscore the multifaceted nature of body image ideals. These insights underscore the
need for a nuanced understanding of body image perceptions and their implications on
mental health, emphasizing the importance of fostering body positivity and self-
acceptance amidst varying societal pressures.

The theme of "Sources of Beauty Standards (Theme 2; see Figure 6)" explored
the various influences that shape how individuals perceive beauty. These influences
come from both external and internal sources. Figure 6 shows subthemes or child codes,
including social media and body image, the influence of Asian and Western culture,
Filipino culture, and different marketing strategies targeting body image.

Informants shared insights on the sources that shaped their perceptions of ideal
body types. Danica mentioned that social media platforms like Facebook, tabloids, and
magazines played a significant role. She noted that artists and celebrities who
maintained certain body standards set the benchmark for beauty, leading people to
believe that emulating these figures made them attractive.

“Mostly Facebook and also, you know, in tabloids and magazines and, you

know, artists who tend to make their bodies like that. [...] It kind of becomes

the standard because they think that if you look like this artist or this, you

know, celebrity, then you are pretty as well.” — Danica, 24 years old

Brenda echoed similar sentiments, emphasizing that television, billboards, and
social media showcased celebrities as the epitome of attractiveness. She observed that
society often based its beauty ideals on the images of attractive Filipinas, Asians, and
Westerners frequently portrayed in the media. These platforms collectively influenced
the public's perception of what

“TV or billboards, social media, the celebrities that we typically say to be...

The best example of an attractive Filipina or attractive Asian, or attractive

Westerner. It seems like we base our ideas usually through the people we see
in general media.” — Brenda, 27 years old

100

These platforms reinforce a standard of beauty, which many aspire to resemble,
believing that resembling these figures equates to attractiveness. In addition, social
media also plays a significant role in shaping beauty standards, with the portrayal of
idealized beauty leading to harmful comparisons and judgments. This is particularly
prevalent in the Philippines, where critiques of physical appearance, especially on body
weight, size, and shape, are common, even among relatives.

Informants provided perspectives on the influence of Korean pop culture on
body image standards in Asia. Heidi observed that K-pop idols, who often have fair
skin and slim bodies, set a beauty standard that many young girls aspired to. She noted
that these young girls believed thinness equated to beauty, leading them to undertake
extreme dieting measures that could severely impact their health. Heidi emphasized the
negative health effects of such practices as individuals strived to emulate these idols.

“I see K-pop. Korean pop culture, they're all white. In terms of body size.

Body size. They're also thin. Thin. Young girls thinking that they're pretty

because they're thin. So they'll go on diets, diet meals, which can actually

have really, really negative effects on the health of an individual. So people
tend to aspire to these K-pop idols, and then tend to do excessive things in
order for them to achieve this body type.” — Heidi, 24 years old

Dingdong, on the other hand, reinforced this view by stating that the body
standards prevalent in the K-pop industry had become the benchmark for beauty in
Asia. He highlighted how the physique of K-pop idols was often seen as the pinnacle
of attractiveness, influencing societal standards and expectations.

“I don't know, in Asia, usually, if we compare it to the current standard of

Asia, K-pop, the body of the Korean pop industry, that became the standard

of the top.” — Dingdong, 19 years old

This widespread admiration for K-pop idols' body types led to a collective

aspiration among people to conform to these ideals. These cultural phenomena

101

contribute to shaping beauty standards, with its predominantly thin and Caucasian-
inspired aesthetic influencing young individuals to pursue extreme measures to achieve
similar body types despite the potential detrimental effects on their health. These
insights underscore the multifaceted nature of beauty standards, shaped by a complex
interplay of media representation, cultural norms, and interpersonal interactions,
ultimately distorting individuals' perceptions of themselves.

Moreover, Badong, a 26-year-old, highlighted the significant influence of social
media on body image, noting that it was a major factor shaping perceptions. He also
mentioned that his observations in his local environment, particularly the prevalence of
gyms around his residence, contributed to his views on ideal body standards.

First is the social media. That's a big factor. Second thing is what I observed

around my workplace or at home. Not at home but in the place where I

currently live in because there's a lot of gyms around the area.” — Badong,

26 years old

Erlinda added that comments from people in her immediate social circle,
especially relatives, substantially impacted her body image, more so than social media
comments.

“I think comments from other people. Comments from other people, like real

people, not on social media. Yes, yes, like real people, people who really

know you, people, for example, especially your relatives.” — Erlinda, 25

years old

Kylie remarked on the blunt nature of Filipinos in judging appearances,
particularly on social media, where harmful comments were often disguised as jokes.
She also mentioned how Western romance novels, which typically portrayed women
with blonde hair, blue eyes, and tall, slender figures, influenced her perception of

beauty and love, making her feel that true love was unattainable.

102

“Well, it's obvious how Filipinos are very blatant in judging looks, especially
on social media. And they use the excuse of it's just a joke, but it's actually
really harmful.” — Kylie, 18 years old

“I love good romance books. And they typically portray women with blonde

hair and blue eyes. [...] And on the sexy side, the tall ones. [...] Well, now I
think that I can't really find true love. — Kylie, 18 years old

Heidi also shared a personal experience where her sister's comments about her
weight had affected her self-esteem. Despite being thin herself at the time, she was
called fat and told to change her eating habits.

“Here in the Philippines, I got a message from my sister; she's a bit thin

because I was before. So they told me, you're fat, you eat this and that.” -

Heidi, 24 years old

These narratives underscore the societal pressures and critical comments that can
shape body image perceptions in the Philippines. These insights collectively illustrate
the powerful role of social media, familial comments, cultural standards, and literature

in shaping individuals' perceptions of body image and beauty.

103

Filipino cutture
‘on body image
Marketing and DI 005
Body Image a 5
Influence of
Asian culture on
101 010 C2 body image

_ sures of —"
beauty standards

Social Media and
O- / | Body Image

Media Use |
and body image affecting body

IDI 009 mage

Figure 6. Diagram for the theme: Sources of beauty standards.

Another theme from the interviews is the “Feeling about meeting the standards
(Theme 3).” This theme was identified from a series of codes, including comparison of
body appearance, feeling towards the current body type, fitting the standard body type,
Health concerns, pressure about meeting the standards, perception on body image,
reality in meeting the standard, and reasons for wanting to be thinner or in shape (See

Fig. 7.1).

104

(a) Health concerns

11012 and body image Fitting the

ae I fl = ©
Reality in

—
101 003 ae Reasons for
et anting to be
= oes) thinner ein
ipjoa2’ (D113

(2

IDI 009

IDio1t
Comparison of
body
appearance

Praseure about Feelings
‘meeting the body towards current
typo standards body type

Figure 7.1. Diagram for the theme: Feeling about meeting the standard.

The theme "Feeling about meeting the standards" highlighted individuals'
various perspectives and emotions regarding beauty norms in Philippine society. While
some individuals prioritized self-acceptance and highlighted the significance of
personal satisfaction over conforming to external standards, others desired to match
idealized body images. For instance, Angelito emphasized the importance of self-
perception over societal standards, stating that, ultimately, what one thinks of oneself
is what truly matters. This perspective suggests a strong sense of self-worth and

individualism.

105

“Right now, it does not matter (conforming to the standard). Because at the

end of the day, what you think of yourself is the only thing that matters.” —

Angelito, 23 years old

In contrast, Badong, a 26-year-old, admitted that he desired to achieve the ideal
body image, indicating an internal conflict between personal aspirations and external
pressures. He acknowledged a desire to align with these ideals, reflecting common
struggles in reconciling personal goals with societal expectations.

“[Interviewer] You hate your body. So, would you like to meet this ideal

body type, or do you want to achieve this ideal body image? Why or why

not?

[Informant] I guess for me, I would like to achieve that. Okay.” — Badong,

26 years old

Chris, however, took a more health-oriented view. He believed that conforming
to certain standards might be necessary for overall health but confessed that he did not
feel he met these societal ideals personally. This highlights a pragmatic approach,
where health considerations precede purely aesthetic goals.

“Maybe when it is related to your overall health, it may be a concern. You

need to conform to the standards. But personally, I do not think I met the

standard.” — Chris, 26 years old

Dingdong, at 19 years old, expressed contentment with his current body and no
desire to change it to meet beauty standards. He emphasized that any changes he would
consider making would be for his satisfaction, not to please others. This perspective
underscores a sense of self-acceptance and confidence in one's body.

No, I have no plans (pertaining to meeting beauty standards). Because I'm

contented with my body. If I have plans, it's for myself, not to please other

people.” — Dingdong, 19 years old

Eduardo, on the other hand, articulated a personal standard of wanting to look in

the mirror and be pleased with his reflection. This indicates a desire for self-satisfaction

106

and personal approval rather than seeking validation from others. He aspired to meet
his own beauty standards, reflecting an individualized approach to body image.
“I mean, at least on my standard. I would. I would like to see myself. I'd like
to look in the mirror and like what I'm seeing.” — Eduardo, 27 years old
Collectively, these quotes illustrate a spectrum of attitudes toward body image
and societal standards, ranging from self-acceptance and individualism to the desire for
conformity and improvement. Each perspective adds depth to the understanding of how
different individuals navigate the complex landscape of body image in relation to
societal expectations.
The subtheme of "Comparison of Body Appearance" revealed the pervasive
influence of social media and peer interactions on individuals' body image. Chris,
a 26-year-old, reflected on how frequently scrolling through social media led him
to compare his body type with others. While he acknowledged that these
comparisons influenced him, he insisted they did not significantly affect his mental
state. This could be attributed to a strong sense of self or other coping mechanisms
that mitigate the impact of external comparisons.
“But it seems that when I really scrolled, I often compared my body type to
some people. [...]. Maybe the standards affect me but not more on the mental
state.” — Chris, 26 years old
Angelito, at 23, admitted that he could not help but compare his appearance
to those of friends and people on social media. When faced with feelings of
jealousy, he experienced a mental tug-of-war. On the one hand, he felt motivated
to improve himself by starting a calorie deficit or going to the gym; on the other,
he struggled with maintaining consistency in these efforts. This ambivalence could
stem from the high standards set by social media influencers and the unrealistic

portrayals of body types that often seem unattainable.
107

[Interviewer] So, do you compare your appearance or your body image to that
of your friends or on social media?

[Informant] Definitely. I can't help but compare myself.

[Interviewer] So what do you do when you compare and see something that
makes you feel jealous?

[Informant] Actually I don't do much; physically I don't really do anything
else. But mentally, it's like I'm jealous, but at the same time, I'm motivated that
I should. It's like this is the sign to do a calorie deficit or go to the gym. Or, at
the end of the day, it doesn't seem like it's going according to schedule. —
Angelito, 23 years old

Gloria, a 20-year-old, shared that she often compared herself with her friends,

feeling envious of their petite figures. She expressed frustration with her own

thinness, particularly the visibility of her bones, which made her feel undeserving

of her body shape. Her feelings of inadequacy may be amplified by societal

pressures and beauty standards that glorify certain body types while stigmatizing

others. This internal conflict reveals the powerful impact of societal expectations

on individual self-esteem and body image.

“Mostly, I compare myself with my friends. [...] Like, I was once jealous of my,
what, my block mate back then. They are petite. Because it's me, that my hand is
thin, I can see the bones in my hand. Like, Lord, I don't deserve to be this thin.
[...J.” - Gloria, 20 years old

These insights highlight the complex interplay between social media, peer

comparisons, and personal body image. The pervasive influence of social media creates

a platform for constant comparison, often leading to mixed emotions of jealousy,

motivation, and frustration. The unrealistic standards portrayed can have significant

implications for mental health, driving individuals to engage in behaviors aimed at

achieving these ideals, often with inconsistent results. The narratives of Chris,

Angelito, and Gloria collectively illustrate how deeply ingrained and challenging it is

to navigate body image in the age of social media. These narratives underscored the

108

pervasive nature of body comparisons within the social sphere and shed light on the

multifaceted emotional responses they elicited among informants (see Figure 7.2).

Feeling about
meeting the
(=) standards DI 008
1D1 003 eee
_S
aan 11001
He — 4
<— Comparison of

body

arance
STE J appe: ji _—<

IDI.014

Figure 7.2. Diagram for the subtheme: Comparison of body appearance.

The subtheme of "Feeling Towards Current Body Type" delves into how
individuals perceive their bodies, often influenced by health and aesthetic concerns.
Brenda, a 27-year-old, expressed fluctuating feelings about her body, noting that while
she sometimes felt okay, her primary focus was on health rather than physical
attractiveness. This shift from aesthetics to health could be due to a growing awareness
of the importance of wellness over appearance.

It's more like the aesthetic is good and okay, but it does not fit my body type

[which is?]. Some days, I feel okay; some days, I do not. But for me, it is more
of a health concern rather than physical attractiveness.” - Brenda, 27 years old.

109

Angelito, at 23, felt somewhat satisfied with his current body but aspired to future
improvements. This indicates a balance between contentment and the desire for
enhanced health and fitness, reflecting societal pressures to constantly improve oneself.

“Right now, I can feel that it [pertaining to his body] is a bit okay, but I want to

see improvement in the future as well.” — Angelito, 23 years old

Carla, 22, shared that she previously conformed to beauty standards but now
prioritizes health. Her motivation to become thinner is driven by medical concerns
rather than societal expectations, highlighting a shift from external validation to internal
well-being. This change could be attributed to a broader societal trend towards health
consciousness and the de-emphasis on purely aesthetic goals.

“I used to conform before, and I still want to conform now, but not because of

the beauty standards, but because of health concerns. [...] I have medical or

health concerns. That is the main reason I want to get thinner and not for beauty
standards per se.” — Carla, 22 years old

These perspectives illustrate a common theme of prioritizing health over beauty
standards, showcasing a more holistic approach to body image and self-care. The
narratives reveal a journey from external conformity to internal motivation, driven by

personal health goals and a growing recognition of the importance of well-being over

appearance. See Figure 7.3 for the diagram of this subtheme.

110

io1o10

11 008

Figure 7.3. Diagram for the subtheme: Feeling towards current body type.

The subtheme "Fitting the Standard Body Type" reveals how societal beauty
standards impact individuals' self-perception. Brenda, discussed with friends,
including a dermatologist, the pressure to meet certain beauty ideals. Despite their
involvement in the aesthetics industry, none of them felt they fit the stereotypical
image of an attractive Filipina. This reflects the unrealistic and narrow definitions
of beauty perpetuated by media and societal expectations.

“[...] I do have a friend who works in the aesthetics industry. She is a

dermatologist. And only recently did we actually discuss the meeting, the whole

idea of there being a standard where we need to meet, like that. Because we, as

a group of friends, seem like I don't think that any of us particularly fits the cliche

standard of an attractive Filipina.” - Brenda, 27 years old

Aida echoed similar sentiments, admitting that although she didn't consider

herself fat, she didn't feel beautiful compared to others. This indicates how societal

lll

standards can create feelings of inadequacy and low self-esteem. The pervasive

influence of media, cultural norms, and peer comparison often fosters unrealistic

expectations, making many feel they fall short of these ideals.

“I'm not fat, but I don't think I'm beautiful compared to others. I feel like I don't
{fit these standards in terms of body appearance.” — Aida, 19 years old

These quotes underscore the emotional and psychological toll of striving to meet

societal beauty standards, highlighting the gap between individual self-perception

and external expectations. The results reveal the complex interplay between personal

identity and societal pressures, illustrating the broader impact on mental health and

self-worth. See Figure 7.4 for the diagram.

ia i)
~~ 7

— Fitting the -—

er standard body
type
Feeling about
meeting the
standards
IDI 004

IDI 007

Figure 7.4. Diagram for the subtheme: Fitting the standard body type.

112

The subtheme "Perception on Body Image" explores the impact of societal
and social media influences on individuals' self-perception. Erlinda, observed that
photos with high engagement on social media led her to aspire to similar body types.
This reflects social media's significant role in shaping body image ideals, where
validation through likes and views can drive personal aspirations and influence self-
worth.

“I think something similar that since I see that these kinds of photos get a great

number of views, I tend to aspire to have something similar.” — Erlinda, 25

years old

Carla, 22, recounted her personal struggle with bulimia and the societal
preference for thinner bodies. She noticed that she received more favorable attention
when she was thinner, reinforcing her desire to conform to these beauty standards.
Carla's experience highlights the detrimental effects of societal pressures, where
external approval can lead to unhealthy behaviors and persistent challenges in
balancing self-acceptance with societal expectations.

I had personal encounters with weight because I was bulimic before, and a lot

more people favored me when I was thinner. I used to conform before, and I
still want to conform now.” - Carla, 22 years old

These narratives illustrate how deeply entrenched societal and media influences are
in shaping body image. These accounts highlighted body image perception's
multifaceted nature, influenced by external factors such as media and internal struggles
with self-acceptance. Pursuing validation and acceptance through conforming to
unrealistic beauty standards can lead to significant emotional and physical health
challenges. These stories underscore the need for a more inclusive and diverse
representation of beauty to mitigate the adverse effects of such pressures on individual

well-being. See figure below for the diagram.
113

101011
|
|_— conifer)
Renn IDI 004
erception on
al body image

Feeling about

meeting the

standards

IDI 006

Figure 7.5. Diagram for the subtheme: Perception on body image.

The subtheme "Pressure About Meeting the Body Type" highlights individuals'
significant societal pressures to conform to ideal body standards. Carla, 22, described
the pressure as a perfect 10 out of 10, illustrating the overwhelming impact of societal
expectations on her self-esteem and mental health. Gloria, 20, shared a personal
anecdote about crying when her rebonded hair curled back, showing how even minor
deviations from beauty standards can cause severe emotional distress. This underscores
how rigid beauty standards may affect one's self-image and emotional well-being.

Interviewer] Do you feel pressure to meet the standards?
[Informant] Oh, of course. Yes. On a scale of 1 to 10, 10. — Carla, 22 years old

“There was one time when my hair just got rebonded. Then it curled again.
It's like my hair is slanted again. And I really cried a lot.” — Gloria, 20 years
old

114

Angelito, on the other hand, expressed feeling pressured when shopping for
clothes, as many styles seemed designed exclusively for thinner bodies. This reflects
how the fashion industry's standards contribute to feelings of inadequacy among those
who do not fit the typical mold, perpetuating a narrow definition of beauty. Chris, 26,
admitted to feeling pressured but often felt a sense of futility, believing he could not
achieve the ideal standard. He described this as feeling "delusional," highlighting the
mental struggle and resignation many experiences when faced with unattainable
beauty ideals.

“Yes, right now, there is still pressure. Because let's see about the clothes
when you try on clothes, there are clothes that are only suitable for thin
people or something that looks good or is suitable to look at.” — Angelito, 23
years old

“Ah, sometimes I feel pressured. But when I know that I can't achieve the
standard, I tell myself that I really can't do it. But the “cannot do it” is more
prevailing because I feel like I'm delusional.” — Chris, 26 years old

These narratives reveal the profound impact of societal and cultural pressures on
individuals' self-esteem and mental health. The constant exposure to idealized body
images in media, fashion, and beauty industries creates a relentless pursuit of
perfection, creating pressure. This pursuit often leads to emotional distress,
dissatisfaction, and a pervasive sense of inadequacy among those who do not meet
these unrealistic standards. The quotes underscore the need for broader acceptance and

representation of diverse body types to alleviate the pressure and promote healthier

self-perception and mental well-being (see Figure 7.6).

115

eS

‘rors

iA e

Tororo oe
‘ores Pressure about ~

2

<—

“XS

baad [=) mT

e [2

Figure 7.6. Diagram for the subtheme: Pressure about meeting the body type

standards.

The subtheme "Reality in Meeting the Standards" explores individuals' practical
challenges and considerations when conforming to societal body ideals. Danica, 24,
found it difficult to achieve these standards due to her slow metabolism and lack of
resources, highlighting the disparity between average individuals and celebrities with
access to extensive support systems. Brenda, 27, observed that while people strive to
meet these standards, there is growing awareness of the effort and sacrifices involved.

“My metabolism is very low. So it's hard for me to do that. And I don't have
enough resources to do what the celebrities do with their bodies”. — Danica, 24

years old

“Yes. Before. But now, it seems more like we are aware that other people are
striving to achieve that standard.” — Brenda, 27 years old

116

Carla, 22, acknowledged that while achieving these standards might be feasible for
some, it is not necessarily healthy or appropriate. She pointed out that individual body
compositions often don't align with popular ideals, emphasizing the unrealistic nature
of such expectations. This suggests that societal standards often disregard the natural
diversity of body types.

“T think it is realistic, but it's not necessarily correct. Sometimes, it's hard

because your body composition doesn't necessarily, what do you call this,

conform to what's popular right now.” — Carla, 22 years old

Moreover, Intiang believed that meeting body standards was possible with
determination and resources but emphasized that it should not be an obligation for
everyone. This perspective highlights the importance of personal choice and the
potential harm of imposing uniform standards on all individuals, recognizing that not
everyone has the same capabilities or priorities.

“Realistically speaking, if the person really wants to and is determined to meet

that body standard, then yes, it is possible, and I think it is realistic. But I don't

think everyone should be obligated to meet it.” —Intiang, 20 years old

Badong, 26, noted that while some might realistically achieve these standards,
extreme measures, such as plastic surgery, make the pursuit unrealistic and potentially
harmful. He pointed out that achieving the ideal body type often involves significant
interventions that are not accessible or desirable for everyone. This underscores the
unrealistic nature of these ideals for the average person and the extremes people might
go to conform to societal expectations.

“[Interviewer] So, do you think achieving this ideal body standard is realistic?

[Informant] To some, yes. But for me, if you're going to take it to the extreme

level, then that's too unrealistic. Even people undergo surgery to achieve those
ideal body type they want, like plastic surgery.” - Badong, 26 years old

117

These quotes collectively illustrate the complexity of achieving societal body
standards, emphasizing the disparity between idealized images and the realities of
individual circumstances, health considerations, and personal choices. The narratives
reveal the pressures and challenges involved, advocating for a more inclusive and
realistic approach to body image that respects individual differences and promotes

health and well-being over unrealistic ideals. See the figure below for the diagram.

al

1D1 008

=)

(a =
ete

standards
101007

101 002

Figure 7.7. Diagram for the subtheme: Reality in meeting the standards.

The subtheme "Reasons for Wanting to Be Thinner or in Shape" highlights the

various motivations behind individuals' desires to achieve a certain body type. Danica,

cited her medical condition, a hormonal imbalance, which made it difficult for her to

118

stay in shape despite her efforts. This emphasizes health-related challenges as a reason
for wanting to be thinner.

“But if you're a regular person, and especially like me, I have a medical

condition. I have a hormonal imbalance. So it's really hard for me to stay in shape

even if I don't eat a lot.” — Danica, 24 years old.

Carla, 22, mentioned two main reasons: attracting love intcrests and fitting into
fashionable clothing. She observed that thinner individuals are often more favored
romautically, reflecting societal preferences that influence personal relationships.
Additionally, the fashion industry frequently designs clothes for slimmer figures,
pressuring individuals to conform to these standards to enjoy trendy styles.

“I can see two reasons why. The first one is because of love interests. And since

the thinner ones are generally more favored, that's what men seek. Okay. And

then the second reason is the clothing we buy.” — Carla, 22 years old.

Badong, 26, expressed his desire to be physically fit to fit in socially and Icad a
healthier lifestyle. He noted that gym attendance and physical fitness are commonly
associated with healthy living, indicating that societal perceptions link physical
appearance with overall health. This reflects the broader narrative that equates fitness
with well-being, driving individuals to pursue these physical goals for social acceptance
and perceived health benefits.

“Just to be fit in. Just to fit in. And also to have a healthy living. So that's

another thing. Because some people say, for example, if you do gym to be

physically fit, it connotates to a healthy living.” — Badong, 26 years old

These quotes reveal multiple reasons for wanting to be thinner: health challenges,
societal and romantic pressures, fashion trends, social acceptance, and the pursuit of a
healthier lifestyle. Health conditions, such as Danica’s hormonal imbalance, can
significantly impact weight management, making the desire to be thinner a matter of

medical necessity. Societal and romantic pressures play a crucial role, as Carla's

119

experiences indicate that thinner individuals are often perceived as more attractive,
affecting personal relationships and social status. The fashion industry’s tendency to
design clothes for slimmer figures further perpetuates these standards. Additionally,
social acceptance and health perceptions, as highlighted by Badong, demonstrate how
societal narratives equate physical fitness with overall health, driving individuals to
pursue these goals for social and health-related reasons. This complex interplay of
factors illustrates how deeply cultural and social influences impact body image and

personal well-being. See Figure 7.8 for the diagram.

Oe

meeting the

noe

Reasons for

ee eaniing to IDI 004
thinner or in

iy, 101006
ft) abe

{D1 007

Figure 7.8. Diagram for the subtheme: Reasons for wanting to be thinner or in shape.

120

Theme 1: Ideal body type, Theme 2: Sources of beauty standards, and Theme
3: Feeling about meeting the standards is essential to each of the informants’ mental
well-being. The next theme is Theme 4: Effect of body image on well-being. It has two
child codes or subthemes: Body Image to Depression and Body Image to Stress. Most
informants mentioned that their perceived body image made their well-being worse.
The effect of body image on well-being (see Figure 8) was a prominent theme

that emerged from the informants' experiences. The influence of societal beauty
standards on individuals' perceptions of themselves was apparent through various
narratives, which further affected their emotional and mental states. Aida expressed
how external validation of beauty significantly affected their happiness to the point of
withdrawing from social activities when faced with negative comments about their
appearance.

“Yes. I feel like I'm more satisfied and happy if I'm beautiful in other people's

eyes. It depends, but sometimes he has a big effect. Before, if I was told that I

was fat, like that, I lost my will to leave the house and stay in the room. I feel

like I'm sad.” — Aida, 19 years old

Badong, 26, shared that his pursuit of an ideal body image led him to buy various
products, resulting in negative physical, mental, and financial impacts. He experienced
significant pressure, depression, anxiety, and body dysmorphia. This highlights how
deeply ingrained societal standards can affect an individual's overall health. This
sentiment was echoed by another informant. Angelito, 23, described engaging in
unhealthy behaviors to control his weight, such as starving himself or feeling guilt and
regret after eating. He often held back from eating or planned to compensate for
perceived overeating by skipping meals the next day. This behavior reflects the extreme
measures individuals might take to meet societal expectations, leading to unhealthy

eating patterns and psychological distress.

121

“It affects me in such a way that I tend to buy products that just supplement, for
example, just to achieve this body image. So, it impacted me negatively, not just
physically or mentally, but also financially. In terms of mental well-being, it
puts too much pressure. I was experiencing depression and anxiety before
because of having this kind of body. So I have a body dysmorphia.”

— Badong, 26 years old

“So because of that, it's like I'm doing unhealthy ways to starve myself, or it's

like there's pretending that I want to fry and eat it like you're holding yourself

back, oh shit, I ate a lot for today, so it's like, I should eat tomorrow or next

time when feel that I am not too fat. Because I have that feeling, I'm not sure if

it's just me. There are times when I eat or feel like I'm too heavy for today,

that's it.” — Angelito, 23 years old

The emotional toll was palpable as Gloria recounted experiencing sleepless nights
and anxiety attacks directly linked to their body image struggles. The role of social
media in perpetuating unrealistic beauty standards was highlighted by Badong, who

reflected on the distortion of mental health in the pursuit of these ideals.

“I have a sleepless night. There was a time when I had an anxiety attack.” —
Gloria, 20 years old

“So it distorts my mental health just to achieve if I'm going to achieve that kind

of body standard that is being advertised online or what you see on the social

media.” - Badong, 26 years old

Despite attempts to maintain a positive outlook, as expressed by Angelito, the
pervasive stress and occasional sadness underscored the ongoing struggle with body
image. However, Intiang offered a glimmer of hope, indicating a shift towards a more
neutral perspective on their body over time, influenced by a change in environment and
reduced exposure to negative comments.

“Tfeel the stress po, but not to the point of feeling depression, more on the stress
side. And sometimes I feel sad.” - Angelito, 23 years old

“And then, during that time, it was more negative. But that's because of the

people I was surrounded with and the comments I heard. Those really
influenced my behavior or my image of my body. But years later, my perspective

122

on my body is more neutral. There's no more fat shaming, and there's less

judgment about how a person looks.” — Intiang, 20 years old

Nonetheless, the lingering impact of past experiences was evident, as described by
Eduardo, who reflected on persistent anxiety surrounding body exposure, even in
intimate moments.

“It's like I think more on anxiety. I can't say anxiety because I haven't been

diagnosed yet. But it really stressed me out before taking off my shirt. Even in

the sexy times. In sexy times. So, it made me more anxious before.” — Eduardo,

27 years old

These narratives depicted the intricate relationship between body image and well-

being, showcasing the enduring struggle to reconcile societal standards with individual

self-perception.
Trove
Toror i DToee
r
(=) >. WW ye (=)
Se
101.013 = ee Image to
ees Se depression
well ro —([
Toro06
[>

‘Or (=)

1Dro0s

Figure 8. Diagram for the theme: Effect of body image on well-being.

123

Because body image affects the informants' well-being, they used various
coping mechanisms to help them deal with negative reactions toward their bodies. The
theme of "coping with negative reactions towards the body" is explored through various
strategies individuals use to manage their self-perception and societal pressures. To
cope with negative reactions towards their bodies, individuals employed various
strategies including physical exercise, healthier eating, self-affirmations, and seeking
inspiration from diverse body-positive influencers. They also used mental diversions
and internal dialogues to shift focus away from societal pressures and cultivate a more
positive self-perception. Brenda found coping mechanisms to be exhausting, feeling
the need to exert extra effort to compensate for her appearance. This reflects the
pervasive societal pressure to meet certain beauty standards, which can lead to mental
and physical fatigue.

“Coping mechanisms (no specific mention of the type of mechanism) are very
tiring. Because you exert double effort. It's like, yeah, I think I have to put in that
effort to compensate for my looks.” — Brenda, 27 years old
Aida coped by diverting her attention to other topics and avoiding self-reflection,
which helped reduce her sadness and feelings of inadequacy. This avoidance strategy
suggests that focusing on external activities temporarily alleviates negative self-
perception.
“Like divert my attention to other topics and not think about myself. It's like I
tend to avoid it and then project it onto something else. My sadness or loss of
will is reduced.” — Aida, 19 years old
On the other hand, Angelito relied on self-motivation and self-approval, constantly
reminding himself that inner qualities were more important than physical appearance.
His approach highlights the importance of cultivating a positive internal dialogue to

counteract external pressures.

124

“I am just so self-motivated, like I have self-approval. It's the same thing that I

keep telling myself: You look beautiful, or the people you see on social media

seem to have their beauty. It doesn't seem like what matters physically or what

matters is the personality or what's inside.” — Angelito, 23 years old

Danica, 24, found inspiration in curvy celebrities who promoted different beauty
standards. By following their tips and observing their confidence, she gained
encouragement to accept her body. This indicates the positive impact of diverse
representations of beauty in media, which can help individuals feel more confident and
accepted.

“I started following celebrities who are making a different beauty standard, and

they're just curvy girls or those who are not that skinny, but they're still very

confident in themselves. So I try to do the tips they give, and I also like looking at

them like, why are they so confident given their body? So that helps me. Okay, so

these are what you call the influencers on social media, right? Yeah, yeah.” —

Danica, 24 years old

Carla used physical exercise and healthier eating as coping strategies, budgeting
her allowance to afford better food options. She felt generally better when she resumed
physical activity and stopped using pills, underscoring the benefits of a healthy lifestyle
on mental well-being. Moreover, Erlinda, 25, combined physical exercises with self-
affirmations, focusing on internal rather than external attributes. This reflects a holistic
approach to body image, where both physical and mental strategies are employed to
improve self-perception.

“I exercise, and yes, I budget my allowance so I can afford healthier food

options. And how do these strategies help you? Actually, when I started

exercising again, I felt better in general. Also, when I stopped using pills, I felt

better altogether.” - Carla, 22 years old

“Well, I try to do some physical exercises and then give myself affirmations. But

I've noticed that the affirmations are more internal, like not exactly about the
body image. So that's one of the coping strategies I do.” — Erlinda, 25 years old

125

Angelito also mentioned how early exposure to hookup culture (hookup culture: a
social environment that accepts and encourages casual sexual encounters without the
expectation of a committed relationship) and the influence of K-pop exacerbated his
body dysmorphia, leading to extreme measures like skipping meals. This highlights the
detrimental impact of certain cultural influences on body image and eating behaviors.

“Because I was introduced to hookup culture early. But I had a lot of body

dysmorphia at that time, to the point that I couldn't seem to eat at lunch to satisfy

the maintaining calories. But it's not just about hookup culture. That's also a

factor in K-pop.” — Angelito, 23 years old

Badong, on one hand, struggled with depression and anxiety due to body
dysmorphia, initially resorting to dieting, controlling food intake, and rigorous gym
routines. However, he eventually realized that these actions were self-destructive,
recognizing the excessive pressure he placed on himself. This demonstrates the
importance of self-awareness in developing healthier coping mechanisms.

“I was experiencing depression and anxicty before because of having this kind
of body. So, I have a body dysmorphia. So, that greatly affects my mental health.

I tend to start dieting, controlling my food intake, and hitting the gym. But at the

end of the day, I realized what I was doing and why I was doing this. I'm just

giving myself too much pressure, and I'm hurting myself hitting

the gym and all.” -Badong, 26 years old

These stories showed how emerging adults cope with negative reactions towards
their bodies, demonstrating resilience and adaptive strategies in the face of criticism
and personal battles. They highlight the importance of finding healthy and sustainable
ways to cope with societal pressures and negative self-perception. Figure 9 shows the

diagram for Theme 5: Coping with negative reactions toward the body. This theme has

a subtheme called Body Dysmorphia.

126

as eee

101 093 IDI 012

iz x / i a)

1D1005 reactions

a =< ft)

‘a

ID1013

Body
dysmorphia

ID1 010

11.009

Figure 9. Diagram for the theme: Coping with negative reactions towards the body.

Qualitative Phase: Skin-Lightening Practices
Like body image perception, five main themes were identified in the discussion
of skin-lightening practices. The table below summarizes the themes and subthemes

identified.

Table 12. Themes and subthemes for skin-lightening practices.

Themes | Subthemes
Theme 1: Being white as standard for ¢ Colonization and skin color
skin color © Comparison of skin color or tone

127

Themes Subthemes

e Discrimination in terms of skin
color
© Perception of skin tone or color

e Pressure about meeting skin

color standards.
Theme 2: Influential factors on skin- e K-pop culture
lightening practices e Movies

e Social Media

e Television

Theme 3: Filipino culture on skin e Family members
lightening e Peer pressure

Theme 4: Meeting skin color e Budget for skin whitening
standards products

e Marketing strategies

© Meeting standards of being
white or fair colored

e Reasons for buying SLP

e Skin lightening products and

Tegimen
Theme 5: Effect of Skin Color on [le Body image and skin lightening
Well-Being ¢ Coping with negative reactions

towards skin color

The first theme identified was “Being white as standard for skin color.” Most
informants mentioned that being white or having fairly colored skin is the “standard”
set by society. This theme has subthemes: colonization and skin color, comparison of
skin color or tone, discrimination in skin color, perception of skin tone or color, and

pressure about meeting skin color standards. These subthemes were identified as

128

contributing factors to their perception of the “standard” skin tone set, as prevalent in
the Philippine setting.

For this theme, the pervasive influence of white as the standard skin color was
evident in the narratives shared by the informants, reflecting an ingrained societal
preference shaped by historical and colonial legacies. Fe highlighted how the
idealization of white skin was deeply entrenched in countries like the Philippines.

“The skin color that still depends on the country. In the country. Example in the

Philippines? For us in the Philippines, it's really white.” — Fe, 19 years old

Angelito delved into the impact of colonization on shaping perceptions of beauty,
emphasizing how Western ideals had influenced notions of ideal skin tone and body
type. Joy, a 23-year-old, expanded on this, describing colorism, white supremacy, and
racism as global phenomena, underscoring the universality of the preference for lighter
skin. Building upon this, Intiang also traced the historical roots of this preference,
attributing it to the colonization of the Philippines by lighter-skinned peoples like the
Spaniards and the Americans, who had established lighter skin as more attractive or
prestigious.

“There is a factor in that, the colonization of us by the Westerners. It is how we

think. Colonization shaped how we think about this ideal skin tone or body type.

Yes, that's it. Okay.” — Angelito, 23 years old

“I feel like colorism, white supremacy, racism is actually a global phenomenon.

So, across the globe, the ideal is always white or lighter than you are. Okay. So
it's really prominent.” — Joy, 23 years old

“I think historically also, because of the fact that since we're colonized by
Spaniards and other people who have lighter skin, it's been embedded in our
culture or in our mindset that lighter skin is more attractive or has a higher status.
So that's where our idea stemmed from: we should have lighter skin. If that makes
sense.” - Intiang, 20 years old

129

Badong, 26, felt jealous of others' fair skin, which he attributed to spending much of
his time indoors, away from sunlight. This reflects the societal valorization of fair skin,
often associated with higher social status and beauty.

“Sometimes | feel jealous that they really have good white skin. Because maybe
you're always in the lab and not getting enough sunshine. That's why they are, you
know, fair-skinned or white? Yes” - Badong, 26 years old

Aida, 19, observed an obsession with lighter skin among her sister and friends,
indicating a widespread societal preference that equates fairness with attractiveness.
This obsession is likely fueled by media representation and cultural norms that idealize
lighter skin tones.

“Yes. Like I noticed that with my sister, it's like they're obsessed with getting

white. And I also noticed it with my friends before and with my friend now.” —

Aida, 19 years old

Danica noted a mutual desire for different skin tones between locals and foreigners.
Foreigners often seek tanned skin, which they associate with exoticism and health,
while locals in the Philippines desire lighter skin, reflecting a colonial legacy that
equates whiteness with higher social status and beauty.

“I think it's because of what we see in other people like foreigners, and that's
also why I think foreigners want to have tanned skin. It's because what they see

in foreign countries, we have darker skin, so they want that, and us, we want

lighter skin because other people have that.” - Danica, 24 years old

Carla, 22, highlighted bullying faced by darker-skinned individuals, especially in
younger generations, and linked it to broader systemic issues within the educational
system. This suggests that discrimination based on skin color is deeply ingrained and
perpetuated by societal structures and norms.

“This is very apparent in younger generations. The ones you've seen during your

orphanage visits? They really get bullied just because they're dark-skinned. And

it's not right. I don't get why they're doing it. But as you've mentioned, | think it's
an indictment of our educational system.” — Carla, 22 years old

130

Angelito discussed the negative perception of dark skin among Filipinos, where
fairness is seen as more beautiful and cleaner. This belief, rooted in historical and
cultural contexts, perpetuates colorism and affects how individuals view themselves
and others.

“Is that called mestizo? Yes. That's it. Because there are Filipinos who don't want

to be black because they perceive themselves as ugly, so it seems that you are
more beautiful or more attractive when you are pale. Or look clean. Actually,
that's what stuck in my head.” — Angelito, 23 years old
Heidi, 24, described feeling self-conscious about her skin color when comparing

herself to fairer individuals in higher social classes. This indicates that societal
hierarchies and media representation contribute to internalized colorism, where
individuals feel inferior based on their skin tone.

“Sometimes, when I'm not looking at social media, or I'm not looking at other
people, I'm worried about myself, but as soon as I see other people that are white,
like in the upper part of society, I think, I wish I was like them.” — Heidi, 24 years
old
Collectively, these narratives underscored the pervasive influence of white as the

standard skin color, shaping perceptions of beauty and self-worth within Philippine
society. The preference for lighter skin is deeply rooted in historical, social, and cultural

contexts, perpetuating colorism and affecting self-esteem and social dynamics. See the

figure below for the diagram.

131

es 010 G2

: a\ WZ se

standard for skin —"

or \S

101006 101 008
Colonization
and skin color Discrimination in
terms of skin
color

=

ID1 002

Perception on
‘Skin Tone or
Color

101 003 o1o1t
Pressure about
meeting skin
color standards

Figure 10. Diagram for the theme: Being white as standard for skin color.

Theme 2 encompasses the influential factors on skin-lightening practices. The

influential factors on skin-lightening practices were multifaceted and deeply rooted in

cultural and societal influences, as revealed by the informants’ narratives. Aida

underscored the impact of Korean culture's prominence, particularly K-pop, which

idealized tall, skinny, and fair-skinned individuals, setting a standard many aspired to

emulate. Heidi echoed this sentiment, expressing a desire for a white complexion

aligned with the K-pop standard, prevalent even in everyday settings like pharmacies.

Joy further explored the influence of K-pop and J-pop globalization on Filipino

perceptions of beauty, particularly regarding skin color and body image.

132

“Sorry, but the Korean culture is really booming right now. And I think that's
one of the reasons why it goes hand in hand. If you see them, they're tall, they're
skinny, they're white.” - Aida, 19 years old
“Okay. Here in the Philippines, I want to be white. Okay. I want to have a white
K-pop standard. K-pop standard, really? I always see that as a standard. You
only see that in the pharmacy.” — Heidi, 24 years old
“Because of the K-pop globalization, some... Oh, yeah. Because of this, the
dominance of K-pop or J-pop really influenced Filipino cultures in terms of how
they see themselves, in terms of their shape and their skin color. Oh, actually, I
would agree." — Joy, 23 years old
As Angelito noted, the prevalence of collagen products and whitening
commercials in Asian media reflected the pervasive nature of skin-lightening practices
promoted through popular culture.
“Actually, in Asia, I notice there are collagen products in Asia, like in Thailand.
In BL (Boy’s Love) or series with collagen commercials for whitening or glowing
skin. That's it.” — Angelito, 23 years old
On the other hand, Brenda, 27, discussed the growing trend of introducing
diversity in characters, noting that it reflects the idea that good things and
attractiveness can come in different shades. However, she also felt that society still
harbored a conventional idea of what is considered attractive. This duality points to
progress in inclusivity but also highlights lingering biases.
“We are introducing diversity in characters that is not inherent in their story or
their skin color. It shows that good things can happen to anyone or attractiveness
comes in different shades, and that's it. But for, I think sometimes it's like there's
still an Oh, what's the term? It seems like there's still this idea of what is
attractive." — Brenda, 27 years old
Carla observed more appreciation and inclusion of darker skin tones in media,
which she saw as beneficial. However, she mentioned the backlash against casting a
darker-skinned actress as Tinkerbell, labeling it as an instance of "toxic positivity."

This suggests that while there is a push for diversity, it can sometimes lead to

controversy, indicating that societal acceptance of inclusivity is still evolving. This

133

reflects the complexities and challenges in changing traditional beauty standards and
promoting genuine inclusivity.
“So, I think there is more inclusion now, more appreciation now to the dark skin
ones. So that one, that specific example, you think the portrayal of inclusivity in
terms of skin color in casting members of movies or TV series would become
helpful for people? Yes. However, I have another example where casting tends
to have this bad reaction. Another recent example is Tinkerbell. Tinkerbell? Yes,
they cast a darker-skinned woman to portray Tinkerbell. I don't know why, but
they're receiving a lot of backlashes. It's like, what do you call this toxic
Positivity now? Okay.” — Carla, 22 years old
Heidi appreciated Western media's acceptance of tan skin, offering a
contrasting perspective on beauty standards. She mentioned that she frequently
watched Western movies featuring actors with tanned skin, appreciating that these
films celebrated this skin tone. This observation highlights a positive shift in media
tepresentation, where diverse skin tones are increasingly recognized and valued.
While Western movies may promote tanned skin, the cultural context often
differentiates between natural and artificially tanned skin. Moreover, Western
standards of beauty may still not fully embrace darker skin tones, reflecting ongoing
issues of colorism and racial biases.
I usually watch Western movies, and the casts are composed of people who tan.
So, I think it's good that Western movies appreciate tan skin.” - Heidi, 24 years
old
The role of social media emerged as a significant influencer, with Aida noting
how exposure to white influencers and products in advertisements conditioned
individuals to pursue skin-lightening practices.
“Social media in general. That's all the social media you consume. If the
Personalities or influencers that you see are white people and the product they

are advertising is also the product, then you are conditioned to buying it.” —
Aida, 19 years old

134

Danica raised concerns about the potential harm of unregulated SLPs,
emphasizing the importance of researching SLP mechanisms and awareness of SLP
active ingredients.

“I think it would be harmful since there are some artists in social media who
promote products that are quite expensive, and there are chemicals there that
people don’t really do research about, normal people don’t really research
about like glutathione and all.” — Danica, 24 ycars old

Similarly, Erlinda, 25, observed that the heavy advertising of SLPs on social
media platforms significantly influences skin-lightening practices. She noted that
influencers who already possess light skin often promote these products. This
highlights the powerful role of social media in shaping beauty standards and consumer
behavior. Influencers with light skin perpetuate the ideal of lighter skin as more
desirable, leveraging their wide reach and credibility to endorse these products and
benefit from the social media algorithms that prioritize content that garners high
engagement. Badong also underscored and expanded this observation on social media
algorithms and the pervasive nature of advertisements, which intensified exposure to
SLPs and reinforced certain beauty standards.

“I think it’s more about advertising the products on social media. So, what
you're saying is that skin-lightening products being advertised heavily on these
four platforms (referring to Facebook, TikTok, Twitter or X, and Instagram)
influence skin-lightening practices. So, who is selling the products for skin-
lightening practices? Usually, they are influencers who already have light skin.”
- Erlinda, 25 years old

“For example, if they have a very aggressive advertisement, if they are using
celebrities who are naturally white just to promote a product, things like that.

And right now, we have an increasing amount of social media consumption, so
everyone is exposed regardless of age.” - Badong, 26 years old

135

These narratives depicted the complex interplay of cultural, media, and
societal influences on skin-lightening practices, shaping perceptions of beauty and

self-image within various communities (see Figure 11).

Social Media

2)
oe

K-Pop Cutture

—_ IDI 003

_— Influencial

—— factors on skin
_— lightening
Fe practices

o =

9 4

Movies

Figure 11. Diagram for the theme: Influential factors on skin-lightening practices.

The third theme is the Filipino culture on skin lightening. The influence of Filipino
culture on skin-lightening practices is a complex interplay between familial, societal,
and individual perceptions. This was revealed through the narratives of the informants.
Heidi reflected on the impact of familial expectations and the desire for a lighter
complexion, which was influenced by comments from their parents, who deemed
lighter skin more desirable. This desire for whiteness was intertwined with notions of
body image, reflecting broader societal pressures. The reason for this observation lies
in the cultural and social context where lighter skin is often associated with higher

social status, beauty, and privilege. These societal norms are reinforced by family

136

members and media, perpetuating the belief that lighter skin is more attractive and
desirable.
“They also comment on your skin color? Yes, all the time. To be fair, my mom
is white. Okay. She's a white Filipino. Yeah, yeah, yeah. So, since I didn't
inherit that gene, I'm sad. So they always comment that it doesn't suit me
because I'm not white. I wish it would suit me if I'm just white. So, how does it
make you feel? Are the comments coming from your parents similar to the
perception of body image? Yeah”. — Heidi, 24 years old
On the other hand, Erlinda highlighted a generational shift towards inclusivity, citing
the acceptance of different skin colors among peers. It was also observed that familial
influence still played a significant role in shaping attitudes towards skin tone. For
example, Aida acknowledged the role of a sibling in this regard, wherein her sister lured
her into buying SLP.
“For individuals my age, I think we are generally more inclusive of all the skin
colors since I am also surrounded by people who are accepting of all kinds of
skin colors.” — Erlinda, 25 years old
“How about family? Does it affect you? Oh, it's your sister, right? She is the
one who lured you. Yes. So, your sister is a big influence, does that mean?
Yes.” — Aida, 19 years old
Additionally, Danica emphasized the role of friends and a culture of body positivity,
where discussions about skin tones were rare, which led to greater acceptance of
individuals regardless of their complexion.
“No, we don't usually talk about skin tones, and my friends they're very body
Positive, so they tend to accept whatever skin tone a person has.” - Danica,
24 years old
Erlinda also underscored the cultural value placed on activities like beach outings,

where sun exposure and natural tanning were embraced, suggesting a divergence from

the Westernized beauty standards prioritizing lighter skin.

137

“And then, as for the color of the skin, we're not into really the color of the
skin since most of my friends love going to the beach. So, it's not really a big
deal for us.” — Erlinda, 25 years old

These narratives depict the complex dynamics within Filipino culture regarding skin
tone. The influence of Filipino culture on skin-lightening practices reveals a complex
interplay between familial expectations, societal norms, and individual attitudes. While
traditional views often equate lighter skin with higher status and beauty, reflecting
historical and colonial legacies, there is a noticeable generational shift towards
inclusivity and acceptance of diverse skin tones. Narratives from informants like Heidi,
Erlinda, Aida, and Danica illustrate these evolving dynamics, highlighting the ongoing
tension between enduring cultural pressures and emerging trends of body positivity and
self-acceptance.

Global cultural exchanges and exposure to diverse beauty standards have introduced
more inclusive ideals. Younger generations, influenced by body positivity movements
and multicultural interactions, tend to challenge these traditional norms. Additionally,
individual experiences, similar to the informants’, such as familial influence and social
circles that embrace diversity, contribute to varying perceptions and acceptance of
different skin tones. This dynamic interplay highlights the evolution of beauty
standards within Filipino society, balancing historical legacies with contemporary

inclusivity. See figure below for the diagram.

138

ad

IDIO11

Peer Pressure

IDI 009

O_-
——~ Filipino culture

on skin
lightening
Family members

Is

IDI014

1D1.004

Figure 12. Diagram for the theme: Filipino culture on skin lightening.

Meeting skin color standards is Theme 4. This theme includes a budget for

SLPs, marketing strategies, meeting standards of being white or fair-colored, and
reasons for buying SLPs. Carla refused to adhere to social standards, acknowledging
the challenges of meeting them as Filipinos with brown skin and rejecting the need to
conform to white skin.

“Oh, I actually don't care for it. Yes, it is hard to meet the skin tone standard

because we're Filipinos. I don't think it's a necessity to conform to this

standard.” - Carla, 22 years old

On the other hand, Aida expressed a strong desire for lighter skin, believing it

would bring her more acceptance from other people and happiness.

139

“I feel like other people like me better if I'm whiter. I feel like I would be
happier if I were whiter than I am now. So, I will continue using the product
until I reach what I want.” — Aida
Danica, 24, acknowledged that she aligns with the prevailing beauty standard in
the Philippines, which favors fair or lighter skin. Being fair-skinned herself, she felt
she met this ideal. Despite already having fair skin, she observed that many Filipinos
strive for an even lighter complexion, highlighting the societal pressure to achieve and
maintain this standard. This pursuit of lighter skin reflects deep-rooted cultural
preferences and the influence of media and advertising, perpetuating the notion that
lighter skin is more desirable and associated with beauty and higher status.
“T think I do. I mean, the standard here is usually fair-skinned or lighter, and
I'm fair-skinned, so I think I meet that. I think it would be very hard if they're
trying to get lighter skin because I think most Filipinos are already fair-
skinned and think they want lighter skin, so that's why they aim to get that.’—
Danica, 24 years old
Chris, 26, observed that many people his age actively seek to improve their skin
color, often purchasing whitening soaps to achieve brighter, fairer skin. This behavior
underscores the cultural emphasis on lighter skin as a desirable trait, reflecting societal
pressures to conform to beauty standards that equate fair skin with attractiveness and
higher status.
“At this age, I see most people at the same age really want to improve their skin
color. So often, they buy whitening soaps. So, they really care about having
better or brighter skin.” - Chris, 26 years old
Erlinda attributed this phenomenon to societal standards and perceptions of skin
color. She noted that lighter skin is seen as the "standard" and that people with darker

skin are often looked down upon. This highlights the ingrained colorism within the

culture, where skin tone significantly impacts social judgment and self-esteem.

140

“I think it's because it's the standard, quote-unquote. It's the standard and the

idea of skin color. And then I think some people tend to look down when you

have a darker skin color.” — Erlinda, 25 years old

Heidi observed that many people strive to meet beauty standards but find it
challenging without financial resources, deeming it unrealistic for many. She also noted
the historical context where lighter skin symbolized higher social status, as upper-class
individuals typically avoided outdoor labor.

“So some people really try hard to meet the standard. If you don't have money,

I think it is hard to meet the standard. I think it is not realistic to meet the

standards.” - Heidi, 24 years old

Brenda, however, appreciated inclusive beauty brands like Rihanna's Fenty Beauty
and Lady Gaga's House Labs, which cater to various skin tones, reflecting a positive
shift in the beauty industry. However, she expressed frustration with the local market's
focus on SLPs, finding it difficult to find products without lightening agents.

“Like Rihanna's Fenty Beauty and Lady Gaga's House Lab, those are different

skin colors. The ones they market already serve many skin tones. It is very good

that we now have such options.” — Brenda, 27 years old

Gloria emphasized the need for honest marketing of skin-lightening products to
avoid misleading consumers, highlighting the ethical concerns in advertising. Heidi
also added concerns about the safety of skin-lightening creams sold in questionable
pharmacies, noting the use of these products from childhood due to societal pressures
and financial availability.

“If there is ever a discussion about skin-lightening products, I hope they don't

exaggerate the results too much because it seems like a lot of deception to other

people. So, from a marketing perspective, I wish that skin-lightening product

marketing would be as truthful as possible.” - Gloria, 20 years old

“In questionable pharmacies and stores, whitening cream is sold —cream that

contains really questionable chemicals. The ingredients. The whitening products.
Okay. I started using them on and off throughout childhood and up to adulthood.

141

Usually, when I have money, I buy them. During my undergrad, I just used the

funds.” — Heidi, 24 years old

Badong, 26, believed that lighter skin is perceived as more beautiful and increases
social and romantic opportunities, reflecting deep-seated cultural biases, while Joy
noted that individuals’ self-worth is often tied to their appearance, with light skin
considered a key aspect of beauty, driving people to conform to these standards.

“I believe that because they see having white skin is more beautiful. And also,

I think this is not in a general sense, but I see that mostly females see that having

white skin increases their chances of having a boyfriend or getting married.” -

Badong, 26 years old

“Their sense of self-worth is tied to their appearance, and what they think is

attractive is light-skinned. So to increase their sense of self-worth, they try to

meet the standard and their own standard of beauty.” — Joy, 23 years old
Heidi, 24, reflected on historical documentaries that depicted lighter skin as a symbol
of higher social status, as upper-class individuals avoided outdoor labor, which tanned
the skin of commoners. This historical context underscores the long-standing
association between fair skin and social prestige.

“In the past, I've watched documentaries. Upper-class people are white because

they don't work in the field. The commoners work in the field, so they are white.

So, they view lighter skin as a social status symbol.” - Heidi, 24 years old
Aida shared her experience of being influenced by her sister to buy skincare products.
Initially, she purchased a non-whitening facial wash, but she eventually bought them
due to the proximity of whitening products at the store. This highlights how familial
influence and product placement can drive skin-lightening practices.

“It's because of my sister because she bought it for me. And then the first

skincare product I bought wasn't really whitening. It's just like a facial wash.

But when it ran out, I bought it again. It's just that the stall for whitening seems

to be right next to it. So, the whitening is what I bought for like last month.” ~
Aida, 19 years old

142

Brenda also expressed a strong aversion to products containing lightening agents
but noted the difficulty in finding alternatives in the local market. This reflects the
pervasive presence of SLPs and the challenge of avoiding them.

“I seem to be very conscious that if this product has anything to do with
lightening, I don't like it. But of course, it's very hard to find products now in
our local market. Actually, almost everyone is like that." — Brenda, 27 years
old
Danica also cautioned against the use of skin-lightening products without
professional consultation, emphasizing the potential dangers. This points to the health
risks associated with the unregulated use of these products and the need for greater
consumer awareness and education.
“And they tend to buy those products and use them without consulting their doctor
or a person with whom they can consult. And it can be very dangerous if they use
that without proper knowledge.” — Danica, 24 years old
The desire to meet skin color standards in the Philippines reveals a multifaceted
issue deeply rooted in cultural, social, and economic factors. The narratives of the
informants underscore the pervasive influence of societal beauty standards that favor
lighter skin, often perceived as a symbol of higher social status, beauty, and privilege.
This cultural bias is reinforced by family members, media, and marketing strategies
that promote SLPs. The narratives collectively depict a complex landscape where
familial influence, societal pressures, marketing strategies, and historical context
contribute to Filipino emerging adults’ ongoing pursuit of lighter skin. This pursuit is
not without its challenges and risks, revealing the need for broader societal change and
increased awareness of the diversity of beauty. See the figure below for the diagram of

this theme.

143

£
xn Mitening Bugger skin
4

oducts,

roducts

ee re Reasons for
ee buying skin

101 003, procures
11 008

woor 101 006

{D1 010

Meeting

Markering) standards of
strategies being white or
fair colored skin

Figure 13. Diagram for the theme: Meeting skin color standards.

The last theme is the effect of skin color on well-being. It includes body image
and skin-lightening and coping with negative reactions toward skin color. Brenda has
discussed the societal pressure through social media that individuals feel to conform to
beauty standards. She acknowledged that some people have personal goals and
preferences that drive them to extreme lengths to achieve lighter skin. However, there
are concerns regarding the potential harm to general health and the toll that skin-

lightening practices can take on mental well-being.

144

“So it didn't create any stress. Or anxiety or I'm not depressed because I don't

think I'm white. However, I think some people will do the above and beyond

effort to achieve those standards. [....] Because that's their preference. That's

their preference. That's their personal goal. But my only worry is if it comes at

the cost of general health or if the pain received from the typical lightening

practices is equated to achieving that goal.” — Brenda, 27 years old

Aida shared her experience of feeling pressured by the depiction of attractiveness
on social media, which often highlights very fair skin. She wondered if she would be
more attractive if she were whiter, indicating the significant impact of social media on
her self-perception and beauty standards.

“Alright, right now, there's a little stress. It's like there are things that I perceive

in. Well, I see something. In social media, that's right, their attractiveness is

very white. To the point that I'm under pressure. I mean, what would I be like if

I were whiter? Would I be more attractive if I were white?” — Aida, 19 years

old

Similarly, Heidi, 24, expressed that her skin color influenced her choices in clothing,
feeling that certain colors made her look whiter and more attractive. This perception
led her to limit her wardrobe to colors that enhanced her appearance, reflecting the
deep-seated impact of societal and media-driven beauty norms on her daily life and
self-esteem.

I think so. Because of my skin color, I have a perception that, Oh, you can only

wear this color because it makes you look whiter. I feel like limiting myself to

this color I can wear. — Heidi, 24 years old

Meanwhile, Carla, 22, discussed the dual desire to be thinner and whiter, attributing
this trend to the booming influence of Korean culture. She noted that Korean celebrities’
tall, skinny, and fair-skinned appearance has set new beauty standards, driving people
to aspire to similar traits. This illustrates how global cultural influences can shape local

beauty ideals, further complicating the pressures individuals face in conforming to

these standards.

145

“Okay. It goes hand in hand. You want to be thinner and whiter. Sorry, but the

Korean culture is really booming right now. And I think that's one of the reasons

why it goes hand in hand. If you see them, they're tall, they're skinny, they're

white.” - Carla, 22 years old

Erlinda reflected on the psychological impact of skin-lightening practices. She noted
that while not everyone is affected the same way, the pressure to engage in these
practices can harm mental well-being, especially when linked to the notion of having a
better life. This pressure can make individuals feel inadequate if they do not partake in
skin-lightening, similar to the negative effects of extreme body image practices. Erlinda
emphasized that excessive focus on skin lightening can drive people to actions
detrimental to their mental health.

“Yes, but not all of them. It still depends on the way you see yourself. I think

when some of the skin-lightening practices tend to impose when they force

people to do it and then relate the skin-lightening practices to having a better

life in general, I think that would negatively affect their mental well-being

because it would make it seem that there's something wrong with them. After

all, they are not engaged in these skin lightening practices. Okay, so similar

with the body image, the excessive practices on skin lightening would drive

people to do something that would affect their mental health.” — Erlinda, 25

years old

Badong's experience highlighted the negative impact of unrealistic beauty standards
on mental health. He felt significant distress and depression because he could not
achieve the white skin tone idealized in advertisements and online content. This
inability to attain the desired skin color led to feelings of inadequacy and
disappointment, illustrating how societal pressures and media portrayals of beauty can
profoundly affect an individual's mental well-being. The constant exposure to these
unattainable standards perpetuated a cycle of self-criticism and unhappiness,

underscoring the need for more inclusive and realistic representations of beauty.

Because of that, it affects my mental health to the point that I get depressed.
Because why I cannot achieve that white skin tone as advertised, as what I've

146

seen online. Meaning, when I haven't achieved my ideal skin color, I tend to be

depressed.” ~ Badong, 26 years old
Badong added the mental and financial toll of striving to meet the beauty standard of
having white skin. He equated this pressure with the challenges of achieving an ideal
body image, noting that the belief in white skin as the ultimate beauty standard led him
to increase his consumption of various cosmetic products. This relentless pursuit
significantly affected his mental health, causing stress and feelings of inadequacy.
Additionally, with only enough salary to meet basic needs, the continuous purchase of
these products had a substantial financial impact on him.

“It affects me, the same thing with achieving body image, it affects me mentally.

Because, you know, making myself think that having white skin is considered

the gold beauty standard, I tend to increase my consumption of different

cosmetic products. I tend to buy a lot of cosmetic products. And at the end of

the day, it greatly affects me financially.” - Badong, 26 years old

Meanwhile, Kylie shared an embarrassing experience where she developed a
noticeable tan line on one side of her body. The uneven tan made her self-conscious,
leading her to avoid wearing shorts for a month or two to hide the tan line. This situation
Teflects the societal pressure to maintain an even skin tone and the personal discomfort
that arises from not meeting these beauty standards. Kylie's experience highlights how
external appearances can significantly impact one's confidence and daily choices,
especially in a culture that emphasizes uniform skin color.

“It was embarrassing to the point where I have like a side in my body that's a

bit tan. Like it's, and then it's, it looks weird because it's not like, only on my

other side, like on my left side of the body, there's a tan line. And I had to stop

wearing shorts for about a month or two since it's so obvious that I got a tan

line on there.” — Kylie, 18 years old

People use different coping mechanisms when dealing with the societal pressures

around skin color. Gloria coped with colorism by choosing not to follow social media

147

accounts that impose specific beauty standards regarding skin color. She acknowledged
that not all products are effective, so this selective following was how she managed the
pressure. Badong dealt with the stress of social media by occasionally taking breaks
from Facebook and being selective about the information he consumed, preferring to
verify claims with scientific research. Kylie, 18, coped by hiding parts of herself to
avoid comments about her skin color, yet felt her self-worth was tied to maintaining a
specific appearance. This combination of selective engagement, critical thinking, and
self-concealment illustrates the varied strategies individuals use to navigate societal
pressures related to skin color.

“It's often because I don't follow people... On social media, I don't follow people

who really impose the colorism that your color should be like this. It's my

coping. Because not all products are effective”. — Gloria, 20 years old

“To cope, sometimes I skip one day, not scrolling on my Facebook account, so

one day max. But somehow, as a researcher, I tend to start being selective about

the information I get from any platform, social media or television. I always

like, okay, I'm gonna read this, about this, I'm gonna consider this one, but I'm

gonna look for a scientific paper that their claims are true or not.” - Badong,

26 years old

“I hid a part of myself to cope. Those around me stopped pointing it out. But

yeah. Well, I make sure to maintain since I think that a part of me thinks that

my worth is based on my skin color.” — Kylie, 18 years old

The last theme delved into the profound effects of skin color and use of SLPs on
well-being, encompassing aspects of body image, skin-lightening practices, and coping
mechanisms for negative reactions towards skin color. Brenda discussed the societal
pressures perpetuated by social media, leading individuals to extreme lengths to
achieve lighter skin, often at the cost of mental health. Aida and Heidi both highlighted
the significant impact of social media and societal standards on their self-perception

and daily choices. Carla attributed the dual desire to be thinner and whiter to the

influence of Korean culture, while Erlinda and Badong elaborated on the mental health

148

repercussions of these pressures, with Badong also emphasizing the financial strain due
to his limited salary. Kylie shared her embarrassment over an uneven tan, reflecting
societal pressure to maintain uniform skin tone. Various coping mechanisms were
employed, from selective social media engagement by Gloria and Badong to self-
concealment by Kylie, illustrating the diverse strategies individuals use to navigate
these pervasive societal pressures. These insights underscore the complex interplay
between cultural influences, societal standards, and personal well-being, highlighting

the need for more inclusive and realistic beauty standards. See figure below for the

diagram.

oO

ae ARB

wo } one Va vos

=O oS

troor
of, o Mg O

i) 004

© with
negative
reactions
towards skin
color

Figure 14. Diagram for the theme: Effect of skin color on well-being.

149

Upon examining the themes presented above for both the body image
perception and skin-lightening practices, the identified stressors and facilitators
that modified the informant’s mental well-being status as influenced by their

body image perception and skin-lightening practices are summarized below.

150

Ist

‘soonoeid Surusyy3y-urys pue uondsoied

a8eun Apog s19q} Aq poouonyyut se snyeys Sutaq-][om [eJUOU S,JURMOFUT 94} POYIPOU jeM} SIOVETTIOWJ PUL sIOSsaNs poy HUop] ‘ST anSty

(surmoyysryT || (Suruoyysry
urs) urys)
s10yey 198. J SIOSSOS

NY,

(uondesiag “"* (uondosieg
oseul] ose]
pog) Apog)

sIoyeyTIOe SIOSSOS


As seen in Figure 15, the identified stressors and facilitators stem from the
generated themes of the qualitative investigation. Stressors are elements or factors that
create tension, pressure, or difficulties in the informants’ mental health, while
facilitators are factors that support and enhance their mental health.

In body image perception, stressors such as the pressure to conform to ideal
body types, the pervasive culture of comparison, and the influence of Filipino and
Western media, including K-pop culture, were significant. For instance, one informant,
Brenda, shared how the constant comparison with ideal body types portrayed in media
exacerbated her body dissatisfaction and mental distress. She felt compelled to exert
double effort in her coping mechanisms, which included physical exercises and
affirmations, to compensate for her perceived shortcomings. Another informant,
Angelito, described the negative impact of early exposure to hookup culture and K-
pop, which intensified his body dysmorphia and led to extreme measures like skipping
meals.

Conversely, facilitators include coping mechanisms employed by informants to
navigate societal pressures and the acceptance and support received from peers
promoting body positivity. For example, Aida coped by diverting her attention to other
topics, which helped reduce her sadness and feelings of inadequacy. Angelito relied on
self-motivation and self-approval, constantly reminding himself that inner qualities
were more important than physical appearance.

Skin-lightening practices can be influenced by various stressors. These include
the prevailing notion that white skin is the standard of beauty, the prevalence of skin
color comparison, and the impact of media, especially K-pop and Western culture, as
well as Filipino cultural norms. For example, Badong shared how his desire to achieve

a whiter skin tone, fueled by media portrayals, led to feelings of depression and anxiety

152

when he could not meet these standards. Another informant, Aida, expressed the
pressure she felt from social media portrayals of beauty, which made her question her
attractiveness and contributed to her mental stress.

On the other hand, there are also facilitating factors that encourage the
acceptance of diverse skin tones. These include coping mechanisms such as individuals
using to minimize societal pressures, recognizing and celebrating skin tone diversity by
peers, representing various skin colors in movies and TV, and using SLPs to achieve
the desired skin tone. For instance, Heidi mentioned her cautious approach to selecting
SLPs, reflecting a coping mechanism to ensure safety and efficacy. Additionally, Carla
highlighted the benefits of physical exercise and healthier eating as positive coping
strategies, which improved her overall mental well-being.

The arrows in Figure 15 illustrate the cyclical nature of these stressors and
facilitators. For example, an informant like Angelito might initially feel pressured by
media portrayals, leading to body dysmorphia and unhealthy behaviors such as extreme
dieting and over-exercising. However, through self-approval and focusing on inner
qualities, he navigates these pressures and finds a healthier mental state, demonstrating
the dynamic interaction between stressors and facilitators. Similarly, Brenda's
experience with media-induced body dissatisfaction exemplifies this cycle. She initially
felt immense pressure to conform to the ideal body types showcased in media, leading
to mental distress. Nonetheless, Brenda's engagement in physical exercises and positive
affirmations helped her cope with these pressures, gradually improving her self-esteem
and mental well-being.

Another informant, Badong, struggled with the societal notion that lighter skin
is more attractive. This belief led to his extensive use of SLPs and subsequent feelings

of depression when the results did not meet his expectations. However, through

153

supportive peer interactions and celebrating his natural skin tone, Badong began to
appreciate his unique features, reducing his reliance on skin-lightening practices and
improving his mental health. Similarly, Aida, who felt pressured by social media's
portrayal of beauty, initially experienced significant mental stress and a desire to lighten
her skin. Over time, through recognition of diverse beauty standards and support from
her peers, she adopted a more accepting view of her appearance, facilitating a positive
mental shift.

Heidi's approach to skin-lightening practices also demonstrates this cyclical
interaction. Initially driven by the desire for a lighter skin tone, she carefully selected
products to ensure safety and effectiveness. Her cautious and informed approach,
combined with physical exercise and healthier eating habits, allowed her to navigate
societal pressures while maintaining her mental well-being. Carla's experience further
illustrates this dynamic. Initially, societal pressures led to her dissatisfaction with her
body image. However, by adopting healthier lifestyle choices and focusing on inner
qualities, she successfully navigated these pressures, enhancing her self-esteem and
overall mental health.

These examples accentuate the importance of understanding the cyclical and
interconnected nature of stressors and facilitators in influencing mental health. By
recognizing and addressing these factors, individuals can develop effective coping
mechanisms that promote a positive self-image and mental well-being, breaking the
cycle of negative influences and fostering resilience. Appendix 14 shows the in-depth
interview transcripts from all the informants.

Overall, the interplay between stressors and facilitators in both body image
perception and skin-lightening practices highlights the complex and cyclical nature of

these influences on mental health. By examining the experiences of informants like

154

Brenda, Angelito, Badong, Aida, Heidi, and Carla, I see a multifaceted picture of how
societal pressures, media portrayals, and personal coping mechanisms intersect. For
instance, Brenda’s struggle with media-induced body dissatisfaction and subsequent
adoption of physical exercise and positive affirmations illustrates the delicate balance
between stress and coping mechanisms. Angelito’s journey from experiencing body
dysmorphia due to media portrayals to finding self-approval by focusing on inner
qualities exemplifies the dynamic interaction between negative influences and positive
personal strategies.

Similarly, Badong's reliance on SLPs driven by societal standards and his
eventual shift towards appreciating his natural skin tone through supportive peer
interactions highlight the potential for positive change. Aida’s initial mental stress from
social media's portrayal of beauty and her subsequent acceptance of diverse beauty
standards underscore the importance of peer support in fostering body positivity.
Heidi's careful selection of skin-lightening products and her engagement in healthier
lifestyle choices reflect a balanced approach to navigating societal pressures, while
Carla's adoption of positive coping strategies to improve her self-esteem showcases the
resilience needed to combat negative influences.

These narratives underscore the importance of fostering supportive
environments and promoting positive coping strategies to mitigate the negative impacts
of body image and skin-lightening pressures. This comprehensive understanding can
inform targeted interventions to enhance mental well-being and promote body

positivity among emerging Filipino adults.

155

Data Triangulation

Specific Aim 7: To use qualitative findings to explain the quantitative survey data
results about the effect of body image and skin-lightening practices on the mental
health of emerging Filipino adults.

This study explored the interrelationships among body image perception, skin-
lightening practices, and mental health among emerging Filipino adults using a mixed-
methods approach. The integration of quantitative and qualitative data provided
insights into how these factors interact and influence mental well-being. See Tables 13

(specific) and 14 (general) for the joint theme displays for integrating both data sources.

Specific Joint Theme Display

Body Image Perception and Mental Health

Quantitative data revealed that many informants exhibited severe body image
issues, as indicated by low scores in BAS and BES domains. Qualitative findings
provided a deeper understanding of these issues, highlighting societal pressures, media
influence, and personal struggles with body image. The alignment between quantitative
scores and qualitative narratives indicated a consensus for most informants, such as
Angelito, Aida, Brenda, Carla, Danica, Erlinda, and Eduardo. However, there were
instances of discordance, such as with Fe and Chris, where high quantitative scores did
not fully capture the underlying mental health struggles revealed in the qualitative data.
Skin-lightening Practices and Mental Health

Quantitative data showed varying levels of knowledge, perception, and
frequency of SLPs use among informants. Qualitative findings emphasized societal and
media-driven pressures to conform to lighter skin standards, which significantly

impacted mental health. The data consistently showed a consensus between

156

quantitative scores and qualitative narratives for most informants, reflecting the
profound influence of societal standards on their mental health. Informants like
Badong, Heidi, and Intiang exhibited clear alignment between their frequent use of
skin-lightening products and their mental health challenges. Instances of discordance
were noted where qualitative insights revealed deeper psychological impacts not fully
captured by quantitative measures.

Elaboration on Consensus and Discordance

The consensus between quantitative and qualitative data underscores the
pervasive impact of societal and media-driven beauty standards on the mental health of
emerging Filipino adults. For example, informants like Angelito and Aida showed
severe body image issues in both quantitative scores and qualitative narratives,
highlighting how societal pressures manifest in mental health challenges. Similarly,
informants like Danica and Erlinda exhibited frequent use of SLPs due to societal
pressures, consistent across both data sources. This alignment emphasizes the reliability
of quantitative mcasures in capturing the broad impacts of thcsc issucs.

On the other hand, instances of discordance reveal the limitations of quantitative
measures in capturing the nuanced and deeply personal aspects of mental health
influenced by body image and skin-lightening practices. For instance, Fe's high
quantitative scores suggested a positive body image perception, yet qualitative findings
revealed significant stress and anxiety due to societal pressures. Similarly, Chris's
narrative highlighted mental health challenges not fully reflected in his quantitative
scores. These discrepancies suggest that while quantitative data provides a general
overview, qualitative insights are crucial for understanding the depth and complexity

of individual experiences.

157

Integrating quantitative and qualitative data in this study provides a
comprehensive understanding of the effects of body image perception and skin-
lightening practices on the mental health of emerging Filipino adults. While
quantitative data offers valuable insights, qualitative findings are essential for capturing
the depth and complexity of these issues and guiding effective interventions and
policies to promote mental well-being.

General Joint Theme Display

On the other hand, in the overall generalizing joint theme display, an overview
of the corresponding quantitative findings and data (effect estimates expressed as Odds
Ratio with a 95% Confidence Interval) were reported vis-a-vis the selected theme from
the qualitative assessments. The generalizing findings were reported as inferences
drawn after integrating quantitative and qualitative results.

Body Image and Mental Health

The significant association between body appreciation and reduced mental
health issues highlights the crucial role of positive body image in promoting mental
well-being. Quantitative and qualitative findings indicate that body appreciation is
linked to better mental health outcomes. Meanwhile, each domain of body esteem
(Physical Attractiveness/Sexual Attractiveness, Upper Body Strength/Weight Concern,
Physical Condition) shows a strong inverse relationship with mental health issues.
Qualitative data supports this, with participants indicating that positive body esteem in
these domains contributes to protecting against depression, anxiety, and stress.

The overall effect of body image perception on mental health underscores the
importance of fostering positive body image among individuals. Both data sources
agree that interventions aimed at improving body image could significantly enhance

mental health outcomes.

158

Skin-Lightening Practices and Mental Health

There is a clear consensus between the quantitative and qualitative findings
regarding the perception of the benefits of SLP and mental health. Quantitative data
shows that a higher perception of the benefits of SLPs correlates with increased mental
health issues, such as anxiety and depression. This significant association is supported
by qualitative data, which provides context for these findings. For example, participants
like Aida, a 19-year-old informant, reported feeling pressured by societal beauty
standards to use SLPs, which in turn led to heightened anxiety and depression. Aida
expressed that she felt more accepted and beautiful when using these products, but the
pressure to maintain a lighter skin tone significantly impacted her mental health. This
alignment across both data sources highlights how societal pressures and the desire to
conform to beauty standards drive the perception of SLP benefits, leading to negative
mental health outcomes.

On the other hand, there is discordance between the quantitative and qualitative
findings regarding the knowledge of SLP ingredients. Quantitative data suggests a non-
significant association between knowledge of SLP ingredients and mental health issues,
implying that awareness of ingredients does not necessarily correlate with mental health
outcomes. However, qualitative narratives indicate a different perspective. Informants
like Heidi, a 24-year-old participant, revealed that her extensive knowledge of SLP
ingredients made her cautious about using these products. Heidi’s awareness of the
potentially harmful chemicals in SLPs led her to scrutinize the products she used, which
helped mitigate some of her mental health risks by ensuring she used safer products.

This qualitative insight suggests that individuals with more knowledge about SLP

159

ingredients might adopt more cautious and informed practices, reflecting safety
concems not fully captured in the quantitative data.

This discordance can be attributed to several factors. Firstly, motivational
differences play a significant role; individuals like Heidi, who are highly aware of SLP
ingredients, might be driven by safety concerns, leading to more cautious behavior.
This cautiousness is not fully captured by quantitative measures focusing more broadly
on knowledge than its application. Secondly, the limitations of the quantitative data
might also contribute to this discordance. Quantitative surveys often lack the
granularity needed to capture the nuanced motivations and behaviors related to
knowledge about SLP ingredients. While these surveys can show overall trends, they
may not fully encapsulate qualitative research's detailed and context-specific insights.

Another area of discordance is the frequency of SLP use and its impact on
mental health. Quantitative data shows no significant association between the
frequency of SLP use and mental health issues. In contrast, qualitative findings
highlight significant mental health challenges faced by frequent users of SLPs. For
instance, Erlinda, a 25-year-old informant, shared that she used SLPs regularly to meet
societal expectations of beauty. However, this frequent use resulted in high levels of
stress and anxiety, as she constantly worried about maintaining a lighter skin tone and
feared the judgment of others. This qualitative data indicates that the societal pressures
to conform to lighter skin standards lead to considerable mental health impacts not
reflected in the quantitative findings.

The discrepancy here can be explained by considering the participants’ cultural
context and subjective experiences. Qualitative data often captures cultural and societal
pressures more effectively, revealing the emotional and psychological toll of frequent

SLP use that quantitative measures might overlook. The subjective experiences and

160

emotional nuances described in qualitative interviews provide a deeper understanding
of the stress and anxiety associated with SLP use, which are difficult to quantify in
standard surveys.

Both data sources show consensus on the significant role of societal pressures
and cultural beauty standards in influencing mental health among emerging adults. The
perception and use of SLPs are largely driven by these pressures, resulting in increased
mental health challenges. Qualitative data provides rich contextual insights, illustrating
how cultural norms and societal expectations shape individuals' behaviors and mental
health. For example, Heidi and Erlinda’s experiences reveal how deeply ingrained
societal standards of beauty can lead to significant emotional distress and pressure to
conform. These findings emphasize the need for culturally sensitive interventions that
address these societal pressures and promote healthier beauty standards to mitigate the
mental health impacts observed in this study.

The integration of quantitative and qualitative findings in Table 14 reveals
consensus and discordance regarding the impact of skin-lightening practices on mental
health. While quantitative data provides broad trends, qualitative narratives offer depth
and context, highlighting the complex dynamics behind these trends. The consensus on
the role of societal pressures emphasizes the importance of addressing cultural beauty
standards in mental health interventions. The discordance between the two data sources
underscores the need for a comprehensive approach including quantitative and
qualitative insights to fully understand and address the factors affecting mental health

telated to skin-lightening practices.

Body Image Perception and Skin-Lightening Practices

161

There is discordance between the quantitative and qualitative findings regarding
the relationship between body image perception and knowledge of SLP ingredients.
Quantitative data shows that for every unit increase in body image perception, the odds
of knowing SLP ingredients increased by a factor of 1.30 (95% CI: 1.20 - 1.41). This
suggests that individuals with higher body image perception are more likely to be
knowledgeable about the ingredients in SLPs. The implication is that a positive body
image perception might drive individuals to be more informed about the products they
use, perhaps as part of a broader interest in personal care and appearance.

However, qualitative data from informants such as Heidi, who had low body
image perception, offers a contrasting perspective. Heidi indicated that her cautious
approach to selecting SLPs, due to concerns over questionable ingredients, was driven
by her low body image perception. Despite her dissatisfaction with her body, she was
very meticulous in choosing products, driven by fears about the safety and efficacy of
the ingredients. Heidi’s narrative suggests that low body image perception can also lead
to increased knowledge about SLP ingredients but for different reasons compared to
those with high body image perception.

This discrepancy highlights a more complex relationship where both high and
low body image perceptions can lead to increased knowledge about SLP ingredients,
but through different motivations. For individuals with higher body image perception,
their interest in SLP ingredients might stem from a proactive approach to enhance and
maintain their appearance. They might actively seek information to ensure they use the
best products that align with their beauty routines. On the other hand, for individuals
with low body image perception like Heidi, the motivation to know more about SLP
ingredients is driven by caution and concem. These individuals might be more vigilant

about the safety and potential side effects of SLPs, reflecting a protective behavior

162

aimed at avoiding further harm to their self-esteem and health. This careful scrutiny is
not necessarily about enhancing their appearance but rather about mitigating risks
associated with using potentially harmful products.

The discordance can be attributed to several factors. First, the motivational
differences are crucial—individuals with high body image perception might be
motivated by enhancement, while those with low body image perception are motivated
by safety concerns. Secondly, the quantitative measures might not capture the nuanced
reasons behind the knowledge acquisition. Quantitative surveys often lack the
granularity to discover the specific motivations and behaviors that qualitative data can
reveal. While quantitative data can show overall trends, they may miss the context-

specific insights qualitative research provides.

The Filipino Culture and Mental Health

There is discordance between the quantitative and qualitative findings regarding
the impact of comments from immediate family members on mental health.
Quantitative data did not specifically address the influence of family comments on
mental health, resulting in a lack of measurable data in this area. This omission could
lead to an underestimation of the significant role that family interactions play in
influencing mental health outcomes. Without specific measures in the quantitative
model to assess the impact of family comments, capturing the nuanced and often
profound effects of these interactions on individuals' mental well-being is challenging.

In contrast, qualitative data vividly highlights the significant distress caused by
comments from immediate family members about body shape, appearance, and skin
color. For example, Erlinda, a 25-year-old informant, shared that comments from her

relatives about her appearance made her feel extremely distressed. She explained that

163

these comments had a more substantial impact because they came from people she
knew well and who knew her intimately, unlike comments from strangers on social
media. This personal connection amplifies the emotional impact of the comments,
affecting her self-esteem and mental health.

Similarly, Heidi, a 24-year-old informant, described how comments from her
parents about her skin color made her feel sad and inadequate. Heidi expressed that
these comments reinforced societal preferences for lighter skin within her family
context, which significantly affected her self-esteem and led to increased feelings of
depression and anxiety. These qualitative insights reveal the deep emotional toll that
family members' comments can have, illustrating how these interactions contribute to
mental health challenges.

The discordance between the quantitative and qualitative findings can be
attributed to several factors. Firstly, the lack of specific quantitative measures to assess
family comments means the quantitative data might not fully capture this critical aspect
of individuals' experiences. Quantitative surveys often focus on broader trends and may
overlook the detailed, context-specific interactions that qualitative data can reveal.
Secondly, the cultural context plays a significant role in this discordance. In Filipino
culture, familial bonds are strong, and family members influence individuals
significantly. The qualitative data reflects this cultural context, where comments family
members' comments can profoundly impact the individual’s self-esteem and mental
health. This cultural specificity might not be fully captured in standardized quantitative
measures, which may not account for the unique dynamics of family interactions in
different cultural settings.

The cultural context in the Philippines emphasizes the importance of family,

and family members' opinions often carry considerable weight. This can amplify the

164

emotional impact of their comments, making them more influential on mental health
than comments from other sources. The qualitative data captures these cultural nuances
and provides a more detailed understanding of how family interactions shape mental

health outcomes.

165

991

amo ydap am wayer fry

10U Op saoos asnjo Aouenbey pw
09 do aad ayy saoos oat RyTyWeNb
atp ut pom deo Aytoydxe # jou

SE yoTyM ‘q Poy USUI soNPsTy
Uo sanssad pruqoo pw poposjo
sous TyUT ywogTUsIs amp sys YysTG
PEP OAL FIL Enb oy], -WwepLOOSIq,
899981 Suyuajqsy-uN{S

‘WWBlam [AQUOS 0} Sor ABYaq oWaNXs

“Y Raq PIGU Sty s}oo yp soUaUOS
YO ‘s pepueys FieOs asaqy

wag anssad am gooy ap] “sou0y Uys
39148] 10; sousraya d og} Buoua nyUt
‘kyreaq jo soy do rad po deys

BY WO! RzIUGOd Mog sozi sea Wo
owesuy :seopoesg Suyuazy3y-upis
“sjwowaad wt

amgny 103 sands yng Apog siy TL

pus eraio wisp Apog ywoyradis | pogsizs BYMaLOS Zutoaj Jo syusUO WI 190 Bnd :svud
$0 suoy duosap oat ey Enb sy oy ‘soBua py sso aWsaq 12]! enD
TPL UB! B sopos a un Apog ‘1q810¢ STY [aQUOD 0} gow Bud dys i¢ W wog Sad
P10} a]! yenbjsa mq om} UI SaOOS 9¥T] SOM Vous oUIINXe 0} But peo] ise)
SAT Ry URN ayy ‘sMsst o& unt |‘dod-y pus a mynodnyoog 0} anso dxe Aap 8 U0 329], :7 Ww wog sag
Apog al2A0S 8 FOIpUT BBP AI BY ENb Awe Aq poous ngut erqio wiskp B :esnyo Aouonbely 1 9]! eng
pte oA! Ry JwNb Mog: snsaasuo; Apoq ywoyru8ts seouetiadxa Z 9 Wud :uonds asg : | URWwog Sad
suondasiag adem Apog oyjesay :uopdasieg ademy Apog wossa dep aJaA0g SOX o8pojmouy LenD ‘sya | €z ‘oesuy
SN8Ig |IBIA saapovid wopdasi0g
(Aasmimng aape.iey) ase
saouasajoy PeyuayA] Jo [aaa] Suyue3437-UPIS ademy Apog ‘
sduppuy aapejqend ‘S}UBULIO;U]
ssuypuy aapeynusnd

“(9 [=U) syURULIOFUT OY) JO YOLs JO} SoaNOs REP YIOg BuIeIB9;UI IOJ Avidsip ouloy} yuLOf SuIzIpeIOUSH “Ey s1qU],


L91

B1sadans soamos eEP Pog ‘sg 1S
Jo o8esn Ayam pte u0y da aod

2 Hipo W BuLMoYs ERP OAT BIT yWNb
om MIM USIP Sq7IS Jo osn ANBor
aq} ple Sauo} Upys 193481] 0} uZOFUOD
op anssad propos Sunysyqsry

SEP SAL EY ENb oy: snsuasTOD
iseapoeig Suyuazysy-upis
‘samssad pyopos pw o8 ut

*Sd’IS JO osn am} pwessaysip
BIUOUL Joy 0} somnquyuOD anssad

STILL" SS9 UrTBy 10y souarayad POpOS B
Sur porpur ‘Al uey pw sood Joy B10 ue
UNS 109431] TIM WOSsesqgo we Sd Alosqo
Spry ‘saopowig Suyuasqsy-upiS
Reepmin

sSuypuy sAQEspHueNd

Apog MIM so[B3njs ywoyrasis | PPOs 0} Sut peo] ‘Bulo qjam PUCO We € If BND ‘SVad
jJosuoyduosep cate pnb | somad wi Aywoyradis wo sue W095 ee)
Ti O81 B sopos 0% un Apoq Sat B90 Ing ‘samo Aq [NyIITeq w *€ Ge wWod Sad
B10} of! yenbysa Mq oq} UI saoos pears aad vay Jord dy pw pogsies 19]! BND
SAL BL wENb oy] ‘sass o@ ut a0 ul goajaqg ‘Ayreoqjo géatod YoomM B BON 9], :7 ww wog sad
AP0q d19A98 9 BOIPUL BEP OAL EI pnb vIpeul pw sanssad propos Aq R :asnjo Aouanbary 1 oF BND
pl oA RI }Nb Yog:snsussuoD | peous nyu o# un Apog MIM s9j33nys € 9[f WNY :u09 do asg +] Ww wod sad
suopdasiag adem Apog epry :uopdasieg ademy Apog | uossadeq owanxg ON :o3pqmou y 1 9]! BND :sva 61 Spry
“Apar ey pnb
pequosapiasd wy pord qophsd
(Crommang aayeszen) SIQBIg Wee seopoeid uopdasi2g Po
sauat3yuy Te3UIA] JO [Aa] Suyaazq3q-0pS asemy Apog
sSuypuy aayeyyend ‘aBOLojay


891

2At Fat BN a UI pequasap w ‘srs
Y Boy PIToW Joy Wt payoayor st
amssad smqy‘s pepays anys 193931]
0} umosuoo 0} anssad pyapos qaay
ays ‘sjonpard urusyq3t]-apjs asn
JOU S8Op Bpuarg a]f4M RI} 9 BOrpur
soanos eEp og:snsuesu0_
ssa0paB1g Supuayqsy-up{S

‘so8ua yo

"SSOUSAT JQP

poskyd wey Joy BY BOY UO 30
Sesnoo} ays Ysnoy}‘sa[s3mMs y Foy,
PIUsUL J0q 0} sojnquyOD anssad

STL ‘OAT 10829B 90 w BuIaq UD{s I9IqST]
JOS pepws plepos way anssad
aq} 4993 ING Sq’JS 98N J0U Soop
Bpusig :sadpIw1g Supuazys-UpiS

Y Poy PIU! wWwoyTUsisjo | ‘sanssad osoyy ofswe uw 0} suOTP UTP € 91! BND ‘SVad
SAI BRU OY a Boqatos sa0os S_g | pw ostaoxe porsdqd oyIp Us! WYSOU te re)
p& Syqg JoH ‘sanssad piapos Smdoo sesn oyg'ssans pus ¢ We wood Saad
01 onp sassi 9% wt Apog o1oaes ‘Aqo1 xs ‘DOB sa dap aroaas 0} Bur pea], TE BND
soouatiadxe epusig Fp Sul Zorpur | ‘y Boy pIUDUI J9y sloop anssad sm], eae 17 us wWod saa
‘at p suoy duosap oar eit pnb pw ‘sMgodeipew wag Aqnoed S8al}S O19A0S sasnyo Aouanbary € Ot BND
SHOOS dAI By }WweNb ay: snsuasuod | ‘s pepus Ajmweq Ejepos Aq panssad ‘Ayor xuw aurayxe | | 2]! wNd :003 de aag 1] We woq Sa
ruopdesseg adem Apog | 9903 epusig :uopdasseg adem Apog | ‘uossadap o1aAeg 0 N :98pqmouy 1 9]! BND :sva
"Y POY
Piuew sepry ug d unt ywoyradis
STQBIg VIA saapovad uopdesiag
(Axeuraing aAyeiey)
saouasajoy TsyuayA] JO aaaT Suyua3qsq-aPI1S adem] Apog
sduypug aaneyyend

sSuypuy sApespuend

LZ Spuaig

ade

‘syuBOLIOjOy


691

WI paqnosep s&‘snE}s 4 Poy BIUSUL
Joy Ut payoogar st anssad srqy,

*S pepuns us Jo1y3T] 0} HAOJUOD
o}anssad pyapos om qooy

ays ‘sjonpar d 8umayq31-unjs asn
JOU S8Op ABD a[TyAA BI o ROrpur
soamos BEp Mog: snsussu0_

‘sore ys Buidoo sw ssojoyo aAysayiy
Jaq] POY Wo sasnooy ays ‘Uns JaIyBI
so pryour yorym ‘Ayreaq jo s papwys
Fi9_0s 0} umoyU09 0} anssad

sduypuy sApespuend

:sa9 981g SapUIqST-UpIS amp sodpo prouyss yng s_’JS asn jou
“Ss pepuns Ayreoq | scoop qed ‘saapowsg SuyuaqSy-UP{S
FIODOS JaAo Y Fay Buzyuord “Bueq
pw Bruning qui SuTsBNys jo {2 BUS! 0} VOL EPIP A BU}XS 12] BND :Svad
SAL BU J9y 9 Boqamod saoos SA woy yrgs e Sar Borpur‘s pepus 1 9yf BND
pW svq JH ‘sanssad piopos Xq Ayreaq 0} Sarumoywoo Jaao y Boy :¢ Ws Wo Sad
peous ngur sa ssi o® wt Apog ozaAes seznuond Mou ayg JouUTT) UsqA T 2]! BND
ssousuiedxe yeQ By) 3uI Zorpur WONUS IB 9 [GIO Ay 30 WI BULAIOOOL Joaou :7 we wo Sag
‘St p saoy duosap oAl eI Enb pw ‘sopog Jour) Suno wy sanssad ssans oJoA0s rasnjo Aouonbery 1 3]! BND
SalOOS OAI BI JWENb ay: snsuesu0|D BiODOs 0} onp emuriNg WILMA poys3nys “Aya xtw osaaas | 7 o]f wNd :u0y do aog : | Ws wog Sag
ruondesi9g adeumy Apog Sq WO ‘uopdasseg adem Apog | ‘uossa dsp swenxg sox :o8pqmou y 1! BND :‘sva TZ WO
*saoos uoy da aad
Jaq GUM 304 SISOO SI ySTyA SEP
SMS BTCA saapoead uopdasieg
(Areuruing aane.Liey) ase
saouarayuy [eyU9JA] JO JaAaT Suyus3q3y-UPIS asemy Apog
sduypug saneyyend ‘sJUBOLIO;U]


OL

aassad pyopos om jo u0y dussap
SAL eH pnb og} wpa SUB! B SIS
joasn HnZor sop“ seémod erpow
pl BIapos Aq poous nyuI‘s papas
UD{S 19I43T] 0} uBOJTOD 0} anssad
ywograsis qoay vor ww BI o Boul
soamos exp Bog: snsuesuo0;
1sa92e1g Supuazqsy-upIS

“suo! goedxe

Piepos pw of unt Apog mis

*sodus poy Roy pyuoW

aJ9A9S JOY 0} SoInqunUOD anssatd siqy
ysnog B ‘Aqn3e1 sjonpa d Suruesq3y]
-UD{S Sasn oYg *s]aWIe Sopue Aj1qG9]99
Pw erpaur ppos Aq Aq way poous Tut
‘s pEpURs UNS 197431] 0} UZOZTOD 0}
suotoedxe pyopos Aq panssad qoay
Bor Ww isaIHBAg SuyUasYysy-UP{S

sduypuy aayezpuend

So[S3nys ywoyTUs{s Jo OA LU Joy “Aywmoyrusys Y Boy Pusu 191 BND :Svad
9 WOqaIOs sHOOS SWad Pw ‘sada Jaq Bape d un ‘9 [Bur BBO Jo93 Tayo 1 9s Bnd
‘SVq JoH ‘sanssad piepos fq 'S PEpusys asamy ‘soja Joy oydsaq :¢ U2 Woq Saad
pode TUT smsst 9% wi Apoq o1sA0s “Sot Jaq ywoyTUsis w soamosos ZI! BND
soouatisdxe wormed Bm} Bur gorpur | jo yoy pwUsI;oquoW Mqs Jaq SunIo yoom B BONO 29], 17 we wog sag
‘031 p suoy dnosep ares! pnb pw ‘sanugeso Aq pozign dod s pepwis ssagjsossaes | # :asnjo Aouonbary ZTE BND
SaOOs oAl RII }UENb oy: snsuasuoD Aqreaq Ost parm jooul 0} s3j33nqs ‘Ayr xuw ouranxe | p 9]} wNd :00y do asg :] Ww wog Sa
suoydasseg ademy Apog vol Ww ‘uoydasieg adem Apog | ‘uossadop swenxg sox :o3pqmouy 1 9II RNY :sva rT ereg
*saoos uoy do aad 10g,
WW: qua sisuoo BED oA BI Nb omy
(aemmng aapezz6y) SNYBIS INVA saapovad uopdasiag =
saouatajuy JepUaIA] JO [BAIT] ‘Suyaas43y-upis aSemy Apog
sdurpuy aaneyyend to ‘syOBOLIOjUy


ILI

Suyuazq3t]-uD{s Jo woy da aad Joy
SuMoys BBP cal BIT ywNb 9m} TL
su3i p yoryM ‘s pepars uns 164431]
0} woyuoo 0} anssad piopos

Jo Woy da aod seput py 1ysysTy
PEP dA! BI ENb oy]: snsuesto_
ssa0poeig SuyusqSy-Up{S

"Y Poy Piusul Joy Bunoa yp A uRy
WY sus WOOD POND JO Al BET
J9q WLM Burast p‘suor wioadxa
Fispos pw 08 ust Apoq

TPM sa[33mys J9q yOoYor SaOOS

9% wi Apog say ‘sanssad pry upy
pw Fepos Aq peous nur smsst
98 wit Apog ywogrudis ssouatisdxo
epul pA RU} 9 ROI BRP sAr eA pnb
pte oar Fy wen Mog: snsuasuo_

suoydassag ademy Apog

‘Zuo Qjom PuaU we wo ZuyuA4sT
UD{S UO SNd0y SABsoox9 HIP SeAaToq,
2YS ‘900 doom BlaDos pw oy1] JoNOq,
B 0} S pad] UNS 19,431] ¥I Sagsodsns
Aq soot yo d Suraayg3y]-upys Aq oyun
0 ward saoua nyu BIpew Boos

pw Sunoyw wi oassal88e BY} SO Alosqo
epUl py ssaopowsg Supuayysy-upiS
*sqoo UNS

yuorayyIp JO 3uy do ow 20 Wow Sood
Jaq BP Bayou “Ay1At stOUT § peMo}
YRS PUO! woued we siysyysIy o4g
‘aagoddnsunso ponuo o.B sjum woo
asm ueyM = Aproadsa ‘o® ult Apog J0q
9009 TYU AyoPIyTUBIs so ouByuT enbaw
pie Alupy way sjus woo ¥q)

q90} epul py :uopdassag adem Apog

“sodua pYO Y Roy BUS oJoAes

Joy Susayor‘ ssoustiadxe oys

—|—

sanuadayuy

(Aaeoming aapetien))
ssurpuy aapezEnO

yall BND ‘SVad

1 2l} BND

*¢ We Wog Sad

€ 91! BND

I2A00 :7 ws woq sad

Ssans oulanxe resnjo Aouonbary yoy BND

‘Ayot xue ousenxe | 7 o]1 NY 00} do aeg 1] U8 wog Sada
‘wossa dap azaaog Sox o8pqnou y Za END :sva | $ 7% Spur pa

STQBIg THEO saopovad uopdasiag
Te}U2]{ JO [240] Bayu9;43q-UPIS aaemy Apog ‘ a

‘SUBULIOFUT

sduppuy aapeypuend


cLI

PLA 30a sisuoo st yor ‘s pepuys
UD{S 19,431] 0} UNOJUOD 0} 499}

aq anssad propos om siydTTysrq
PEP OAL FU pnb oy, :snsuasuo;
18901 jag Surus}qS1-urys,

*soduo ID Y Boy piGoUL

Joy pw swoos 0 un Apog ysry

Joy usamjaq drgsuor Hor xpd w09
20 Ww 8 dugsed&s‘sanssad popos

“Mol xB pwessays 0} Zuynqiu0s

‘q Poy PGW oped un Aywoyrasis
qorym ‘sjonpar d Saruayy3y]

“Us sesn ARnBol syg “sooue NUL
Bmyno pw pozoysty Aq ueAUp

“ADs 191481] 103 aoualgjad Fopos

9 0} wtOsUON 0} anssa d ssoustadxe

sduypuy aapezyyuend

0} np Ajor xe purssans ywoyrusis a4 isaapavig Supuasysy-ups yAIE BND :SVad
soquosep oJ aJaya BEp 2AT EI pnb ‘03 da aod 0% wt Apoq 7 oI! BND
Ot} WIM s}s2U00 ST IOAQMOH PAO pw Waa sa -Jas Joy so ye 1¢ We Wod Saad
“a|t zenbysaqarq om} ul Buteq sxoos amssad smyy ‘Ayreoqjo pepuys y at BND
F Aq po xorpur @ ‘a0; do aod 0 un | on) BUDS oY BuIZIpepr AqnoIed Asp 8 cou0 } 29] 17 Ue wog sag
Apog aauBo d jo [aaa] YSIY 8 olor soud drm am mi ‘sou0} Uys ssaqs aJoaas B :osnjo Aouenbaly py OE ND
Saoos sar gyrywNb oy] ywpLossiq | Js143I[JO wy Al oy Ss Pepus FIOpOS “Ayot Xue oulanxo | p oj! wNH :00y do aag 1] W@ wog saa
suoydaaieg adeumy Apog | By) 9993 0,4 :woydasieg advmy Apog | ‘cossadap swanxg sox :o8pqmouy 1 If BNY :sva 61 ‘Ad
“so8ue pYyS y Poy Pyusu Izy 0}
soinqijuce anssad plepos si) BYL sooriard
2 ROIpUl ssaMos eEP Mog ‘seo! yaad 9 un Apog awenxe 0} AIUIS
(Coomuang aayearey) STYBIS HEI saapoeid uopdesiag i
saouadajuy TepUaTA] JO [aA] Suyussq3y-Opis aseuy Apog
sduypug aayesend ‘SyUBULIOJUy


€Ll

“sa]33ngs Mesy yeyoU
Joy pue soroos a3eun Apog q3rq
Jay usemjeq drysaonejer xojduioo &

SuyseBSns ‘stomo WWM suosuedu0s

“Buteq-[]on
JeUoU! poe ulse}se-jJas J0q sjoRdut

Ajaaneseu gor ‘somsy aned

sSurpug sAQEHUBNd

pur samssaad [ea100s 03 Hom JO snotaus Surjooy ‘spusyy 19q, y alwend :syad
parejas Ajorxue pue ssays jreoyrudis | MIM Jjosioy soreduioo usyo ays ‘adeqs Z2NENyH
Teodor Bep oANBTENb om ‘IoASMOHY | Apog 19y Jo BurAsasapun [aaj J0y SoyBUL 2¢ Uewog Sag
“SVUd Pae SV UT sazoos YatY gorge ‘souog Joy Jo Ayriqista atp TL 9qprend
Aq poyeorpur se ‘uondsoiod oSeun | pue ssouurg Joy WLM payensny Surjoqy Aep ® 9000 1Se9] 17 urewoq Saad
Apog eautsod jo JoA9] YSTY & ySO[JOI ‘sprepusys Ayneaq [e19100s 0} ULIO}UOD ye :osn Jo Aouanbary T2DIENH
sazoos oAyeyHUeNb oy] :JUepsoosiq, 0} amsseid yueoyradis ssoustiadxa 7 9]HTENY -uondsoieg 2] urewog Saq
suopdasseg ademy Apog BUOLD :uopdasieg adem Apog Ayatxue 219495 Sax :o8po]Mouy p end :sva 07 Bu0ID
“SSOMS 919A0S
pur ‘Ajorxue ‘uoissaidap ouenxa
0} SugnquyUoo “WeeY [eWOWT
Jay sjoedun Apoeoyrasis amssaid
Te19{90s sit yet} Seorpur ssomos
wep Mog ‘sionpoud Suruayysy]
-Unjs Jo asn juonbay pue uondssisd
yaiq 3utmoys wep saneqjuenb Joy
sNgBIg Wea saayaead uondasi0g
(Assuming sAQeLiey) ase
saoua19yuy Te90aqA] JO yaaa] Sayuasqay-uTYS aseumy Apog
sdurpuy saneyTEnd ‘syusuLioyuy


vLI

sSuIpug aapeypuend

soqovoidde snoynes quim samssoid Z91BIENY :Svad
Tev0100s Surouejeq saquosop Iploy ‘Ajsnonnes syonposd Surusyq3y-orys T 9]B7end
aloyM Bep oaneyenb WLM susye | sasn rplopy ssaanovig SuyuaqSy-UpIS +€ Uremiod saa
SIU], “7 pue | so[qrenb ssome sasoos “sadtoyo a]AISajT] JoIMeOy, € 9]7eNnd
SUA Pue Syg Aq poyoyaz ‘sonsst pue Ajayes yonpoid uo Bursns0y Aep @ 9000 se] :7 urewog saq
a8eunt Apog ayesspows ayeorput ‘Burueyq81]-urys 0} yovosdde snonnes ssaqs olaAes | 48 :asn Jo Aouanbary Za1neNy
soroos sAneyoenb oq] :snsuasu0_d 8 JIM Samssoid [eja190s sooue]eq ‘Ayorxue aleaas | ¢ ajyrend :wondaoisg :] Urewog saa
suondasi9g ademy Apog IploH :uondesiag ademy Apog | ‘uoissaidop owanxg SoX :o3poymony | 9IneNd ‘sya 7 ‘IPIPH
“Ancae
araAas 0} SuyNquyTOO ‘MYeAq [BITOUT
Jaq spedur Apaeoyrusis amssoid
Tey8100s siqy JT aeorpUr ssomos
wep Tog ‘sjonposd Suraayq3r, “so[38ngs myeoq
~upys JO asn juanbey pue uondaoied JeyUaur []eI9A0 Jay 0} BuNGLNWOS
yarq Satmoys wep caneyuenb ‘Aorxue pur ssays jueoyrusis
J0q TIM suse yor ‘sprepueis 0} spea] amssoid sry, ‘suonejoodxa
UPS 19j437] 0} WEJTOD 0} sjaaz | [RIOI00S pu eIpow [eIoos Xq poousnyur
PUO[D omssaid yeroto0s amp SIGS | st yorq ‘prepueys Ajnvaq e se oU0} UTIs
Rep aanjeyjenb ay :snsuasuoD | sayyay] e UreyUFeUL 0} amssaid arp s[say
ssaon BIg Surua}qsq-UDIS PHO[D saanowig Suyaa3q3y-up{S
(Caemmng aayeazey) SNYBIS TIBIA saogaead uondasiag PP
saomasayuy Te303qAl JO [249] Suyuasq3q-0T1S aSeury Apog .
sSurpuy aaneqend ‘s}UBULIO;OT


SLI

JUBOYTUSIs 0} oyeIopeul ayeorpuT
saloos sanByUENb ay snsuesu0d

suondassag adeuy Apog

‘sadAy Apog jeapt Jo sjeXequod erpout
0} ONp ssaNsip [eyUaUI JuBOTUIS sooRy

Suopeg :uondasieg adeuy Apog

Ssaqjs oJ9A0S
‘Ayorxue owenxo

‘uolssaudep ouanxg

y a[0FeNd :uondaoieg
Sox :oBpo]mony

‘spedum Myeoq

Jequow pue sprepuEls [e19100s jnoge
sws909 Joy SuNSo[Je1 ‘Aovoyyo pue
Ayes Suzquoud jo suonduosep
SAQeTENb Joy PLM JU9}sIsuOD

axe sjonposd SuraeTy3t-arys Jo

asn yuanbey pue Jo oSpayMouy Joy
“samssaud [B}9190s 0} anp soonoesd
Burue;q3q-arys 0) yovordde snonnes
SIPIOH 19811q31q wep cAneHTeNb
pue saneuenb mog -snsuasuo;,
ssaopoeig Juyaagysy-uN{S

“Umesy peyuau

Joy Uo pedunt em pue sprepuys
Ayneaq [891008 Jo ssouseMe

ue Saeorput ‘soo1049 apAysayT]
Jonesy pue Soyusyay-unjs 0}

“Aowogye pue Ajayes Suizguoud
ynq amssad |Ra190s Suztuso0ar

—_|___

———y
Z91pEnD

:] Uremod sad

€ s1RIEND ‘Sv

9¢ ‘Suopeg

saouasajay

(Aaemuing aageLien)

sduypuy aaneyyend

SNyBIS PIEOH
Te309],] JO 2Aa7]

soopoead

Buyuayyaq-upis

uondesieg
aseury Apog

sSuypuy aapeynueNd

‘syuBmojay


9LI

‘amssaad ]e0100s Jo 2AneLeU

SIY iM JUajsISUOO o7e s~npold
Buraayy3q]-unjs Jo asn ywanbey

pus uondsosad y8rq sty ‘sprepueys
UHYS 193487] 0} ULIOJUOS 0} s[aoy
Suopeg amssaid [eyo1o0s yueoyrasIs
9qp USTYsTY Bep oanenenb

pue cAneuenb jog :snsuasu0d
isaopovig Suwa ysy-UP{S

mpeg

Teyuaw sry uo yoedun punojoid

8 aaey adXy Apog Jeep! ue cvsTqoR
0} samssaid [e9100s yeM :sedsns
saomos yep qjog ‘adeum Apo

01 paiejax suoraeqaq [nyourey pur
SSoNSIP [BUSOU JTeOyTUSIS saquOsep
Suopeg aoqM eyep oar-eyjenb

TRIM sUsTe SILL, ‘so100s $3q pue
SV Aq paysayar ‘sons: o3eun Apoq

‘sprepurjs asay} jaaul jou. ay MAYA
Tpyesg [eow sry syoayye gor ‘Urys
Jaq431] Avy OF aMssaid [eya100s spoay
Suopeg :saapoeig Suyua;ysy-up{S
*sIOLAByaq,

asoqy Ul ULeY om} SuIzrUsooas 13}B] ING

Buyerp swanxe 0} Suyosay Ayjeqrar

‘yaoM & 9dU0 ISB]

ye :asn Jo Aouanbary

saouarayuy

(Assuring aayesiey)
SSurpuy aaneyEnd

STUBS WITCH
[BUI] JO [BAIT

saopovaid

Soquasysn-Upis

€ SEND ‘Svad

Z a[prend

+¢€ Urewod Sad

Tajpsend

:7 uewlog saa
wopdesieg
asemy Apog

sduypug aageynuend

ae

‘syuBmIojuy


LL

isaapoeig Supwayysy-uyS
‘auoye

Bep aagequenb amy Aq pommdes
Alyny you st gor ‘samssoid
18191908 0} np saduayjeqo Tyeoq
[ejuaw SutA}Jopun ssousuedxe

SUD ‘seroos a8eun <poq q3rq

“souapguos
“J9s paseaisep pure ssans [ejU9UI Sty 0}
SuTNquyuOs ‘souR}da008 [BIN0s 19}9q
0} pea] pnoo unjs J9y3q SurAsryoR
JBN SeAoTeq Op “suLOU [B190s puB
erpowl Aq poouonyyut ‘sprepuels UDys
ajy3q] 0} uLO;UOD 0} amssaud [e}2100s
$199} SUYD ssaopo81g Suua;qST-UpIS

sdulpug sAQeyyaEnd

aidsap yeq) sayeorpur Aouedaxostp *suosuedwioo jeu13}x9
STL ‘381s [eWoU sty oedurt jo pedun canesou om soueSyru eq}
Apueogragis you op Kay} susrepo JI2S JO asuas SuoNs B JO suIsTIEqOOUL 1 21808Nd :syud
9q ‘suostreduzoo Aq poouanygut | Sudoo pedojoaep sey oy sisoB8ns sry, raise)
SI SLGS apg ye) 3so33ns “oyeys [BJUSUL STY yooyye APUBOWTUsIS +€ areuiod Sad
Rep oAgeiyenb ayy “IOAsMOH ‘SV q you op Aoq} sisisut oy Ysnoy} | ayrend
ut Ajzejnonred ‘uondoored oSeun “wiry souenyur suosueduios esau} yaaM B Q0UO jSBI] 7 urewog saq
Apog eanisod jo Joaa] Y8ty B oLJor eM) BuSpojmowyoe ‘erpou je190s uo ye :osn Jo Aouanbery Ta1BIENH
solods sAeIQUENb sq] :JWepIoosiq | siamo 03 Apog sry sereduioo Apuenbay, Ajorxae asaas | p a]yFend :uondssieg :] Ureulog sag
suogdasiag asvuy Apog suqa :uondasieg adem] Apog ‘uotssoidap 919A9S ON :oSpoymouy y bend ‘Sva 92 ‘suqD
“ssams a19Aes pus ‘Ajorxue
‘uorssaidap aulanxe Suys9]Yo1
(Caemamng aanesz0y) SnjBIg W)TBaAL saogaead uoydasiag =
saouasayuy TeyuaqA] Jo [2Aa77, Buyus)q37-0PS asdemy Apog
ssurpuy aayeyEnd ‘syUBMIOJUY


SLI

asuas Suons e seq pur Apog sy MIM
jUNUOd sjaej Suop3uig yey} soB3ns

‘souapyuos pue sounjdao08

sduypuy sApeypuenO

Byep aaneytenb om ‘IaAsmojyy “J19S JO asuas Buoys ev ZuyOIyar ZaqENd :Svad

‘uondasiad uoyrpuoo jesshqd | ‘stomo aseojd 0} uery Jomyer UoORJsyES yp o[nend

aapisod syeorput ¢ ureMiog Sad yeuosiad srq Joy 9q pjnom Jopisu0o +¢ Uremod Sad

UT Sazoos YBTY opTgM ‘| UreWog sag | 3WsTwW oy soTuego Aue jem soziseqduo L 9]psend

pue Syq Ut Ajrenonred ‘susou09 9H ‘sprepueys Ayneaq [e}9!00s OOM B 20U0 ISeO] :7 urewog saq

aseuil Apog ayesapour 0} Mo] }99]JoI oul 0} 31 aBueYo 0} aNtsap jou sop Ssans amAes | 48 :asn Jo Aouanbaly Z91ENg

sazoos aANeiHUeNb sy] :JWepsoosiq | pue Apog jusLMO sty WLM 1U9}N09 s[oay ‘Marxue owanxe | | a]QeNd :vondsoisg :] Urewog Saq

suondasi0g adem Apog Suop3uiq :aopdasieg adem Apog ‘aorssoidap aaAeg Sox :o3poyMony 1 a1BENd :syaq | 61 ‘Suopsmq
“Aorxae |
pus uorssaidap oleaes Sugoo[jo1
‘amssaad [e}0190s Jo vonduosep
saneienb sq MIM Usie sjonpoid
Burasyy3q]-unjs Jo asn yuanbey
pue uondaosed y81q siz] ‘sprepueis
UPS Jaxq3T] 03 WOZTOD 0} syoaz
suyD amssaud [eatsos yuvogrusis
oup 1ysTGaTY wep eanedenb
pur sAneynuenb qog :snsuasuo;
ses PAA saapovad uondasieg
(Assuming aane.iey) ase
saouesayoy Teyuayq] Jo paaay Suyuajqsy-0rS aseary Apog ‘
SsSurpuy aaneyEnd ‘s}UBULIO;UY


6LI

Sssurpug eaaneyQuend

SueNu] c1ogM wep oAaneyyenb omy Teyo190s Aq pamssaid sjaoj agg +€ Urewiog Sad
HM suBye SILL “SVad PUR ‘saa | “Aineag Jo prepurys e se UTys 0943] 10y 1 91nrend
‘SV UI saloos Mo] Aq payooyor | souarayoud om Apremnonred ‘suondeoied oom B 00 ISBa] :7 urewog Sqq
‘sansst a8eunt Apog oJ9A9S 9}e91pUL aBeult Apog uo Ar0jstq jeTUO]OD Jo Ssaqjs aJaAes | ye :asn Jo Aouanbary 1 9197en
sa100s sAnBIHUENb oy], :snsuasuoD | souanIyur JueOyTUSIs om soSpojmouyor ‘Morxue awlanxe | p a[tyend :uondaoleg :] Urewiog Sag
suopdaoieg ademy Apog Buen] :uoydasieg ademy Apog | ‘uorssoidep swonxg ON :93peymony 1 qed ‘sya 0z ‘Buequy
“ssaqs pus ‘Ajorxue
‘uoissaidap alsAas Sunoeyor
‘amssoad [e}9100s Jo oAeLEU
STq WHIM yUa)sISuOO ore sjonpoid
Suruaiy3y]-aNYs Jo osn yuonbey pus Agrees sty pur sjeopt aso~ us9M39q,
uondaosed mo] SIH ‘sprepuyys UTys de v soatooied oq vega Aorxae
Jax431] 0} WUEJUOS 0} s[903 SuopSuiq: pus ssans Jo s8uyjoay 0} SuNquADOD
amssoad }e}o100s uogTUsIs “Treo [eyuow sty syoedu souowos
2up G3Tq3ry eep cAnentenb amssoad Sm, “Bis U1 sprepueys
pur aaneynuenb mog :snsussuod, Ayneaq uo souangur yueoyTadis
ssaonaeig duyuasq3q-upis 8 SB SoBpoyMmouyoe oy YOIGM ‘sou0}
“snyeys Wyyey yeyuaUE pue aBeumt Apoq UPjs 131481] Jo UoNEZITeap! UoAU
poateoiad sry uaaajaq Aouedasosip ~BIPOU! pUe [e}9190s aq} JO aTEME St
2 Buyeorpat ‘sourjdacoe-sj0s Jo | SuopSurq :seopovsg Suyu9;q43y-0PIS
(Cremumg aanezey) sms Ween saapoBid uondasieg Po
saauet3juy TeyuayA] JO [aaa] Suyaa3y3q-04S asemy Apog
SSurpuy aayesTEnO ‘squBULI0juy


081

“ssaqs

@aAas pue ‘Aarxus ‘uolssaidap
aulegxe Sunooyyor ‘sprepueys Anevaq,
Wo saoUaN]UT [B}o190S pus [BOUO}STY
JO dANeLEU Joy TL UBte sjonpord
Surmejq3q]-urys Jo osn yuanboy

pue uoydaosad y31q Jo “sprepueis
UNIS 194431] 0} WLIOJTOD 0} s]305
Suenuy] amssaid [eyotoos yaeoy Tass
op 18H Y8Ty wIEP eANeHTeNd

pus sAnenUenb Mog :snsuesu0d
wsa0poBIg Suyuaqsy-up{S

“ssas pue ‘Ayarxue ‘uolsseidap
awaQxe 0} SuNNqUaUOS ‘tTHyROq
]eyaaw say yoedunt Aueoyrusis
samssoid sou yeqy ayeorpur
saomos wep Tog ‘A10}stq fefBOjoo

‘somssaid sory SuneStAed Ul so104o
yedosiad Jo sougyodun om ses ose
9s ing ‘Tpyeay peyWoU Uo yoedunt syr
pure souaiayaid [ejo100s pouresBur sim}
sazfusosel ayg ‘sajdood pouupys-399481]
Aq sourddyrgg om Jo uoneztuojoo
9} 0} Uys JoIqST] 10} souarayord

90} JO sjoos TBoLIOIsTY amp Saoey,
Suen] :saopavig Suyusazysy-upis
“au0AIOA9

Jo} UOHeSI[Go UB aq jou pnoys

3 YBnom ‘o[qissod st sprepueys asamp

sSuypug sagespuend

Aq peouanyur sprepueys [e121900s Suyoour ‘saomosaz pue UOHeUTULIZp 1 91ND :svad
Aq pomssaid 8urs9j soquosap TPLM 3eq} SOAdT]9q 3Nq sprepuE}s tse)
STIS TIE) saoyoeid uondesiag
(Aascaming aaye1ieN) : a ase
saouasajuy Teyuay,] Jo Jaa] Suyuayysy-upIS adeury Apog
sSurpuy aayeyrend ‘uemoyoy


181

‘suonduosap saneyyenb Jog MLA
qua\s}su09 are suone}sedxa |ea100s
9saq} 0} DonoBe pus jo uondasied
JoY ‘sprepueys uTys 193q3T]

0} WLOJUOD 0} sjsej Aor amsseid
Tevetoos ap 1q3Ty81q wep oAnByTeNb
pure sAneiquenb mog :snsussuod
isaspovig Suyuajysy-UpS
‘syso8ans ouoye

2yep eaneynuenb oq} weTp TeOy
[ejGowi Jaq uo yoedur punojoid

aio B SuIeorpul ‘sprepuEys

dxo ‘anys sq} U9}431] 0) sIOLAeqaq
Aysu ut o8e3us Ava sjenprarpur osayM
“2u10q-][9M [UW Uo joedun jryuUeY
8 0} peo] Wed ‘sjeapr sloemerdns
SyTM pu WSLIO]O9 aAIsBAIod

Aq Waaup ‘souoy Uns I9jg3t] Ureye

0} samssaid [Bjo100s pus JeIMy]No aq -

sduypug aageypuend

Ajneaq UsAUp-erpoul pue [e}a100s ‘uotssadap Z END :Syad
0} onp Aoenbapeut jo s8uraay se Yons Slapsosip yTeoY [eWU 0} 1 amend
pure ssans JUeOyIUsIs IseBIns | FayNqunuos ‘soseo ouios U1 ‘pu sonsst t¢ Urewod Sad
Byep eageyyenb ogy “JOAOMOH ‘SVUd adeunt Apog 0} Supe ‘Tyeay [eUSUE € 9nd
pue Syq or Ajrejnonred ‘susaou09 pus ws9}s9-J[9s senpLArput yoedurt Joaau :@ urewog Sad
adeun Apog ayelapou yoayjos | A[jueoyrusis wes ‘erpow Aq payesedoid resn yo Aouanbary rahe)
sozoos aAneinuenb oy] :yueps0ssiq: asom Ajsemnonred ‘sprepueys Aneaq Ssos o1Aes | ¢ o[fWeNd :uondeoisg :] Urewog Sad
suondaciag adem Apog [2191908 0} ULIOJTOD 0} amssaid ag - ‘aorsseidap 212005 8oX :o3pojmouy TIMWEND :‘Sva €z ‘Aor
(croureang sanestey) STHBIS TVA saonoeid wondasi0g
saguasayuy Te30ayA] Jo [aaa] Suyuajqdq-UpiS ademy Apog
sSurpuy aanesyend ‘syuBUli0juy


781

Tpeay [ewWow Joy Ut poyooyar st
amssaid siq], ‘sprepueys Urys 101431]
0} WIOJUOD 0} amsserd [eIa1008 sjaay

ays ‘sjonposd Surua;q3q-orys osn
JOU Soop ar]Ay o[FG A Jet) aJeorpur
soomos wep Tog :snsuasu0D
ssaonoeig Suyuasq3y-upjs
‘kone

aI0A9s pue uolssoidep oulanxe

0} 3urpeay ‘semssaid [eo190s 0} onp

“ssoys pu uolssoidap

ax9Aas 0} SuyNQLBUOD ‘sa[33nqs

Upyeay [Bout Joy sayequesexe omssoid
STYL “ULYS 191481] Joy souasazoud oy}
souenyul AjiAvoy Aoeuaidns oq pue
WSLIO]O9 Jo UoMaUIOUAY [eqo]3 oq}
pure suoyejoadxe ]e}a100s yey} SAIOSGO

Aog ssaopovig Suyua3qSy-up{s

sduypuy eaaneypuend

so[33nys Meoq PeUsUE JOBOyTUIS | syeopr asoq} JoouL 0} SeALNS ays SB ssaNS 1 21B7eNd -Svud
jo suonduosap oayeijenb | pus Aoenbapeur jo sdurjooy 0} Surpes] 1 prend
WPM UBB sayeos eeun Apoq “qpreeaq jeuow! J0q jowdun sprepueis +€ Uremod Sad
Te 103 often ysaMo] ayy UT saroos | asamp JET) SoSpojmouyoe oyg ‘sound Z a1pTEN
sanenuenb oy ‘sansst oSewt dod-r pue dod-y Aq poouanyyut Joaou 2% UreMiog Sad
Apog aisaaas ayeorput eep oayeyenb Ajremonred ‘sprepueys Aineoq weAUp :asn Jo Aouanbary 1 9]n7end
pue sanequenb mog :snsuasu0d ~BIpeul pus [Bjo190s Woy omssaid Ajorxue asoAes | p o[NFeNd :wondsoseg 2] Urewog Saq
suopdasiag adumy Apog | om) sjooy Aor :uondasiag adem Apog | ‘uorsseudop auanxg ON :o3peymouy L 91D7eNd :sva 81 ‘andy
“samssoid asoqj 0} snp sseqs
pur uoissaidap asaAes Sunsapyor
(Cawarmng aapesiey) SIBIG Wea saopovid uondadieg a
saouasayuy Teyuayal Jo JaAay Suyuasqsy-upS advary Apog
ssuypuy aaneyyEnd ‘syuBOLioyuy


€81

SIH ‘Sprepawys UPjs 109484]

0} wLIOJUOD 0} sjoay Oprenpg amssoid
Teyot00s oup ysTySTy eep oAneyenb
pur saneynuenb Mog :snsuesuod
ssaopoeig Suyuazqsy-uNs

“Treeq

Jejuaw sq uo yoedu punojoid

8 oAey Samssaid [eyo100s 32q)

‘2 JBOIPUI Ssomos wep Gog ‘amsodxa

“your jou are
s[208 sty ueYM ssaqs pus UoIssaidap Jo
SBUr]993 0} Po] Sey JO]Oo UDYs pezt[eopr
ue jo ymsind smqI, ‘ssousayoenye

Sty aAoidunt pjnom 940} uns 391437]

8 SurAarqoe yep ZuLAsijoq ‘sousnyut
BIPoU pue somssasd [ej9190s 0} onp

syonposd Suraayy31-urys sosn Ajrejndox

ssuypuy saAnepUeNd

Apog 0} poyeyar sans paw Ajerxue oprenpg :saonowig Suyua;yaq-UpyS € SEND ‘SVad
yueoyTUsIs saquosep opsenpy a1aqM “9UIT] I9AO BULsq-][94 € ound
wep sayeqyenb om ILM suse [euow pue souspyuoo siy payoaye :¢ urewoq Sad
SIH "7 WrewWOg SA PUR ‘| UreWOg sey pur juasisiad st Aorcae sty 1 9jprend
SU ‘SV Ul sazoos Mo] Aq power | ‘syuowou! syeuNyUT UI amsodxe Apog 0} Aep 2 2000 \sea] :@ urewod Sad
‘sonsst odeun Apog asoaas aeorpur | sowioo 31 ways Ayjersedso ‘o3eunt Apoq Ssaqs aJoaes | ye :osn Jo Aouonbaly T 9197eNd
sasoos aanequenb aq] :snsussao0; sty Surpreder Ajorxue yueoyruBis sjoay ‘Ayarxue swayxe | ¢ opwend :uondsoleg :] Urewlog $qq
suopdasieg adeuy Apog oprenpg :uoydasieg ademy Apog | ‘uorssoidep owenxg ON :93poyMouy Lomend :sva | Lz ‘oprenpg
“saloos uonjdaored ysrq
Jaq] GUM JUa}SISMOO SI Ory ‘BEp
aayeqtfenb amy ut pequosap se ‘snqes
(Cavormng aaneaiey) STQBIG WI[b2R saapoead wopdasiag ote
saguaiayuy TequaqAl Jo [2497 Suyuajq3q-UpIS aSeury Apog
sSurpuy aayeyyend ‘syuBULIojay


v8

‘ssans
99A98 pur ‘Ajarxue ‘uorssaidap
autegxe Suydeyor ‘aayeLeN iy MIA
WajsIsuoo ore syonpoid SurasyqSt]

Uys Jo asn juonbay pue uondsoied

saouaaaguy

(Areurming aaye.iey)
SSurpuy saneyyEnO

sTywIg WOH
TeqU9JA] Jo 12497

saopoead
Suyuayysy-upis

uoydasi0g
aseuy Apog

sduypug aapejypuend

ase

‘sjusmLioyuy


ssl

“ssans

pure ‘Ajarxue ‘uorsseidep jsurese.
Sunoajoid 0} saynquyuod smewiop
asamp ut wisaisa Apog aanisod
ye) Saneorpur syuedionred

tim ‘sp syoddns eyep
SARWEND ‘sansst qyeoy [eyuour
WU drysuoyeyjas asraaur SuoNs
B SmoYs (CONIPUOD JeoISKyd
“wus0005 1WsleM/MBuaNS

Apog saddp ‘ssousanoemy
Jenxeg/ssousanoemy

TeoIshqg) wee}so

Apoq Jo urewop yoeg :snsuasuo_
isuyemi0g Wsa3sq Apog

*somooNo WeaY [eyUSUT 19}}9q
0} poxuT] st wonerocudde Apoq
yeq} oyeorpur sBurpuy saneyenb
pur saneyuenb Tog “3u1aq
-[12M [eyuaw Sayowosd of aBeut
Apog eapisod jo ajoz yeronio

amp SIGS TYSIY sonst TEOG
[ejUewW psonpa pue uonelseidde
Apog usemjeq UoneISosse
yuBogTUBis ay :snsuasuo_
NDIseH

[s3uaJ] pus uonEesddy Apog

41 yoaload uay} pun }1 proan 0} puay [ ay1] $37 fjasdiu ynogo
uly} Jou pup so1do}j 42430 0} uoyuario Aut 14adip 2Y!'T,,

PIO sreak 17 ‘epuaig — ,, 'sy00] du 40f ajvsuadwod o} juoffa

soy) ut ind of anny J yurys | ‘yDad ‘ayy Say uoffa ayqnop
juaxe nod asnnoag ‘Buty Kan aun susjupysau 3urdo5,,

Plo sieok 07 ‘eUO[D ~,, yoouD Gaixuw up
PDY | UaYym aul} D SDM aay] tY431U ssajdaa]s D andy J,

Plo suwak 12 ‘opsenpy — ,, 240/29
Snoixup asou aul apout }} ‘og ‘sau Axas uy ‘samy Kas
ay} ul uang ‘ta1ys Kui {fo 3uryn} asofag jno aut passa.ys
Ayjpa4 31 Ing ‘jak pasouSvip uaaq j,uaavy J asnv2aq
Garxup dbs j,upo | “Gaixup uo asoud yusy} J 243] 5,11,

‘sounjdocoe pur Ayisioatp Aynvaq

au) JO Zurpuejssopun pure ssouareme ue Suidojaasp Surpnyour
‘suorjoBel sAnedou o3eum-Apog 0} sustueysow Suidoo dojaasp

0} Way} pomoTje osye paoustadxe syueULIOsUr emp 3eT} SSANSIP OL,

‘oriqnd am wo,

SoAlaSWAT] [OSI Wat} spew yor ‘Ajorxue pue uoissaudap
peouariadxe way} Jo awlog ‘ssansip jeordojoyoAsd popjoih
Ayato0s Aq jos sprepurys Ajnvaq oq} Woy aatsoied syaemuoyut
amp 38q) adAy Apog jeapt aq} ‘podojaacp sauiaq: 94} 0) Surpsosoy

‘Jepous jusuamseour
[les9A0 oy Sarpnjout ‘qjeoy jeyUsUI MIM payetoosse
Ayyueogruais are uondsored o8eun Apog Jo sjornsuoo [TV

. . . uondsoieg odeuy
£9°0 670 sso Apog [1281949
7 7 - € Urewoq
wl Ort os'T ursaisg Apog,
[_- Pj} ==
5 5 @ urewog
so'st €e8 Ovi ursaisq Apog,
7 5 | Urewog
ve Ve 80°71 SULIT ursaisq Apog
aiddy Apoa |
SL oe's 2) uoneieddy Apog
90uB}d990"
00'1 v
Tedoney eAnisod
punog | punog
aaddn | s2M0T uo Siomereel
(1D) Teasaquy sovBUISY
aouepyuod %S6 PUA

‘ssaqs pur ‘Ajorxae
‘uorssaidap Jo sjoAg] J9q3tq SuLABY Jo YSU tp JO} “MOH
Teyaayj uo uondasi0g a3euy Apog jo soyeummso yoy

s99u919jU]

sBuypuy aapesEnd

sduypuy aapeypuend

“SdoMOS ep YIOG Jo UoNeIBouI oy} 10y Ae[dsip ousoy) yULOf Buiztpe19Ued |[eIOAO “pT 21GB


981

Bep aageynuenb ayy ‘sonsst qyeoq
[equ9UE paseor9UT WLM saye[aLI09
seonoeid Suruajy3q]-UnYs Jo syyousq,
au) Jo uondaosad soy Bry Bey
90188 ssomos BEp Hog :snsuasuo;D
SUPA [eUaA,

pus syyauag JIS Jo wopdes10g

‘AUIJUO UDAS A,] IDYM SD ‘pasysaApD SD AUOI ULYS ajlyM
104} anatyov jouund | Kye asnozag ‘passacdap 323 J 104)
Jujod ay} 0} yspoay jo}uawu Ku syoaffo 31 ‘joya fo asnpoag,,

*1O[09 UNAS UI JOGA JO 199485]
2q 0} pemssaid Zutaq ynoge pessaidap pure “snorxcue ‘poLuiom
3/2} SJWBULIOJUI at Jo DUIOS 3eq} PoMoYs jUoUIssasse OAHEITENH

“ssaqs pue ‘Ajarxue
‘uoissoidap Jo s[oAo] Jay31q SuLAey Jo ¥su op 10; “TPTEOEY
TeUaW] Uo ssonowg SuTUDIq3I] UNIS Jo soBUINSE WayA

“Apnys stq} Ut peAtasgo

spedun wyesy [eusur sAyeSou omy
Supesnrw ut jeyuasso ore AyAnisod
Apogq aj0woad pue sprepueys Aineaq
Telald0s ssamppe yet} SUOHUSAIO}OT
aApisuas Al[BIMYIND “Ws9}se-J]9s
pue o8eun Apog nam Suidojoasp
Jo a8ejs JeonUO B38 are OYA ‘SIINpE
ButBsouso Joy yuBAd[az Ayrenonsed
are sSuIpuy oy] :snsuasuo;
3810398 q [enjxa3U0D

‘saulooqno TyjeeY jeyuaw souequa
Apueoyragis pinoo eseum Apoq
Suracidun ye powre suonusAsayut
yey} sou8e soomos wep Mog
“s[enplarpur Suoure o8eurt Apog
aAnisod Zu9}s0} Jo souepodun
9) saJoosiepun Wyeaq

Jeyuau uo uondasied oSeunt Apoq
JO OQjJo [[eIDAO OY, :snsuasuo_
smondaaiag

adem Apog [[e12AQ

Plo siead 6] “epry ~ ,, paonped
St 111M fo sso] 40 ssaupps dy; ‘asja Buiyjatuos ofuo

sanuaiayuy

sduypug aapeyTend

sduypuy eaayeyuend


L81

Jaj431] ureyareur 0} samssaud yeya190s
0} onp Ayorxue pue ssaNs JO s[aAo]
y8rq woder sqTg osn Apuanbay ogm
syuedjonreg ‘sSurpuy eanenenb mim
s}seQuod sonsst qijeaY [eWaW pue
asn d’TS Jo Aouanbay om usemyoq
woneloosse saneynuenb yueogrusIs
BJO HOR] YL, :eou"psoosiq

2989 LIS Jo Aouanbasy

‘sysu Wppeoq
Jequaw owos oe3nrw 343TH eq}
Ayayes noge susou09 Buyooyer ‘asn
Joy jnoge snonned ore syusrpesBut
‘TS Noge a8pe]Mony ssow WILMA.
S[ENPLAIPUT Jem o}eorpur saAnedeD
aaneyyenb ‘uoneisosse juBogTasIs
-uou 8 ysadans eep oApEnUENb om
SIMA ‘SiarpowBut g7TS Jo a8pojmowy

“(BIT -€0'1

1D %S6) OI’ JO 10}9¥y @ Aq poseosoUl sonsst WIBOHY [EUIPAL
SuLavy Jo sppo oq ‘syyousq JTS Jo suoydeosed ur aseauour
yfon As9A9 JO} TloayM “Peay [eWIUI ILM poywloosse
Apueogrusis are osn gTS JO sigouaq paatsosad oy} ATID

‘om Surpredei s8urpay oaneyenb queogusis,
pue saneynuenb om woemjoq Zl 08'0 S60 os)
Aouedaiosip 8 si aay, :souepsoosiq, PIO sreak 6] ‘epry —,, anym asam J fi aayonayo d Ts 50 Aouanbory
is}UaIpaiduy gTS U0 aspajmouy adOul aq | Pinoy {4a}1ym aaam J fi ayt; aq | pynom joy el 68°0 Sot syuarpex3ut
‘upaul J ‘aanssaad 4apun w,] yoy} jurod ays Of ‘ajlyn ATS 10 e8pe]mouy
“uorssaidap pue Garxue 0} Surpesy Man $1 ssauanyovayp 4194) ‘JYSLd SOY) ‘vIpauL D120 srt col Olt sigeusq
‘uoydasied sq) oAUp sprepueys uy ‘Suryjauos aas ] ‘Way “Ut adtaodad J joys SBurys aad d TS Jo vondesieg
Ayneag 0} wLI0JUOd 0} azIsap om adays ayt] SJ] “SSa4jS afitt] D S,a40y} ‘Mou 1y8L ‘JYBLayy,, punog | punog
pue samssaid [ejorsos yeq3 Suneorpat aaddy | samo7T yo eae
‘xqqU09 epraoid wep caneiyenb am Plo sieak 97 ‘Buopeg — ,, passaadap aq 0} puay (19) Peasajuy sayemysgy s a
pure ‘voneisosse JURY IUSIs & MOUS J ‘40109 urys joapt dui panaiyon j,uaany J uaym ‘Surunay aauspyuoD %S6 yaya
sa0ua13ajuy sSurpuy sayeyTEnd sdulpuy aapenuend


881

a1aqm drysuoneyjes xojdaz09 si0ul &
sysod8ns Aouedaxstp sm, ‘uondesiad.
aBeun Apog Moy sq Aq WaAUp

SM SyuoIpaBut s]qzuonsenb 0} anp
SdIS 3an29]9s 0) qokoudde snonnes
Taq ye—p payeorput ‘uondsosed

9Beum Apoq Mo] peq OM “PIO

ey] SyoeULOJUL WON Rep sAnBTENb
“IOAQMOH “sJUSTPesBUt gS inogs
MOUY 0} A[a¥T] Q10UI ore UONdeoiad
98eunt Apog soySry TILA STenprAIpaT
JEM sysaBIns sip “OE | JO ojo" B

Aq paseaiout syuarpas8u! g7]¢ Suimouy
JO sppo om ‘uondsoseg oSeury

Apog wt aseasout yun AraA9 103 32q)
SMOYS BIEp DANEHUEND :sdUBps0IsIG.

Plo sreak p27 “IPIOH — ,, “spunfays
pasn ssn{ J ‘pos8sapun hu Bupang ‘ways dng 7 ‘Aauow aavy J uayn
‘Ayjons:) pooysjnpy oj dn puy pooypyiyo jnoysno.ys Jo pup uo
ways Butsn pajans 1 “AoyxQ ‘sjonpoad Buuayiym ayy ‘sjuaipas3uy
ay] ‘spoonuayo ajqouoysenb Ayjwad suivjuod joys uDa4I—
DIOS st mado Sujuaytym ‘sadojs pun saaouanyd ajqouoysanb uy,,

“a]qeuoysonb asa syonposd aq} Jo

aWIOS JO SyuaIpardur oANoe oI a0uIs Ang 0} sjor:poid a~ Zunsejas
UI snONNeD AIDA SBM OYS ING ‘GTS 3sN 0} Jay SAOIp IJ ‘woNdsosed
adeun Apog Mo] 8 Sey ays 1eq) pauoSW ;TEULIOUI SUG

“(Ip'T - 02'1 ID %$6) O€'T JO J0,905 & Aq paseauouy
syuorpoiZut g71¢ Jurmowy Jo sppo omp ‘uondsoeg eBewy]
Apog ut asvasout yrun AraA9 Joy 3eT) pomoys [apoul mE

“soSuaTTeqo Myeay jeyuour

pesearouy ut SuyINsal ‘somssard

asatp Aq UdAUp are Sq’JS JO osn pue
wondassed ayy 3em3 ayeorput soomos
wep Pog ‘synpe ZurSssws Suoure
tpyeog [eae Surouonyur ur sprepurys
Ayneaq jemmy[no pue semssaid

Jeq9190s Jo o[Or yUBOYTUSIS oT]
asoosapun sdurpay aq], :snsuesu0Z
1840}98,] [8N}X9z000)

“wep sageyguenb
‘ou ut pomydeo jou yoedun myeoq,
[eyUaud juRyTUsIs e SUNYysTYysry ‘UTS

$a9U91950]

s8uypuy aapepTend

ssuypuy aaygeiyuENd


681

‘samseaul eAyeyqUeNb peziprepueys

uy posmydes Aqyny 2q you yq3rut
Ayoytoads jemymo sm ‘tpyeay eyusw
pur W199}S9-}]9S SENPIAIPUT Ue TO
yoedun punojoid & saeq wed syuuTUI0D
Sloquiour Ayrurey asoyan 4x9j000
TeaTyjno simp syooyor wep oaNeyenb
OWL “S|ENPLAIpUt J9AO soUDNIUT
yOROTUSIs savy Usyo sloquiom
Ayrurey pus ‘Suons ase spuog jerrurey
‘amyno ourdyy UT :3xa300D TeanyInD
“sauloojno Tyeay

Jeyuew Surouenyur ut Ae]d suonsesayut
Aypares yeqp 2[01 orp JO UoeUSaIopun
UE 0} ped] Pfnoo uorssTMO

SIL ‘suoquisuy A[rosey oyetpourmmt
Woy sjaauTwod Jo joedun om

Ssasse 0} samsvoul ogtoads papnyout
aaey jou Avur japom sanesnuenb oy],
2B SAPEWVUBNH Jo Ye]

Plo
seok 7 ‘Iplay — *,,4yoax ca8pus Apog fo uoydacsad
ays 0} Appts sjuaand anod wosf 3uimos sjuamuor
aul aay gjaaf nod aypui 31 saop moy ‘og ‘ayy isnf wy
fi aus pins pynom 1 ysim J ‘aytym jou uy asnozaq aul yins
4,usaop 31 10Y} juauuuon stomp Kays og ‘pos u,j["*],,

Plo sreak ¢z ‘epurlg — ,, ‘saayojas
4nok &yp10adsa ‘ajduxa 4of ‘ajdoad ‘nok mouy
Ajjpa4 oym ajdoad ‘ajdoad vas ayy ‘sak ‘sax oipaut
191908 uo jou ‘ajdoad vas ayy ‘ajdoad sayjo most
Sjuauwuo ‘ajdoad sayjo wou sjuawuuos yury} J,

‘pessansip
Wat} apeus MOYSMIOs JO]Oo Uys pue souRIeedde Jo odeys
Apog seq noge syaquiew Ayre syerpeuruN Woy sjusuTOO oy}

384} SyTeULOFUT ay} Woy UoHeUOsU SuLLMdAI Jo a0eId B SI BIT,

“suoneanour
qusJapIp YSnam} nq e8pe;mony
peseasoul 0} pea] ued suondeoied
a8eun Apog Mo] pue y8ry MOG

sa0uaI9juy

sduypuy aayesEnd

sduypuy aapeynuend


Chapter V
Discussion

Body Image on Mental Health

The developmental phase from 18 to 29 is now recognized as a life stage of
emerging adulthood rather than the final phase of prolonged adolescence or the initial
phase of young adulthood (Amett, 2000, 2023). Specific characteristics distinguish the
period of emerging adulthood between 18-29 years from the stages that come before or
after. Despite the similarities between these stages, some essential features make them
unique (Sussman & Amett, 2014). Emerging adults are a distinct group from
adolescents as they have already passed through puberty, are not currently enrolled in
secondary school, and are no longer considered minors under the law. They have
already attained physical and sexual maturity and exhibit various educational and
occupational experiences and aspirations (Bynner, 2005; Tanner & Amett, 2011). Five
characteristics distinguish them from other phases of life: the age of identity
explorations, the age of instability, the self-focused age, the age of feeling in-between,
and the age of possibilities. During emerging adulthood, individuals tend to engage in
identity explorations. This phase is when they begin to explore various personal and
professional opportunities to make long-lasting decisions eventually. By experimenting
with different possibilities, they gain a clearer sense of their identity, including their
inherent strengths and limitations, personal beliefs and values, and societal place
(Amett, 2000, 2023; Cote, 2006). These experimentations may also lead them to
compare their body image to some people, which may eventually take a toll on their
mental health.

Peer groups have an essential role in molding the social norms of these

emerging adults, including their values and perception of body image (Gattario &

190

Frisén, 2019; Gillen & Lefkowitz, 2009). The ages 18 to 29 of the emerging adulthood
developmental phase often experience profound changes in their lives, including the
development of romantic relationships and other social roles as workers, partners, and
parents (Arnett, 2000).

Tri-media (TV, radio, newspaper), movies, social media, the internet, and peer
pressures influence how emerging adults see themselves. As a result, their mental
perception of their appearance can become distorted, leading them to engage in risky
behaviors when they feel they do not measure up to the impossible goal set of meeting
beauty standards. The media’s effect on body image can cause self-image issues,
leading to poor mental health conditions, eating disorders, drug and alcohol use,
cutting, bullying, and sexual risk behaviors. (Gurari et al., 2006).

An increasing corpus of literature indicates the detrimental effects of bodily
concerns, especially body image, on mental health. Earlier studies have discussed how
worries about one’s physical appearance can lead to harmful weight-control habits that
can occasionally be excessive or bad for one’s mental health (Gentile et al., 2007;
Neumark-Sztainer & Eisenberg, 2014; Olivardia et al., 2004). Recent studies on body
image and mental health status focused on emerging adults as the sample population
(Aimé et al., 2020; Rodgers et al., 2017; Shagar et al., 2017). However, this evolving
scientific subject has not yet been extensively investigated among emerging adults in
the Philippines, and developmental research on body image is scarce, particularly on
positive body image. Emerging adults may risk failing to experience their bodies
positively (Rodgers et al., 2017).

While the prevalent developmental model suggests a sharp rise in negative body
image during early adolescence followed by a consistent state into emerging adulthood,

studies on individual trajectories revealed the presence of alternative patterns of

191

positive body image development (Frisén et al., 2015; Lacroix et al., 2022; Rogers et
al., 2018). These studies delved into an intriguing pattern observed in specific
individuals who, like most people, experience negative body image during their early
teenage years. However, these individuals can overcome their negative body image and
develop a positive body image as they transition into emerging adulthood. Therefore,
further studies on emerging adults must focus on positive body image development.
Valuable information concerning the timing of interventions could be gained from these
studies.

Furthermore, differences across subpopulations, such as different sex and age
groups of emerging adults, should be studied. Throughout childhood, individuals are
taught to conform to certain gender norms, which can impact how they behave, what
they aspire to, and what opportunities they can have as they transition into emerging
adulthood. These traditional gender roles may shape the activities, professions, and
relationships people choose during this phase (Epstein & Ward, 2011; Smith et al.,
2011). Moreover, variations in the timing of key developmental transitions and
milestones may occur during emerging adulthood, depending on the age group of
individuals in this phase of life (Wood et al., 2018).

In the Philippines, several cross-sectional studies dealt with body image and
mental health (Aquino et al., 2009; Brebante & Cagas, 2015; Dionisio, 2016; Elsayed
et al., 2021; Javellana, 2014). However, it never focused on positive body image. One
study described central body adiposity among women, which brought body
dissatisfaction because of the change in their body shape due to fat deposition (Aquino
et al., 2009). The concept of feeling shy because of a higher body mass index and a
higher fat perception was described and elaborated by another study done among

female students (Brebante & Cagas, 2015). Mental health issues were also reported

192

among participants who suffered from objectification due to body image issues

(Dionisio, 2016).

Prevalence of Psychological Distress

In our study, severe to extreme levels of depression, anxiety, and stress are
estimated to be 26%, 63%, and 13%, respectively. Our estimated prevalence rate for
severe to extreme levels of depression is higher than previously reported prevalence
rates among emerging adults in the United States (~12%) (McGee & Thompson, 2015)
and Spain (~14%) (Martinez-Hernaez et al., 2016) and lower than previous reports in
the United States (~52%) (Shafer et al., 2017) and Canada (~34%) (Ferro, 2016). For
anxiety levels, our estimated prevalence rate of 63% on severe to extreme levels is
lower relative to prevalence rates reported in Australia (~72%) (Stapinski et al., 2021)
but higher among Hispanic emerging adults in the United States (~30%) (Cano et al.,
2021). In addition, our estimated prevalence rate of severe to extreme levels of stress is
somehow lower than the reports on female emerging adults from the United States
(~24%) (Shen et al., 2020) and on early emerging adults from the United States as well
(~24%) (Mahmoud et al., 2012).

Further studies are needed to validate our findings, as these estimated
prevalence rates may be underestimating the true proportions of emerging adults with
severe to extreme levels of depression, anxiety, and stress. Many people report
depression, anxiety, or high stress at some point (Evans et al., 2020). These people
would, however, be hesitant to accept formal screening or treatment. Even people aware
of their mental health illness or clinically diagnosed with one frequently avoid therapy
because of the fear of stigmatization (Johnstone, 2001). Therefore, mental health

illnesses are most of the time ignored. There are observed differences among the

193

estimated prevalence rates of severe to extreme levels of depression, anxiety, and stress
across different studies, which may be attributed to the differences in the study
populations’ characteristics such as culture and race, differences in assessment tools
used, sampling biases and differences in the study designs. Our estimated prevalence
rates show that a substantial proportion of Filipino emerging adults may suffer from
clinically unscreened and undiagnosed severe to extreme levels of depression, anxiety,

and stress.

Body Appreciation and Mental Health

Over the past decades, body image has gained popularity since 1980, and 90%
of studies on body image have been published (Markey, 2010). In addition, the
increasing public health concerns about obesity (Rosen, 2002; Schwartz & Brownell,
2004), eating disorders (Chisuwa & O’Dea, 2010; Levine & Piran, 2004), and lifestyle
and physical activities (Kirkcaldy et al., 2002; Rote et al., 2013) that can have a negative
impact on health have sparked interest in this field. Body image is a complex concept
encompassing how we view, feel, and behave toward our bodies (Fischetti et al., 2020).
Previous studies have consistently shown that a negative body image is linked with
poor mental health outcomes (Hosseini & Padhy, 2019; Shpigelman & HaGani, 2019),
and only a few studies have examined factors predicting a favorable body image
(Andrew et al., 2016; Augustus-Horvath & Tylka, 2011). Early theories on body image
development believed that positive body image was the inverse of negative body image.
Thus, the factors presumed to foster positive body image were considered the reverse
of those hindering body image (Striegel-Moore & Cachelin, 1999). However, recent
positive body image evidence suggests that the abovementioned theories may be

oversimplified. By studying the experiences, thoughts, attitudes, and behaviors of

194

people with a positive body image, valuable insights into the characteristics of positive
body image, including body appreciation (Holmqvist & Frisén, 2012; Tiggemann &
McCourt, 2013; Tylka & Wood-Barcalow, 2015). Identifying predictors is crucial for
conceptualizing positive body image theoretically and identifying possible areas of
intervention. In this current study, we uscd a varicty of pertinent, empirically supported
a priori selection of variables that may affect the body appreciation of our study
population.

The triangulated data showed a congruent result wherein the levels of body
image significantly affect the mental health of the participants. In the quantitative data,
all body image constructs (BA, BE, and PRA) were associated with depression, anxiety,
and stress levels, both in the generalized linear and generalized structural equation
models.

This study shows that body appreciation is significantly associated with
indicators of better mental health, particularly in reducing the risk of having severe to
extreme levels of depression, anxiety, and stress. Other similar cross-sectional studies
have reported similar associations between body appreciation and depression and
anxiety (Winter et al., 2019), or body appreciation and depression alone, but not on
anxiety (Linardon et al., 2023) among women and sexual minority men (Simpson et al.,
2016). One research also showed a negative implication of the link between having
romantic attachment anxiety and levels of body appreciation (Raque-Bogdan et al.,
2016), which is the inverse examination of the analysis of our study.

Researchers have examined the relationship between depression and favorable
body appreciation. For instance, one research developed their assessment of pregnant
women's awareness and appreciation of body functionality and reported that greater

understanding and body appreciation were linked to reduced depression symptoms

195

among these women (Rubin & Steinberg, 2011), which is in congruence with our
findings. In addition, research on female Romanian medical students reported lower
depression symptoms among those who valued their bodies more (Dumitrescu et al.,
2008). Researchers also reported inverse relationships between body appreciation and
depressive symptoms in a bivariate analysis but not in a multivariate examination in a
sample of American undergraduate women (Iannantuono & Tylka, 2012). There is
hardly any information in the literature demonstrating the link between body image or
body appreciation and stress levels. However, recent studies have reported positive
body image factors, such as body appreciation and appearance orientation, correlated
with low-stress levels among American undergraduate female students (Rosenbaum et
al., 2023) and a correlation between higher perceived body image and lower perceived
stress levels among Turkish burn patients (Uyar et al., 2022). Our current findings,
however, support these previous findings and expand this literature to include the
possible association between body appreciation and stress levels by providing evidence
of associations present among Filipinos in a sample of emerging adults from varied
classes of socio-economic backgrounds with different usage levels of media,

particularly the television, movies, internet, and social media.

Body Esteem and Mental Health

Furthermore, this study shows that body esteem is significantly associated with
indicators of better mental health, particularly in reducing the risk of having severe to
extreme levels of depression, anxiety, and stress. The BES measures three specific
subscales or domains. In terms of the BES, three domains were analyzed: Domain 1 -

Physical Attractiveness (males) or Sexual Attractiveness (females), Domain 2 - Upper

196

body strength (males) or Weight concern (females), and Domain 3 - Physical condition
(males and females).

There is a scarcity of literature discussing the influence of body esteem on
mental health among emerging adults, including adolescents (Davis & Katzman, 1997;
Golan et al., 2023; Kornblau et al., 2007; Mili & Raakhee, 2015). Still, previous cross-
sectional and cohort research articles looked at this relationship in other populations,
such as in Polish middle-aged women (Olchowska-Kotala, 2018), English obese male
adults (Bidzan et al., 2018), Polish geriatric population (Lipowska et al., 2016),
American young elementary school-aged children (Shriver et al., 2013), Iranian adults
(Sharif-Nia et al., 2024), and Polish females diagnosed with polycystic ovary syndrome
(Zachurzok et al., 2021), to name some. Moreover, most literature focused on the
influence of body esteem on health-related behaviors rather than on mental health or
psychological distress. For example, numerous observational studies have investigated
the relationship between body esteem and dietary behaviors (Gitau et al., 2014;
Shentow-Bewsh et al., 2016). A study found that adolescents with lower body esteem
were more likely to engage in unhealthy weight control behaviors, such as fasting or
using diet pills (Neumark-Sztainer et al., 2002). The literature has extensively studied
and documented the relationship between body esteem and physical activity levels
(Chae et al., 2017; Kaminsky & Dewey, 2014; Sabiston et al., 2019) using
observational study design. Individuals with higher levels of body esteem tend to
engage in physical activity more frequently and adhere to a consistent exercise regimen
compared to those with lower levels of body esteem. A meta-analysis by Sabiston and
Chandler (2009) shows a positive correlation between body esteem and exercise

behavior spanning various age groups and populations. These negative health-related

197

behaviors, such as bad eating habits or unhealthy weight control behaviors, would
eventually lead the individuals to experience negative well-being.

The direct influence of body esteem on mental health has been reported in some
literature. There were very little to no research articles in the literature discussing the
relationship between body esteem and depression, anxiety, or stress specifically. A
research article utilized body esteem as a mediator and determined the mediating effects
of body esteem on the association between physical activity and depression. The results
showed that males showed significantly higher levels of physical activity and body
esteem than females, and body esteem mediated the relation of physical activity with
depression (Chae et al., 2017).

Moreover, one research study conducted a multiple regression and reported that
satisfaction with body image, use of TikTok, stress levels, and loneliness significantly
affected body esteem (Pop et al., 2022). This study is opposite to what this current
research has documented. Other researchers also reported this type of direction wherein
results showed that use of social media use generates anxiety in adults and has been
proven to have negative effects on body image outcomes, such as body esteem (Neff &
Vonk, 2009; Zinovyeva et al., 2016). In research conducted on patients with breast
cancer after mastectomy, body esteem was found to be low, and there was a direct linear
relationship between body esteem and mental health (Heidari et al., 2015). Moreover,
the authors highlighted the detrimental effects of stressful events on patients' well-
being. Stressful treatments, such as mastectomy, can lead to high levels of stress,
anxiety, and depression, which can negatively impact the physical, mental, and familial
health of patients.

This study may be the first study that documented the direct influence of body

esteem on depression, anxiety, and stress among emerging adults, the Filipino

198

population in particular. Individuals with positive body esteem are more likely to
engage in healthy behaviors such as regular exercise and a balanced diet and less likely
to engage in risky behaviors. Positive body esteem also enhances social relationships,
as people with a positive body image tend to be more confident and socially engaged
(Ameen et al., 2022; Cash, 2012b). On the other hand, individuals who experience
negative body esteem may avoid social situations, withdraw from activities they enjoy,
and experience reduced life satisfaction. They may develop unhealthy coping
mechanisms such as binge eating, restrictive diets, or excessive exercise to alter their
appearance, which can lead to physical and mental health problems (Cash, 2008),
similar to what this current study reported. Further studies are needed to warrant our
findings across other races or groups of populations. Studying body esteem and its
association with mental health is crucial for understanding the multifaceted nature of
psychological well-being, addressing body image concerns, promoting healthier

behaviors, and enhancing overall quality of life.

Positive Rational Acceptance and Mental Health

Similar to body appreciation and body esteem, this current study documented
the direct influence of PRA on mental health. Results showed that higher PRA levels
decreased the likelihood of having higher levels of depression, anxiety, and stress.
Some research studies on similar areas can shed light on the relationship between PRA
and body image and mental health, even though there may not be any direct studies
particularly studying this association. A research study examined relationships
between multiple facets of alexithymia and indices of positive body image, including
PRA. The results identified significant predictive relationships between a facet of

alexithymia and PRA, which is the reverse examination of this current study. The

199

researchers concluded that those with more difficulty in identifying their feelings could
be less likely to exhibit lower body and functionality appreciation, perceive others to
accept their bodies less, and use adaptive coping mechanisms with their bodies
(Longhurst & Swami, 2023). This current study expands our understanding of the
multifaceted relationship between PRA and mental health.

Moreover, another research examined the influence of PRA on body image
threats that mediate the association between nature exposure and body appreciation.
The results of their study highlight the potential benefit of nature exposure in promoting
adaptive body image coping strategies, which in turn are associated with more positive
body image (Swami et al., 2022). The research found that individuals with a greater
level of PRA tend to have higher body appreciation. This finding means that adopting
an adaptive body image strategy catalyzes the development of greater acceptance,
respect, and care for one's body. Moreover, individuals with high PRA are more likely
to reject external factors that threaten their positive body image. For instance,
individuals with high PRA may be more skilled in recalling positive hody-related
memories or experiences that encourage them to take better care of their bodies. It
highlights the importance of PRA in measuring the overall perception of an individual's
body image, as this current study did. In addition, another research examined the
mediation effect of coping strategies (PRA) in the relationship between physical
appearance-related teasing and body esteem among adolescents. The study's results
revealed that PRA partially mediated the relationship between different kinds of
physical appearance-related teasing, like forms of harassment, appearance-related
teasing, physical-related teasing, and body esteem — appearance and attribution. It also
partially mediated the connection between the form of harassment and body esteem—

weight and fully mediated the link between appearance and physical-related teasing

200

and body esteem-weight (Japil et al., 2018). The results of their study emphasized the
need to identify and empower adaptive or positive coping strategies to cope with
interpersonal interactions and body image disturbances.

The results of this current study strengthen the need to conduct more studies
focusing on this area of research to warrant our findings. PRA involves accepting one's
body rationally and constructively. Studying this association with body image can
provide insights into the coping mechanisms individuals use to navigate societal
pressures, media influences, and personal insecurities related to body image.
Understanding these coping strategies can inform interventions aimed at promoting

healthier body image perceptions and reducing the risk of mental health problems.

Overall Body Image Perception and Mental Health

This current study also utilized these three constructs, BA, BE Domains 1, 2, 3,
and PRA, to create a measurement model. This latent variable on body image
perception has a direct influence on another latent variable, mental health, which
consists of three constructs: depression, anxiety, and stress. GSEM estimation showed
a negative significant association between body image perception and mental health.
Using measurement models allows researchers to take a holistic approach to
understanding complex phenomena by considering multiple interrelated constructs
simultaneously. This comprehensive perspective can provide a more nuanced
understanding of the factors contributing to outcomes, such as mental health, as with
this study (Morin et al., 2020). Since the constructs for both measurement models were
already identified and their relationships within the measurement models, the
influences of one construct to one another were generated. This predictive power allows

testing theoretical predictions and gaining valuable insights into the underlying

201

mechanisms driving phenomena, such as the relationship between body image

perception and mental health.

Qualitative Assessment of Body Image Perception on Mental Health

Furthermore, a qualitative assessment was conducted to identify the
participants’ stressors and facilitators of body image and corroborate the findings with
the quantitative phase. Stressors from body image perception that modified the mental
health of the informants include ideal body type comparison of appearance, the unique
Filipino culture, and the media use (K-Pop, Western culture). On the other hand,
facilitators from body image perception include coping mechanisms and peers!
acceptance of body positivity.

Most qualitative research focused on body dissatisfaction in relation to overall
body image and its influence on eating disorders (Javier & Belgrave, 2019; Monotti et
al., 2023; Morgan & Arcelus, 2009; Springmann et al., 2022). It should be noted, as
mentioned in the quantitative part, that these unhealthy eating habits often lead to poor
mental health outcomes. However, some qualitative research delved into the influence
of body image perception on mental health outcomes. One study found that participants
were not satisfied with their body image and thus expressed shame, a lack of self-
esteem, and a lack of confidence, which led to psychological distress (Mbabazi et al.,
2023). These findings were congruent with previous research (Aparicio-Martinez et al.,
2019; Durkee et al., 2019).

The results from the qualitative assessment showed that the ideal body type
comparison of appearance, the unique Filipino culture, and the media use (K-Pop,
Western culture) were all factors that could lead to low body image perception among

the participants. Across various cultures worldwide, a widespread tendency exists to

202

idealize certain body types, often influenced by societal norms, cultural expectations,
and media representations. This phenomenon is particularly prevalent in the
Philippines, where informants may experience significant stress and dissatisfaction
when their bodies fail to measure up to these idealized standards (Cortez & Alfonso,
2020). This can give rise to a range of adverse mental health outcomes, including
depression, anxiety, and low self-esteem. The constant pressure to compare oneself to
these idealized body types through social media, peer interactions, or cultural messages
can exacerbate these stressors, leading to potentially severe consequences (Klein,
2013).

Filipino society's cultural values and beliefs influence how individuals perceive
their body image and handle stress (Ricciardelli et al., 2007). Family, community, and
interpersonal relationships are highly valued in Filipino culture (Capistrano & Weaver,
2018), but they can also intersect with appearance-related expectations. The emphasis
on hospitality, generosity, and respect for elders may pressure individuals to adhere to
specific beauty standards to gain acceptance within their community or meet familial
expectations (Uba, 2003). Filipino cultural practices such as fiestas and gatherings often
revolve around food (Mendoza; Uba, 2003), contributing to body image concerns,
particularly in a society where thinness is usually equated with beauty. These cultural
factors can create a challenging environment for individuals, as they may feel torn
between upholding traditional values and meeting societal expectations around their
appearance.

The role of traditional and social media cannot be underestimated in shaping
the beauty ideals and body image perceptions of people, particularly young generations
(Stein et al., 2021). In the Philippines, where people are exposed to a plethora of media

sources, ranging from K-pop to Western media, the impact of these sources can lead to

203

the internalization of unrealistic beauty standards. K-pop girl and boy groups are viral
and often become the standard for how they want to look (Lin et al., 2021). The
members of these K-pop groups are usually portrayed with slim bodies, white skin, thin
faces, and high noses, which leads fans to idolize and aspire to have a similar physical
appearance to their favorite idols (Tresna et al., 2021). K-pop music and television
shows emphasizing flawless appearances and slim figures may contribute to feclings
of inadequacy and dissatisfaction among Filipino youth (Estoque, 2022). Similarly,
Western media often promotes a narrow definition of beauty that may not align with
the cultural norms and ideals of the Philippines, which can cause further confusion and
insecurity among people (Ong & Braun, 2016).

Body image perception, including the comparison to an ideal body type, is a
significant source of stress for many people, including emerging adults. This stress is
further compounded by factors such as the unique cultural context of the Philippines
and media use. The impact of these stressors on an individual's mental health cannot be
overstated. A qualitative approach to researching this topic offers a valuable
opportunity to understand the complex dynamics between these factors. By exploring
the lived experiences of emerging adults within the Filipino context, researchers can
gain a deeper understanding of the specific mechanisms at play. This approach allows
for a more nuanced exploration of the subject matter, which can lead to a more adequate
knowledge of the impact of body image perception and related stressors on mental
health.

In the Philippines, where cultural norms and societal expectations may shape
body image perceptions differently than in other cultures (Owen-Wilson, 2009), the
facilitators of coping mechanisms and peer acceptance of body positivity take on a

unique significance. The way we feel about our bodies can have a significant impact

204

on our mental health. However, there are ways to mitigate the negative effects of body
image stressors. Coping mechanisms are crucial in helping individuals manage their
feelings of dissatisfaction or distress related to their bodies (Mann et al., 2004).
Effective coping strategies can vary widely and may include positive self-talk,
mindfulness, engaging in physical activity for pleasure rather than appearance, seeking
social support, and cultivating self-compassion (Coulbeck, 2023). By utilizing these
techniques, individuals can better handle negative feelings and improve their overall
well-being. In addition, peer acceptance of body positivity is centered around
individuals receiving social support and validation from their peers regarding diverse
body shapes, sizes, and appearances (Jones et al., 2004). It involves creating an
environment where people feel valued and accepted for who they are, regardless of
their physical appearance, resulting in positive perceptions of body image (Tiggemann,
2015). When peers demonstrate acceptance and appreciation for body diversity, it
fosters a sense of belonging and community, reducing feelings of isolation or stigma
(Breiner et al., 2023; Tiggemann, 2015). It is a powerful and effective way to promote

a culture of inclusivity and body positivity among individuals.

Skin-Lightening Practices on Mental Health
Quantitative Investigation of Skin-Lightening Knowledge, Perception, and
Frequency of Use, and Mental Health

The link between skin-lightening practices and the mental health status of
emerging Filipino adults is not fully understood. This quantitative study's approach to
measuring SLP-related factors included knowledge of, perception of the benefits, and

frequency of use to create a holistic understanding of the phenomenon of SLP-related

205

practices. We assessed the association between the knowledge, perception, and use of
SLP and psychological distress levels, including depression, anxiety, and stress.

The current study provided information on the association between the
knowledge, perception, and frequency of SLPs and psychological distress levels,
particularly depression, anxiety, and stress. There is an evident high prevalence of
severe to extreme levels of depression, anxiety, and stress noted among the participants.
In addition, high use of SLP among the participants was also observed. Most
participants knew the active ingredients of the SLPs they were using and perceived an
increased benefit of using SLPs. About 30% of the participants used SLP at least once
a day.

Furthermore, results also showed that high perceived benefits of SLP use
suggest being associated with high levels of depression, and the frequency of SLP use
might be associated with decreased levels of depression. Moreover, the frequency of
SLP use suggests being related to anxiety levels in which high frequency of use
increased anxiety levels. Lastly, once-a-week use of SLP may decrease the stress levels
among the participants.

The high prevalence of severe to extreme levels of depression, anxiety, and
stress among Filipinos has previously been reported, particularly among gender
minorities (Alibudbud, 2023), undergraduate students (Lim et al., 2022; Montano &
Acebes, 2020), general population (Flores et al., 2017), and young adults (Kapoor &
Subida, 2023; Reyes et al., 2021). On the other hand, qualitative assessments of skin-
lightening practices among Filipinos were conducted to shed light on the role of
colonialism in the success of the Filipino SLP industry (Natividad, 2006; Rondilla,
2012; Singson, 2017) and government intervention in more efficient than market-

driven approaches in addressing the health risks and harms associated with skin-

206

lightening (Mendoza, 2014). Moreover, the use of SLP in the Philippines has been
discussed before, in which the author accentuated the fact that regardless of the socio-
demographic characteristics of the Filipinos, there was an unfaltering trust in
manufacturers and distributors of SLP (Mendoza, 2014). This trust thereby increased
the frequency of SLP use among Filipinos.

Around the world, unintentional injuries represent one of the leading causes of
morbidity and mortality for people of all ages (De Ramirez et al., 2012; Krug et al.,
2000). Despite recent research documenting that dermatological threats are rising
globally, efforts to prevent skin injuries or safety are among the most understudied
areas of public health (Jardine et al., 2012; Krejci-Manwaring et al., 2006). Potential
skin hazards exist, including occupational-related skin exposures, community skin
exposures (Tamene, 2021), and skin damage resulting from practices such as skin
lightening. In addition, comparatively little research has been given to the widespread
global practice of dangerous skin-lightening practices, considering the potential harms
of exposure to hazardous chemicals (Jacobs et al., 2016). Numerous potentially life-
threatening consequences of skin-lightening practices have been identified in the
literature (Boyle & Kennedy, 1986; Mahe et al., 2003; Mahé et al., 2007; Ramsay et
al., 2003).

Moreover, dermatologic consequences include skin lesions, skin thinning,
exogenous ochronosis, eczema, bacterial and fungal infections, dermatitis, scabies, and
body odor (Ajose, 2005; Mahe et al., 2003). This current study gives a better
understanding of the state of SLP use among Filipino emerging adults and the
association of the knowledge, perception, and use on the distress levels of this specific
population. A previous study investigated these SLP-related variables among Southeast

Asian countries (Peltzer et al., 2016) but not the Philippines. Healthcare specialists have

207

strongly advised against unsupervised SIP use due to the severe health implications
they can have; hence, the high prevalence of SLP use can be of great concern (Ajose,
2005), such as in our study.

This quantitative study is the first research conducted in the Philippines to
assess the association between SLP-related exposures and markers of mental health
among Filipino emerging adults. The availability of literature discussing the influence
of SLP-related exposures, such as knowledge, perception, and use on mental health
levels, ranges from very limited to none. As mentioned earlier, most literature on SLP
use among Filipinos was qualitative. Therefore, this current study provides an avenue
to investigate further this burgeoning scientific field, particularly among emerging
adults, who are prone and at risk for detrimental mental health consequences due to
rapid developmental changes in their bodies and social interactions. Addressing this
public health problem is challenging because of the intricate exchange of ingrained
ideas of beauty standards and social pressure. The interplay among ideas of beauty
standards, social norms, and family and peer pressures plays a significant role in the
rampant SLP use and its possible poor mental health consequences, as presented in the
current study. However, for other countries, the current study results, particularly on
anxiety and stress levels, are congruent with their findings that the participants who
used SLP more frequently displayed a more enduring pattern of poor mental health
(James et al., 2016; Peltzer et al., 2016). The protective influence of frequent SLP use
on depression levels is a unique finding in the current study, which is reported in
minimal literature. Previous reports demonstrated that increased use of SLP may lead
to increased levels of depression but not the protective effect (Alrayyes et al., 2019;
Peltzer et al., 2016; Peltzer et al., 2013). Our finding of this specific association should

be further investigated and validated. Based on our results, we hypothesize that the

208

protective influence of SLP use on the depression and stress levels of emerging adults
may be related to the aspirations of these emerging adults to achieve their desired skin
tone. This aspiration decreases their likelihood of experiencing high levels of
depression and stress. This observation was similar to a study involving middle school
students. The results showed that students who were beginning to lighten their skin tone
had the lowest levels of depression compared to black or brown-skinned African
American students (Williams, 2006). Lightening their skin color somehow increases
their self-esteem, reducing psychological distress risks.

On the other hand, we hypothesize that the opposite observation on the
influence of SLP use on anxiety levels may be attributed to the feeling of being worried
and bothered by the social appearance of not being white or light in skin tone. This
hypothesis is backed up by limited literature reporting that skin-whitening creams make
dark-colored people anxious (Froehling, 2017; Shah et al., 2022). The influence of
SLP-related exposures on psychological distress markers among emerging adults
warrants further investigation as this is complex and multi-faceted. It may help address
this growing public health problem, particularly in underrepresented, low-middle-
income countries like the Philippines, where SLP use is prevalent.

The study's results may increase Filipino emerging adults’ awareness of the
possible influences of skin-lightening practices on their mental health outcomes.
Additionally, this might help the public comprehend how numerous aspects sensitive
to Filipino culture influence this phenomenon. Moreover, explicit action is required to
develop and promote safe skin-lightening practices and instill acceptance of the
diversity of skin tones to encourage good mental health and well-being among
emerging adults. This study could be a first step in demonstrating how well safe skin-

lightening practices and use should be monitored and regulated.

209

Qualitative Investigation of Skin-Lightening Practices and Mental Health

This study also determined the stressors and facilitators of the skin-lightening
practices that modified the participants’ mental health status. For the stressors from
skin-lightening practices, being white as the color standard, comparison of skin color,
media use (K-pop, Western culture), and Filipino culture were identified. In contrast,
facilitators of skin-lightening practices include coping mechanisms, peer acceptance of
skin tone diversity, skin color diversity in movies and television, and using SLP.

In many cultures, physical appearance plays a vital role in defining social status
and beauty standards. Unfortunately, in some societies, such as the Philippines, there is
a pervasive belief that lighter skin equates to greater beauty, success, and social
acceptance (Mathews & Johnson, 2015; Naidoo, 2022). This Eurocentric beauty
standard perpetuates the idea that lighter skin is more attractive, leading to better
opportunities in ficlds such as employment and romantic relationships (Mady et al.,
2023). It can be a significant pressure source for individuals who may teel compelled
to conform to this standard, even if their natural skin tone is darker, as seen by the
participants of this study. This pressure can lead to negative feelings such as low self-
esteem and body dissatisfaction. Therefore, raising awareness about the negative
impact of these beauty standards and how they can affect individuals' self-esteem and
overall well-being is essential.

In society, people often make judgments based on skin color, which can lead to
increased stress and negative self-image for individuals. This is because people tend to
compare themselves to others, particularly those seen as having lighter skin and
considered ideal in media and popular culture (Strahan et al., 2006). These comparisons
can exacerbate feelings of inadequacy and inferiority, ultimately impacting one's

overall well-being, as most participants in the qualitative phase mentioned. This

210

stressor arose as a recurring topic among the participants, exploring the impact of social
comparisons on participants’ self-image and mental well-being. This showed how
individuals navigate and internalize societal beauty standards and the role of peer
influence and social media in perpetuating unrealistic beauty ideals based on skin color.

In K-pop and Wester culture, the beauty industry has faced much criticism for
promoting a narrow definition of beauty that places lighter skin tones on a higher level
(Wong, 2020). The media constantly bombards consumers with images and messages
that idealize fair-skinned celebrities and influencers (Veloo & Mustafa, 2023), thereby
perpetuating the belief that lighter skin is superior. This unrelenting reinforcement of
beauty standards can intensify feelings of inadequacy and fuel a desire to resemble the
role models seen on screen, as mentioned by most participants. As a result, some
individuals resort to skin-lightening practices to emulate their idols' appearance. As part
of this qualitative research, this topic delved into how media representations influence
the participants’ perceptions of beauty and self-worth. This research explored the
profound impact of exposure to diverse media content, including K-pop music videos
and Western beauty advertisements, on participants' attitudes toward skin color and
skin-lightening practices.

In Filipino culture, various factors such as historical colonial influences, media
representation, and societal norms have played a significant role in perpetuating skin
color biases (Rondilla, 2012; Singson, 2017; Tirona, 2023). The preference for lighter
skin tones is often viewed as a symbol of beauty and social status, while darker skin is
usually stigmatized and associated with negative stereotypes. These deeply ingrained
cultural attitudes from the colonizers can lead to discrimination, prejudice, and
marginalization of individuals with darker skin tones. Despite efforts to promote

diversity and inclusivity, colorism remains a prevalent issue in Filipino society,

211

affecting individuals' self-esteem, opportunities, and relationships (Adame, 2023;
Ibardaloza & Mabulay, 2023). The Philippines has a rich and intricate history of
colonization by different foreign powers, such as Spain and the United States (Joseph
et al., 2003). Throughout the colonial era, the dominant powers enforced their cultural,
social, and aesthetic ideals on the indigenous population, which significantly impacted
their views on beauty and skin complexion (Joseph et al., 2003). During the 400-year
Spanish colonization of the Philippines, the concept of "mestizaje" was introduced.
This concept referred to the intermixing of Spanish and indigenous heritage, which
gave preference to lighter-skinned individuals (Lépez, 2016; Yakal, 2023). It created a
societal belief that lighter skin was superior to darker skin, and this mindset continued
even after the country gained independence from foreign rule (David, 2013; David &
Nadal, 2013). The remnants of colonization can still be observed today, particularly in
the prevalent beauty standards prioritizing lighter skin tones and Western features
(Block, 2018). Despite attempts to acknowledge the country's diverse cultural heritage,
many Filipinos still grapple with the notion that lighter skin is more attractive.

In comparison, darker skin is deemed inferior and less desirable. It led to the
development of colorism; a type of discrimination based on skin color. The
discrimination favored individuals with lighter skin, who were perceived as more
attractive, intelligent, and socially desirable (Rondilla, 2012; Rondilla & Spickard,
2007). This bias continues to be ingrained in modern Filipino culture, where lighter
skin is often associated with beauty, success, and social status.

In addition, in the Philippines, individuals' skin color can often be the subject
of comments from family and relatives. The participants in the study pointed out that
this practice can significantly impact their mental well-being and self-esteem. In

Filipino culture, familial bonds are highly valued, and family plays a central role in this

212

(Morillo et al., 2013). Communication within Filipino families in this culture is often
characterized by directness and frankness, with less emphasis on political correctness
or sensitivity (Roces & Roces, 2013). As a result, family members and relatives may
openly comment about an individual's physical appearance, including their skin color,
without considering the potential impact on the individual. These comments can
perpetuate colorism, a form of skin color-based discrimination, and reinforce the
societal preference for lighter skin tones. The perpetuation of colorism can have long-
lasting effects on individuals' perceptions of beauty and worth and their interactions
within broader society (Thomas, 2018).

Through the participants' rich information, this study explored the intersection
of Filipino cultural values and skin-lightening practices by examining how participants
navigate conflicting messages about beauty, identity, and self-acceptance. The role of
family dynamics, Filipino cultural traditions, and societal expectations in shaping
individuals' attitudes toward skin color and their mental health outcomes is an essential
consideration when examining the stressors of this phenomenon.

Moreover, this study identified facilitators of skin-lightening practices,
including coping mechanisms, peer acceptance of skin tone diversity, skin color
diversity in movies and television, and the use of SLP. Strategies that people employ
to deal with stress, adversity, or challenges are called coping mechanisms. Coping
mechanisms can differ widely when it comes to problems related to skin tone. In
contrast, some people may cultivate strong self-acceptance and confidence and
concentrate on their inner qualities. As mentioned by the participants, fostering self-
acceptance and cultivating a positive body image are among those strategies.
Recognizing that skin tone is just one aspect of a person's identity is essential. By

embracing it as a unique and integral part of who they are, individuals can develop a

213

sense of pride in their heritage and cultural background. This can be a valuable source
of strength and resilience when facing discrimination or prejudice (Carranza, 2007).
This also tackles the overall aspect of developing a positive body image perception.
Developing a positive body image involves learning to appreciate one's body for what
it is rather than what it is not. By focusing on their strengths, talents, and abilitics,
individuals can build a sense of self-worth that is not dependent on their skin color or
other physical characteristics (Keith & Thompson, 2003).

Cultivating a culture of inclusivity that celebrates differences and promotes
acceptance of diverse skin tones is essential. As mentioned by the participants, peer
acceptance is an important integral component of their self-esteem in terms of skin
color. As a significant part of one's identity, skin color can profoundly impact an
individual's sense of belonging and self-worth. When peers embrace diversity and
celebrate differences in skin tone, it can help reduce feelings of isolation and promote
a sense of acceptance and value (Gummadam et al., 2016; Tummala-Narra, 2007).

The participants also reiterated that the inclusion of skin color diversity in
portraying main characters in the mainstream media, such as television and movies,
somehow gave them a sense of belongingness. How skin color diversity is portrayed in
movies and television profoundly impacts how society perceives and shapes its
attitudes toward people of different skin colors. Historically, mainstream media has
perpetuated narrow beauty standards, which tend to favor lighter skin tones while
marginalizing and stigmatizing those with darker skin (Berry, 2007). This limited
representation can lead to negative sclf-image and lowcr sclf-cstccm among individuals
who identify with these groups. However, there is growing awareness and recognition
of the importance of diverse representation in media, which can promote inclusivity,

acceptance, and a more equitable society (Cerna et al., 2021), as evidenced by

214

mentioning of the participants of the different specific examples of movies or television
shows that showcase main characters that are dark colored.

Lastly, using SLP is an adaptive mechanism for the participants to deal with
issues related to skin color. The usc of SLP is a highly complex and contentious issuc
that has deep-rooted cultural, social, and psychological implications. The utilization of
SLPs is a multifaceted matter with advantages and disadvantages for the well-being of
individuals. Recognizing the possible hazards and societal demands connected with
skin lightening is crucial. Yet, it is equally important to acknowledge that using these
products may benefit some individuals' well-being. Some participants said that the use
of SLP gave them a sense of hope, often associated with the results of the SLP, to make
their skin color match what society dictates. Achieving a lighter skin tone using SLPs
can boost confidence and self-esteem for some individuals. In cultures where lighter
skin is often linked with beauty, success, and social status, individuals unsure about
their natural skin color may find that lightening their skin helps them feel more accepted
and attractive (Li, Min, Belk, et al., 2008).

The practice of using SLP may seem harmless, but it can have severe health
consequences. Such products can cause extensive damage to the skin, heighten the risk
of skin cancer, and even lead to dependency on harmful ingredients (Cheng et al.,
2021). Moreover, prolonged usage of these products can result in a wide array of health
issues, including damage to vital organs such as the liver and kidneys, disruption of
hormones, and even neurological problems (Olumide et al., 2008). Therefore,
awareness of the potential health hazards associated with using SLPs is crucial.

The use of SLPs is a topic that requires careful consideration due to its potential
risks and broader social implications. However, it is worth noting that for some

individuals, these products may positively impact their overall well-being. Ultimately,

215

the decision to use such products should be based on informed choices that consider
one's values, cultural beliefs, and individual preferences. Providing individuals with the
necessary support and information to make their own decisions without judgment or
prejudice is essential.

It takes a multidimensional strategy to address the underlying causes of skin-
lightening practices, which involves questioning beauty standards, cncouraging sclf-
acceptance, and tackling institutional disparities. To effectively tackle the negative
impact of SLPs and foster an environment that values and respects skin color diversity,
it is crucial to focus on education, advocacy, and regulation (Araojo et al., 2023). By
promoting knowledge and awareness about the risks and consequences of using such
products, advocating for inclusive beauty standards, and enforcing strict regulations on
the production and marketing of these products, the creation of a safer and more
accepting community where everyone can feel confident and comfortable in their skin

may be warranted.

Body Image on Skin-Lightening Practices

The influence of body image perception on skin-lightening practices is a
complex interplay of societal influences, cultural norms, and individual beliefs about
beauty and self-worth. In the triangulated data, the quantitative part of the research
showed that high body image perceptions result in a higher likelihood of knowing SLP
ingredients. On the contrary, qualitative data showed that low body image perception
may result in using SLP more, thereby increasing the chances of knowing SLP
ingredients.

The correlation between high body image perceptions and a greater likelihood

of knowing SLP ingredients highlights the intersection of beauty standards, consumer

216

awareness, and personal grooming practices. People with a positive body image tend
to be highly aware of current beauty trends and grooming habits (Wilhelm, 2006). They
often devote substantial time and resources to maintaining their physical appearance
and constantly look for products that enhance their natural beauty (Cash & Smolak,
2011; Shroff et al., 2018). Their increased consciousness of personal aesthetics can lead
them to thoroughly research and educate themselves about the various ingredients
commonly found in skincare products, including formulations for skin lightening
(Ahmed, 2012). In addition, individuals who place high importance on their physical
appearance may feel compelled to seek solutions that can effectively address any
perceived flaws or imperfections in their skin (Rumsey & Harcourt, 2012). By
thoroughly understanding the ingredients used in these products, individuals can make
informed decisions about which ones to use to achieve their desired aesthetic goals.
On the other hand, low body image perccption may rcsult in using SLP more,
thereby increasing the chances of knowing SLP ingredients, as evident from the
qualitative data. The relationship between low body image perception and increased
use of SLP, leading to a greater likelihood of knowing product ingredients, also sheds
light on complex dynamics surrounding self-esteem, beauty standards, and consumer
behavior. Individuals with low body image perception often seek external validation to
feel more accepted and attractive (O'Connor, 2000). Beauty and success are often
associated with lighter skin tones in many societies. This association can make
individuals feel their natural skin color is less desirable or attractive. To meet societal
beauty standards and gain acceptance from others, many tum to SLPs as a means of
improving their appearance. Perceiving a body image in a negative light can result in
a feeling of not being good enough and a strong urge to conform to societal standards

of beauty (Stewart, 2004). This pressure to fit into certain beauty norms may cause

217

individuals to internalize negative messages about their appearance, leading them to
believe that having lighter skin is inherently more desirable or socially acceptable. The
use of SLP among individuals with low body image perception may lead to increased
consumer awareness of product ingredients. Individuals determined to attain their
desired physical appearance while reducing the likelihood of any adverse effects may
take the initiative to acquire knowledge about the constituents present in these products.
It includes gaining an understanding of their effectiveness and safety, as well as any
possible negative consequences that may arise from their use (Atiyeh et al., 2008). This
understanding and heightened awareness empower them to make informed decisions
about their skincare routine and product choices. Previous studies have confirmed this
observation, wherein results showed that high body image perception often results in
low use of SLP (Masood et al., 2022; Owusu-Agyei et al., 2020).

The intricate relationship among self-esteem, beauty standards, and consumer
behavior is exemplified by the correlation between low body image perception,
increased use of SLP, and heightened awareness of product ingredients. By
understanding the motivations behind this correlation, they are acquiring insights into
how people with low body image perception cope with societal pressures and make
decisions regarding their appearance and well-being may be warranted. To create a
more inclusive and accepting society, there is a need to establish more diverse beauty
standards. The results of this rescarch require further investigation to confirm their

validity.

Body Image Perception, Skin-Lightening Practices, and Mental Health: Data

Triangulation

218

This study utilized a mixed-methods approach to explore the interrelationships
among body image perception, skin-lightening practices, and mental health among
emerging Filipino adults. The integration of quantitative and qualitative data provided
a nuanced understanding of these complex interactions and their influence on mental
well-being.

The integration of quantitative and qualitative findings revealed a consistent
pattern where negative body image perceptions were strongly associated with higher
levels of depression, anxiety, and stress. Quantitative data highlighted the prevalence
of severe body image issues among participants, while qualitative narratives provided
context, illustrating how societal and media pressures contribute to these mental health
challenges. Informants frequently discussed the detrimental effects of societal
expectations and media portrayals of idealized bodies, reinforcing the quantitative
results. However, the integration also exposed some discrepancies. For example,
quantitative scores indicated a generally positive body image for some participants, but
qualitative interviews revealed underlying stress and anxiety due to societal pressures.
These instances underscore the limitations of quantitative measures in fully capturing
the complexity of personal experiences and the importance of qualitative insights in
providing a more complete picture.

Both data types demonstrated that societal and media-driven pressures to
conform to lighter skin standards significantly impact mental health. Quantitative data
showed varying levels of SLP use and its association with mental health issues, while
qualitative findings detailed the psychological burden these practices impose.
Participants described feeling compelled to use SLPs to meet societal expectations,
which exacerbated their mental health struggles. The integration highlighted a clear

consensus on the negative impact of perceived benefits of SLPs on mental health, with

219

both data types showing that higher perceived benefits correlate with increased anxiety
and depression. However, a discordance was noted in the relationship between
knowledge of SLP ingredients and mental health. Quantitative data suggested no
significant association, whereas qualitative narratives indicated that greater knowledge
led to more cautious use and potentially mitigated some mental health risks. This
suggests that qualitative data can reveal protective behaviors and motivations that
quantitative data might overlook.

Data integration also emphasized the significant role of cultural and familial
influences in shaping body image and skin-lightening practices. Qualitative findings
vividly illustrated how comments from immediate family members about appearance
deeply affected participants' mental health, an aspect not specifically captured by the
quantitative data. This cultural context is crucial in understanding the emotional and
psychological impact of family dynamics, highlighting the need for culturally sensitive
approaches in interventions.

The concept of the "white standard" of beauty has evolved over time but
remains a pervasive influence. Historically rooted in colonialism, this standard equated
lighter skin with higher social status and desirability (Fragkouli, 2017). Over time,
global media and advertising have perpetuated this ideal, reinforcing the association
between lighter skin and beauty. However, there are signs of both perpetuation and
rejection. While mainstream media still often promotes lighter skin as ideal, there is a
growing movement towards embracing diversity and rejecting narrow beauty standards
(Lazuka et al., 2020). Social media campaigns and influencers promoting body
positivity and self-acceptance challenge the traditional white standard (Chiat, 2021). In

the Philippines, the persistence of skin-lightening practices reflects ongoing societal

220

pressures, but the increasing visibility of darker-skinned models and celebrities

suggests a slow shift toward broader acceptance of different skin tones.

Methodological Limitations

Certain limitations should be considered when interpreting our results. For the
quantitative part, because the data were self-reported, biases such as respondents not
entirely giving truthful information or having the social desirability to be accepted may
have influenced our estimations in any direction. However, these biases were somewhat
reduced by ensuring the anonymity and confidentiality of their data and highlighting
their voluntary involvement in the study through the consent form. Furthermore, the
study’s sample size and limited geographical reach through online platforms limit its
generalizability to other emerging adults elsewhere. This study should also not rule out
unmeasured confounding factor bias. The cross-sectional design of the study could not
determine the temporal and causal links between levels of body appreciation and mental
health outcomes. Determining whether poor body image leads to mental health issues,
mental health issues lead to poor body image, or if there is a bidirectional relationship
between the two is difficult in cross-sectional studies. Cross-sectional studies lack
longitudinal data or experimental manipulation, making it impossible to determine the
temporal sequence of events definitively. Although this study can identify correlations
between body image and mental health, it cannot confirm whether one variable causes
change in the other or if other underlying factors influence the observed associations.
This limitation highlights the necessity for additional research using longitudinal
designs or experimental methods to better understand the dynamic interplay between

body image and mental health over time.

221

Furthermore, this study is limited due to using non-validated instruments to
evaluate critical constructs. This presents a significant possibility of measurement error,
which questions the reliability and validity of the conclusions. Although the
instruments were carefully chosen to align with the study's goals, the absence of
validation data raises doubts about their appropriateness and the precision of the
measurements. As a result, there may be some uncertainty in interpreting the results as
the tools used may not accurately capture the intended concepts or have sufficient
psychometric properties. It is important to note that using non-validated instruments
could introduce subjectivity and ambiguity into the assessment process, possibly
weakening the reliability of the conclusions drawn from the data. Future research
should prioritize the validation of instruments used to measure key constructs, thereby
improving the methodological rigor and reliability of findings in similar studies.

It is important to acknowledge potential sampling biases that may affect the
generalizability of the findings to the broader population of emerging adults in the
Philippines. Although the sample of 3,127 respondents provides valuable insights,
certain demographic characteristics differ from what might be expected in a
representative sample. Specifically, the sample is skewed towards a higher proportion
of females (67%) and individuals identifying as heterosexual (36%), potentially
impacting the gender and sexual orientation distribution. Additionally, the
predominance of other demographic characteristics in the sample may also affect the
generalization of the findings. It is important to note that this study's results may not
represent the broader population. Many participants reported low usage of movies, TV,
and social media, which may not align with broader trends. Additionally, many
respondents reported high internet use, which could introduce bias if certain

demographic groups are overrepresented. Therefore, it is essential to recognize the

222

limitations of the findings and interpret them carefully in the context of our sample
characteristics. Future research should include more diverse and representative samples
to better understand the experiences and perspectives of emerging adults in the
Philippines. Additionally, many respondents reported high internet use, which could
introduce bias if certain demographic groups are overrepresented. Therefore, it is
essential to recognize the limitations of our findings and interpret them carefully in the
context of our sample characteristics. Future research should include more diverse and
representative samples to understand better the experiences and perspectives of
emerging adults in the Philippines.

The qualitative part of this research, which used a case study design, can provide
valuable insights into the influence of body image perception and skin-lightening
practices on mental health. However, one of the primary limitations of a case study
design is that it needs more generalizability. Case studies typically focus on a specific
individual or a small group, making applying the findings to a larger population
challenging. Although case studies can offer valuable insights into the experiences and
perspectives of participants, they may differ from the broader population. Therefore,
the applicability of the findings to other contexts or groups may be limited (Connell et
al., 2001; Hyett et al., 2014). It should also be noted that this research is heavily reliant
on subjective interpretations, which can make it vulnerable to researcher bias. The
researcher’s personal beliefs, values, and preconceptions can significantly influence the
data collection, analysis, and interpretation process, which may lead to biased findings.
This is especially true when studying subjects such as body image perception and skin-
lightening practices, where the researcher’s personal biases can impact how
participants’ experiences are understood and represented. To minimize these biases in

the qualitative part, I employed several strategies. I ensured a rigorous interview

223

protocol and maintained reflexive journals or notetaking to monitor and address biases
throughout the research process. Additionally, member checking was used, where
participants reviewed and confirmed the accuracy of the findings from their respective
quantitative findings, further enhancing the credibility and reliability of the results.

Similar to the quantitative part, the design of a case study is typically descriptive
and does not establish causal relationships between variables. Despite providing
valuable insights into the intricate interplay of factors that influence mental health
outcomes, drawing definitive conclusions about the causal effects of skin-lightening
practices and body image perception on mental health can be challenging (Gerring,
2004). Qualitative research focuses on an in-depth understanding of phenomena, often
through narrative descriptions and thematic analysis. The interviews were conducted
online; hence, some non-verbal reactions to the questions needed to be noted due to the
unavailability of video.

The study also faced limitations in the conceptualization and measurement of
body image. Future research should differentiate between these aspects, considering
how body image perceptions may vary between different body parts (e.g., muscularity
versus skin tone) and genders. Objective measurements of participants' bodies, such as
BMI, skin color, and facial features, should be included to determine how closely they
align with their own or imposed beauty standards. This approach would provide a more
comprehensive understanding of body image and its correlation with practices like
skin-lightening. The absence of objective measurements in this study presents a
limitation. Without such data, it is challenging to determine the extent to which
participants' perceptions of their bodies align with reality and how these perceptions
influence their mental health and behavior. Future studies should include objective

measurements to enhance the understanding of body image issues and their impact.

224

Despite these limitations from the study's quantitative and qualitative parts,
explanatory sequential mixed method design involving the triangulation of both data
sources offered a comprehensive approach to exploring the complex relationship
among body image perception, skin-lightening practices, and mental health of the
Filipino emerging adults. To the best of the researcher’s knowledge, this may be the
first study, not only in the Philippines but also in Southeast Asia, to delve into the
intricacy of this phenomenon. By integrating quantitative and qualitative data,
researchers gained a more holistic understanding of these phenomena, identify patterns
and trends, and generate hypotheses for further investigation. However, it is essential
to acknowledge and address the limitations inherent in this study design to ensure the

rigor and validity of the research findings.

Key Arguments and Practical Implications

Integrating quantitative and qualitative data led to several key arguments. First,
societal and media pressures on body image were identified as key drivers of negative
body image and associated mental health issues. Both data types highlighted the
detrimental effects of these pressures, suggesting the need for media literacy programs
and campaigns promoting diverse body types and positive body image. This finding
aligns with previous research that underscores the pervasive impact of media on body
image and mental health (Fardouly et al., 2015; Tiggemann & Zaccardo, 2015). This
study contributes to this body of work by providing specific insights into the Filipino
context, where Wester beauty standards heavily influence local perceptions.

Second, the influence of skin-lightening practices on mental health was evident,
with higher perceived benefits of SLPs correlating with increased mental health issues.

This calls for educational initiatives to raise awareness about the risks of SLPs and

225

promote natural beauty. Previous studies have documented the health risks associated
with SLPs (Bastiansz et al., 2022; Masub & Khachemoune, 2020), but my research
expands this understanding by illustrating the psychological toll these practices take on
young Filipino adults. The cultural acceptance and promotion of lighter skin as a beauty
ideal contribute significantly to these mental health challenges.

Third, cultural and familial influences were found to play a significant role in
shaping body image perceptions and mental health. The qualitative data revealed the
profound impact of family comments and cultural norms, highlighting the importance
of designing culturally sensitive interventions that engage families and communities.
This supports earlier theories on the role of family and culture in body image
development. Body image development is a multifaceted process influenced by various
factors, with family and culture playing significant roles. Previous research indicates
that family dynamics and early childhood influences, including the family and school
environment, profoundly impact body image development (Amianto et al., 2017;
Hesse-Biber et al., 2010; McCabe et al., 2016). Parents, in particular, are highlighted
as influential in shaping a child's developing body image (McCabe et al., 2016).
Moreover, the structure and nature of body images can shift over historical time and
vary between cultures, emphasizing the impact of cultural factors on body image
(Featherstone, 2010; Yuca et al., 2020). Cultural influences, including societal ideals,
mass media, and gender-based socialization, shape body image development (Bilal et
al., 2021; Heinberg & Thompson, 1995). Studies have shown that social and cultural
factors strongly influence the shaping, development, and maintenance of societal body
image problems (Yuca et al., 2020). Additionally, the thin-ideal standard of female
beauty prevalent in Western societies adversely affects body satisfaction, underscoring

the importance of considering cultural contexts in body image research (Ozbek et al.,

226

2023). My study builds on these theories by providing evidence from a Filipino
perspective, demonstrating how deeply ingrained cultural standards and family
dynamics affect mental health. Filipino family and culture play pivotal roles in body
image development. Understanding how these factors interact and influence
individuals' perceptions of their bodies is essential for promoting positive body image
and overall well-being.

The concept of "body politics" is also central to understanding these dynamics
of media-driven body ideals, skin-lightening practices, and mental health. Body politics
refers to the practices and policies through which powers of society regulate the human
body, focusing on how societal norms and power structures influence perceptions and
treatments of bodies (Bartky, 2015; Turner, 2008). In the Filipino context, body politics
plays a crucial role in perpetuating the white standard of beauty. The globalization of
whiteness as the beauty ideal has been critiqued for perpetuating colonial dichotomies
that place white as central and racialized individuals as peripheral (Kumbhare, 2021).
Social media platforms like Instagram have also been analyzed for their role in
promoting body positivity and diversity, countering traditional beauty norms (Cohen et
al., 2019). However, the perpetuation of unattainable thinness as the American beauty
standard, exemplified by models like those from Victoria's Secret, continues to idolize
unrealistic body sizes (Anderson et al., 2022). My dissertation highlights how body
politics manifests in promoting lighter or whiter skin as the ideal skin tone and thinness
or muscularity as the body ideal or standard, influenced by historical colonialism and
sustained by contemporary media and societal norms.

Body politics operates by embedding certain beauty standards within societal
norms and media representations, influencing individual behaviors and self-

perceptions. In the Philippines, historical colonial influences have left a legacy where

227

lighter skin is often equated with higher social status and desirability. This historical
context is crucial because it shows how deeply entrenched these standards are and how
they continue to be reinforced by modern media and advertising. Contemporary media
perpetuates these ideals by frequently showcasing lighter-skinned models and
celebrities, thereby normalizing this standard and making it aspirational.

The persistence of these beauty ideals is evident in the widespread use of SLPs
among Filipino youth (Lasco & Hardon, 2020). This behavior is not just a personal
choice but a reflection of broader societal pressures that dictate what is considered
attractive and acceptable. By using these products, individuals are conforming to the
societal norms imposed by body politics, often at the expense of their mental health.
The psychological burden of trying to meet these standards can lead to increased
anxiety, depression, and low self-esteem, as evidenced by both the quantitative and
qualitative data in this study.

Given these results and their alignment with existing literature, my study
provides a robust argument for the necessity of comprehensive and culturally tailored
interventions. The media literacy programs I suggest aim to counteract the pervasive
influence of unrealistic beauty standards by fostering critical thinking and resilience
among young adults. These programs should be integrated into educational curricula to
reach a broad audience and include practical components, such as analyzing media
content and discussing its impact on self-esteem and body image.

Public health campaigns to promote the acceptance of diverse body types and
skin tones are also essential. These campaigns can leverage the power of social media
and collaborations with influencers and celebrities who advocate for body positivity.
By showcasing a variety of beauty standards, these campaigns can help shift societal

perceptions and reduce the pressure to conform to traditional beauty norms.

228

Mental health support services need to be made more accessible, especially in
educational institutions, community centers and barangay health sites. Counseling and
therapy services should focus on building self-esteem and promoting body positivity,
while also being sensitive to the cultural context of the Filipino community. Workshops
and seminars for families can educate parents and guardians about the impact of their
comments and attitudes on their children's body image and mental health at an early
age, fostcring a supportive home environment.

Stricter regulations on advertising SLPs are necessary to prevent the
perpetuation of harmful beauty standards. The Philippine government should enforce
guidelines that ensure advertisements do not promote unrealistic and unhealthy beauty
ideals. Additionally, educational campaigns can inform the public about the risks
associated with SLPs and encourage the use of safer, natural alternatives.

The integration of quantitative and qualitative data in this study provides a
comprehensive understanding of the effects of body image perception and skin-
lightening practices on the mental health of emerging Filipino adults. This integrated
approach highlights the importance of addressing societal and individual factors in
developing effective interventions and policies. The findings underscore the need for
culturally sensitive interventions that promote positive body image, challenge harmful
beauty standards, and support mental well-being. By implementing specific
interventions such as media literacy programs, public health campaigns, mental health
support services, family education workshops, and stricter advertising regulations, I
believe that we can foster a healthier, more inclusive society for emerging Filipino
adults. My study contributes to the existing literature by providing specific insights into
the Filipino context, expanding on earlier theories of body image and cultural influence,

and offering practical recommendations for interventions tailored to this population.

229

Chapter V1

Conclusion and Recommendations

Conclusions

This research study utilized a mixed-method approach, combining quantitative
and qualitative methods, to gain a deeper understanding of the complex relationship
among body image perception, skin-lightening practices, and mental health outcomes
such as depression, anxiety, and stress in emerging Filipino adults. The study revealed
that multiple factors influence individuals' attitudes, behavior, and psychological well-
being.

The quantitative analysis highlighted significant associations between body
image perception and various mental health outcomes, with skin-lightening practices
playing a mediating role. This study also noted the high prevalence of SLP use among
Filipino emerging adults, with many participants perceiving increased benefits from
their use. These findings underscore the need to address skin-lightening behaviors and
body image concems as potential risk factors for adverse mental health outcomes.

The qualitative interviews provided deeper insights into the cultural, social, and
psychological stressors and facilitators shaping individuals' perceptions and
experiences regarding body image and skin-lightening practices. Participants’
narratives revealed that these practices are influenced by a complex interplay of societal
norms, media influences, personal beliefs, and emotional motivations, significantly
impacting mental well-being. The triangulation of quantitative and qualitative data
enriched the understanding of the relationship between body image, skin-lightening
practices, and mental health, allowing for a comprehensive view of the factors

contributing to individuals' experiences and outcomes.

230

The concept of body politics is central to understanding these dynamics. Body
politics refers to the practices and policies through which societal powers regulate the
human body, focusing on how norms and power structures influence perceptions and
treatments of bodies. In the Filipino context, body politics plays a crucial role in
perpetuating the white standard of beauty, influenced by historical colonialism and
sustained by contemporary media and societal norms.

This dissertation contributes to the extensive literature on body image and
emerging adults by providing specific insights into the Filipino context, where Western
beauty standards heavily influence local perceptions. Unlike previous studies that often
focus on Western populations, this research highlights how these global beauty
standards affect mental health in an Asian, post-colonial society. The study's mixed-
method approach also offers a more comprehensive understanding by combining
statistical associations with personal narratives, revealing cultural nuances that
influence body image and mental health.

Building on existing theories, such as the Sociocultural Theory, this study
proposes the Culturally Informed Body Image Theory. Sociocultural Theory posits that
societal and cultural influences significantly shape body image perceptions and
behaviors. According to this theory, individuals internalize societal beauty standards
through media exposure, peer interactions, and cultural norms, subsequently
influencing their body satisfaction and self-esteem (Rodgers, 2016; Swain et al., 2015).
In the context of this study, Sociocultural Theory helps explain how Western beauty
standards, perpetuated through global media and local societal norms, impact the body

image perceptions of emerging Filipino adults

231

The “Culturally Informed Body Image Theory” expands on Sociocultural
Theory by incorporating historical, cultural, and media-driven factors. It suggests that
body image perceptions and related mental health outcomes are influenced by 2
combination of these factors, which interact with individual psychological aspects such
as self-esteem and personal beliefs. This theory I propose emphasizes the importance
of considering historical contexts, such as colonialism and sociocultural aspects,
including familial and peer beliefs, in understanding beauty standards and the need for

culturally sensitive interventions to address these deeply rooted issues.

Recommendations

Healthcare professionals, policymakers, educators, and the wider community
can utilize these insights to design and implement interventions that promote positive
body image and mental well-being. For healthcare professionals, the study advocates
for the development of mental health treatments tailored to support individuals
struggling with body dysmorphia and the psychosocial stresses related to skin tone and
beauty ideals. Policymakers are encouraged to enforce stricter regulations on SLPs and
critically evaluate how beauty standards are marketed.

Public health programs should focus on raising awareness about the harmful
effects of adhering to societal standards of beauty and encourage self-acceptance. These
programs should be integrated into school curricula and supported by media campaigns
that leverage influencers to promote diverse beauty standards. Family education
workshops and community discussions in the barangay level can help shift attitudes
and reduce the pressure to conform to unrealistic beauty ideals.

In conclusion, this study underscores the need for culturally sensitive

interventions that promote positive body image, challenge harmful beauty standards,

232

and support mental well-being. While changing ingrained beauty standards is
challenging, especially given the influence of global media, it is not impossible.
Through sustained efforts involving education, media regulation, and community
engagement, significant strides can be made in promoting healthier beauly standards
and improving mental health outcomes. This dissertation not only contributes to the
existing literature by providing specific insights into the Filipino context but also offers
a theoretical framework that can guide future research and interventions in this field.
By addressing these issues holistically, 1 believe that we, as a society, can foster a

healthier, more inclusive environment for emerging Filipino adults.

233

References

Adame, K. T. (2023). Tangkilikin ang sariling atin: Presence of colonial mentality
among Filipinos today.

Adebajo, S. (2002). An epidemiological survey of the use of cosmetic skin lightening
cosmetics among traders in Lagos, Nigeria. Mercury, 5(7), 43-48.

Ahmed, I. I. (2012). A Thematic Analysis of Female University Students’ Perception
of Idealised Body Image in Sudan and Their Experiences of Performing
Common Beauty Practices:(Skin Lightening, Applying Black Henna Dye and

Purposively Induced Weight). University of South Wales (United Kingdom).

Aimé, A., Fuller-Tyszkiewicz, M., Dion, J., Markey, C. H., Strodl, E., McCabe, M.,
Mellor, D., Gallegos, A. G., Pietrabissa, G., & Alcaraz-Ibanez, M. (2020).
Assessing positive budy image, body satisfaction, weight bias, and appearance
comparison in emerging adults: a cross-validation study across eight countries.
Body image, 35, 320-332.

Ajose, F. O. (2005). Consequences of skin bleaching in Nigerian men and women.
International journal of dermatology, 44, 41-43.

Al-Sarraf, A. (2022). Skin lightening as an image enhancing phenomenon:
investigating risks, motivations, and underlying psychological factors.

Alaa, A.-S., Anthony, B., Mariya, P., & Omella, C. (2021). Image enhancing drugs: A
narrative review on the motivational risk factors influencing skin lightening
use. Emerging Trends in Drugs, Addictions, and Health, 1, 100009.

Alibudbud, R. (2023). Gender in mental health: Comparison of the rate and social

factors of depression, anxiety, and stress among young adult Filipino

234

heterosexual cisgender men and women and LGBT+ individuals.
International Journal of Social Psychiatry, 69(2), 430-437.

Alleva, J. M., Sheeran, P., Webb, T. L., Martijn, C., & Miles, E. (2015). A meta-
analytic review of stand-alone interventions to improve body image. PloS one,
10(9), €0139177.

Alrayyes, S. F., Alrayyes, S. F., & Farooq, U. D. (2019). Skin-lightening patterns
among female students: A cross-sectional study in Saudi Arabia. International
journal of women's dermatology, 5(4), 246-250.

Altabe, M. (1998). Ethnicity and body image: Quantitative and qualitative analysis.
International Journal of Eating Disorders, 23(2), 153-159.

Ameen, N., Cheah, J. H., & Kumar, S. (2022). It's all part of the customer journey:
The impact of augmented reality, chatbots, and social media on the body
image and self-esteem of Generation Z female consumers. Psychology &
Marketing, 39(11), 2110-2129.

Amianto, F., Martini, M., Spalatro, A., Abbate, D., & Fassino, S. (2017). Body image
development within the family: attachment dynamics and parental attitudes in
cross-sectional and longitudinal studies. Acta Psychopathol, 3(4), 50.

An, J., Zhou, K., Li, M., & Li, X. (2022). Assessing the relationship between body
image and quality of life among rural and urban breast cancer survivors in
China. BMC Women's Health, 22(1), 1-10.

Anderson, J. B., Laughter, M. R., Hatch, J., Patel, P., Maymone, M., Vashi, N. A.,
Laughter, M., & Vashi, N. (2022). Shifting the Standard of Beauty: Beginning
of the Body Inclusive Model. Cureus, 14(6).

Andrew, R., Tiggemann, M., & Clark, L. (2016). Positive body image and young

women’s health: Implications for sun protection, cancer screening, weight loss

235

and alcohol consumption behaviours. Journal of health psychology, 21(1), 28-
39.

Aparicio-Martinez, P., Perea-Moreno, A.-J., Martinez-Jimenez, M. P., Redel-Macias,
M. D., Pagliari, C., & Vaquero-Abellan, M. (2019). Social media, thin-ideal,
body dissatisfaction and disordered eating attitudes: An exploratory analysis.
International journal of environmental research and public health, 16(21),
4177.

Aquino, M. T., Orense, C. L., Tanchoco, C. C., Amarra, S. V., Tajan, M. G., & Dela
Cruz, E. (2009). Correlates of body image satisfaction among economically
depressed urban Filipino women. Philippine Journal of Science, 138(1), 67-
TA.

Araojo, R., Browning-McNee, L. A., Katz, L. M., Manga, P., Michele, T., Lee, C. S.,
Santiago, Y., Hsieh, J., & Welch, T. (2023). Advancing Health Equity: Efforts
to Expand Education on Skin Lightening Products. Public Health Reports,
00333549231213158.

Armstrong, B. G., & Sloan, M. (1989). Ordinal regression models for epidemiologic
data. American journal of epidemiology, 129(1), 191-204.

Ammstrong, B. K., & Kricker, A. (2001). The epidemiology of UV induced skin
cancer. Journal of photochemistry and photobiology B: Biology, 63(1-3), 8-
18.

Arnett, J. J. (2000). Emerging adulthood: A theory of devclopment from thc late tecns
through the twenties. American psychologist, 55(5), 469.

Arnett, J. J. (2023). Emerging adulthood: The winding road from the late teens

through the twenties. Oxford University Press.

236

Arnett, J. J., Zukauskiené, R., & Sugimura, K. (2014). The new life stage of emerging
adulthood at ages 18-29 years: Implications for mental health. The Lancet
Psychiatry, 1(7), 569-576.

Atari, M. (2016). Factor structure and psychometric properties of the Body
Appreciation Scale-2 in Iran. Body image, 18, 1-4.

Atiyeh, B. S., Ibrahim, A. E., & Dibo, S. A. (2008). Cosmetic mesotherapy: between
scientific evidence, science fiction, and lucrative business. Aesthetic plastic
surgery, 32, 842-849.

Augustus-Horvath, C. L., & Tylka, T. L. (2011). The acceptance model of intuitive
eating: a comparison of women in emerging adulthood, early adulthood, and
middle adulthood. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 58(1), 110.

Avalos, L., Tylka, T. L., & Wood-Barcalow, N. (2005). The body appreciation scale:
Development and psychomctric cvaluation. Body image, 2(3), 285-297.

Barkhordari-Sharifabad, M., Vaziri-Yazdi, S., & Barkhordari-Sharifabad, M. (2020).
The effect of teaching puberty health concepts on the basis of a health belief
model for improving perceived body image of female adolescents: a quasi-
experimental study. BMC public health, 20, 1-7.

Barlett, C. P., Vowels, C. L., & Saucier, D. A. (2008). Meta-analyses of the effects of
media images on men's body-image concerns. Journal of social and clinical
psychology, 27(3), 279-310.

Barmar, S., Alimohammadian, M., Sadjadi, S. A., Poustchi, H., Hosseini, S. M., &
Yasseri, M. (2018). Generalized structural equation modeling (GSEM) and its
application in health researches. Journal of School of Public Health and

Institute of Public Health Research, 16(1), 51-62.

237

Bartky, S. L. (2015). Femininity and domination: Studies in the phenomenology of
oppression. Routledge.

Bassett-Gunter, R., McEwan, D., & Kamarhie, A. (2017). Physical activity and body
image among men and boys: A meta-analysis. Body image, 22, 114-128.

Bastiansz, A., Ewald, J., Rodriguez Saldaiia, V., Santa-Rios, A., & Basu, N. (2022). A
systematic review of mercury exposures from skin-lightening products.
Environmental health perspectives, 130(11), 116002.

Baxter, P., & Jack, S. (2008). Qualitative case study methodology: Study design and

implementation for novice researchers. The qualitative report, 13(4), 544-559.

Bender, R., & Grouven, U. (1997). Ordinal logistic regression in medical research.
Journal of the Royal College of physicians of London, 31(5), 546.

Bengwasan, P. D., Bernardo, A. B., & Maximo, S. I. (2022). Translation and Initial
Validation of the Depression Anxiety and Stress Scale (DASS-21) in Ilokano.
Psychological Studies, 67(4), 594-604.

Berry, B. (2007). Beauty bias: Discrimination and social power. Bloomsbury
Publishing USA.

Bidzan, M., Yousaf, O., Lipowski, M., & Lipowska, M. (2018). How health-related
behaviors predict body-esteem in men. American journal of men's health,
12(6), 1901-1907.

Bilal, A., Wazir, S., & Farooq, B. (2021). Relationship between Body Image
Dissatistaction and Social Media Usage in Young Women. Pakistan Journal
of Humanities and Social Sciences, 9(3), 460-468-460—-468.

Blay, Y. A. (2011). Skin bleaching and global white supremacy: By way of

introduction. The Journal of Pan African Studies, 4(4), 4-46.

238

Block, S. (2018). Colonial Complexions: Race and Bodies in Eighteenth-Century
America. University of Pennsylvania Press.

Blond, A. (2008). Impacts of exposure to images of ideal bodies on male body
dissatisfaction: A review. Body image, 5(3), 244-250.

Boroughs, M., & Thompson, J. K. (2002). Exercise status and sexual orientation as
moderators of body image disturbance and eating disorders in males.
International Journal of Eating Disorders, 31(3), 307-311.

Boyle, J., & Kennedy, C. (1986). Hydroquinone concentrations in skin lightening
creams. British Journal of Dermatology, 114(4), 501-504.

Brant, R. (1990). Assessing proportionality in the proportional odds model for ordinal
logistic regression. Biometrics, 1171-1178.

Braun, V., & Clarke, V. (2006). Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qualitative
research in psychology, 3(2), 77-101.

Brebante, Z. R. T., & Cagas, J. Y. (2015). Body image, body mass index and the
experience of Hiya in physical education among Filipino female university
students. Asia Life Sciences, 24(2), 647-659.

Breiner, C. E., Miller, M. L., Sanzari, C. M., Perry, T. R., & Hormes, J. M. (2023).
Peer ethnicity as a mediator in the relationship between ethnic identity and
body appreciation in Black college-aged women. Journal of Black
Psychology, 49(6), 814-834.

Brown, J. D. (2002). Mass media influences on sexuality. Journal of sex research,
39(1), 42-45.

Buchanan, T. S., Fischer, A. R., Tokar, D. M., & Yoder, J. D. (2008). Testing a

culture-specific extension of objectification theory regarding African

239

American women's body image. The Counseling Psychologist, 36(5), 697-
718.

Buhlmann, U., Marques, L. M., & Wilhelm, S. (2012). Traumatic experiences in
individuals with body dysmorphic disorder. The Journal of nervous and
mental disease, 200(1), 95-98.

Biirkner, P.-C., & Vuorre, M. (2019). Ordinal regression models in psychology: A
tutorial. Advances in Methods and Practices in Psychological Science, 2(1),
77-101.

Bynner, J. (2005). Rethinking the youth phase of the life-course: The case for
emerging adulthood? Journal of youth studies, 8(4), 367-384.

Cain, M. (2021). Structural equation modeling using Stata. Journal of Behavioral
Data Science, 1(2), 156-177.

Cano, M. A., Schwartz, S. J., MacKinnon, D. P., Keum, B. T., Prado, G., Marsiglia,
F. F., Salas-Wright, C. P., Cobb, C. L., Garcini, L. M., & De La Rosa, M.
(2021). Exposure to ethnic discrimination in social media and symptoms of
anxiety and depression among Hispanic emerging adults: Examining the

moderating role of gender. Journal of clinical psychology, 77(3), 571-586.

Capistrano, R. C. G., & Weaver, A. (2018). That's what friends are for: Emotional
solidarity, friendship and social interactions between first-generation
immigrants and their visiting friends. Journal of Hospitality and Tourism
Management, 36, 57-66.

Carey, R. N., Donaghue, N., & Broderick, P. (2014). Body image concern among
Australian adolescent girls: The role of body comparisons with models and

peers. Body image, 1 1(1), 81-84.

240

Carranza, M. E. (2007). Building resilience and resistance against racism and
discrimination among Salvadorian female youth in Canada. Child & Family
Social Work, 12(4), 390-398.

Cash, T. (2008). The body image workbook: An eight-step program for learning to
like your looks. New Harbinger Publications.

Cash, T. F. (1997). The body image workbook: An 8-step program for learning to like
your looks. New Harbinger Publications, Inc.

Cash, T. F. (2000). Body image. Oxford University Press.

Cash, T. F. (2012a). Cognitive-behavioral perspectives on body image.

Cash, T. F. (2012b). Cognitive-behavioral perspectives on body image. Encyclopedia
of body image and human appearance, 1, 334-342.

Cash, T. F., & Pruzinsky, T. E. (1990). Body images: Development, deviance, and
change. Guilford press.

Cash, T. F., Santos, M. T., & Williams, E. F. (2005). Coping with body-image threats
and challenges: Validation of the Body Image Coping Strategies Inventory.
Journal of psychosomatic research, 58(2), 190-199.

Cash, T. F., & Smolak, L. (2011). Body image: A handbook of science, practice, and
prevention. Guilford press.

Cerna, L., Mezzanotte, C., Rutigliano, A., Brussino, O., Santiago, P., Borgonovi, F.,
& Guthrie, C. (2021). Promoting inclusive education for diverse societies: A
conceptual framework.

Chae, S.-M., Kang, H. S., & Ra, J. S. (2017). Body esteem is a mediator of the
association between physical activity and depression in Korean adolescents.

Applied Nursing Research, 33, 42-48.

241

Charles, C. A. (2011). Skin bleaching and the prestige complexion of sexual
attraction. Sexuality & Culture, 15(4), 375-390.

Charles, C. A., & McLean, S. K. (2017). Body image disturbance and skin bleaching.
British Journal of Psychology, 108(4), 783-796.

Cheng, A.-D., De La Garza, H., Maymone, M. B., Johansen, V. M., Vashi, N. A.,
Maymone, M., & Vashi, N. (2021). Skin-lightening products: consumer
preferences and costs. Cureus, 13(8).

Cheung, T., Wong, S. Y., Wong, K. Y., Law, L. Y., Ng, K., Tong, M. T., Wong, K.
Y., Ng, M. Y., & Yip, P. S. (2016). Depression, anxiety and symptoms of
stress among baccalaureate nursing students in Hong Kong: a cross-sectional
study. International journal of environmental research and public health,
13(8), 779.

Chiat, A. (2021). Body Positivity Movement: Influence of Beauty Standards on Body
Image.

Chisuwa, N., & O’Dea, J. A. (2010). Body image and eating disorders amongst
Japanese adolescents. A review of the literature. Appetite, 54(1), 5-15.

Clark, R. G., Blanchard, W., Hui, F. K., Tian, R., & Woods, H. (2023). Dealing with
complete separation and quasi-complete separation in logistic regression for
linguistic data. Research Methods in Applied Linguistics, 2(1), 100044.

Classen, S., Lopez, E. D., Winter, S., Awadzi, K. D., Ferree, N., & Garvan, C. W.
(2007). Population-based health promotion perspective for older driver safety:
conceptual framework to intervention plan. Clinical interventions in aging,
2(4), 677.

CNN. (2019, May 17, 2019). The 2019 Philippine midterm elections: What you need

to know. CNN. https://www.cnnphilippines.com/news/2019/5/7/2019-

242

midterm-elections-FAQ. html? fbclid=IwAR3qsvfGShmrQ29IQuyrT XsHf-

YpfGSbnKk 5nlzVCCD8avBpB99dxBx6G6Eo

Cohen, J. (2013). Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences. Academic
press.

Cohen, R., Irwin, L., Newton-John, T., & Slater, A. (2019). # bodypositivity: A
content analysis of body positive accounts on Instagram. Body image, 29, 47-
57.

Cole, S. R., Chu, H., & Greenland, S. (2014). Maximum likelihood, profile
likelihood, and penalized likelihood: a primer. American journal of
epidemiology, 179(2), 252-260.

Connell, J., Lynch, C., & Waring, P. (2001). Constraints, compromises and choice:
Comparing three qualitative research studies. The qualitative report, 6(4), 1-
15.

Cook-Cottone, C. P., Tribole, E., & Tylka, T. L. (2013). Healthy eating in schools:
Evidence-based interventions to help kids thrive. American Psychological
Association.

Cortez, M. A. T., & Alfonso, G. J. (2020). Fitspiration and Body Positivity: The
Relationships of Body-Focused Instagram Trend and Movement, Self-
Objectification, and Gender Stereotypical Beliefs. University of the
Philippines Open University.

Cote, J. E. (2006). Emerging Adulthood as an Institutionalized Moratorium: Risks

and Benefits to Identity Formation.

243

Coulbeck, V. (2023). Examining the feasibility, acceptability, and effectiveness of a
self-compassion intervention in physical education class for adolescent girls
The University of Western Ontario (Canada)].

Coyne, S. M., Davis, E. J., Warburton, W., Stockdale, L., Abba, I., & Busby, D. M.
(2021). Mirror, mirror on the wall: The effect of listening to body positive
music on implicit and explicit body esteem. Psychology of Popular Media,
10(1), 2.

Creswell, J. W., & Tashakkori, A. (2007). Developing publishable mixed methods
manuscripts. In (Vol. 1, pp. 107-111): Sage Publications Sage CA: Los
Angeles, CA.

Dadzie, O., & Petit, A. (2009). Skin bleaching: highlighting the misuse of cutaneous
depigmenting agents. Journal of the european Academy of Dermatology and
Venereology, 23(7), 741-750.

Dakanalis, A., Zanetti, A. M., Riva, G., Colmegna, F., Volpato, C., Madeddu, F., &
Clerici, M. (2015). Male body dissatisfaction and eating disorder
symptomatology: Moderating variables among men. Journal of health
psychology, 20(1), 80-90.

David, E. J. R. (2013). Brown skin, white minds: Filipino-/American postcolonial
psychology. LAP.

David, E. J. R., & Nadal, K. L. (2013). The colonial context of Filipino American
immigrants’ psychological experiences. Cultural Diversity and Ethnic
Minority Psychology, 19(3), 298.

Davis, C., & Katzman, M. (1997). Charting new territory: Body esteem, weight
satisfaction, depression, and self-esteem among Chinese males and females in

Hong Kong. Sex Roles, 36, 449-459.

244

De Maynard, V. (2013). Developing the racialised body image disturbance scale.
International Journal of Culture and Mental Health, 6(2), 108-129.

De Ramirez, S. S., Hyder, A. A., Herbert, H. K., & Stevens, K. (2012). Unintentional
injuries: magnitude, prevention, and control. Annual review of public health,
33, 175-191.

Denzin, N. K. (2017). The research act: A theoretical introduction to sociological
methods. Transaction publishers.

Di Giacomo, D., Guerra, F., Cannita, K., Di Profio, A., & Ranieri, J. (2021). Digital
innovation in oncological primary treatment for well-being of patients:
psychological caring as prompt for enhancing quality of life. Current
Oncology, 28(4), 2452-2465.

Diedrichs, P. C., Atkinson, M. J., Steer, R. J., Garbett, K. M., Rumsey, N., &
Halliwell, E. (2015). Effectiveness of a brief school-based body image
intervention ‘Dove Confident Me: Single Session’when delivered by teachers
and researchers: Results from a cluster randomised controlled trial. Behaviour
research and therapy, 74, 94-104.

Dionisio, N. J. (2016). The Effect of Objectified Images in the Media on the
Development of Body Dissatisfaction and Depressive Symptoms in Filipino
American Women Walden University).

Dlova, N., Hendricks, N., & Martincgh, B. (2012). Skin-lightening creams used in

Durban, South Africa. Ethnic skin and hair disorders in kwaZulu-NataL, 37.

Dlova, N. C., Hamed, S. H., Tsoka-Gwegweni, J., & Grobler, A. (2015). Skin
lightening practices: an epidemiological study of South African women of

African and Indian ancestries. British Journal of Dermatology, 173, 2-9.

245

Dominguez, J., de Guzman, F., Reandelar Jr, M., & Thi Phung, T. K. (2018).
Prevalence of dementia and associated risk factors: a population-based study
in the Philippines. Journal of Alzheimer's Disease, 63(3), 1065-1073.

Draelos, Z. D. (2014). Cosmeceuticals: efficacy and influence on skin tone.
Dermatologic clinics, 32(2), 137-143.

Dukut, E. (2022). Archiving local culture through transnational popular culture
research. In Innovation on Education and Social Sciences (pp. 197-200).
Routledge.

Dumitrescu, A. L., Zetu, L., Teslaru, S., Dogaru, B. C., & Dogaru, C. (2008). Is it an
association between body appreciation, self-criticism, oral health status and
oral health-related behaviors. Romanian Journal of Internal Medicine, 46(4),
343-350.

Durkee, P. K., Polo, P., Mufioz-Reyes, J. A., Rodriguez-Ruiz, C., Losada-Pérez, M.,
Fernandez-Martinez, A. B., Turiégano, E., Buss, D. M., & Pita, M. (2019).
Men’s bodily attractiveness: Muscles as fitness indicators. Evolutionary
Psychology, 17(2), 1474704919852918.

Dwivedi, Y. K., Ismagilova, E., Hughes, D. L., Carlson, J., Filieri, R., Jacobson, J.,
Jain, V., Karjaluoto, H., Kefi, H., & Krishen, A. S. (2021). Setting the future
of digital and social media marketing research: Perspectives and research

propositions. International journal of information management, 59, 102168.

Elias, A. S., & Gill, R. (2018). Beauty surveillance: The digital self-monitoring

cultures of neoliberalism. European Journal of Cultural Studies, 21(1), 59-77.

246

Elsayed, H., O'Connor, C., Leyritana, K., Salvana, E., & Cox, S. E. (2021).
Depression, Nutrition, and Adherence to Antiretroviral Therapy in Men Who

Have Sex With Men in Manila, Philippines. Frontiers in public health, 1344.

Engler, D. E. (2005). Mercury “bleaching” creams. Journal of the American Academy
of Dermatology, 52(6), 1113-1114.

Epstein, M., & Ward, L. M. (2011). Exploring parent-adolescent communication
about gender: Results from adolescent and emerging adult samples. Sex Roles,
65, 108-118.

Erikson, E. H. (1968). Identity: Youth and crisis. WW Norton & company.

Erikson, E. H. (1993). Childhood and society. WW Norton & Company.

Erkan, A., & Yildiz, Z. (2014). Parallel lines assumption in ordinal logistic regression
and analysis approaches. Int Interdisciplinary J Sci Kes, 1, 10-11.

Estoque, E. I. (2022). The Filipino Millennial and the Korean Drama Fad. Journal of
Humanities and Social Sciences Studies, 4(2), 110-126.

Evans, S., Mikocka-Walus, A., Klas, A., Olive, L., Sciberras, E., Karantzas, G., &
Westrupp, E. M. (2020). From “it has stopped our lives” to “spending more
time together has strengthened bonds”: The varied experiences of Australian
families during COVID-19. Frontiers in psychology, 11, 588667.

Fanon, F. (2008). Black skin, white masks. Grove press.

Fardouly, J., Diedrichs, P. C., Vartanian, L. R., & Halliwell, E. (2015). Social
comparisons on social media: The impact of Facebook on young women's
body image concerns and mood. Body image, 13, 38-45.

Featherstone, M. (2010). Body, image and affect in consumer culture. Body & society,

16(1), 193-221.

247

Ferro, M. (2016). Major depressive disorder, suicidal behaviour, bipolar disorder, and
generalised anxiety disorder among emerging adults with and without chronic
health conditions. Epidemiology and psychiatric sciences, 25(5), 462-474.

Finato, S., Rech, R. R., Migon, P., Gavineski, I. C., Toni, V. d., & Halpern, R. (2013).
Body image insatisfaction in students from the sixth grade of public schools in

Caxias do Sul, Southern Brazil. Revista Paulista de pediatria, 31(1), 65-70.

Fischetti, F., Latino, F., Cataldi, S., & Greco, G. (2020). Gender differences in body
image dissatisfaction: The role of physical education and sport. Journal of
Human Sport & Exercise, 15(2).

Flores, J. L., Tuazon, J. A., Hernandez, M. A., & Evangelista, L. S. (2017).
Prevalence and correlates of depression, anxiety and stress among Filipinos in
the Philippines. Circulation, 136(suppl_1), A17228-A 17228.

Fox-Wasylyshyn, S. M., & El-Masri, M. M. (2005). Handling missing data in self-
report measures. Research in nursing & health, 28(6), 488-495.

Fragkouli, K. (2017). Skin Color Politics and the Beauty Standard: Examining
African American Girlhood Aristotle University of Thessaloniki].

Franko, D. L., Keshaviah, A., Eddy, K. T., Krishna, M., Davis, M. C., Keel, P. K., &
Herzog, D. B. (2013). A longitudinal investigation of mortality in anorexia
nervosa and bulimia nervosa. American Journal of Psychiatry, 170(8), 917-
925.

Franzoi, S. L., & Shields, S. A. (1984). The Body Esteem Scale: Multidimensional
structure and sex differences in a college population. Journal of personality

assessment, 48(2). 173-178

248

Frederick, D. A., & Essayli, J. H. (2016). Male body image: the roles of sexual
orientation and body mass index across five national US studies. Psychology
of Men & Masculinity, 17(4), 336.

Freedman, R. (2002). Bodylove: Learning to like our looks and ourselves: A practical
guide for women. Gurze Books.

Frisén, A., & Holmgvist, K. (2010). Physical, sociocultural, and behavioral factors
associated with body-esteem in 16-year-old Swedish boys and girls. Sex Roles,
63(5), 373-385.

Frisén, A., Lunde, C., & Berg, A. I. (2015). Developmental patterns in body esteem
from late childhood to young adulthood: A growth curve analysis. European
Journal of Developmental Psychology, 12(1), 99-115.

Froehling, A. (2017). Anxiety and Hypocrisy: An Analysis of the Skin Lightening
Industry in India and the United States’ Criticism of the Skin Lightening
Practice.

Frost, N., & Bailey-Rodriguez, D. (2020). Doing qualitatively driven mixed methods
and pluralistic qualitative research. In Enjoying research in counselling and
psychotherapy (pp. 137-160). Springer.

Gattario, K. H., & Frisén, A. (2019). From negative to positive body image: Men’s
and women’s journeys from early adolescence to emerging adulthood. Body
image, 28, 53-65.

Gavin, A. R., Simon, G. E., & Ludman, E. J. (2010). The association between obesity,
depression, and educational attainment in women: the mediating role of body

image dissatisfaction. Journal of psychosomatic research, 69(6). 573-581.

249

Gentile, K., Raghavan, C., Rajah, V., & Gates, K. (2007). It doesn't happen here:
Eating disorders in an ethnically diverse sample of economically
disadvantaged, urban college students. Eating Disorders, 15(5), 405-425.

Gerbner, G., Gross, L., Morgan, M., Signorielli, N., & Shanahan, J. (2002). Growing
up with television: Cultivation processes. Media effects: Advances in theory
and research, 2(1), 43-67.

Gerring, J. (2004). What is a case study and what is it good for? American political
science review, 98(2), 341-354.

Ghiara, V. (2020). Disambiguating the role of paradigms in mixed methods research.
Journal of mixed methods research, 14(1), 11-25.

Gillen, M. M., & Lefkowitz, E. S. (2009). Emerging adults’ perceptions of messages
about physical appearance. Body image, 6(3), 178-185.

Gitau, T. M., Micklesfield, L. K., Pettifor, J. M., & Norris, S. A. (2014). Changes in
eating attitudes, body esteem and weight control behaviours during
adolescence in a South African cohort. PloS one, 9(10), €109709.

Glaser, B. G. (2007). Doing formal theory. The Sage handbook of grounded
theory(Part II), 97-113.

Glenn, E. N. (2008). Yearning for lightness: Transnational circuits in the marketing
and consumption of skin lighteners. Gender & society, 22(3), 281-302.

Golan, M., Cohen-Asiag, D., & Ankori, G. (2023). Fostering resilience by means of
an online academic course: Exploring the mediating effects of self-esteem,
body esteem and mental status. Mental Health & Prevention, 30, 200268.

Goldschmidt, A. B., Wall, M., Choo, T.-H. J., Becker, C., & Neumark-Sztainer, D.
(2016). Shared risk factors for mood-, eating-, and weight-related health

outcomes. Health Psychology, 35(3), 245.

250

Gonzalez-Cabrera, J., Tourén, J., Machimbarrena, J. M., Gutiérrez-Ortega, M.,
Alvarez-Bardon, A., & Garaigordobil, M. (2019). Cyberbullying in gifted
students: Prevalence and psychological well-being in a Spanish sample.
International journal of environmental research and public health, 16(12),
2173.

Goon, P., & Craven, A. (2003). Whose debt?: Globalisation and whitefacing in Asia.
Intersections: Gender, history and culture in the Asian context, 9.

Gould, W., Pitblado, J., & Sribney, W. (2006). Maximum likelihood estimation with
Stata. Stata press.

Grabe, S., Ward, L. M., & Hyde, J. S. (2008). The role of the media in body image
concemms among women: a meta-analysis of experimental and correlational
studies. Psychological bulletin, 134(3), 460.

Granikov, V., Hong, Q. N., Crist, E., & Pluye, P. (2020). Mixed methods research in
library and information science: A methodological review. Library &
information science research, 42(1), 101003.

Graupensperger, S., Calhoun, B. H., Fleming, C., Rhew, I. C., & Lee, C. M. (2022).
Mental health and well-being trends through the first year-and-a-half of the
COVID-19 pandemic: Results from a longitudinal study of young adults in the
USA. Prevention Science, 23(6), 853-864.

Greenland, S. (1994). Alternative models for ordinal logistic regression. Statistics in
medicine, 13(16), 1665-1677.

Griffiths, S., Hay, P., Mitchison, D., Mond, J. M., McLean, S. A., Rodgers, B.,
Massey, R., & Paxton, S. J. (2016). Sex differences in the relationships
between body dissatisfaction, quality of life and psychological distress.

Australian and New Zealand Journal of Public Health, 40(6), 518-522.

251

Grogan, S. (2021). Body image: Understanding body dissatisfaction in men, women,
and children. Routledge.
Guest, G., Bunce, A., & Johnson, L. (2006). How many interviews are enough? An

experiment with data saturation and variability. Field methods, 18(1), 59-82.

Gummadan,, P., Pittman, L. D., & Ioffe, M. (2016). School belonging, ethnic identity,
and psychological adjustment among ethnic minority college students. The
Journal of Experimental Education, 84(2), 289-306.

Gurari, I., Hetts, J. J., & Strube, M. J. (2006). Beauty in the" I" of the beholder:
Effects of idealized media portrayals on implicit self-image. Basic and applied
social psychology, 28(3), 273-282.

Gutiérrez, P. A., Perez-Ortiz, M., Sanchez-Monedero, J., Fernandez-Navarro, F., &
Hervas-Martinez, C. (2015). Ordinal regression methods: survey and
experimental study. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering,
28(1), 127-146.

Gwaravanda, E. T. (2011). Shona proverbial implications on skin bleaching: some
philosophical insights. J Pan Afr Stud, 4(4), 201.

Hamed, S. H., Tayyem, R., Nimer, N., & AlKhatib, H. S. (2010). Skin-lightening
practice among women living in Jordan: prevalence, determinants, and user’s
awareness. /nternational journal of dermatology, 49(4), 414-420.

Hardwick, N., Van Gelder, L., Van der Merwe, C., & Van der Merwe, M. (1989).
Exogenous ochronosis: an epidemiological study. British Journal of
Dermatology, 120(2), 229-238.

Harrell, F. E. (2015). Ordinal logistic regression. In Regression modeling strategies

(pp. 311-325). Springer.

252

Hayficld, N., Halliwell, E., & Clarke, V. (2017). An exploration of biscxual, Icsbian,
and heterosexual women's body dissatisfaction, and body hair and cosmetics
practices. Psychology of Sexualites Review, 8(2), 55-67.

He, J., Sun, S., Zickgraf, H. F., Lin, Z., & Fan, X. (2020). Meta-analysis of gender
differences in body appreciation. Body image, 33, 90-100.

Headley, M. G., & Plano Clark, V. L. (2020). Multilevel mixed methods research
designs: Advancing a refined definition. Journal of mixed methods research,
14(2), 145-163.

Heidari, M., Shahbazi, S., & Ghodusi, M. (2015). Evaluation of body esteem and
mental health in patients with breast cancer after mastectomy. Journal of Mid-
life Health, 6(4), 173-177.

Heinberg, L. J., & Thompson, J. K. (1995). Body image and televised images of
thinness and attractiveness: A controlled laboratory investigation. Journal of
social and clinical psychology, 14(4), 325-338.

Helman, C. (2007). Culture, health and illness. CRC press.

Hesse-Biber, S., Livingstone, S., Ramirez, D., Barko, E. B., & Johnson, A. L. (2010).
Racial identity and body image among Black female college students
attending predominately White colleges. Sex Roles, 63, 697-711.

Hew, K. F. (2011). Students’ and teachers’ use of Facebook. Computers in Human
Behavior, 27(2), 662-676.

Hilal, A. H., & Alabri, S. S. (2013). Using NVivo for data analysis in qualitative

research. International interdisciplinary journal of education, 2(2), 181-186.

Ho, C. S., Tan, E. L., Ho, R. C., & Chiu, M. Y. (2019). Relationship of anxiety and

depression with respiratory symptoms: Comparison between depressed and

253

non-depressed smokers in Singapore. International journal of environmental
research and public health, 16(1), 163.

Holland, G., & Tiggemann, M. (2016). A systematic review of the impact of the use
of social networking sites on body image and disordered eating outcomes.
Body image, 17, 100-110.

Holmqvist, K., & Frisén, A. (2012). “I bet they aren’t that perfect in reality:”
Appearance ideals viewed from the perspective of adolescents with a positive
body image. Body image, 9(3), 388-395.

Hosseini, S. A., & Padhy, R. K. (2019). Body image distortion.

Huang, Q., Peng, W., & Ahn, S. (2021). When media become the mirror: A meta-
analysis on media and body image. Media psychology, 24(4), 437-489.

Huber, C. (2013). Generalized structural equation modeling using stata. Italian Stata
Users Group Meeting, November,

Hughes, E. K., & Gullone, E. (2011). Emotion regulation moderates relationships
between body image concerns and psychological symptomatology. Body
image, 8(3), 224-231.

Hunger, J. M., Smith, J. P., & Tomiyama, A. J. (2020). An evidence-based rationale
for adopting weight-inclusive health policy. Social Issues and Policy Review,
14(1), 73-107.

Hunter, M. L. (2011). Buying racial capital: Skin-bleaching and cosmetic surgery in a
globalized world. The Journal of Pan African Studies, 4(4), 142-164.

Hyett, N., Kenny, A., & Dickson-Swift, V. (2014). Methodology or method? A
critical review of qualitative case study reports. International journal of

qualitative studies on health and well-being, 9(1), 23606.

254

Iannantuono, A. C., & Tylka, T. L. (2012). Interpersonal and intrapersonal links to
body appreciation in college women: An exploratory model. Body image,
9(2), 227-235.

Ibardaloza, I. S. M., & Mabulay, M. E. P. (2023). Colonial Influence and Skin
Complexion: Understanding Mental Health Disparities in the Filipino
Community.

Jablonski, N. G. (2012). Living color. University of California press.

Jackson, K. L., Janssen, I., Appelhans, B. M., Kazlauskaite, R., Karavolos, K., Dugan,
S. A., Avery, E. A., Shipp-Johnson, K. J., Powell, L. H., & Kravitz, H. M.
(2014). Body image satisfaction and depression in midlife women: the Study
of Women’s Health Across the Nation (SWAN). Archives of women's mental
health, 17(3), 177-187.

Jacobs, M., Levine, S., Abney, K., & Davids, L. (2016). Fifty shadcs of African
lightness: a bio-psychosocial review of the global phenomenon of skin
lightening practices. Journal of Public Health in Africa, 7(2).

James, C., Seixas, A. A., Harrison, A., Jean-Louis, G., Butler, M., Zizi, F., &
Samuels, A. (2016). Childhood physical and sexual abuse in Caribbean young
adults and its association with depression, post-traumatic stress, and skin
bleaching. Journal of depression & anxiety, 5(1).

Japil, A. R., Mustapha, M., & Ee, G. T. (2018). Body Image Coping Strategies as
Mediator between Physical AppearanceRelated Teasing and Body Esteem
among Adolescents. Education Sciences & Psychology, 47(1).

Jardine, A., Bright, M., Knight, L., Perina, H., Vardon, P., & Harper, C. (2012). Does
physical activity increase the risk of unsafe sun exposure? Health Promotion

Journal of Australia, 23(1), 52-57.

255

Javellana, G. M. (2014). Influence of media on body image satisfaction among

adolescents. Asia pacific journal of education, arts and sciences, 1(1), 95-101.

Javier, S. J., & Belgrave, F. Z. (2019). “I’m not White, I have to be pretty and
skinny”: A qualitative exploration of body image and eating disorders among

Asian American women. Asian American Journal of Psychology, 10(2), 141.

Jefferson, D. L., & Stake, J. E. (2009). Appearance self-attitudes of African American
and European American women: Media comparisons and internalization of
beauty ideals. Psychology of Women Quarterly, 33(4), 396-409.

Johnstone, M. J. (2001). Stigma, social justice and the rights of the mentally ill:
Challenging the status quo. Australian and New Zealand Journal of Mental
Health Nursing, 10(4), 200-209.

Jones, D. C., Vigfusdottir, T. H., & Lee, Y. (2004). Body image and the appearance
culture among adolescent girls and boys: An examination of friend
conversations, peer criticism, appearance magazines, and the internalization of
appearance ideals. Journal of adolescent research, 19(3), 323-339.

Joseph, G. M., Rosenberg, E. S., & Kramer, P. A. (2003). The American colonial
state in the Philippines: Global perspectives. Duke University Press.

Juchacz, K., Ktos, P., Dziedziejko, V., & Wojciak, R. W. (2021). The effectiveness of
supportive psychotherapy in weight loss in a group of young overweight and
obese women. Nutrients, 13(2), 532.

Julien, N. (2014). Skin bleaching in South Africa: a result of colonialism and
apartheid? Discovery: Georgia State Honors College Undergraduate

Research Journal, 2(1), 4.

256

Kaarbo, J., & Beasley, R. K. (1999). A practical guide to the comparative case study
method in political psychology. Political psychology, 20(2), 369-391.

Kaminsky, L. A., & Dewey, D. (2014). The association between body mass index and
physical activity, and body image, self esteem and social support in
adolescents with type 1 diabetes. Canadian journal of diabetes, 38(4), 244-
249.

Kaplan, S. (1995). The restorative benefits of nature: Toward an integrative
framework. Journal of environmental psychology, 15(3), 169-182.

Kapoor, S. K., & Subida, M. (2023). Assessment of Gaming Addiction and Perceived
Psychological Distress among Filipino Young Adults during COVID-19

Pandemic. International Journal of Educational Methodology, 9(1), 29-40.

Karazsia, B. T., Murnen, S. K., & Tylka, T. L. (2017). Is body dissatisfaction
changing across time? A cross-temporal meta-analysis. Psychological bulletin,
143(3), 293.

Kaur, N., Sulaiman, S. S., Hamid, H. A., Ghazali, N., Radzi, A. H. M., & Sani, Y. S.
A. (2022). The Extent of Media Influence on the Body Image of Malaysian

Emerging Adults. International Journal of Asian Social Science, 12(1), 43-54.

Keel, P. K., & Klump, K. L. (2003). Are eating disorders culture-bound syndromes?
Implications for conceptualizing their etiology. Psychological bulletin, 129(5),
747.

Keith, V. M., & Thompson, M. S. (2003). Color Matters: The Importance of Skin

Tone for African American Women’s Self Concept in Black and White

257

America. /n and out of our right minds: The mental health of African
American women, 116-135.

Kirana, A. C., Alfian, A., Mustika, N. P., Adesla, V., Ibrahim, R., & Onie, S.
Assessing the Predictive Validity and Reliability of the DASS-21, PHQ-9 and
GAD-7 in an Indonesian Sample.

Kirkcaldy, B. D., Shephard, R. J., & Siefen, R. G. (2002). The relationship between
physical activity and self-image and problem behaviour among adolescents.
Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology, 37, 544-550.

Klein, K. M. (2013). Why don't I look like her? The impact of social media on female
body image.

Kleinbaum, D. G., & Klein, M. (2010). Ordinal logistic regression. In Logistic
regression (pp. 463-488). Springer.

Kormblau, I. S., Pearson, H. C., & Breitkopf, C. R. (2007). Demographic, behavioral,
and physical correlates of body esteem among low-income female
adolescents. Journal of Adolescent Health, 41(6), 566-570.

Kpanake, L., & Mullet, E. (2011). Motives for skin bleaching among West Africans.
H&PC Today, 6, 6-9.

Krejci-Manwaring, J., Kerchner, K., Feldman, S. R., Rapp, D. A., & Rapp, S. R.
(2006). Social sensitivity and acne: the role of personality in negative social
consequences and quality of life. The International Journal of Psychiatry in
Medicine, 36(1), 121-130.

Krug, E. G., Sharma, G. K., & Lozano, R. (2000). The global burden of injuries.
American journal of public health, 90(4), 523.

Kuang, J., Zhong, J., Yang, P., Bai, X., Liang, Y., Cheval, B., Herold, F., Wei, G.,

Taylor, A., & Zhang, J. (2023). Psychometric evaluation of the inventory of

258

dimensions of emerging adulthood (IDEA) in China. /nternational Journal of
Clinical and Health Psychology, 23(1), 100331.

Kumbhare, S. (2021). Skin colour dissatisfaction in South Asian-Canadian women
Toronto Metropolitan University].

Kurz, M., Rosendahl, J., Rodeck, J., Muehleck, J., & Berger, U. (2022). School-based
interventions improve body image and media literacy in youth: A systematic
review and meta-analysis. Journal of Prevention, 43(1), 5-23.

Lacroix, E., Atkinson, M. J., Garbett, K. M., & Diedrichs, P. C. (2022). One size does
not fit all: Trajectories of body image development and their predictors in
early adolescence. Development and Psychopathology, 34(1), 285-294.

Lai, Y., Yew, Y., Kennedy, C., & Schwartz, R. (2017). Vitiligo and depression: a
systematic review and meta-analysis of observational studies. British Journal
of Dermatology, 177(3), 708-718.

Lally, J., Samaniego, R. M., & Tully, J. (2019). Mental health legislation in the

Philippines: Philippine mental health act. BJPsych international, 16(3), 65-67.

Lasco, G., & Hardon, A. P. (2020). Keeping up with the times: skin-lightening
practices among young men in the Philippines. Culture, health & sexuality,
22(7), 838-853.

Lawler, M., & Nixon, E. (2011). Body dissatisfaction among adolescent boys and
girls: the effects of body mass, peer appearance culture and internalization of
appearance ideals. Journal of youth and adolescence, 40(1), 59-71.

Lazuka, R. F., Wick, M. R., Keel, P. K., & Harriger, J. A. (2020). Are we there yet?
Progress in depicting diverse images of beauty in Instagram’s body positivity

movement. Body image, 34, 85-93.

259

Le Breton, D. (2011). Anthropologie du corps et modernité. Presses universitaires de
France.

Lee, S.-Y. D., Jott, B., Banaszak-Holl, J., Shih, S.-F., Raj, M., Johnson, K. E.,
Kiessling, K., & Moore-Petinak, N. d. (2021). Application of Mixed Methods
in Health Services Management Research: A Systematic Review. Medical
Care Research and Review, 1077558721 1030393.

Lehmann, V., Hagedoom, M., Gerhardt, C. A., Fults, M., Olshefski, R. S.,
Sanderman, R., & Tuinman, M. A. (2016). Body issues, sexual satisfaction,
and relationship status satisfaction in long-term childhood cancer survivors
and healthy controls. Psycho-Oncology, 25(2), 210-216.

Leong, S. (2006). Who's the fairest of them all? Television ads for skin-whitening
cosmetics in Hong Kong. Asian Ethnicity, 7(2), 167-181.

Lépine, J.-P., & Briley, M. (2011). The increasing burden of depression.
Neuropsychiatric disease and treatment, 7(SuppI 1), 3.

Levine, M. P., & Harrison, K. (2004). Media's Role in the Perpetuation and
Prevention of Negative Body Image and Disordered Eating.

Levine, M. P., & Piran, N. (2004). The role of body image in the prevention of eating
disorders. Body image, 1(1), 57-70.

Levine, M. P., & Santos, J. S. (2021). Beauty-Cosmetic Science, Cultural Issues and
Creative Developments.

Levine, M. P., & Smolak, L. (2001). Primary prevention of body image disturbances
and disordered eating in childhood and early adolescence.

Levine, S., Powell, C., Davids, L. M., & Jacobs, M. (2016). Skin
lightening/bleaching. The Wiley Blackwell Encyclopedia of Gender and

Sexuality Studies, 1-3.

260

Levinson, D., Lakoma, M. D., Petukhova, M., Schoenbaum, M., Zaslavsky, A. M.,
Angermeyer, M., Borges, G., Bruffaerts, R., De Girolamo, G., & De Graaf, R.
(2010). Associations of serious mental illness with earnings: results from the
WHO World Mental Health surveys. The British Journal of Psychiatry,
197(2), 114-121.

Lewis, K. M., Robkin, N., Gaska, K., & Njoki, L. C. (2011). Investigating
motivations for women’s skin bleaching in Tanzania. Psychology of Women
Quarterly, 35(1), 29-37.

Li, E. P., Min, H. J., & Belk, R. W. (2008). Skin lightening and beauty in four Asian
cultures. ACR North American Advances.

Li, E. P., Min, H. J., Belk, R. W., Kimura, J., & Bahl, S. (2008). Skin lightening and
beauty in four Asian cultures. Advances in consumer research, 35.

Lim, L. T. S., Regencia, Z. J. G., Dela Cruz, J. R. C., Ho, F. D. V., Rodolfo, M. S.,
Ly-Uson, J., & Baja, E. S. (2022). Assessing the effect of the COVID-19
pandemic, shift to online learning, and social media use on the mental health
of college students in the Philippines: A mixed-method study protocol. PloS
one, 17(5), €0267555.

Lin, A., Vlasceanu, D., & Vlasceanu, M. (2021). An Experimental Assessment of the
Effects of K-Pop Music Video Exposure on Teenagers’ Negative Body Image.
Open Journal of Social Sciences, 9(8), 40-46.

Linardon, J., Anderson, C., & McClure, Z. (2023). Body appreciation predicts better
mental health and wellbeing. A short-term prospective study. Body image, 45,

20-24.

261

Lipowska, M., Lipowski, M., Olszewski, H., & Dykalska-Bieck, D. (2016). Gender
differences in body-esteem among seniors: Beauty and health considerations.
Archives of gerontology and geriatrics, 67, 160-170.

Liu, J., Tang, R., Xiao, Y., Luo, M., Shi, Y., Deng, Q., Zhang, H., Zeng, Z., Pi, Z., &
Xiao, R. (2021). Meta-analytic review of high anxiety comorbidity among
patients with vitiligo. BioMed research international, 2021, 1-12.

Longhurst, P., & Swami, V. (2023). A feeling difficult to identify: Alexithymia is
inversely associated with positive body image in adults from the United
Kingdom. Journal of affective disorders, 334, 121-128.

Lépez, K. (2016). The Asian presence in Mestizo nations: a response. In Critical
Terms in Caribbean and Latin American Thought: Historical and Institutional
Trajectories (pp. 125-131). Springer.

Lovibond, S. H., & Lovibond, P. F. (2013). Depression anxiety and stress scales
(DASS).

Mady, S., Biswas, D., Dadzie, C. A., Hill, R. P., & Paul, R. (2023). “A Whiter Shade
of Pale”: Whiteness, Female Beauty Standards, and Ethical Engagement
Across Three Cultures. Journal of International Marketing, 31(1), 69-89.

Mahe, A., Ly, F., Aymard, G., & Dangou, J. M. (2003). Skin diseases associated with
the cosmetic use of bleaching products in women from Dakar, Senegal. British
Journal of Dermatology, 148(3), 493-500.

Mahé, A., Perret, J., Ly, F., Fall, F., Rault, J., & Dumont, A. (2007). The cosmetic use
of skin-lightening products during pregnancy in Dakar, Senegal: a common
and potentially hazardous practice. Transactions of the Royal Society of

Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, 101(2), 183-187.

262

Mahmoud, J. S. R., Staten, R. T., Hall, L. A., & Lennie, T. A. (2012). The
relationship among young adult college students’ depression, anxiety, stress,
demographics, life satisfaction, and coping styles. Issues in mental health
nursing, 33(3), 149-156.

Mahsan, I. P., Harun, M. F., Zulkefli, M. Y., & Alim, M. M. (2020). Visual
communication on social media advertisement that influence consumer buying
behavior on skin-whitening product. KUPAS SENI, 8(1), 11-19.

Maine, M. (2011). Body wars: Making peace with women's bodies (an activist's
guide). Gurze Books.

Malik, S. (2007). The Domination of Fair Skin: Skin Whitening, Indian Women and
Public Health San Francisco State University Department of Health Education
Culminating Experience.

Manago, A. M., Graham, M. B., Greenfield, P. M., & Salimkhan, G. (2008). Self-
presentation and gender on MySpace. Journal of Applied Developmental
Psychology, 29(6), 446-458.

Mann, M., Hosman, C. M., Schaalma, H. P., & De Vries, N. K. (2004). Self-esteem in
a broad-spectrum approach for mental health promotion. Health education
research, 194), 357-372.

Maravilla, N. M. A. T., & Tan, M. J. T. (2021). Philippine Mental Health Act: just an
act? A call to look into the bi-directionality of mental health and economy.
Frontiers in psychology, 12.

Markey, C. N. (2010). Invited commentary: Why body image is important to

adolescent development. 39. 1387-1391.

263

Marta-Simées, J., Ferreira, C., & Mendes, A. L. (2016). Exploring the effect of
external shame on body appreciation among Portuguese young adults: The
role of self-compassion. Eating behaviors, 23, 174-179.

Martinez, A. B., Co, M., Lau, J., & Brown, J. S. (2020). Filipino help-seeking for
mental health problems and associated barriers and facilitators: a systematic

review. Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology, 55(11), 1397-1413.

Martinez-Hernaez, A., Carceller-Maicas, N., DiGiacomo, S. M., & Ariste, S. (2016).
Social support and gender differences in coping with depression among
emerging adults: a mixed-methods study. Child and adolescent psychiatry and
mental health, 10(1), 1-11.

Masood, M., Haque, M., Rasheed, A., Iqbal, J., Batool, A., Hussain, A., & Hasan, Z.
(2022). Frequency of Use of Skin-Lightening Products, Levels of Self-Esteem
and Colorism Attitudes in University Students of Karachi: A Cross Sectional
Study. Global Journal of Health Science, 14(8), 1-1.

Masub, N., & Khachemoune, A. (2020). Cosmetic skin lightening use and side
effects. Journal of Dermatological Treatment, 1-6.

Mathews, T. J., & Johnson, G. S. (2015). Skin complexion in the twenty-first century:
The impact of colorism on African American women. Race, Gender & Class,
22(1-2), 248-274.

Mathur, M. B., Ding, P., Riddell, C. A., & VanderWeele, T. J. (2018). Website and R
package for computing E-values. Epidemiology (Cambridge, Mass.), 29(5),
AS.

Mbabazi, J., Nalweyiso, D. I., MacGregor, F., Breckon, J., Kunonga, E., Tolchard, B.,

Dawson, R., Teke, J., Saltikov, J. B., & Kagugube, G. W. (2023). A

264

Qualitative Study of the Experiences of Obesity, Body Image, and Mental
Health of British-Bom Afro-Caribbean Male Students at a West Yorkshire
University in England. International Journal of Physical Activity and Health,
2(3), 4.

McAdams, D. P. (2013). The psychological sclf as actor, agent, and author.
Perspectives on psychological science, 8(3), 272-295.

McCabe, M. P., Mellor, D., & Mealey, A. (2016). An educational programme for
parents on the body image of preschool-aged boys. Journal of health
psychology, 21(7), 1241-1248.

McGee, R. E., & Thompson, N. J. (2015). Peer reviewed: unemployment and
depression among emerging adults in 12 states, behavioral risk factor
surveillance system, 2010. Preventing chronic disease, 12.

McLean, S. A., Wertheim, E. H., Masters, J., & Paxton, S. J. (2017). A pilot
evaluation of a social media literacy intervention to reduce risk factors for

eating disorders. International Journal of Eating Disorders, 50(7), 847-851.

Mendelson, B. K., Mendelson, M. J., & White, D. R. (2001). Body-esteem scale for
adolescents and adults. Journal of personality assessment, 76(1), 90-106.

Mendelson, B. K., White, D. R., & Mendelson, M. J. (1996). Self-esteem and body
esteem: Effects of gender, age, and weight. Journal of Applied Developmental
Psychology, 17(3), 321-346.

Mendoza, C. C. Historical, Socio-Political and Economic Implications of Festival
Celebrations in Pangasinan.

Mendoza, R. L. (2014). The skin whitening industry in the Philippines. Journal of

Public Health Policy, 35(2), 219-238.

265

Mili, M., & Raakhee, A. (2015). The relationship between body esteem, attachment
anxiety and attachment avoidance among young adults. S/S Journal of
Projective Psychology & Mental Health, 22(2), 119.

Mingoia, J., Hutchinson, A. D., Wilson, C., & Gleaves, D. H. (2017). The relationship
between social networking site use and the internalization of a thin ideal in
females: A meta-analytic review. Frontiers in psychology, 8, 1351.

Moinuddin, S. (2017). Mediascape and the State. Springer.

Monotti, E., Watt-McMahon, K., & Kilby, C. (2023). She is like me: a qualitative
exploration of body image ideals and the young woman psychologist working
with eating disorders. Australian Psychologist, 58(5), 388-400.

Montano, R. L. T., & Acebes, K. M. L. (2020). Covid stress predicts depression,
anxiety and stress symptoms of Filipino respondents. Jnternational Journal of
Research in Business and Social Science (2147-4478), 94), 78-103.

Morgan, J. F., & Arcelus, J. (2009). Body image in gay and straight men: A
qualitative study. European Eating Disorders Review: The Professional
Journal of the Eating Disorders Association, 17(6), 435-443.

Morillo, H. M., Capuno, J. J., & Mendoza, A. M. (2013). Views and values on family
among Filipinos: An empirical exploration. Asian Journal of Social Science,
41(1), 5-28.

Morin, A. J., Myers, N. D., & Lee, S. (2020). Modern factor analytic techniques:
Bifactor models, exploratory structural equation modeling (ESEM), and
bifactor-ESEM. Handbook of sport psychology, 1044-1073.

Motseki, M., & Oyedemi, T. (2017). Social media and the cultural ideology of beauty

among young black women in South Africa. Communitas, 22, 136-148.

266

Nagpal, D., Kornerup, I., & Gibson, M. P. (2020). Mixed-method Research: A Basic
Understanding.

Naidoo, A. (2022). Perceptions of dark-skinned beauty on social media using social
identity theory: the case ofi# melaninmagic on Instagram

Natividad, B. R. (2006). Rendering whiteness visible in the Filipino culture through
skin-whitening cosmetic advertisements.

Natsuaki, M. N., Samuels, D., & Leve, L. D. (2015). Puberty, identity, and context: A
biopsychosocial perspective on internalizing psychopathology in early
adolescent girls.

Nayir, T., Uskun, E., Yiirekli, M. V., Devran, H., Celik, A., & Okyay, R. A. (2016).
Does body image affect quality of life?: A population based study. PloS one,
11(9), €0163290.

Neff, K. D., & Vonk, R. (2009). Self-compassion versus global self-esteem: Two
different ways of rclating to oncsclf. Journal of personality, 77(1), 23-50.

Nelson, S. C., Kling, J., Wangqvist, M., Frisén, A., & Syed, M. (2018). Identity and
the body: Trajectories of body esteem from adolescence to emerging
adulthood. Developmental Psychology, 54(6), 1159.

Neumark-Sztainer, D., & Eisenberg, M. E. (2014). Body image concerns, muscle-
enhancing behaviors, and eating disorders in males. Jama, 312(20). 2156-
2157.

Neumark-Sztainer, D., Story, M., Hannan, P. J., Perry, C. L., & Irving, L. M. (2002).
Weight-related concems and behaviors among overweight and nonoverweight
adolescents: implications for preventing weight-related disorders. Archives of

pediatrics & adolescent medicine, 156(2), 171-178.

267

Neumark-Sztainer, D., Wall, M., Story, M., & Standish, A. R. (2012). Dieting and
unhealthy weight control behaviors during adolescence: associations with 10-

year changes in body mass index. Journal of Adolescent Health, 50(1), 80-86.

Niclsen, A. (2007). Ilealth, beauty & personal grooming: a global Niclsen consumer
report. Report: March.

North, C. S., & Pfefferbaum, B. (2013). Mental health response to community
disasters: a systematic review. Jama, 310(5), 507-518.

Norton, P. J. (2007). Depression Anxiety and Stress Scales (DASS-21): Psychometric

analysis across four racial groups. Anxiety, stress, and coping, 20(3), 253-265.

O'Connor, C. L. (2000). Body image disturbance in relation to self-perceptions of
physical attractiveness, social competence, and need for approval in college
women.

Oei, T. P., Sawang, S., Goh, Y. W., & Mukhtar, F. (2013). Using the depression
anxiety stress scale 21 (DASS-21) across cultures. International Journal of
Psychology, 48(6), 1018-1029.

Oinonen, K. A., & Bird, J. L. (2012). Age at menarche and digit ratio (2D: 4D):
Relationships with body dissatisfaction, drive for thinness, and bulimia
symptoms in women. Body image, 9(2), 302-306.

Olatunji, O., Popoola, O., & Ayandele, O. (2019). Media influence on skin bleaching
tendency among female students of the Polytechnic, Ibadan, Nigeria.
International Journal of Communication: an Interdisciplinary Journal of

Communication Studies, 25.

268

Olchowska-Kotala, A. (2018). Body esteem and self-esteem in middle-aged women.
Journal of women & aging, 30(5), 417-427.

Olenik-Shemesh, D., & Heiman, T. (2017). Cyberbullying victimization in
adolescents as related to body esteem, social support, and social self-efficacy.
The Journal of genetic psychology, 178(1), 28-43.

Olivardia, R., Pope Jr, H. G., Borowiecki II, J. J., & Cohane, G. H. (2004). Biceps
and body image: the relationship between muscularity and self-esteem,
depression, and eating disorder symptoms. Psychology of Men & Masculinity,
5(2), 112.

Olumide, Y. M., Akinkugbe, A. O., Altraide, D., Mohammed, T., Ahamefule, N.,
Ayanlowo, S., Onyekonwu, C., & Essen, N. (2008). Complications of chronic
use of skin lightening cosmetics. International journal of dermatology, 47(4),
344-353.

Ong, M. G., & Braun, V. (2016). Erasing/Embracing the marks of aging: Alternative
discourses around beauty among Filipina migrants. Social Science Diliman,
12(2).

Osman, A., Wong, J. L., Bagge, C. L., Freedenthal, S., Gutierrez, P. M., & Lozano,
G. (2012). The depression anxiety stress Scales—21 (DASS-21): further
examination of dimensions, scale reliability, and correlates. Journal of clinical
psychology, 68(12), 1322-1338.

Owen-Wilson, M. M. (2009). The impact of familial influence and Filipino cultural
values in Filipina body image and disordered eating symptoms. Alliant

International University, San Francisco Ba\

269

Owusu-Agyei, M., Agyei, M., & Ogunleye, T. A. (2020). Skin-lightening practices
among shoppers in select markets in Kumasi, Ghana: A cross-sectional
survey. JAAD international, 1(2), 104-110.

Ozbek, S., Greville, J., & Hooper, N. (2023). The thin-ideal across two cultural
contexts: The role of body image inflexibility and the fear of negative
evaluation. Psychology of Popular Media.

Park, A., Bryson, C., & Curtis, J. (2014). British Social Attitudes 31. NatCen London.

Patrick, D. L., Burke, L. B., Gwaltney, C. J., Leidy, N. K., Martin, M. L., Molsen, E.,
& Ring, L. (2011). Content validity—establishing and reporting the evidence
in newly developed patient-reported outcomes (PRO) instruments for medical
product evaluation: ISPOR PRO Good Research Practices Task Force report:

part 2—assessing respondent understanding. Value in Health, 14(8), 978-988.

Paxton, S. J., Neumark-Sztainer, D., Hannan, P. J., & Eisenberg, M. E. (2006). Body
dissatisfaction prospectively predicts depressive mood and low self-esteem in
adolescent girls and boys. Journal of clinical child and adolescent psychology,
35(4), 539-549.

Peltzer, K., & Pengpid, S. (2017). Knowledge about, attitude toward, and practice of
skin lightening products use and its social correlates among university
students in five Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) countries.
International journal of dermatology, 56(3), 277-283.

Peltzer, K., Pengpid, S., & James, C. (2016). The globalization of whitening:

prevalence of skin lighteners (or bleachers) use and its social correlates among

270

university students in 26 countries. International journal of dermatology,
55(2), 165-172.

Peltzer, K., Pengpid, S., Olowu, S., & Olasupo, M. (2013). Depression and associated
factors among university students in Western Nigeria. Journal of psychology
in Africa, 23(3), 459-465.

Perkins, N. J., Cole, S. R., Harel, O., Tchetgen Tchetgen, E. J., Sun, B., Mitchell, E.
M., & Schisterman, E. F. (2018). Principled approaches to missing data in

epidemiologic studies. American journal of epidemiology, 187(3), 568-575.

Perrotta, R. (2004). Mirror, Mirror on the Wall, who is the Fairest of Them All? In
Studies in Symbolic Interaction. Emerald Group Publishing Limited.

Peters, M. A., & Phelps, L. (2001). Body image dissatisfaction and distortion, steroid
use, and sex differences in college age bodybuilders. Psychology in the
Schools, 38(3), 283-289.

Pifieiro, B., Correa, J. B., Simmons, V. N., Harrell, P. T., Menzie, N. S., Unrod, M.,
Meltzer, L. R., & Brandon, T. H. (2016). Gender differences in use and
expectancies of e-cigarettes: Online survey results. Addictive behaviors, 52,
91-97.

Pop, L. M., lorga, M., & Iurcov, R. (2022). Body-esteem, self-esteem and loneliness
among social media young users. /nternational journal of environmental
research and public health, 19(9), 5064.

Prakash, L., & Majeed, M. (2009). Multifunctional skin tone lighteners from nature:
An overview. Euro cosmetics, 6, 19-23.

Prioreschi, A., Wrottesley, S. V., Cohen, E., Reddy, A., Said-Mohamed, R., Twine,

R., Tollman, S. M., Kahn, K., Dunger, D. B., & Norris, S. A. (2017).

271

Examining the relationships between body image, eating attitudes, BMI, and
physical activity in rural and urban South African young adult females using
structural equation modeling. PloS one, 12(11), 0187508.

Priigl, E. (2015). Neoliberalising feminism. New Political Economy, 20(4), 614-631.

Quek, T. C., Ho, C. S., Choo, C. C., Nguyen, L. H., Tran, B. X., & Ho, R. C. (2018).
Misophonia in Singaporean psychiatric patients: a cross-sectional study.
International journal of environmental research and public health, 15(7),
1410.

Rabe-Hesketh, S., Skrondal, A., & Pickles, A. (2004). Generalized multilevel
structural equation modeling. Psychometrika, 69, 167-190.

Ramesh, J. (2019). Study on Society s influence on Women s portrayal in the Indian
Media with special reference to Advertising and Movies.

Ramos, P., Moreno-Maldonado, C., Moreno, C., & Rivera, F. (2019). The role of
body image in internalizing mental health problems in Spanish adolescents: an
analysis according to sex, age, and socioeconomic status. Frontiers in
psychology, 10, 1952.

Ramsay, H., Goddard, W., Gill, S., & Moss, C. (2003). Herbal creams used for atopic
eczema in Birmingham, UK illegally contain potent corticosteroids. Archives
of disease in childhood, 88(12), 1056-1057.

Raque-Bogdan, T. L., Piontkowski, S., Hui, K., Ziemer, K. S., & Garriott, P. O.
(2016). Self-compassion as a mediator between attachment anxiety and body
appreciation: An exploratory model. Body image, 19, 28-36.

Rawana, J. S., Morgan, A. S., Nguyen, H., & Craig, S. G. (2010). The relation

between eating-and weight-related disturbances and depression in

adolescence: a review. Clinical child and family psychology review, 13(3),
213-230.

Redaniel, M. T., Lebanan-Dalida, M. A., & Gunnell, D. (2011). Suicide in the
Philippines: time trend analysis (1974-2005) and literature review. BMC
public health, 11(1), 1-9.

Reyes, M. E. S., Carmen, B. P. B., Luminarias, M. E. P., Mangulabnan, S. A. N. B.,
& Ogunbode, C. A. (2021). An investigation into the relationship between
climate change anxiety and mental health among Gen Z Filipinos. Current
Psychology, 1-9.

Ricciardelli, L. A., McCabe, M. P., Williams, R. J., & Thompson, J. K. (2007). The
role of ethnicity and culture in body image and disordered eating among
males. Clinical psychology review, 27(5), 582-606.

Roces, A., & Roces, G. (2013). CultureShock! Philippines. Marshall Cavendish
International Asia Pte Ltd.

Rodgers, R. F. (2016). The role of the “Healthy Weight” discourse in body image and
eating concerns: An extension of sociocultural theory. Eating behaviors, 22,
194-198.

Rodgers, R. F., Donovan, E., Cousineau, T., Yates, K., McGowan, K., Cook, E.,
Lowy, A. S., & Franko, D. L. (2018). BodiMojo: efficacy of a mobile-based
intervention in improving body image and self-compassion among
adolescents. Journal of youth and adolescence, 47, 1363-1372.

Rodgers, R. F., Franko, D. L., Donovan, E., Cousineau, T., Yates, K., McGowan, K.,
Cook, E., & Lowy, A. S. (2017). Body image in emerging adults: The

protective role of self-compassion. Body image, 22, 148-155.

273

Rogers, C. B., Webb, J. B., & Jafari, N. (2018). A systematic review of the roles of
body image flexibility as correlate, moderator, mediator, and in intervention
science (2011-2018). Body image, 27, 43-60.

Rondilla, J. L. (2012). Colonial faces: Beauty and skin color hierarchy in the
Philippines and the US. University of California, Berkeley.

Rondilla, J. L., & Spickard, P. R. (2007). Is lighter better?: Skin-tone discrimination
among Asian Americans. Rowman & Littlefield.

Rosen, J. C. (2002). Obesity and body image. Eating disorders and obesity: A
comprehensive handbook, 2, 399-402.

Rosenbaum, D. L., Gillen, M. M., & Bloomer, S. A. (2023). The effects of sleep on
body image: examining the roles of depression, perceived stress, and anxiety.
Journal of American College Health, 1-9.

Rote, A. E., Swartz, A. M., & Klos, L. A. (2013). Associations between lifestyle
physical activity and body image attitudes among women. Women & Health,
53(3), 282-297.

Rubin, L. R., & Steinberg, J. R. (2011). Self-objectification and pregnancy: Are body
functionality dimensions protective? Sex Roles, 65, 606-618.

Rumsey, N., & Harcourt, D. (2012). Oxford handbook of the psychology of
appearance. OUP Oxford.

Rusmadi, S. Z., Syed Ismail, S. N., & Praveena, S. M. (2015). Preliminary study on
the skin lightening practice and health symptoms among female students in
Malaysia. Journal of environmental and public health, 2015.

Sabiston, C., Pila, E., Vani, M., & Thogersen-Ntoumani, C. (2019). Body image,
physical activity, and sport: A scoping review. Psychology of sport and

exercise, 42, 48-57.

274

Sagoe, D., Pallesen, S., Dlova, N. C., Lartey, M., Ezzedine, K., & Dadzie, O. (2019).
The global prevalence and correlates of skin bleaching: a meta-analysis and

meta-regression analysis. International journal of dermatology, 58(1), 24-44.

Sagone, E., De Caroli, M. E., & Indiana, M. L. (2018). Psychological well-being and
self-efficacy in life skills among Italian preadolescents with positive body
esteem: Preliminary results of an intervention project. Psychology, 9(06),
1383.

Sahay, S., & Piran, N. (1997). Skin-color preferences and body satisfaction among
South Asian-Canadian and European-Canadian female university students.
The Journal of social psychology, 137(2), 161-171.

Santiago-Delefosse, M. (2002). Psychologie de la santé. Perspectives qualitatives et
cliniques.

Saraiya, M., Glanz, K., Briss, P. A., Nichols, P., White, C., Das, D., Smith, S. J.,
Tannor, B., Hutchinson, A. B., & Wilson, K. M. (2004). Interventions to
prevent skin cancer by reducing exposure to ultraviolet radiation: a systematic
review. American journal of preventive medicine, 27(5), 422-466.

Saunders, J. F., & Eaton, A. A. (2018). Snaps, selfies, and shares: How three popular
social media platforms contribute to the sociocultural model of disordered
eating among young women. Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and Social
Networking, 21(6), 343-354.

Saxena, S., Funk, M., & Chisholm, D. (2013). World health assembly adopts
comprehensive mental health action plan 2013-2020. The lancet, 381(9882).

1970-1971.

Schwartz, M. B., & Brownell, K. D. (2004). Obesity and body image. Body image,
1(1), 43-56.

Schwartz, S. J., Zamboanga, B. L., Wang, W., & Olthuis, J. V. (2009). Measuring
identity from an Eriksonian perspective: Two sides of the same coin? Journal
of personality assessment, 91(2), 143-154.

Sedgwick, P. (2014). Cross sectional studies: advantages and disadvantages. Bmj,
348.

Shafer, K., Jensen, T. M., & Holmes, E. K. (2017). Divorce stress, stepfamily stress,
and depression among emerging adult stepchildren. Journal of child and
family studies, 26, 851-862.

Shagar, P. S., Harris, N., Boddy, J., & Donovan, C. L. (2017). The relationship
between body image concems and weight-related behaviours of adolescents
and emerging adults: A systematic review. Behaviour Change, 34(4), 208-
252.

Shah, S. H., Anjum, I., & Majeed, T. (2022). The dark side of skin lightening: A
review of a public health issue affecting dermatology. Pakistan Journal of
Biochemistry and Biotechnology, 3(1).

Shankar, P. R., & Subish, P. (2007). Fair skin in South Asia: an obsession? Journal of
Pakistan Association of Dermatologists, 17(2), 100-104.

Sharif-Nia, H., Sivarajan Froelicher, E., Gorgulu, O., Osborne, J. W., Blachnio, A.,
Rezazadeh Fazeli, A., Goudarzian, A. H., & Kaveh, O. (2024). The
relationship among positive body image, body esteem, and eating attitude in
Iranian population. Frontiers in psychology, 15, 1304555.

Shaw, E. K., Ohman-Strickland, P. A., Piasecki, A., Hudson, S. V., Ferrante, J. M.,

McDaniel, R. R., Nutting, P. A., & Crabtree, B. F. (2013). Effects of

276

facilitated team meetings and learning collaboratives ou colorectal cancer
screening rates in primary care practices: a cluster randomized trial. The
Annals of Family Medicine, 11(3), 220-228.

Shen, M., Zhou, Y., Ye, J., Al-Maskri, A. A. A., Kang, Y., Zeng, S., & Cai, S. (2020).
Recent advances and perspectives of nucleic acid detection for coronavirus.
Journal of pharmaceutical analysis, 10(2), 97-101.

Shentow-Bewsh, R., Keating, L., & Mills, J. S. (2016). Effects of anti-obesity
messages on women's body image and eating behaviour. Eating behaviors, 20,
48-56.

Shpigelman, C. N., & HaGani, N. (2019). The impact of disability type and visibility
on self-concept and body image: Implications for mental health nursing.
Journal of psychiatric and mental health nursing, 26(3-4), 77-86.

Shriver, L. H., Harrist, A. W., Page, M., Hubbs-Tait, L., Moulton, M., & Topham, G.
(2013). Differences in body esteem by weight status, gender, and physical
activity among young elementary school-aged children. Body image, 10(1).
78-84.

Shroff, H., Diedrichs, P. C., & Craddock, N. (2018). Skin color, cultural capital, and
beauty products: An investigation of the use of skin fairness products in
Mumbai, India. Frontiers in public health, 5, 317662.

Simon, P. (2022). Longitudinal measurement invariance of the Depression Anxiety
Stress Scale (DASS-21) in Filipino adolescents Transactions NAST PHL 44.
doi. org/10.57043/transnastphl. 2022.2557 Copyright 2022 Simon PD and
Bernardo ABI Abbreviations: DASS. Depression Anxiety Stress Scale.

Simpson, C. C., Sutter, M., & Perrin, P. B. (2016). Can community consciousness be

a bad thing? A moderated mediation analysis of heterosexism, mental health

277

and body appreciation in sexual minority men. Culture, health & sexuality,
18(11), 1279-1294.

Singson, F. (2017). Colonialism's Role in the Success of the Filipino Skin Whitening
Industry.

Smith, C. (2019). Body Image, Self-Esteem, Weight, and Weight Stigma In Male and
Female College Students.

Smith, C., Davidson, H., & Herzog, P. S. (2011). Lost in transition: The dark side of
emerging adulthood. OUP USA.

Sohn, S. H. (2010). Sex Differences in Social Comparison and Comparison Motives
in Body Image Process. North American journal of psychology, 12(3).

Spiess, M., Fernandez, D., Nguyen, T., & Liu, I. (2020). Generalized estimating
equations to estimate the ordered stereotype logit model for panel data.
Statistics in medicine, 39(14), 1919-1940.

Springmann, M. L., Svaldi, J., & Kiegelmann, M. (2022). A qualitative study of
gendered psychosocial processes in eating disorder development.
International Journal of Eating Disorders, 55(7), 947-955.

Stapinski, L. A., Prior, K., Newton, N. C., Biswas, R. K., Kelly, E., Deady, M., Lees,
B., Teesson, M., & Baillie, A. J. (2021). Are we making Inroads? A
randomized controlled trial of a psychologist-supported, web-based, cognitive
behavioral therapy intervention to reduce anxiety and hazardous alcohol use
among emerging adults. EClinicalMedicine, 39, 101048.

Stein, J.-P., Krause, E., & Ohler, P. (2021). Every (Insta) Gram counts? Applying
cultivation theory to explore the effects of Instagram on young users’ body

image. Psychology of Popular Media, 10(1), 87.

278

Stewart, T. M. (2004). Light on body image treatment: Acceptance through
mindfulness. Behavior Modification, 28(6), 783-811.

Stice, E., Davis, K., Miller, N. P., & Marti, C. N. (2008). Fasting increases risk for
onset of binge eating and bulimic pathology: a 5-year prospective study.
Journal of abnormal psychology, 117(4), 941.

Strahan, E. J., Wilson, A. E., Cressman, K. E., & Buote, V. M. (2006). Comparing to
perfection: How cultural norms for appearance affect social comparisons and
self-image. Body image, 3(3), 211-227.

Striegel-Moore, R. H., & Cachelin, F. M. (1999). Body image concerns and
disordered eating in adolescent girls: Risk and protective factors.

Sussman, S., & Arnett, J. J. (2014). Emerging adulthood: developmental period
facilitative of the addictions. Evaluation & the health professions, 37(2), 147-
155.

Swain, M., Kinncar, P., & Stcinman, L. (2015). Sociocultural theory in second
language education: An introduction through narratives. Multilingual
Matters.

Swami, V., Henry, A., Peacock, N., Roberts-Dunn, A., & Porter, A. (2013). “Mirror,
murror...." A preliminary investigation of skin tone dissatisfaction and its
impact among British adults. Cultural Diversity and Ethnic Minority
Psychology, 19(4), 468.

Swami, V., Robinson, C., & Furnham, A. (2022). Positive Rational Acceptance of
Body Image Threats Mediates the Association Between Nature Exposure and
Body Appreciation. Ecopsychology, 14(2), 118-125.

Syed, M., & McLean, K. C. (2016). Understanding identity integration: Theoretical,

methodological, and applied issues. Journal of adolescence, 47, 109-118.

279

Tamene, A. (2021). Occupational Contact Dermatitis in Employees of Large-Scale
Narcotic Crop Farms of Ethiopia: Prevalence and Risk Factors. A Self-
Reported Study Using the Nordic Occupational Skin Questionnaire.
Environmental Health Insights, 15, 11786302211048378.

Tanner, J. L., & Amett, J. J. (2011). Presenting “emerging adulthood”: What makes it
developmentally distinctive. Debating emerging adulthood: Stage or process,
13-30.

Tashakkori, A., Johnson, R. B., & Teddlie, C. (2020). Foundations of mixed methods
research: Integrating quantitative and qualitative approaches in the social
and behavioral sciences. Sage publications.

Tee, M. L., Tee, C. A., Anlacan, J. P., Aligam, K. J. G., Reyes, P. W.C.,
Kuruchittham, V., & Ho, R. C. (2020). Psychological impact of COVID-19
pandemic in the Philippines. Journal of affective disorders.

Thomas, M. J. (2018). Social Expectation and Colorism: Informing the Educational
Divide and Influencing Life Chances of African-American Women. Saint Louis
University.

Thompson, J. K., Roehrig, M., Cafri, G., & Heinberg, L. J. (2005). Assessment of
Body Image Disturbance.

Thompson, M. S., & Keith, V. M. (2001). The blacker the berry: Gender, skin tone,
self-esteem, and self-efficacy. Gender & socicty, 15(3), 336-357.

Tiggemann, M. (2005). Television and adolescent body image: The role of program
content and viewing motivation. Journal of social and clinical psychology,
24(3), 361-381.

Tiggemann, M. (2015). Considerations of positive body image across various social

identities and special populations. Body image, 14, 168-176.

280

Tiggemann, M., & McCourt, A. (2013). Body appreciation in adult women:

Relationships with age and body satisfaction. Body image, 10(4), 624-627.

Tiggemann, M., & Zaccardo, M. (2015). “Exercise to be fit, not skinny”: The effect
of fitspiration imagery on women's body image. Body image, 15, 61-67.

Tirona, C. M. G. (2023). The Impact of Colonial Beauty Standards on the Ethnic
Identity and Mental Health of Filipina Americans.

Toma, T., Harling, L., Athanasiou, T., Darzi, A., & Ashrafian, H. (2018). Does body
contouring after bariatric weight loss enhance quality of life? A systematic
review of QOL studies. Obesity surgery, 28, 3333-3341.

Tresna, K. A. A. D., Sukamto, M. E., & Tondok, M. S. (2021). Celebrity worship and
body image among young girls fans of K-pop girl groups. Humanitas
Indonesian Psychological Journal, 18(2), 100-111.

Tribole, E., & Resch, E. (1995). Intuitive eating: A recovery book for the chronic
dieter: Rediscover the pleasures of eating and rebuild your body image.

Tsunokai, G. T., Kposowa, A. J., Carroll, E., & Karamoko, M. (2019). The color
continuum: Skin tone and online dating preferences among Asian Americans.
Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 36(11-12), 4027-4047.

Tuazon, V. E., Gonzalez, E., Gutierrez, D., & Nelson, L. (2019). Colonial mentality
and mental health help-seeking of Filipino Americans. Journal of Counseling
& Development, 97(4), 352-363.

Tummala-Narta, P. (2007). Skin color and the therapeutic relationship.
Psychoanalytic Psychology, 24(2), 255.

Turner, B. S. (2008). The body and society: Explorations in social theory.

281

Turner, T. S. (2012). The social skin. HAU: Journal of Ethnographic Theory, 2(2),
486-504.

Turner-Bowker, D. M., Lamoureux, R. E., Stokes, J., Litcher-Kelly, L., Galipeau, N.,
Yaworsky, A., Solomon, J., & Shields, A. L. (2018). Informing a priori
sample size estimation in qualitative concept clicitation intervicw studies for
clinical outcome assessment instrument development. Value in Health, 21(7),
839-842.

Tylka, T. L., & Wood-Barcalow, N. L. (2015). The Body Appreciation Scale-2: item
refinement and psychometric evaluation. Body image, 12, 53-67.

Uba, L. (2003). Asian Americans: Personality patterns, identity, and mental health.
Guilford Press.

Ullman, J. B., & Bentler, P. M. (2012). Structural equation modeling. Handbook of
Psychology, Second Edition, 2.

Uyar, B., Akkog, M. F., Bulbuloglu, S., & Yilmaz, R. (2022). Examining the
perceived stress and body image in burn patients: A cross-sectional study.
International Wound Journal.

Van der Velde, C. D. (1985). Body images of one's self and of others: developmental
and clinical significance. The American journal of psychiatry.

VanderWeele, T. J., & Ding, P. (2017). Sensitivity analysis in observational research:
introducing the E-value. Annals of Internal Medicine, 167(4), 268-274.

Veloo, V., & Mustafa, S. E. (2023). The influence of beauty standards in local beauty
advertisements among female millennials in Klang Valley, Malaysia.

Ventola, C. L. (2014). Social media and health care professionals: benefits, risks, and

best practices. Pharmacy and therapeutics, 39(7), 491.

282

Wang, C., Pan, R., Wan, X., Tan, Y., Xu, L., Ho, C. S., & Ho, R. C. (2020).
Immediate psychological responses and associated factors during the initial
stage of the 2019 coronavirus disease (COVID-19) epidemic among the
general population in China. /nternational journal of environmental research
and public health, 17(5), 1729.

Wang, C., Pan, R., Wan, X., Tan, Y., Xu, L., McIntyre, R. S., Choo, F. N., Tran, B.,
Ho, R., & Sharma, V. K. (2020). A longitudinal study on the mental health of
general population during the COVID-19 epidemic in China. Brain, behavior,
and immunity, 87, 40-48.

Wang, T., You, X. Q., Li, Y., & Huang, X. T. (2021). Understanding how youth
develop a purpose: A qualitative study among Chinese emerging adults.
Current Psychology, 1-11.

Webb, J. B., Butler-Ajibade, P., & Robinson, S. A. (2014). Considering an affect
regulation framework for examining the association between body
dissatisfaction and positive body image in Black older adolescent females:
Does body mass index matter? Body image, 11(4), 426-437.

Westland, J. C. (2010). Lower bounds on sample size in structural equation modeling.
Electronic commerce research and applications, 9(6), 476-487.

White, H. R., & Jackson, K. (2004). Social and psychological influences on emerging
adult drinking behavior. Alcohol Research & Health, 28(4), 182.

Wilhelm, S. (2006). Feeling good about the way you look: A program for overcoming
body image problems. Guilford Press.

Williams, M., & Moser, T. (2019). The art of coding and thematic exploration in

qualitative research. International Management Review, 15(1), 45-55.

283

Williams, Z. A. (2006). Does It Matter if You're Black or White? Skin Color and
Psychological Well-being Among Middle-school Youth.

Wilson, V. (2014). Research methods: triangulation. Evidence based library and
information practice, 9(1), 74-75.

Winter, V. R., Landor, A. M., Teti, M., Morris, K., Schliep, E. M., Pevehouse-
Pfeiffer, D., & Pekarek, E. (2019). Is body appreciation a mechanism of
depression and anxiety? An investigation of the 3-Dimensional Body
Appreciation Mapping (3D-BAM) intervention. Mental Health & Prevention,
14, 200158.

Wore, I., Tal-Dia, A., Diallo, O., Badiane, M., Touré, K., & Diallo, I. (2000).
Prevalence of the use of skin bleaching cosmetics in two areas in Dakar
(Sénégal). Dakar medical, 45(2), 154-157.

Wong, Z. (2020). Authentic self branding on social media and its effects on global
culture flows: A case study of K-pop group SuperM.

Wood, D., Crapnell, T., Lau, L., Bennett, A., Lotstein, D., Ferris, M., & Kuo, A.
(2018). Emerging adulthood as a critical stage in the life course. Handbook of
life course health development, 123-143.

Yakal, M. A. (2023). Spanish Colonialism in Bikol, Philippines: Localizing Devotion
to Our Lady of Peiafrancia. University of California, Los Angeles.

Yarborough, B. J. H., Leo, M. C., Yarborough, M. T., Stumbo, S., Janoff, S. L.,
Perrin, N. A., & Green, C. A. (2016). Improvement in body image, perceived
health, and health-related self-efficacy among people with serious mental
illness: the STRIDE study. Psychiatric Services, 67(3), 296-301.

Yin, R. (2003). Case study research: design and methods., 3rd edn.(Sage: Thousand

Uaks, CA).

284

Yin, R. K. (1994). Discovering the future of the case study. Method in evaluation
research. Evaluation practice, 15(3), 283-290.
Yoon, S., & Kim, Y. A. (2020). Cosmetic surgery and self-esteem in South Korea: a

systematic review and meta-analysis. Aesthetic plastic surgery, 44, 229-238.

Yuca, V., Zahri, T. N., & Magistarina, E. (2020). The Differences in Body Image in
terms of Gender, Cultural Background, and Students Admission Path.
Zachurzok, A., Pasztak-Opilka, A., & Gawlik, A. M. (2021). Depression, anxiety and
self-esteem in adolescent girls with polycystic ovary syndrome. Ginekologia

Polska, 92(6), 399-405.

Zhao, S., Grasmuck, S., & Martin, J. (2008). Identity construction on Facebook:
Digital empowerment in anchored relationships. Computers in Human
Behavior, 24(5), 1816-1836.

Zhou, Y., Zhou, Y., Yang, L., & Yu, S. (2020). Evaluating Mixed Methods Research
Integration Quality in Three Top Journals of Higher Education. International
Journal of Multiple Research Approaches, 12(3).

Zickmund, S. L., Yang, S., Mulvey, E. P., Bost, J. E., Shinkunas, L. A., & LaBrecque,
D. R. (2013). Predicting Cancer Mortality: Developing a New Cancer Care
Variable Using Mixed Methods and the Quasi-Statistical Approach. Health
Services Research, 48(6pt2), 2208-2223.

Zinovyeva, E. V., Kazantseva, T. V., & Nikonova, A. N. (2016). Self-esteem and
loneliness in Russian adolescents with body dissatisfaction. Procedia-Social

and Behavioral Sciences. 233, 367-371.
