Analysis of microbial eukaryotic communities for source tracking of microbial contamination in the Pasig-Marikina-San Juan (PAMARISAN) River System in Metro Manila, Philippines

Diana Rose D. Mamawal

University of the Philippmes Diliman

Master of Science in Microbiology

June 2024


ABSTRACT

Microbial eukaryotes are an important part of the total microbial diversity
globally. However, little is known about their composition and sources in contaminated
surface waters. Here, the pathogens and potential sources (i.e., cattle, ducks, dogs,
poultry, swine, and sewage) of microbial eukaryotic communities in polluted sink
environments (i.e., Pasig, Marikina, and San Juan Rivers in Metro Manila, Philippines)
during the dry and wet seasons collected between December 2021 and March 2023
were examined using the 18S rDNA amplicon sequencing combined with Fast
Expectation-Maximization for Microbial Source Tracking (FEAST) program.
Taxonomic composition revealed the dominance of SAR, Opisthokonta, and
Archaeplastida in the rivers, accounting for 69.7%, 18.9%, and 10.2% mean abundance
of microbial sink communities, respectively. Economically and clinically relevant
human pathogens from Apicomplexa and Fungi were also found in sink environments
including Cryptosporidium sp., Plasmodium sp., Kodamaea sp., Candida sp.,
Aspergillus sp., and Fusarium sp. The Spearman’s rank correlation test demonstrated
that dissolved oxygen, total suspended solids, pH, temperature, fecal coliform count,
and phosphates were the important environmental factors driving the microbial
eukaryotic community variations. While the presence of indicator species Uronemella
filificum and Euplotes vannus in the dry season and Spumella sp. and unclassified
Chlorophyta in the wet season did not exhibit significant abundance, their occurrence
suggests their potential as bioindicators for bacterial and nutrient pollution assessment
in the river system. Moreover, the observed distinctiveness of community patterns
between sinks and sources, as shown by the NMDS plot using Bray-Curtis distances, strengthens the effectiveness of the source-tracking analysis. Results generated from FEAST displayed that sewage (19.6%), followed by duck (0.644%) and cow (0.566%)
feces, were the major sources of riverine microbial eukaryotes. Spatio-seasonal
variations were also observed wherein downstream stations received higher
contributions of microbial eukaryotes from source samples than upstream stations, and
that source contributions were higher in the wet than in the dry season, indicating the
impact of rainfall in enhancing the dispersal of microbial eukaryotic communities.
Results from community-based microbial source-tracking (MST) can give knowledge
on how microbial eukaryotes in freshwater environments are shaped by different
factors. Moreover, it could provide information on evaluating potential hazards caused
by pathogens and providing effective strategies for the conservation and management of the river system.

Keywords: community-based source tracking, FEAST, microbial eukaryotes, Philippines, 18S metagenomics

CHAPTER 1

INTRODUCTION

Microbial contamination in water bodies poses health risks to humans and
damage to aquatic organisms, thereby continuing to affect the valuable
application of surface waters (Abdalla & Khalil, 2018; Lepak et al., 2019).
Metro Manila rivers, which serve as an important means of transport,
sustenance, recreation, and livelihood, have similar problems. Pasig River is the
largest river in Metro Manila connecting Manila Bay and Laguna de Bay. It
flows from Laguna de Bay then joins the Marikina and San Juan Rivers at
Taguig and Manila, respectively, and eventually drains into Manila Bay
(Deocaris et al., 2019). San Juan River drains water from Manila and Quezon
City, while Marikina River flows from Marikina and Rizal provinces (Azuma
et al., 2017). These rivers have been critical sites for biodiversity and a source
of income for many people. Due to increased urbanization in the Metro Manila
Region over the past three decades, surrounding industries, establishments, and
communities have overexploited resources and later discharged wastes resulting
in the deterioration of water quality (Escoto et al., 2021).

The Pasig-Marikina-San Juan (PAMARISAN) River System has long
failed some parameters of the Department of Environment and Natural
Resources (DENR) Class C water quality standards, which are suited for aquatic
species’ propagation. Although rehabilitation efforts were made, the waters in
the river system are still unsafe for swimming (NCR-DENR, 2021; CNN
Philippines Staff, 2023; Philippine Daily Inquirer, 2023). Few studies have

reported microbial contamination in these rivers.

The presence of nosocomial bacteria under Order Enterobacterales and Hepatitis
A viruses (HAV) were detected in Pasig River (Bai et al., 2019; Guzman et al., 2020).
Protozoans such as Giardia spp., Cryptosporidium spp., Acanthamoeba spp., and
Naegleria spp. were also observed in Metro Manila rivers near Pasig River (Labana et
al., 2016; Onichandran et al., 2014). In addition, Salmonella spp. was detected in the
sampled irrigation waters of urban farms in cities of Quezon and Marikina in Metro
Manila (Garcia et al., 2015). As of now, few studies have been made to trace sources
of fecal contamination in the water bodies of the Philippines (Labrador et al., 2020;
Abello et al., 2021; dela Pefia et al., 2021; Nacario et al., 2022; Malajacan et al., 2023).
However, characterizing microbial communities and pathogens present alongside
identifying sources are not well studied. Therefore, addressing this gap may enhance
the implementation of management strategies, lessen pollution and danger to human
health.

The use of fecal indicator bacteria like Escherichia coli and other coliforms has
long been practiced in assessing water quality issues. However, it does not detect the
origin of fecal pollution. Microbial Source Tracking (MST) methods are either
population-based (library-dependent) or species-based (library-independent) (Harwood
et al., 2014). Both methods utilize microbes with ecological or evolutionary
relationships to the host or source thus providing ways to determine sources of
microbial contamination in environmental samples (Stewart et al., 2006). A recent
library-dependent method using direct DNA sequencing technologies has been
recommended for application in MST (Newton et al., 2013). According to Gilbert &
Dupont (2011), the rapid development of sequencing technologies has made it possible

to characterize and even sequence large environmental samples of bacterial

communities from a variety of sources. Next-generation sequencing (NGS) or high-
throughput sequencing allows multiple samples to be sequenced simultaneously
through the incorporation of barcode strategies (Cardenas & Tiedje, 2008).
Metagenomics is an application of NGS, which involves the analysis of a collection of
genes sequenced from the environment, thus allowing for the characterization of
communities of organisms. Although numerous studies have used NGS to determine
microbial communities from different samples, only a few reports have utilized this
technology for MST purposes focusing on identifying potential host-specific fecal
indicators and examining the source of fecal contamination across a range of fecal and
water samples (Jeong et al., 2011; Unno et al., 2010).

Eukaryotic microbes also make up a large proportion of microbial diversity,
specifically protists and fungi accounting for 17% of the global microbial biomass and
protists making up 25% of microbial eukaryotic biomass (Bar-On et al., 2018). Their
existence in environments is shaped by ecological parameters such as pH, temperature,
salinity and dissolved oxygen (Amaral-Zettler, 2013; Duret et al., 2015; Stefanidou et
al., 2018). However, despite their large contribution to microbial diversity,
metagenomic studies frequently focus on prokaryotes, thereby creating knowledge gaps
in the metagenomic reports about microbial eukaryotes (West et al., 2018). Hence,
progress in identifying eukaryotic components must be considered. Over the past years,
Cryptosporidium and Giardia species, commonly known protozoan pathogens of
concern in surface waters, are at most utilized as indicators for fecal contamination
(Snel et al., 2009). With the application of NGS in characterizing the eukaryotic
microbial community for MST, one could give extensive information on eukaryotic

microbial genera that could be additionally utilized as source-specific markers.

The primary focus of this study was to trace sources of microbial contamination
in the PAMARISAN River System by investigating microbial communities of fecal and
water samples using NGS, specifically, targeting eukaryotic microbes. Specifically, the
study aimed to answer the following research questions: (1) What microbial eukaryotic
communities are unique and dominant across river, sewage, and fecal samples between
dry and wet seasons? (2) What eukaryotic microbial pathogens are observed across
samples? (3) What is the dominant source of contamination in the rivers? (4) What
water quality parameters affect the microbial community structure?

Using NGS of the resulting amplicon targeting the V4 region of the 18S rRNA
gene, the microbial communities and diversity of the fecal and environmental samples
can be characterized and compared, respectively. With this, potential microbial
eukaryotic indicators specific to the host source can be identified. In addition, the use
of a machine learning program would allow the determination of fecal contamination

sources in the rivers.

CHAPTER 2
REVIEW OF RELATED LITERATURE

2.1. Microbial Contamination in the PAMARISAN River System

The PAMARISAN River System comprises Pasig River and its
tributaries, Marikina and San Juan Rivers as shown in Figure 1. Pasig River
runs 27 km long and flows westward from Laguna de Bay through Napindan
Channel, then links downstream with Marikina and San Juan rivers, and finally
drains to Manila Bay through Baseco Channel. The river serves as
transportation from Manila Bay to Laguna Lake or vice versa, and a water

source for Metro Manila residents (Corre et al., 2020).

Marikina River

San Juan River 1
s
f ‘4
fA
x
1 a
v t
‘ s
4
- =-\er F
or tantiae (
C4
be (
Newel of
sad
a
s.
.
»
Pasig River

Figure 1. Map showing the PAMARISAN River System (R Core Team, 2022).

Marikina River, a 78-km water system and the largest tributary of Pasig River,
flows from the Sierra Madre Mountains in Rizal and passes through Rizal provinces
and Marikina City. It has also been recognized for its rich and clean water and bank
often utilized for recreational purposes (Balinado et al., 2019). San Juan River, on the
one hand, is a 10-km long water body which begins near La Mesa Dam and flows
through the cities of Quezon, San Juan, Mandaluyong, and Pasig. The river also
provides a means of transportation and water source for industrial and domestic uses
(Gorme et al., 2010). The PAMARISAN River System is mostly surrounded by several
establishments and residential houses in highly urbanized areas in Metro Manila
making them susceptible to pollution.

Ever-increasing industrialization and population in Metro Manila are
reciprocated with several environmental problems within the river system. This
includes the concern about chemical contamination with an increase in heavy metal
compounds coming from nearby establishments with either improper discharge of
effluent, chemicals left untreated, or no proper protocol for waste management
(Paronda et al., 2019). With this, eutrophication comes in contributing to algal bloom,
and a decrease in dissolved oxygen results in inhibiting the survival of aquatic species
(Clemente, 2020). A study by Azuma et al. (2017) reveals high chemical oxygen and
biochemical oxygen demands in one tributary of Pasig River. Moreover, anthropogenic
and animal wastes and overexploitation in water resources also created habitat
degradation and water deterioration over time making these rivers biologically dead
especially during the dry season (Lazo et al., 2009). Due to these environmental
challenges, water quality in the river system continues to worsen with the threat of the

emergence of microbial pathogens.

Microbial contamination is a serious threat to human health as the presence of
pathogens such as bacteria, protozoa, and viruses cause detrimental effects commonly
affecting the gastrointestinal tract, respiratory tract, eyes, and skin (Praveen et al., 2016;
Stewart et al., 2006). Most of these pathogens are linked with waterborne diseases
which are primarily found in the feces of humans and animals (Leclerc et al., 2002).
Aside from humans, other species like livestock and wildlife from nearby surface
waters are also considered sources of this contamination (Farnleitner et al., 2010;
Wardrop et al., 2018). Only a few studies have reported the presence of harmful
microbes in the PAMARISAN River System. Among them are the studies from Tan &
Hedreyda (2020) and Guzman et al. (2020) where opportunistic pathogens
Acinetobacter baumannii and Morganella morganii were isolated from the sampled
waters in Pasig River. In addition, two subgenotypes of HAV, a virus which causes
acute hepatitis, have also been detected in the river (Bai et al., 2019). The occurrence
of Salmonella spp. and Enterococcus sp. were also reported in the irrigation waters of
urban farms in Quezon City and Marikina City (Garcia et al., 2015; Oliveros & Vital,
2022). Moreover, fecal and total coliform counts in Pasig and Marikina rivers surpassed
the acceptable DENR standard threshold values (Castro & Obusan, 2023). This
suggests that the water contamination might possibly be human-derived. Other water
bodies near the river system have also been observed to be contaminated with
pathogenic microorganisms. Pathogenic bacteria under Class Clostridia and protozoans
Giardia spp., Cryptosporidium spp., Acanthamoeba spp., and Naegleria spp. were
detected in rivers located in Metro Manila, Cavite, and Batangas (Labana et al., 2016;

Onichandran et al., 2014).

Throughout the years, the public has been aware of the risks associated with
microbial-contaminated water, and with that, water quality monitoring done by
government sectors has also been increasing. However, proper assessment and
discussion of water quality issues are still lacking with no clearly identified sources of
contamination (Teaf & Garber, 2011). Although water monitoring through MST is a
challenging task, the method promises results in improving water quality monitoring

strategies (Simpson et al., 2002).

2.2. Microbial Eukaryotic Contamination in Aquatic Systems

Eukaryotic microbes include a diverse group of species with unique
morphological and biological characteristics. Microbial eukaryotes are composed of
protists, microalgae, and microfungi with protists and fungi dominating the population
(McGrath & Katz, 2004). Despite the wide range of research in terms of their
importance in the ecosystem (Kamp et al., 2015), their metabolism (Bhattacharjee &
Rosen, 2007; Worden et al., 2004), and evolutionary relationships (Keeling, 2019),
metagenomic studies investigating their community composition are far lesser than
prokaryotes thereby needing further attention. Only a few studies have been published
focusing on their diversity and community composition in surface water samples such
as in estuaries (Santoferrara et al., 2014), brine pools (Wang et al., 2014), ocean (Lepere
et al., 2011; Massana & Pedrés-Alid, 2008; Piganeau et al., 2008), and even deep sea
(Bik et al., 2012). Independent of that subject are also community composition and
diversity studies relating to the human microbiome (Parfrey et al., 2011) and
mammalian gut (Parfrey et al., 2014).

Through the years, bacteria and viruses are commonly known organisms

associated with human diseases, however, microbial eukaryotes can also be responsible

8

for some illnesses but with lesser prevalence than prokaryotes (Dawson, 2005; Esch &
Petersen, 2013; Logrieco et al., 2003). Some documented microbial eukaryotic
contaminants which pose human health risks are mostly species belonging to Kingdom
Protista specifically Giardia sp., Toxoplasma sp., and Cryptosporidium sp. which are
known parasites that are released to marine or soil environments coming from feces of
humans, wildlife, and domesticated animals (Fayer & Trout, 2005). Toxin-producing
dinoflagellates and microalgae have also been recorded from sampled bivalves (Basti
et al., 2015; Matsuyama, 2012) and surface waters (Chen et al., 2019) across various
countries. With these, improved strategies like MST in mitigating chronic impacts
brought by contaminants to both aquatic life and human health must be considered
(Burkholder, 1998). Protozoans such as Cryptosporidium and Giardia species which
are high-risk zoonotic contaminants are often utilized as indicators for fecal
contamination (Snel et al., 2009). However, studies on the use of eukaryotic microbes
as indicators are not well documented as well as their application in molecular
approaches. As of now, no research has been conducted on the use of NGS in attributing

microbial eukaryotic composition to MST.

2.3. Microbial Source Tracking (MST) Methods

In general, MST refers to a variety of methods used to identify host sources of
fecal or microbial contamination in a certain environment. This is also beneficial to
determine the degree of contamination that could affect human health during contact
with water (Scott et al., 2002; Stoeckel & Harwood, 2007). In addition, the method can
somehow provide modeling risk to human health and evaluate or assess effective
strategies and best management practices (Simpson et al., 2002). MST can be

categorized into library-dependent and library-independent. Library-dependent

9

methods usually depend on the database or library construction of microbial profiles
from known fecal sources and are then compared with a contaminated environmental
sample to attribute the source of contamination (Mott & Smith, 2011). On the other
hand, library-independent methods utilize molecular protocols to look for the host-
specific organisms or genetic markers from the contaminated sample (Bernhard &
Field, 2000; Carson et al., 2005).

Library-dependent methods can be either phenotypic or genotypic. Phenotypic
methods require culture and isolation of bacteria from different samples and then
correlate through direct subtype matching. Usually, distinguishing attributes of fecal
indicator bacteria such as Escherichia coli and other enterococci are utilized for
matching (Harwood et al., 2003). Some of the methods include antibiotic resistance
analysis (ARA) (Whitlock et al., 2002; Wiggins, 1996), fatty acid methyl esters
(FAME) (Duran et al., 2006), and carbon utilization profiling (CUP) (Moussa &
Massengale, 2008; Nemec & Massengale, 2010) with ARA being the least expensive
(Wiggins, 1996). On one hand, genotypic methods such as ribotyping, amplified
fragment length polymorphism (AFLP), denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis
(DGGE), pulse-field gel electrophoresis (PFGE), and repetitive element sequencing-
based PCR (Rep-PCR), also involve bacterial isolation yet utilize microbial fingerprints
to identify the source of contamination (Scott et al., 2002). In the Philippines, few
studies have used the genotypic library-dependent method such as Rep-PCR and DNA
fingerprinting of E. coli isolates to track sources of fecal contamination across
environmental waters within the Greater Manila Area (Labrador et al., 2020; dela Pefia

et al., 2021; Nacario et al., 2022). Although being used as a traditional method for MST,

10

both methods tend to be laborious as these involve the production and validation of a
library or database for every specific geographical site (Ahmed, 2007).

In terms of library-independent methods, the majority are culture-independent.
The method clearly shows the advantage of not needing to culture microorganisms and
at the same time provides participation for many microbes that cannot be cultured
(Wuertz et al., 2011). Among these library-independent culture-independent methods,
most utilize PCR in order to amplify and directly target specific genes of interest
associated with bacteria mostly focusing on the 16S rRNA gene thereby creating high
accuracy in source tracking as well as in detecting pathogens. In addition, the use of
qPCR can also provide a quantitative determination of several gene targets which
makes it more beneficial (Field et al., 2003; Harwood et al., 2009). Through time,
bacteria and viruses commonly present in the gastrointestinal tract of the host tend to
have similarities with their host genetic makeup making one a potential host-specific
candidate. Specifically, gene markers of Bacteroides sp. are frequently used for
detecting humans as a source of contamination since it was observed that it dominates
the human fecal bacterial population (Ko et al., 2018; Okabe et al., 2007). Microbial
eukaryotes such as Cryptosporidium spp. and Giardia spp. have also been used to
source track fecal contamination in environmental waters (Ruecker et al., 2007; Yang
et al., 2008 Prystajecky et al., 2014; dela Pefia et al., 2021). Another alternative method
is the use of bacteriophage which is a library-independent culture-dependent method,
and its high specificity and stability in various environments propose a promising tool
in source tracking (Hundesa et al., 2010).

A study in the Philippines has also utilized a library-independent method for

source tracking of fecal contamination in Laguna Lake using genetic markers such as

1

host-associated E. coli and human mitochondrial DNA (Abello et al., 2021) as well as
Bacteroides 16S rDNA-based markers (Malajacan et al., 2023) specific to animal and
human host sources. Studies showed that library-independent methods tend to have
higher specificity and sensitivity when compared to library-dependent methods.
However, since no host-associated assays are purely specific to their host target, cross-

reactivity may occur (McLain et al., 2009).

2.4. NGS-based MST

Through the years, the rapid progress in sequencing technology gave way to more
advanced sequencing methods to be introduced. Most DNA sequencing studies are now
performed through NGS which has higher daily throughput as compared to Sanger
sequencing. One advantage is that the nucleotides are being sequenced either in a series
of repetitions or real-time manner tenfold than that of Sanger sequencing (Ari & Arikan,
2016; Hert et al., 2008). Due also to its reduced cost, several laboratories solely rely on
this type of sequencing (Kircher & Kelso, 2010).

Two commercial NGS equipment are commonly being utilized, the Roche 454
Genome Sequencer (GS) and the Illumina Genome Analyzer. Roche 454 GS does not
need to undergo separation protocol as the nucleotide bound with DNA polymerase is
automatically detected during light emission (Liu et al., 2012). Longer read length is
also an edge in using this system as this allows high accuracy for taxonomic
classification (Pearman et al., 2020). On the other hand, the Illumina platform employs
a similar method to Sanger sequencing where physical separation is needed because the
reaction between DNA polymerase and nucleotide is terminated after each base.
Although the method only sequences shorter reads, it can still provide highly accurate

results since it can sequence a billion reads at once as detected by optical signals

12

(Bentley et al., 2008). Despite similarities in their limitations such as dephasing and
increase in noise background, most comparative studies have shown that the Illumina
system, although produces shorter reads, showed better assessment in terms of
background error, contig length, and frameshift frequency as shown in the study of Luo
et al. (2012) when evaluating planktonic community. In addition, studies from Li et al.
(2014) and Hirai et al. (2017) also displayed higher sequence coverage and detection of
HIV-1 minority variants as well as higher accuracy in characterizing the copepod
community, respectively, when using Illumina Analyzer. With the accessibility of both
methods, one can evaluate their accuracy and at the same time correct traditional-based
sequences from the database (Schuster, 2008).

One application of NGS includes the characterization of communities of
organisms like microbial communities, which is commonly known as metagenomics.
The samples are directly subjected to DNA extraction and are then ready to be analyzed
thereby avoiding the need for some time-consuming bacterial culture and isolation
(Hugenholtz & Tyson, 2008). It also allows the combined analysis of several samples
being sequenced at the same time thus providing each sample with a more accurate
characterization (Baran & Halperin, 2012). Sequence-based metagenomics is divided
into two methods, the use of amplicon or marker genes to reveal microbial composition
and diversity, and the use of whole genome or shotgun metagenomics where sequences
are generated at random (Tessler et al., 2017). Clearly, NGS tools have allowed large-
scale sequencing studies of multiple samples derived from various ecosystems such as
surface waters (Sunagawa et al., 2015; Yang et al., 2015), soil (Schmidt et al., 2013),
and even gut microbiota (Ghanbari et al., 2015; Maccaferri et al., 2011) targeting either

the whole genome or hypervariable regions of the rRNA gene. Aside from that, the

13

technology is currently being used for MST purposes; however, only a few studies have
been conducted.

Some studies have only looked at water samples, including the study of Wilhelm
et al. (2011) where bacterial communities from sampled surface waters of Taihu Lake
in China were investigated using pyrosequencing targeting the V3 region of the 16S
rRNA gene. The study determined potential fecal indicator bacteria and found that the
source of contamination is not human. Others have focused on fecal materials, in
particular on the study of McLellan et al. (2010) where the V6 region of the 16S rRNA
gene was targeted in order to observe community profiles as well as to track the source
of contamination in the sewage samples collected from an untreated wastewater plant
in Wisconsin, USA. On the other hand, Lee et al. (2011) focused on the V2 region of
the 16S rRNA gene of various animal and human fecal sources in order to determine
potential bacterial markers for identifying sources of river contamination in South
Korea. A study from Hewitt et al. (2013) also utilized the V2 region of 16S rRNA gene
to compare the bacterial communities between neonatal intensive care unit samples
(NICUs) and published amplicon sequences of potential sources. Using SourceTracker,
NICU samples displayed similarity with building surface and air samples with a high
proportion of opportunistic pathogens like Propionibacterium species. Similarly, a
study from Knights et al. (2011) also utilized SourceTracker to determine the percent
contribution of possible sources of contamination such as gut, oral, skin, and soil
contamination to the laboratory, office, and NICU samples. It was found that the
contaminated sink samples were mostly dominated by skin bacteria. SourceTracker is
a Bayesian approach tool in estimating the ratio of contaminants from potential source

environments. This gives wide-range of applications in terms of reducing errors in PCR

14

and sequencing as well as in forensics and environmental pollution (Knights et al.,
2011).

A study by Bauza et al. (2019) on the other hand, utilized Illumina sequencing
targeting the V3 and V4 hypervariable regions of 16S rRNA to examine microbial
community composition of young and adult human feces and compare it to a range of
samples collected from inside (surfaces) and outside (drainage, nearby stream, soil) of
households in the urban slums of Nairobi, Kenya. The same objective was pursued in
the studies of Unno et al. (2010) and Jeong et al. (2011) except that 454 Roche
pyrosequencing platform was utilized and a wide range of fecal samples from animal
and humans were observed to determine sources of river contamination in South Korea.
Similarly, 454 pyrosequencing was also utilized targeting the V4 region of the 16S
tRNA gene as observed in the study of Neave et al. (2014) to track the source of water
contamination in Darwin harbor of northern Australia. Results showed that the main
source of contamination was the sewage effluent of an inner suburb near the harbor. A
study by Liang et al. (2021) also utilized the V3-V4 region of the 16S rRNA gene to
source track contamination in the Fsq river in China. The Fast Expectation-
Maximization for Microbial Source Tracking (FEAST) program developed by Shenhav
et al. (2019) was used to obtain the percent contribution of sources to sink. Results
showed that humans were prevalent during the dry season, while swine and ruminant
were dominant during the wet season. Lastly, a study by Gad et al. (2022) tracked the
microeukaryotic footprint in a watershed in China and found that sediments, sewage
effluents, and influents were the major sources of the dominant microeukaryotic taxa
like Stramenopiles, Alveolates, Rhizaria, Opisthokonta, Archaeplastida, and

Amoebozoa.

15

CHAPTER 3
MATERIALS AND METHODS

3.1. Study area and sample collection

Figure 2 shows the map of the PAMARISAN River System and the

stations where the samplings took place (in black ink).

7

st

s2

(™) )
@ if
: y 4 A
@ 7
oO wt eg
ee b |
st e
P2 $2 Sampling Sites
@ 02 x» @ Aviat tarms
@ @ PANARISAN river stations
oe @ sewage infuent pants
@ Batasan (upstream)

Rosa (downstream)
San Juan River - Culiat
(upstream)

‘San Juan River -
Lubiran (downstream)

hb ohn
TPE

Figure 2. Map showing PAMARISAN river stations, sewage treatment plants,

and animal farms generated using R programming (R Core Team, 2022). The

inset shows the sampling stations relative to the Philippines.

Water samples were collected between December 2021 and March 2023 from
selected PAMARISAN River System sites in two sampling events to accommodate dry
(December 2021-April 2022; November 2022-March 2023) and wet (May 2022-
October 2022) seasons. The selected sites were chosen based on the water quality
monitoring and sampling sites operated by the Environmental Management Bureau
(EMB) and the Pasig River Coordinating and Management Office (PRCMO) of the
DENR (DENR, 2020; DENR-EMB, 2021). Sampling permits were also secured with
the approval of the University of the Philippines Diliman’s Chancellor and the head of
the said DENR agencies. Each river is represented by its upstream and downstream
sites. Pasig, Marikina, and San Juan Rivers are represented by Napindan (P1), Batasan
(M1), and Culiat (S1) as their upstream sites, while Baseco (P2), Sta. Rosa (M2), and
Lubiran (S2) served as the downstream stations, respectively. A list of river stations
with coordinates is shown in Appendix Table A1, while the number of river samples is
shown in Table 1. The measurement of the water quality parameters such as the
biochemical oxygen demand (BOD, mg/L), color (TCU), total suspended solids (TSS,
mg/L), phosphates (mg/L), nitrates (mg/L), fecal coliform (MPN/100mL), dissolved
oxygen (DO, mg/L), pH, and temperature (°C) were obtained from the PRCMO and
EMB. The results obtained were also compared with the Water Quality Guidelines
(WQG) Classifications B and C of the DENR to accommodate different recreational
activities such as bathing and swimming (Class B), as well as boating, fishing, and
other similar activities (Class C) (Department of Environment and Natural Resources,
2016).

Two-liter water samples were obtained from a 20-cm depth per sampling station

and stored in sterile wide-mouth Nalgene bottles (ThermoFisher Scientific, NY, USA).

17

All collected samples were stored in an ice box and immediately transported to the
laboratory for processing. Depending on the turbidity, 500mL—1 L per sample was
filtered through a 47 mm x 3 ym mixed cellulose ester (MCE) membrane (Newstar,
Hangzhou, China) to retain microbial eukaryotic cells. Filter papers were then
suspended with DNA/RNA Shield (Zymo Research, CA, United States) and stored at
—20°C until DNA extraction.

Five individual fecal samples from each of the potential host sources including
cow, dog, duck, poultry, and swine were collected at the farms within the Greater
Manila Area, surrounding the PAMARISAN River System. For human fecal-derived,
the influent wastewater collected from sewage treatment plants near the river system
served as sewage representatives in dry and wet seasons. A list of farm sites and sewage
treatment plants with coordinates is also shown in Appendix Table Al. Meanwhile, the
number of fecal and sewage samples collected is shown in Table 1. All fecal samples
were collected in stool cups and transported immediately to the laboratory.
Approximately 0.25 g of feces was weighed, suspended with DNA/RNA Shield (Zymo
Research, CA, United States), and kept at -20°C in preparation for DNA extraction. In
addition, 250-500 mL of each sewage sample was filtered through a 47 mm x 3 pm
mixed cellulose ester (MCE) membrane (Newstar, Hangzhou, China) to retain

microbial eukaryotic cells. Filter papers were then stored at —20°C as fecal samples.

18

Table 1. Number of river, sewage, and fecal samples collected.

Sample Ty pe Dry Wet No. of individual fecal Total
asi wt < samples per host source
River 6 6 12;
Sewage 2 2} 4

n
N
D

Fecal (cow, dog, duck,
poultry, swine)

For biosafety practices, processing of water, sewage, and fecal samples
involved handling microorganisms under risk group 2, specifically using general
aseptic techniques, biosafety cabinet II (BSCII), and proper protective equipment
(PPE). On the other hand, the classification of agents to be handled in environmental
DNA samples is under risk group 1. All samples were decontaminated at 121°C for 15
minutes prior to disposal.

3.2, Library preparation and metagenomic sequencing

DNA from individual fecal samples was extracted using a ZymoBIOMICS™
DNA/RNA Miniprep Kit (Zymo Research, CA, United States). On the other hand,
DNA of sewage and surface water samples was extracted using E.Z.N.A.® Soil DNA
Kit (Omega Bio-tek, Inc, GA, United States). Quantitation and purity of DNA were
determined using Invitrogen Qubit 4 Fluorometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., MA,
United States) and Multiskan SkyHigh Microplate Spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher
Scientific Inc., MA, United States), respectively. A ratio ranging between 1.8 and 2.0
from A260/A280 reading served as the basis of a highly purified DNA to be utilized
for further sequencing preparation. Afterward, these samples were sent to Apical

Scientific Sdn. Bhd. (Malaysia) for final DNA and amplicon polymerase chain reaction

19

(PCR) quality check, library preparation, library quality check, and amplicon
metagenomic sequencing.

In the Apical Scientific Sdn. Bhd. (Malaysia), the quality of the DNA samples
was visualized on 1% Tris-Acetate-EDTA (TAE) agarose gel, while the quantity was
measured using Implen NanoPhotometer® N60/NS50 (Implen, LA, United States) and
iQuant™ Broad Range dsDNA Quantification Kit (GeneCopoeia, MD, United States).
The 18S rRNA gene was amplified using the eukaryotic primers 528F
(GCGGTAATTCCAGCTCCAA) and 706R (AATCCRAGAATTTCACCTCT)
targeting the fungal V4 hypervariable region (Cheung et al., 2010). The V4
hypervariable region of the 18S rRNA gene reveals higher-level taxonomic groups,
similar to that of the full-length gene, as compared to other hypervariable regions such
as V9 (Dunthorn et al., 2012; Mitsi et al., 2023). The samples were then subjected to
amplicon library preparation based on IIlumina’s 18S metagenomic library preparation.
The libraries were then pooled and sequenced using MiSeq platform with Illumina
Nextera XT Index Kit v2 to obtain 300-bp paired end reads with an output of
approximately 100,000 raw tags per sample.

3.3. Bioinformatics processing and metabarcoding via ASV-based analysis

The bioinformatics pipeline for processing of the sequences was based on the
workflow used by Apical Scientific Sdn. Bhd. (Malaysia). Poor quality regions of
metagenomic raw reads were quality control checked using FastQC
(https://www. bioinformatics.babraham.ac.uk/projects/fastqc/) and trimmed with
Cutadapt, using an average quality score of 30 and a minimum read length threshold of
20 bp (Martin, 2015). Sequences were sorted for a perfect match to the sequencing

adaptor indicated by the provider. The remaining sequences were also filtered into

20

separate files based on a perfect match to predefined barcode sequences. The barcode
sequences were then removed to not cause interference for sequence quality control and
feature table construction with DADA2 V1.18 (Callahan et al., 2016). Trimming and
filtering of the demultiplexed fastq files were done using the DADA2 fastqPairedFilter
function. Paired-end reads were denoised and merged using the DADA2 mergePairs
function. In addition, the isBimeraDenovo in the DADA2 R package was used for
adding a chimera-checking and removal script to sequences. Afterward, a feature data
summary and a list of output sequences known as amplicon sequence variant (ASV)
sequences were generated. The use of ASV provides a more accurate and detailed view
of microbial communities than other traditional clustering methods such as operational
taxonomic units (OTUs) (Callahan et al., 2016). All sequence data generated in this
study have also been submitted to the NCBI Sequence Read Archive (SRA) and have
currently pending accession numbers. The accession numbers will be provided upon
their availability.
3.4. Diversity and taxonomic composition of eukaryotic microbial communities
Microbial community diversity was measured with alpha and beta diversity
metrics. Alpha diversity, which refers to the species richness, evenness, or even both
within a sample, was measured using Shannon and Simpson indices between seasons
in river samples. On the other hand, beta diversity focuses on the comparison between
samples based on microbial community composition. Using the vegan R package, beta
diversity was visualized with non-metric multidimensional scaling (NMDS) plot using
Bray-Curtis distances in terms of relative abundance of ASVs (Oksanen et al., 2022).
NMDS represents the best data in two dimensions, and plots the sample units based on

rank order in such a way that sample units with similar original distance matrices are

21

closer together than those with dissimilar matrices (Oksanen et al., 2022). A
Permutational Multivariate Analysis of Variance (PERMANOVA) using the Adonis
function was then used to assess the spread or dispersion of overall microbial
communities, communities of river and sewage samples, and communities of
pathogens. The use of the PERMANOVA test was based on the assumption of
Homogeneity of Multivariate Dispersion which states that the dispersion of groups
should be similar (Anderson, 2006). The homogeneity test using betadisper function
showed no significant differences in multivariate dispersion, allowing the use of the
PERMANOVA test (Appendix Tables C1, C3, C5, and C7).

The eukaryotic microbial community was characterized based on the ASVs
across fecal and environmental samples representing phylum and genus levels.
Taxonomy assignment of the chimera-removed sequence variants was done using the
SILVA nr database V138.1 algorithm (Quast et al., 2012). The data generated from
SILVA were then subjected to R programming (R Core Team, 2022) for taxonomic bar
plot visualization of the |sequences. The use of indicspecies R package determined the
unique or key species which allowed for the recognition of potential eukaryotic
microbial indicators in each sample (De Caceres & Legendre, 2009). The indicator
species analysis package uses its multipatt() function with the default IndVal index as
the test statistic and the number of random permutations which is 999 (nperm=999) (De
Caceres & Legendre, 2009). In addition, the presence of important ecological and
pathogenic microbial eukaryotes was also determined across river samples between two
seasons. All data visualization was conducted using ggplot2 R package (Wickham,

2016).

22

3.5. Source-tracking and statistical analyses

The relative contribution of eukaryotic microbes from potential sources to sink
samples was analyzed using five independent runs of the Fast Expectation-
Maximization for Microbial Source Tracking program or FEAST (Shenhav et al.,
2019). The ASV dataset of individual fecal and sewage samples was obtained to create
a “source” library, while the ASV dataset of water samples during dry and wet seasons
was classified as “sinks”. The source tracking analysis was validated by pooling equal
proportions of DNA concentration from the source samples in triplicates, and
comparing these proportions to the percentages estimated by FEAST (Fuhrmeister et
al., 2020). Ideally, the resulting predictive values generated by FEAST must be
consistent or closer to the original set of DNA concentration proportions.

NMDS plot using Bray-Curtis distances was performed to determine association
between the environmental water parameters and eukaryotic microbial communities in
sink samples across dry and wet seasons. The goodness of fit in each environmental
parameter was estimated through envfit function with 999 permutations. Spearman’s
rank correlation test was used to reveal the association between water quality
parameters and microbial eukaryotic communities of dominant phyla. Wilcoxon rank-
sum test was performed to determine any significant differences between seasons in
terms of significantly enriched ASVs, alpha diversity indices, microbial communities
of dominant phyla in sink samples, environmental water parameters, and percent
contribution of host sources to sinks. The test was also utilized to identify significant
differences of microbial community patterns across sink and sewage samples per
season. Moreover, significant differences between contributions of sources to sinks

were determined across upstream and downstream sites of the river system in each

23

season using Kruskal-Wallis test. Comparison of shared and unique ASVs across all
samples and ecologically important pathogens was visualized using the UpSetR
package (Gehlenborg, 2019). All statistical analyses were conducted in R v 4.1.3 (R
Core Team, 2022).

A flowchart of the general methodology is given in Figure 3.

‘Sample collection
and processing

“Measurement of
physicochemical
rameters

Alpha and Beta
rersity

Taxonomic

composition of

Measurement and microbial cukuryotic
i communities

preservation of fecal samples
Identification ot
pathogens

Indicator species
analyses

samples

Filtration and preservation of
water and sewage samples

‘brary preparation
‘and metagenomic
sequencing

Final DNA and

‘Correlation of water

rameters with
CS) microbial eukaryotic
Quantitation and ]{ Sending of samples r Cin composition
purity of DNA |] to Apical Scientific rezions using
sewage samples samples Malaysia for 18S S24F and 706R Source racking
metagenomic Primers analyses using

sequencing FEAST

Library
sequencing
using lumina
Miscq platform

Quality assessment
‘and trimming in Fast
QC and Cutada

‘Bioinformatics

ing and ‘Quality assessment
y demultiplexed

sequences

sequences
Error rate estimation
and sample
interference

Figure 3. Flowchart of the general methodology.

SILVA ar datubuse

24

CHAPTER 4
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
4.1. Seasonal variations in terms of diversity in the PAMARISAN River
System

The 18S metagenomic sequencing produced a total of 1,687,456 filtered
sequence reads in sink samples. Specifically, 1,510 ASVs are detected in the
dry season and 1,127 ASVs in the wet season (Figure 4A). The Venn diagram
in Figure 4A displays the number of unique ASVs in each season where 1,177
and 794 unique ASVs are observed for dry and wet seasons, respectively. In
addition, 333 ASVs are shared by both seasons, where only one ASV had a
significantly higher relative abundance in the wet season (P = 0.0184, Figure
4A and Appendix Table D1). Seventeen dominant ASVs with relative
abundances greater than 1% belong to Orders Ochrophyta, Ciliophora,
Chlorophyta, and Dinoflagellata in the dry season. In wet season, eight
dominant ASVs belong to Orders Ciliophora, Ochrophyta, Protalveolata,
Chlorophyta, and Cercozoa with relative abundances greater than 1%
(Appendix Table B1).

Alpha diversity metrics used in the study include Shannon and Simpson
which account both species richness and evenness in a sample. Shannon
diversity gives balance on accounting all species in a sample thereby being more
particularly sensitive to rare species, whereas Simpson diversity squares the
relative abundances thus emphasizing the metric to be driven by the most
abundant organisms (Morris et al., 2014). Although no significant differences

are observed across the alpha diversity metrics between two seasons (P > 0.05,

Appendix Table D2), it is noteworthy that Shannon diversity is higher in the dry than
in the wet season (3.74 and 3.16 mean Shannon for dry and wet seasons, respectively),
while Simpson diversity is higher in the wet than in the dry season (0.0688 and 0.150)
(Figure 4B). In both seasons, the dominant phyla are SAR (69.7% mean abundance),
Opisthokonta (18.9%), and Archaeplastida (10.2%), while low dominance is found in
Excavata (0.29%) and Amoebozoa (0.09%) (Figure 4C). In terms of comparing the
relative abundances of dominant phyla between the two seasons, Archaeplastida,
Excavata, Opisthokonta, and SAR are higher in the dry than in the wet season, while
Amoebozoa is higher in the wet season (Figure 4C). Similar to alpha diversity,
significant differences are not observed in terms of dominant microbial eukaryotic
community composition at the phylum level between dry and wet seasons (P > 0.05,

Appendix Table D3).

26

Shannon Simpson |

eS rir Shaved Toy
333
0 —

im Season
. | Sy
| S Wet
3
4 |
3

logsFC
+ cise BONS a, ry
%, SE >: s
Cc y a
a A
4
/ .
] \.
j t
{ fe Amoebozoa
i
}
\ i Wh 0bIesHa4
fo &
\ fava,

Rep a
é en ae “te,

Figure 4. Differences in microbial eukaryotic communities in river samples between
the dry and wet seasons. (A) Venn diagram displaying the distinct and shared ASVs
between the two seasons. Only one ASV is significantly enriched in the wet season
(Wilcoxon rank-sum test, P < 0.05) and displayed as a yellow-colored dot in the upper
right quadrant of the volcano plot. Gray-colored dots signify non-significant AS Vs. The

plot was made using log2 fold change (FC) on the x-axis and -log10 p-values of the
27

statistical test on the y-axis. (B) Alpha diversity indices (Shannon and Simpson) of
microbial eukaryotic communities in dry and wet seasons. (C) Radial network diagram
displaying the relative abundances of dominant phyla during dry and wet seasons.

The results showed similarities in the composition pattern and alpha diversity of
microbial eukaryotic communities between dry and wet seasons, suggesting the small
impact of seasonal variations due to limited samples representing the seasons. However,
it should be noted that Shannon is higher in the dry compared to the wet season. In other
words, the richness, evenness, and sensitivity to rare taxa in the community are higher
in the dry season. This is similar to the study of Ren et al. (2019) where alpha diversity
of bacterial communities in a freshwater lake is higher in the dry season, and that
variation in nutrient concentrations in the lake stimulated the differences. In contrast,
Simpson diversity index is higher in the wet than in the dry season, emphasizing high
species richness and evenness of the dominant taxa during the wet season. Moreover,
one ASV belonging to Cryptomycota is significantly enriched in the wet season,
indicating its uniqueness and higher abundance compared to the dry season. A study
from Looby & Treseder (2018) displayed that Cryptomycota communities are more
adapted to wet conditions, suggesting their high richness in soils with high moisture
content. Thus, their high abundance during the wet season might be due to this
preference added with the effect of rainwater in the transfer of these fungal species from

soils to water bodies.

28

4.2. Microbial eukaryotic compositions and diversity across sink and source
samples

Consistent with the data above, the dominant phyla in sink samples for both
seasons include SAR, Opisthokonta, Archaeplastida, Excavata, and Amoebozoa in
decreasing order (Figure 5A). Among the sources except for sewage, their dominant
phyla are Opisthokonta (66.3% mean relative abundance), followed by SAR (27.1%),
Archaeplastida (1.73%), Amoebozoa (1.37%), and lastly by Excavata (0.197%) (Figure
4A). Sewage samples have different patterns from other source samples where SAR
(43.5%) and Archaeplastida (37.5%) are displayed to be the most abundant phyla
followed by Opisthokonta (15%), Excavata (0.0228%), and Amoebozoa (0.0108%).
Distinct patterns of microbial eukaryotic communities across samples are also shown
at the genus level (Figure 5B). Uncultured LKM11 clade (59% mean abundance) and
Paramecium (32.5%) are the dominant genera for dry and wet seasons in sink samples,
although Paramecium is higher in the wet season (38.5%) than in the dry season
(26.5%) (Figure 5B). Similarly, the high dominance of Paramecium (41.9%) is
observed among sewage samples. Chicken, cow, dog, duck, and pig fecal samples are
dominated by Candida-Lodderomyces clade (19.4%), Blastocystis (22.4%), Rhabditida
(9.71%), Codonella (14%) and Pichia (8.86%), and Mrakia (10.8%) and Kazachstania
(14.2%), respectively. The differences in microbial eukaryotic community patterns
across sink and source samples can be observed at the phylum and genus taxa (Figure
5). In addition, similarities in microbial communities across samples collected within
the same animal farm and with similar host source types are also observed. Species
under Candida-Lodderomyces clade dominate all the chicken fecal samples collected

in Malabon, while Kazachstania is the most abundant genus found in Cavite chicken

29

samples. Duck samples collected in Bulacan reveal that Codonella and Pichia are the

most abundant, while those in Cavite are dominated by Candida-Lodderomyces clade.

Lastly, Kazachstania and Mrakia are the most abundant genera collected in Bulacan

5B).

and Cavite, respectively (Figure

| SAR

Incertae_Sedis
Cryptophyceae
Haptophyta
Centronelica
Picozoa
SA1-3006
Collodityonidae
unclassified

Archaeplastica
Excavata

‘Amoebozoa

y

,

Source || Source | Source

Source | Source

Source || Source

Source || Source

Source

‘Source

Sample ID

Sink

Sink

75%

s

(%) eouepunge oanejou

25%

100%

F3
8

(%) e2uepunge oaneioy

75%
25%

30

Figure 5. Taxonomic bar plot showing relative abundance distribution of microbial
eukaryotic communities across sink and source samples at the phylum level (A) and
genus level (B). Only the top 9 genera were displayed in the plot. Other genera with
<0.001% relative abundances are not shown. Sample ID labels for fecal samples: CV =
Cavite; ML = Malabon; BL = Bulacan; VL = Valenzuela.

The NMDS plot reveals that the microbial eukaryotic communities of sink
samples (river samples in dry and wet seasons) tend to cluster together with the sewage
but separately from the fecal samples (i.e., chicken, cow, dog, duck, and pig),
suggesting that clustering is based on the nature of the samples. This is consistent with
the results from the PERMANOVA test where community compositions did not vary
significantly between sink and sewage samples (PERMANOVA, Pseudo-F = 0.967, P
= 0.508, Appendix Table C4). However, the distinctiveness of overall microbial
communities is observed between the sink and source environments (Figure 6), which
is supported by a significant difference in their microbial community compositions
based on the number of observed ASVs (PERMANOVA, Pseudo-F = 2.54, P =
1.00E-04, Appendix Table C2).

In addition, significant differences in relation to relative abundances are observed
between pairs of rivers and sewage versus rivers per season (Wilcoxon rank-sum test,
P <0.05, Appendix Tables D4 and D5). In the dry season, microbial communities in
Marikina River had significantly higher abundance than in Pasig River (P = <2.2E-16)
and San Juan River (P = <2.2E-16). Significant differences are also observed between
sewage and the PAMARISAN River System, where a higher abundance of microbial
eukaryotic communities in sewage samples is evident (P < 0.05). However, no

significant differences were displayed between the Pasig and San Juan Rivers (P =

31

0.981, Appendix Table D4). In the wet season, microbial community compositions
between all the river and sewage samples are significantly different from one another
(P < 0.05), except for San Juan River and sewage samples where high relative

abundances in communities are observed (P = 0.201, Appendix Table D5).

Type
Sink
Source
Sample
04 Chicken
Cow
Dog
River_Dry
Duck
| Pig
3] "Sewage
River_Wet

0
NMDS1

Figure 6. The NMDS ordination plot (stress value of 0.142) based on Bray-Curtis
distances showing variations of microbial communities among sink and source
environments.

Similar to the study of Fuhrmesiter et al. (2020), samples appear to significantly
cluster based on sample type (fecal vs environmental), which can be explained by the
fewer environmental inputs of fecal samples compared to environmental samples
resulting in their distinct microbial compositions. This is evident in the differences in

dominant genera compositions found in river and fecal samples in this study. Cyclotella

32

(stramenopile) and Paramecium (alveolate) are the most dominant ASVs in sink
samples during the dry and wet seasons, respectively: all belonging to the SAR
supergroup which consists of Stramenopila, Alveolata, and Rhizaria. The community
composition in the river system is consistent with the studies of Bjorbakmo et al. (2020)
and Gad et al. (2022) showing the dominance and high diversity of SAR communities
in the aquatic realm. Opisthokonta, a large group consisting of fungi, and
Archaeplastida, a group comprising of eukaryotic photoautotrophs, are also ubiquitous
in soil, freshwater, and marine environments, suggesting their abundance in river
samples (del Campo et al., 2015; C. Zhang et al., 2022). Even though no significant
differences in community composition are observed between the two seasons, it is
noteworthy that microbial eukaryotic community composition is characterized by the
higher abundance of Paramecium and microfungi in the wet than in the dry season,
which might be linked with tributary inflow. During the wet season, the rainfall
increases the chance of water inflow from other channels into the river system, thereby
increasing also the occurrence of Paramecium and microfungal communities in the
surface waters (O’Brien et al., 2023). Furthermore, the nature of the samples between
sink and sewage might have resulted in the similarities in their community patterns. In
addition, these similarities might also be due to a river water intrusion which can serve
as the major extraneous water source in the sewer systems (Guo et al., 2020).

On the other hand, the high abundance of communities under Candida-
Lodderomyces clade in chicken feces is explained by the fact that they are commensal
mycobiota in poultry and can be stimulated by antibiotic and probiotic treatments
(Ward et al., 2019). Mrakia and Kazachstania spp. are other common gut

microorganisms in animals like pigs that are driven by dietary carbohydrates

33

composition in the host’s gut (Luo et al., 2021). Some ciliates and ascomycetous yeasts
are also part of gut flora which function in shaping the health of various agricultural
animals, suggesting the high abundances of Codonella and Pichia spp. in duck feces
(Newbold et al., 2015; Angchuan et al., 2021). Moreover, the occurrence of Blastocystis
and nematode infections in cows and dogs, respectively, are also evident as shown by
the dominance of Blastocystis and Rhabditida species in these fecal samples. It is also
observed that chicken fecal samples collected in Malabon have similar microbial
community patterns as compared to chicken fecal samples collected in Cavite.
Similarly, duck and pig fecal samples in Bulacan showed more similar patterns with
each other than those fecal samples collected in Cavite. Various environmental factors
such as antibiotic usage and feed composition during livestock production may have
resulted in these differences thereby highlighting the impact of different environmental
and anthropogenic-related factors in shaping the structure of gut-associated protozoa
and mycobiota in animals (Palleja et al., 2018; Lv et al., 2023).
4.3. Seasonal variations in the composition of microbial eukaryotic pathogens in
the PAMARISAN River System

To identify the pathogens that are present in the microbial eukaryotic
communities, the two topmost important ecological and pathogenic groups, Orders
Apicomplexa and Fungi, were selected. Dominant species under Order Apicomplexa
in the dry season include Theileria sp. (0.0446% of total communities) in Pasig River,
Cryptosporidium spp. (0.00429%) in Marikina River, and Paraschneideria spp.
(0.00731%) in San Juan River (Figure 7A). On the other hand, Plasmodium (0.00625%)
and Gregarina spp. (0.00544%) are the dominant Apicomplexans in Pasig and San Juan

Rivers in the wet season, respectively (Figure 7A). Overall, high abundance of

34

Apicomplexans is found in Pasig River during the dry season and San Juan River during
the wet season (Figure 7A). Although different patterns in community compositions of
microbial pathogens under Order Apicomplexa are observed, no significant differences
are found between the two seasons (PERMANOVA, Pseudo-F = 1, P = 1, Appendix
Table C6).

The high abundance of Paramicrosporidium spp. is observed in Marikina (0.86%
of total communities) and Pasig Rivers (2.59%) during the dry season, and San Juan
River (1.42%) during the wet season. In addition, Kodamaea spp. exhibited greater
abundance in San Juan (1.99%) and Marikina (0.54%) Rivers during the dry and wet
seasons, respectively. Lastly, Candida-Lodderomyces clade is the most abundant
pathogenic fungi in the Pasig River (1.52%) during the wet season. Common fungal
pathogens including Candida (0.742%) and Aspergillus spp. (0.896%) are also
abundant in the San Juan River during the wet season, while Fusarium spp. (0.91%)
mostly dominate in the Pasig River during the dry season. In general, pathogenic fungi
are most abundant in Pasig River and San Juan River during the dry and wet seasons,
respectively (Figure 7B). Similarly, no significant differences were displayed between
seasons in terms of the microbial pathogenic composition under Order Fungi

(PERMANOVA, Pseudo-F = 0.369, P = 0.923, Appendix Table C8).

35

Total @

Theileria
Paraschneideria
Plasmodium

Gregarina

Cryptosporidium (@)

Hoplorhynchus

Tota!

Paramicrospondium

Candida-
Lodderomyces clade

Exophiala

‘Mitosporidium
‘daphniae

Pichia
Candida

Rhodotorula

Yamadazyma-
Candida clade

Biatnospora
Fusarium

Clavispora-
Candida clade

Coniochaeta
Herpotnchiallacese
Medicopsis
Aspergillus
Rorella

Dothideomycetes
Pseudochaeto-
‘sphaeronema

Meyerozyme-
Candida clade

Dry

°

Ss

M

River Samples

Relative Abundance (%)
© 0.001
OQ 0.005
O 0010

() 0080

SZ,

omme)

°

Relative Abundance (%)
° On
05
OQ os
O 19
50

C_ ) 100

River Samples

Figure 7. Relative abundances of dominant pathogenic genera under Order

Apicomplexa (A) and Order Fungi (B) in sink samples between dry and wet seasons.

“Total” represents the sum of the relative abundance of pathogens.

Many microbial eukaryotic species that are known to be obligatory parasites of

both vertebrates and invertebrates are classified under Order Apicomplexa. These

36

microbial eukaryotes have secretory organelles thought to be important in the parasite's
invasion of its host (Guizetti & Frischknecht, 2021). Among the observed genera of
Apicomplexa in the PAMARISAN River System which affect humans include
Cryptosporidium species causing cryptosporidiosis in extensive vertebrate hosts and
Plasmodium spp. causing malaria and infecting humans through mosquitoes as vectors
(Votypka et al., 2016). The presence of Cryptosporidium spp. in the Marikina River
indicates that the river had been contaminated with feces from infected humans and
animals, and that direct fecal dumping and sewage spills might be the cause of
transmission into the water bodies (Gerace et al., 2019). On the other hand, the
occurrence of Plasmodium spp. in the San Juan River during the wet season suggests
that rainfall and mosquito vector breeding sites on or nearby surface waters might be
the major driving factors for the presence of parasites into the waterways (Shayo et al.,
2021).

Aside from Apicomplexa, Order Fungi also comprises several human pathogenic
species which are observed in the PAMARISAN River System. Some of the dominant
ones were opportunistic yeasts Kodamaea spp. and Candida spp. causing fungemia and
candidiasis in immunocompromised individuals respectively, and other nosocomial
fungal pathogens like Aspergillus spp. and Fusarium spp., which give rise to a wide
range of fungal infection especially in immunodeficient patients (Perlroth et al., 2007).
A study of Steffen et al. (2023) showed that the presence of Candida and Kodamaea
spp. in the river is linked with high levels of fecal pollution in environmental waters,
which may lead to rising cases of fungal infections among people who depend on
natural water sources. On one hand, Aspergillus and Fusarium spp. in the river system

indicates their widespread occurrence in the environment including freshwater habitats,

37

thereby showing their extensive adaptability to environmental conditions (Burgess &
Bryden, 2012; Richardson & Rautemaa-Richardson, 2019). The pathogen compositions
across Apicomplexa and Fungi are not significantly different, which might be due to
the small number of sink samples. Although seasonality is taken into account as a
potential factor, the findings indicate that its influence is low. Studies from Gerba
(2015) and Pietryczuk et al. (2018) display that the composition of pathogens is more
likely correlated with other factors such as sewer management systems, anthropogenic
activities, and pathogen adaptability irrespective of seasonal variations.
4.4. Dynamics between environmental water parameters and microbial eukaryotic
composition

The data for water quality parameters such as BOD, color, TSS, phosphates,
nitrates, fecal coliform, DO, pH, and temperature were obtained from the DENR. Most
of the parameters in the PAMARISAN River System such as BOD, TSS, phosphates,
fecal coliform, DO, and temperature did not meet the water quality guideline

classifications B and C of the DENR.

38

Table 2. Environmental water parameters of sink samples between dry and wet seasons
and their standard values based on water quality guidelines (WQG) classifications B

and C of the DENR (Department of Environment and Natural Resources, 2016).

BOD, Color, TSS, Phosphates, Nitrates,
mg/L TCU mg/L mg/L mg/L
WQG Class B 5 50 65 0.5 7
WQG Class C 7 75 80 0.5 7
Dry MI 13 10 326 0.234 0.606
M2 20 15 43 0.343 0.225
Pl 10 10 135 0.52 0.59
P2 - 5 37 0.37 0.35
SI 46 20 31 1.863 0.509
S2 21 20 35 0.92 <0.018
Wet MI 17 25 31 0.371 0.174
M2 17 15 12 111 0.09
Pl 10 10 135 0.52 0.59
P2 - 10 6 0.737 0.09
SI 27 25 15 2.126 0.067
$2 47 25 21 2.057 0.119

Note: Bold values indicate higher measurements than the DENR environmental standard values

39

Table 2. (Continued) Environmental water parameters of sink samples between dry and
wet seasons and their standard values based on water quality guidelines (WQG)
classifications B and C of the DENR (Department of Environment and Natural

Resources, 2016).

Fecal

Coliform, Leet pH aes
MPN/100mL
WQG Class B 100 5 65-85 26-30
WQG Class C 200 5 65-9 25-31
Dry Mi 350,000 631 7.76 30.8
M2 1,200,00 2.01 733 293
Pl 35,000 6.38 7.16 25.6
P2 240,000 3.77 759 26.6
sl 120,000,000 2.63 725 207
82 28,000,000 1.06 745 31.9
Wet Mi 92,000 71 38 33.4
M2 9,200,000 4.03 7.44 31.4
PI 35,000 6.38 7.76 25.6
P2 540,000 2.21 731 31
sl 43,000,000 2.42 735 28
82 35,000,000 2.01 7.59 28.2

Note: MPN/100mL — Most Probable Number per 100 milliliters; Bold values indicate higher
measurements than the DENR environmental standard values

As shown in Table 2, BOD and fecal coliform in the river system in the dry and
wet seasons exceed the upper standard limit values of both classes B and C. TSS has
higher values compared to the standard upper limit values in the M1 and P1 during the
dry season and P1 during the wet season. Except for the M1, M2, and P2 in the dry
season, and M1 in the wet season, the phosphates in other rivers are above the upper
limit value which is 0.5 mg/L. It must also be noted that the M1 and P1 during the two
seasons are the only stations that pass the lower limit value of DO which is 5 mg/L. For
pH, only M1 in the wet season exceeds the upper limit value of pH 8.5 of Class B.

40

Furthermore, S2 in the dry season and M1 and M2 in the wet season exceed the standard

upper limit of the temperature of Class C which is 31°C, while M1 in the dry season

and P1 in both seasons did not meet the temperature range value of Class B which is

26-30°C. To test any significant differences in environmental water parameters between

the two seasons, the Wilcoxon rank-sum test was used. The results only show a

statistical difference in TSS between the dry and wet seasons (P = 0.0446), indicating

a higher water turbidity in the dry than in the wet season (Figure 8, Appendix Table

D6).

40.
30

20

10>

5

BOD, mg/L Color, TEU TSS, mg/L
° ° 25 er Cmca
300
20 fl
200-
15
100

eat

Phosphates, mg/L

Nitrates, mg/l.

aa

Fecal Coliform, MPN/100mL

a

0.4)

02+

00.

1.250408

7.500+07

2.500+07

0.000+00 +

pH

1.000+08-

5.006407 |

Temperature, °C

a

32

|__|

a

=

—

Season
EA by
3 wet

Figure 8. Mean values of environmental water parameters between dry and wet

seasons. Statistical significance between seasons was assessed by the Wilcoxon rank-

sum test and indicated by an asterisk (* represents P < 0.05).

“4

NMDS ordination plot in Figure 9 indicates that spatio-seasonal variations of
microbial eukaryotic communities are significantly associated with changes in water

quality parameters such as pH (P = 0.018) and temperature (P = 0.007, Appendix Table

C9).
+
Temperature pH
DO
Color
By ‘f Seasons
BO
g / by
2 y/ Wet
TSS
Phosphates
Fecal Goliform
Nitrates

NMDS1

Figure 9. NMDS plot of microbial eukaryotic communities in sinks (symbols) and
environmental water variables (segments). Parameters with asterisk/s have goodness of
fit at significant level through envfit function (* represents P < 0.05, ** represents P <
0.01), while the length of the segment shows the magnitude of influence on the
microbial communities.

Associations between environmental water parameters and the five dominant
phyla of the total microbial eukaryotic communities across two seasons were also tested
using Spearman’s rank correlation test. The results show a significant positive
correlation between parameters TSS (P = 0.00278) and pH (P = 0.0499) with Phylum

42

Excavata during the dry season (Figure 10, Appendix Table E3). Moreover, TSS (P =
0.0333) and phosphates (P = 0.0333) are positively and negatively correlated with
Phylum SAR, respectively, in the dry season (Figure 10, Appendix Table E5). During
the wet season, temperature was observed to have a significant positive association with
Phylum Amoebozoa (P = 0.0167), while fecal coliform (P = 0.0767) and phosphates
(P = 0.0244) have significant negative associations with Phylum Excavata (Figure 10,
Appendix Tables El and E3). A significant positive correlation is also observed
between DO and Phyla Excavata (P = 0.0149), Opisthokonta (P = 0.0167), and SAR
(P = 0.0333) during the wet season (Figure 10, Appendix Tables E3, E4, and ES).
Lastly, no significant correlations are displayed between the parameters and Phylum
Archaeplastida across the two seasons (P > 0.05, Figure 8, Appendix Table E2).
Overall, TSS exerts the most influence among other parameters as shown by its strong
relationship (significant rho values closer or equal to 1) with the top microbial

eukaryotic communities (Figure 10).

43

DO

TSS

pH

Temp

Color

BOD

FC

Dry Wet
* * *
02 031 0.65 0.31 0.54 0.37 0.71 089 0.94 0.88
*e *
048 065 1 065 0.88 || 0.14 -0.08 046 06 02
0.08 0.42 0.6 0.42 0.6 0.23 0.17 0.67 04 0.37
Ss Spearman's
0.114 0.11 0.81 0.11 0.49 0.31 0.25 0.66 0.6 0.48 tho 10
* 05
0.25 -0.08 -0.08 -0.08 -0.08 | 094 077 04 0.08 06
0.0
0.61 0.17 061 -0.17 -0.52 || 0.03 -0.18 0.28 0.06 -0.18 05
0.54 -0.08 -0.6 -0.08 -0.42 || -0.23 -0.52 -0.52 -0.23 -0.46
|
*
0.42 -0.2 -0.71 -02 -048 || -0.37 -0.54 086 -0.54 -0.65 |
* * |
0.77 0.65 -082 065 -088 | -06 -0.71 092 -06 -0.77 |
2dr ao 98 eee ssHOEAR 008 oot asll coe ro NE pe
pani" ccn2OF™ EX Opie pmmoP™ ccnaeP™ Ex!
Dominant Phyla
Figure 10. Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient values between environmental

water parameters and microbial eukaryotic communities of dominant phyla between

two seasons. Statistical significance between seasons was assessed by Wilcoxon rank-

sum test and indicated by asterisks (* represents P < 0.05, ** represents P < 0.01). Y-

axis labels: N = nitrates, Temp = temperature, FC = fecal coliform, P = phosphates.

The PAMARISAN River System has been observed with varying levels of

organic, inorganic, and fecal pollution between dry and wet seasons (Paronda et al.,

2019; Clemente, 2020; Nacario et al., 2022). The results suggest that the rivers were

significantly more turbid in the dry compared to the wet season as shown by the

significant differences in TSS levels. Although no statistical differences are found in

the case of other parameters, it must be noted that nitrates and fecal coliform counts are

44

higher in the dry season, and that the dissolved oxygen is lower in the dry than in the
wet season. High level of TSS indicates high concentrations of nutrients, chemicals,
and microorganisms suspended in the waters thereby increasing the turbidity. This may
also obstruct sunlight, which could decrease photosynthesis as well as the amount of
dissolved oxygen in a water body (Irvine et al., 2002; Manitcharoen et al., 2020). These
high nutrient and microbiological levels during the dry season can be explained by a
low dilution and degradation capability of the river system added to sediment’s high
nutrient release (Hideo et al., 2017). The upstream of Marikina and Pasig Rivers in both
seasons are consistent by having DO levels that pass the DENR standard, which is also
shown by their lower BOD, phosphate concentration, and fecal coliform counts
compared to other sites, such as the San Juan River. Despite that, BOD and fecal
coliform levels in all river stations are still high enough to be of concern. Moreover, the
river system was phosphate-enriched during the wet season, implying that abounding
suspended solids-containing phosphates are carried by rainwater into the rivers (Lian
et al., 2020). Among the parameters, only color and nitrates pass the DENR WQG
classes B and C across all stations. Low nitrate concentrations in the rivers can be
explained by the assimilation of nitrate by aquatic plants and other microorganisms for
their nutrient consumption (Moreno-Vivian & Flores, 2007; Aljawahiry et al., 2022).
In addition, the removal of particulates in surface waters through sedimentation added
with denitrification in sediments might have resulted in a more diluted color level in
the river system (Dong et al., 2000).

Significant associations are found between the total microbial eukaryotic
community composition and parameters temperature and pH in wet and dry seasons,

respectively. Temperature variations have considerable impact on microbial eukaryotic

45

activity and enzymes, where the optimal temperature promotes the fastest metabolism
and consequent growth rate. Lower than optimal temperatures cause slower metabolism
and a reduction in enzyme function, while higher temperatures can denature microbial
proteins (Norf & Weitere, 2010; Tarkington & Zufall, 2021). High temperature (above
30°C) is detected in the Marikina River during the wet season. Eukaryotic microbes
have varying optimum temperature levels, where some prefer high temperatures of
25°C and some with temperatures as low as 9°C (Wu et al., 2020). Thus, this increase
in temperature might have eliminated some of the eukaryotes living in the vicinity
thereby altering the community composition and causing a decrease in alpha diversity
in the wet season (Norf & Weitere, 2010). On the other hand, the high alpha diversity
in the dry season might be associated with the neutral to slightly alkaline pH range of
7.25-7.76 being consistently observed in most stations in the river system. It has been
reported that the majority of the microbial eukaryotes can greatly disseminate in neutral
pH environments (Amaral-Zettler, 2013).

Phyla Excavata and SAR are found to be positively correlated with TSS in the
dry season. Some species of Excavata and SAR release organic and inorganic
byproducts into their surroundings, thereby contributing to the increase in suspended
solids in the river system (Madoni, 2011). In addition, the high abundance of
phytoplankton during the dry season might have also contributed to the increase in TSS
(Buana et al., 2021). The observed significant positive correlation between pH and
Excavata during the dry season might be due to the removal of carbon dioxide during
photosynthesis by representative photosynthetic Excavata resulting in a slight increase
of pH in the river system (Zerveas et al., 2021). In addition, a few genera from Phylum

Excavata such as Bodo and Naegleria have also been shown to thrive in alkaline

46

environments (Amaral-Zettler, 2013; Johnson & Aguilera, 2019). High phosphate
concentration decreases the photosynthesis of microbial eukaryotes while increasing
the food availability for heterotrophs. However, phosphate levels in natural waters
affect more the biomass or size of these organisms rather than their abundance,
explaining the significant negative correlation of phosphates with communities under
phyla SAR and Excavata in dry and wet seasons, respectively (Akpor & Momba, 2010;
Wang et al., 2014).

Moreover, a significant negative association between Excavata and fecal
coliform counts is shown during the wet season, suggesting that communities of this
phylum are composed of bacterivores that preferentially feed on dispersed bacteria in
surface waters, thereby reducing the fecal coliform counts in the river system (Simpson
& Eglit, 2016). A significant positive correlation between Phylum Amoebozoa and
temperature suggests the adaptability of free-living amoebas in withstanding high-
temperature surface waters due to the formation of dormant cysts (Salazar-Ardiles et
al., 2022). A significant positive correlation is also observed between dissolved oxygen
and Phyla Excavata, Opisthokonta, and SAR. Microfungi of Opsithokonta are known
to utilize oxygen in order to decompose organic material, heterotrophic unicellular
eukaryotes also utilize dissolved oxygen for respiration, while algae and other
photosynthetic eukaryotes of Excavata and SAR produce oxygen as a byproduct of
photosynthesis (Belevich et al., 2021; Fenchel, 2014; Pietryczuk et al., 2018). Thus, the
positive association might be explained by the high DO production-to-consumption
ratio in the river system during the wet season, resulting in higher DO levels. Lastly,
the overall strong influence of TSS in the dominant microbial eukaryotic communities

suggests that the parameter can be carriers of compounds, nutrients, and even bacteria

47

in the aquatic systems, thereby providing a suitable environment for microbial
eukaryotic propagation and metabolism (Lu et al., 2023).
4.5. Indicator species across sink and source environments

The indicator species analysis reduces a large number of species to a small
number of interesting species that defines or characterizes a specific group. Uronemella
filificum, Paraphysomonas foraminifera, and Euplotes vannus are the top species
indicators in sink samples during the dry season (P < 0.05, Figure 11A, Appendix Table
F1), while Spumella sp., unclassified Chlorophyta, and uncultured Cryptomycota are
the top indicators during the wet season (P < 0.05, Figure 11A, Appendix Table F2).
For the source samples, microbial eukaryotic human and animal pathogens are mostly
observed as species indicators. Among them include Mucor circinelloides and Candida
albicans in chicken feces, Blastocystis sp. in cow and pig feces, Ancylostoma duodenale
in dog feces, and Prototheca spp. in sewage (P < 0.05, Figure 11B, Appendix Tables
F3, F4, F5, F6, F7, and F8). Other species indicators of source samples are pathogens
of fungi and insects (Lecanicillium sp.), intestinal commensals of invertebrate and
vertebrate hosts (Rhizomastix libera), rumen gut fungus (Neocallimastix frontalis),
amoeba (unclassified Gracilipodida), and yeast that causes spoilage
(Zygosaccharomyces rouxii).

Distinct indicator species are observed across sink and source samples. U.
filificum and E. vannus in the dry season displayed the dominance of ciliates as the top
indicator species in the PAMARISAN River System. U. _filificum mostly consume
sulfur-oxidizing bacteria and can be found in mats of these bacterial species, whereas
E. vannus are mostly attached to populations of bacteria and phytoplankton (Wilks &

Sleigh, 2008; Petroff et al., 2015). Ciliates are known bioindicators of saprobic

48

environments and thus, occurrence of bacterivorous ciliates indicate a high level of
organic pollution in freshwater environments due to increased anthropogenic
disturbances (Dias et al., 2021). This is consistent with the higher fecal coliform levels
observed in the dry than in the wet season. Moreover, the river system during the wet
season is dominated by algae as top indicator species. These include Spumella sp.,
which is an omnivorous golden algal stramenopile that prefer feeding on larger prey,
and unclassified species under Chlorophyta, which is a green algal photosynthetic
organism (Baudelet et al., 2017; Jeong et al., 2021). Both of these species are also
shown to be bioindicators for determining the level of trophicity in a water body which
is determined by nutrient concentration directly linked with water quality (Khuram et
al., 2021; Salo & Salovius-Laurén, 2022). Consistently, a higher nutrient concentration
in the form of phosphate was observed in the river system during the wet season.

The presence of M. circinelloides (fungus), Blastocystis sp. (anaerobic protist),
A, duodenale (intestinal hookworm parasite), and Prototheca spp. (chlorophyll-lacking
algae) being the top indicator species in various sources is an indication of possible
prevalence of the following infections: mucormycosis, blastocystosis, ancylostomiasis,
and protothecosis infections in chickens, cows and pigs, dogs, and humans, respectively
(Wawr: a <etal., 2013; Kim et al., 2017; Seguel & Gottdenker, 2017; Wang et al.,
2022). C. albicans, which is also an indicator species of chickens, is a part of gut
mycobiota in several hosts including humans and domestic and wild animals, and thus
can be used as a marker or indicator of fecal pollution in surface waters (Steffen et al.,
2023). Moreover, one of the cow’s top indicator species N. frontalis, is an obligate
anaerobic rumen fungus and has the potential to be used as a marker specific for

ruminant fecal pollution (Kim et al., 2017).

49

Uronemelia fiificum Paraphysomonas foraminifera Euplotes vannus

0000 con oo
§ (Gospmenap | unclassified Chlorphyta | mncultured Cryptomycota_|
| 1 -
beset a |—_|
Season &3 Dry 53 Wet
B Mucor circinelloides B8967 Lecanieillium Candida albicans
H a
Blastocystis sp. subtype 10 CA6 Neocallimastixtrontalis
S &
z a) ;
2 fal
3 Unclassified Gracilipodida Blastocystis sp. subtype 15 CA25 Zygosaccharomyces rouxll
2 ‘i
i g
a
Prototheca sp. EC-2017 Prototheca zopfil

3 Chicken & Dog & Pig

Source Samples 3 Cow Duck 3 Sewage

Figure 11. Indicator species analysis showing relative abundances of significant top
indicator species in sink (A) and source (B) samples.
4.6. Spatio-seasonal variations of source contributions to sink environments

The validation analysis using the FEAST program was conducted including taxa
with low abundances (<0.001%). The program predicted low percentages from chicken,
cow, dog, and pig fecal samples. Their contribution ratios are also slightly

underestimated across the replicates in the observed values compared to the original
50

DNA concentration ratios. On the other hand, correct prediction is observed in duck
and sewage samples (Table 3). The distinctiveness of sink and source communities as
shown by the NMDS plot implied also the good predictive performance of FEAST.

Table 3. Validation of source tracking analysis displaying the pooled sources in equal

DNA concentration ratios.

Chicken Cow Dog Duck Pig Sewage Unknown

Original DNA
concentration ratios 17 17 17 17 17 17 0
(%)
Rep 1 10.0 6.1 2.9 21.4 0.8 19.2 39.5
FEAST Rep2 45 87 160 267 3.6 33.2 73
estimates (%) nes 8042s «18.9«18.7 28.1
Mean 15S 6.4 77 18.3 77 23.7 25.0

The contribution of microbial eukaryotic contamination of the potential sources
to the PAMARISAN River System is compared between dry and wet seasons. In the
dry season, FEAST analyses display that the microbial eukaryotic communities from
the downstream stations have significantly higher proportions of sewage than those
from the upstream sites of the rivers (16.9% and 4.1% mean contributions for
downstream and upstream, respectively) (P < 0.05, Figure 12A, Appendix Table G1).
In addition, dog and pig fecal contributions are also higher in downstream compared to
upstream sites (0.2% and 0.1% of mean dog contributions and 0.02% and 0.01% of pig
for downstream and upstream, respectively) (P < 0.05, Figure 13, Appendix Table G1).
For the wet season, sewage contributions are highest in $1 (67.7%) and S2 (43.1%),
and then in Pasig River (11% and 8.8% for upstream and downstream, respectively),

and in Marikina River (2.2% and 8%) (Figure 12B, Appendix Table G1). Similarly,
51

downstream sites of the river system receive more significant contributions from duck,
cow, dog, pig, and chicken than those in upstream sites (0.5% and 0.1% of mean duck
contributions, 0.3% and 0.04% of cow, 0.2% and 0.03% of dog, 0.02% and 0.01% of
pig, and 0.03% and 0.003% of chicken for downstream and upstream, respectively) (P
<0.05, Figure 13, Appendix Table G1).

Among all sites in the dry season, P2 has the highest contribution from dogs
(0.419%), ducks (0.369%), and pigs (0.0408%), followed by the S1 (0.352%, 0.326%,
and 0.0433% of dog, duck, and pig contributions, respectively), and then M2 (0.0315%,
0.0321%, and 0.012%) (Figure 13, Appendix Table G1). On the other hand, the M2
receives the highest duck (0.82%), cow (0.716%), dog (0.308%), and chicken
(0.0409%) fecal contributions during the wet season, followed by the S2 (0.513%,
0.216%, 0.184%, and 0.036% of duck, cow, dog, and chicken contributions,
respectively) (Figure 13, Appendix Table G1). Moreover, a larger contribution of
unknown sources is found in the dry season (95.6% mean contribution) than in the wet
season (72.8%), especially for the upstream sites of the river system (Figure 12).
Although the contribution of sources is generally higher in the wet than in the dry
season, no significant differences in the percent contributions are found between the

two seasons (P > 0.05, Appendix Table D7).

52

Figure 12. FEAST evaluation showing contributions of potential sources across overall
microbial eukaryotic communities to different stations of the PAMARISAN River

System during the dry (A) and wet (B) seasons.

53

Dry Wet
| |
| |
15% \
|
= |
§ |
3 Duck
Fs 1.0% Deg
5 cow
8
= © 0
8 | Chicken
iS |
|
0.5% }
0.0% Inara paren CRRRN

MrooM2 PY P24 SR. Mt M2) Pt PZ OSH 82
River stations

Figure 13. FEAST evaluation showing contributions of potential fecal host sources
across overall microbial eukaryotic communities to different stations of the
PAMARISAN River System during the dry and wet seasons.

The FEAST analysis indicates that the communities under Phylum Amoebozoa
across the downstream sites of the PAMARISAN River System mainly originate from
sewage in the dry season (80%, 50%, and 1.72% for M2, P2, and S2, respectively),
whereas no contributions from all sources are displayed across the upstream stations of
the river (Figure 14A, Appendix Table G2). In contrast, upstream areas of the river
system receive significantly higher contributions from sewage than the downstream
areas during the wet season (56.4%, 31.3%, and 10% for M1, SI, and P1, respectively)
(P < 0.05, Figure 14B, Appendix Table G2). The high contribution of the communities
in Phylum Amoebozoa from cow (19.7% and 15.8% for M2 and S2, respectively), pig
(10.4% and 2.3%), dog (4.26% and 4.19), and chicken (5.03% and 2.73%) fecal

54

samples are observed in M2 and S2 during the wet season (Figure 14B, Appendix Table
G2). Despite the differences in host’s contributions between the two seasons, no
significant differences are found between them (P > 0.05, Appendix Table D8).

During the dry and wet seasons, the majority of the downstream sites in the river
system under Phylum Archaeplastida acquire higher sewage contributions compared to
upstream sites (18.5% and 7.35% mean percent contributions for downstream and
upstream, respectively) (P < 0.05, Figure 14, Appendix Table G3). A higher duck
proportion is also observed in the P2 during the wet season (3.47%), as well as chicken
(0.79%), dog (0.459%), and cow (0.151%) proportions (P < 0.05, Figure 14B,
Appendix Table G3). Communities under Phylum Excavata receive higher sewage
proportions across downstream stations (44.4% mean contribution) of the river system
than the upstream stations (4.84%) during the dry season (P < 0.05, Appendix Table
G3), whereas lower sewage contributions are displayed across the downstream (3.71%)
than upstream stations (40.4%) during the wet season (P < 0.05, Figure 14, Appendix
Table G4). Similarly, statistically significant differences between dry and wet seasons
in terms of source contributions to sinks are not observed across Phyla Archaeplastida
and Excavata (P > 0.05, Appendix Tables D9 and D10).

For Opisthokonta, the downstream sites of the river system receive a larger
fraction of sewage than the upstream sites during the dry season (22.5% and 8.3% mean
contributions for downstream and upstream, respectively) and wet season (29% and
10% for downstream and upstream, respectively) (P < 0.05, Figure 14, Appendix Table
G5). Opisthokonta from dogs, ducks, and cows are also higher downstream (1.1%, 1%,
0.4% mean contributions of dogs, ducks, and cows, respectively) compared to upstream

stations (0.4%, 0.3%, and 0.1%) of the river system during the dry season (P < 0.05,

55

Figure 14A, Appendix Table G5). In contrast, Opisthokonta signals from dogs and
ducks are significantly higher across upstream (1.1% and 1% mean contribution of
ducks and dogs, respectively) than downstream sites (0.9% and 0.8%) during the wet
season (P < 0.05, Appendix Table G5), while cow contributions are higher across
downstream (0.6%) than upstream (0.4%) stations (P < 0.05, Figure 14B, Appendix
Tables DI] and G5). The similarities in contribution patterns still display
nonsignificant differences in the source contributions between the two seasons (P >
0.05, Appendix Table D11).

Similarly, the SAR in the downstream sites of the river system during the two
seasons mainly originates from the sewage (31.1% and 10.2% mean contributions for
wet and dry seasons, respectively), where contributions are still significantly higher in
wet than in dry season (P < 0.05, Figure 14, Appendix Table G6). Small fractions of
SAR from ducks in the dry season are also shown in P2 and SI (1.27% and 1.01%),
respectively, as well as M2 in the wet season (1.82%) (Figure 14, Appendix Table G6).
Similar to other phyla, there are no significant differences between dry and wet seasons

across contributions of other sources to sinks (Appendix Table D12).

56

A |_Archaeplastida_| Opisthokonta

Percent Contribution (%)

B ‘Amoebozoa Archaeplastida Excavata

=

GISFIS SIGS

VERO ORBEA Ree
River stations

Figure 14. FEAST evaluation showing contributions of potential sources across five

dominant phyla communities to different stations of the PAMARISAN River System

during the dry (A) and wet (B) seasons.

57

Source contributions to sinks of ecologically important pathogens under Orders
Apicomplexa and Fungi are also determined. For Apicomplexa, the results demonstrate
that sewage contributions are higher in the downstream compared to upstream stations
of the river system during dry and wet seasons (30.3% and 6.35% mean contributions
during dry and 14.3% and 11.4% during wet for downstream and upstream sites,
respectively) (P < 0.05, Figure 15, Appendix Table G7). In addition, no other
contributions from identified host sources are shown except for sewage (Appendix
Table G7). During the wet season, a significant fraction of ducks (25.8%, P < 0.05) is
observed in M2, followed by sewage (4%) (Appendix Table G7). The S2 also acquires
5.3% of duck contributions, while S1 receives 6.6%, and 2.3% of cow and duck
contributions, respectively (Figure 15, Appendix Table G7).

For Fungi, sewage is found to be their major source across all sites during wet
(32% mean contribution) and dry (19%) seasons (Figure 15, Appendix Table G8). The
sewage contributions are shown to be significantly higher in downstream (30.6%) than
upstream stations (7.58%) during the dry season, while significantly higher in upstream
(34.3%) than downstream (297%) during the wet season (P < 0.05, Figure 14, Appendix
Table G8). A small fraction of ducks is also evident in P2 (1.08%) in the dry season,
whereas 0.8% of chicken and 0.7% of pig contributions across M2 and P2, respectively,
are significantly higher compared to other sites in the wet season. Both Orders
Apicomplexa and Fungi from all sources did not show any significant differences on
their contribution to sinks between dry and wet seasons (P > 0.05, Appendix Tables

D13 and D14).

58

Apicomplexa Apicomplexa Fungi Fungi
D Wet
eo ry Wet Dry
60%
z
§
§ Sewage
B 40% Dog
° 1) cow
8 Pig
8 Chicken
é

20%

EEE EES FEEL EE PS SPPO SPP POM
Vor ororo® sarah ak aral of or oF of of oo a gi eh oF oF 9%
PLE PL OVE EPH MLC VPM GeO MS

River stations

Figure 15. FEAST evaluation showing contributions of potential sources across
microbial eukaryotic pathogens under Order Apicomplexa and Fungi to different
stations of the PAMARISAN River System during the dry and wet seasons.

The validation results are consistent with the studies of Fuhrmeister et al. (2020)
and Chen et al. (2023) where different programs for source-tracking analysis show great
predictive performances, suggesting the good fitness of FEAST in discriminating
various source types. Aside from that, the observed distinctiveness of microbial
eukaryotic communities across the sink and source samples could also add to the
robustness of the source-tracking analysis. The potential sources of microbial
eukaryotes in the PAMARISAN River System did not show significant seasonal
variations. However, the contribution of sources, especially sewage, is consistently

observed to be higher in the wet than in the dry season. This is also in accordance with

59

the higher number of ASVs shared between sinks and sewage samples in the wet season
as shown in Appendix Figure HI. An explanation for this might be due to the
overflowing of sewage caused by the heavy precipitation during the wet season, thereby
receiving large microbiological quantities in the sink environments (Abraham, 2011;
Olds et al., 2018). Most microbial eukaryotes are also carriers of pathogenic bacteria,
and thus intense rainfall increases the possibility of waterborne pathogen transmission
in environmental waters (Olds et al., 2018).

Agricultural pollution is also observed to be a contributor to microbial
eukaryotic transmission in the river system due to the presence of small fractions of
ducks, cows, pigs, and chickens during the wet season. The cattle, chicken, swine, and
duck farms in Bulacan, Cavite, and Malabon City are located close to inland waters and
other land use types such as built-up, perennial crops, and annual crops (Appendix
Table I1). These inland waters are also connected to other channels that eventually lead
to the PAMARISAN River System (Appendix Table I1). Thus, there is a concern about
the transfer of fecal waste-containing pathogens from farms to the rivers especially
during the wet season. Precipitation increases the runoff, flow of groundwater, river
currents, and erosion along various channels during this season, thereby increasing the
transport of animal wastes into nearby environmental waters which might have resulted
from either contaminated irrigation water runoff or direct fecal discharge from farms
(Geeraert et al., 2015). Moreover, crop agriculture can also contribute to the increase in
contamination in the water bodies. If improperly handled, the use of manure fertilizers
alongside irrigation waters can potentially contaminate and introduce chemicals and
microorganisms in the rivers, thereby resulting in fecal contamination (Sabir et al.,

2021). Lastly, microbial contamination in the river system is further complicated by the

60

existence of built-up land use next to nearby livestock farms. The vegetation scarcity,
impermeable surfaces, and other human activities may also contribute to the increase
of surface runoff volume, thereby increasing also the chance of fecal pollution
transmission into the rivers (Schoonover & Lockaby, 2006).

The large proportions of unknown source contributions indicate that there are
still other environmental sources that might contribute to microbial eukaryotic
contamination including soils, sediments, agricultural wastewater, etc. (Gad et al.,
2022). The FEAST relies on databases or libraries for source-tracking, however, these
libraries cannot fully capture the diversity of microbial eukaryotic communities and
reflect all possible sources, thus resulting in a significant fraction of unknown
sequences (Brown, 2018). In addition, the distant proximity of animal farms based on
the data from the Geoportal Philippines (2020) as shown in Appendix Table I2 might
have also contributed to the minimal contributions of agricultural sources in the river
system resulting in a large proportion of unknown sources.

High signals of dominant phyla as well as pathogenic microbial eukaryotic groups from
sewage are observed in the downstream stations of the river system during the dry
season. The factors affecting the flow of water in the dry season are limited, which can
result in a consistent flow and low dilution capability, indicating the accumulating flows
of sewage contamination downstream (Mishra et al., 2019). Specifically, larger
fingerprints of Phylum Amoebozoa are observed in cows, pigs, dogs, and chickens
compared to other dominant phyla in the wet season. Amoebozoa comprises species
that can transform into dormant cyst structures capable of thriving in extreme
environmental conditions, suggesting their high dispersal capability (Salazar-Ardiles et

al., 2022). On the other hand, sewage is observed to be the sole contributor of Excavata

61

transmission to the river system in both seasons, indicating the dominance of Excavata
communities in human-derived sewage samples. Furthermore, SAR and Opisthokonta
footprints in livestock and dogs are observed during both seasons. SAR and
Opisthokonta include species that are known to be part of the mycobiota of different
livestock, domestic, and wild animals (Lavrinienko et al., 2021; Lv et al., 2023). Several
fungal species from Opisthokonta can also adapt in inclement environments due to their
ability to form spores which are important for their dispersal and survival (Chaudhary
et al., 2022; Gostinéar et al., 2022).

Apicomplexa comprises parasitic species that are economically and clinically
relevant due to human and animal diseases they cause (Votypka et al., 2016). Among
the sources, Apicomplexa communities in sewage are only detected in the river system
during the dry season, whereas a significant fraction of sewage, ducks, and cows are
observed during the wet season. A comparable pattern is also noted which demonstrated
higher shared Apicomplexa ASVs between sinks and sources in the wet than in the dry
season (Appendix Figure H2). The PAMARISAN River System, located in Metro
Manila, is positioned at lower elevations to areas with duck and cattle farming in
Bulacan and Cavite (Regmi, 2017). The duck and cattle farms in these provinces have
land use type combinations of built-up, grassland, and annual crop, and that inland
waters are consistently observed adjacent to these farms (Appendix Table I1). Thus,
feces and other pollutants deposited on urbanized surfaces and soils in built-up and
grassland areas can be picked up by rainwater runoff and transported into nearby water
channels (Alaoui et al., 2011; Zhang et al., 2018). Moreover, the manure from cattle
and duck farming operations may be applied to annual crops. Thus, these extra residues

can also be carried into nearby water bodies, eventually contaminating the rivers

62

(Hooda et al., 2000; Strokal et al., 2016). The proportions of sewage and ducks increase
from upstream to downstream, suggesting again the contribution of rainfall in carrying
domestic and agricultural fecal pollution in downstream parts of river waters (Manini
et al., 2022). In addition, the close proximity of sewage treatment plants in the
downstream stations of the rivers can also explain the high sewage contributions in
these areas (Appendix Table 12). Overall, the results indicate potential health hazards
of Apicomplexa for humans. However, more studies are needed to examine these

hazards in the PAMARISAN River System.

63

CHAPTER 5
CONCLUSION

The findings of the study suggest that the PAMARISAN River System
could present health risks for humans due to the presence of microbial
eukaryotic parasites which are possibly carried along with the potential sources.
Distinct microbial eukaryotic community patterns were observed between sink
and source environments enhancing the effectiveness of FEAST in
discriminating source contributions. The results also revealed that microbial
eukaryotes mainly originated from sewage, followed by ducks and cows, and
that higher contributions were observed during the wet compared to the dry
season, suggesting the impact of rainwater and sewage overflow on the presence
of microbial eukaryotic communities in the river waters. Moreover,
environmental parameters such as DO, TSS, pH, temperature, fecal coliform,
and phosphates were found to be major drivers affecting the composition of
selected dominant phyla. TSS and fecal coliform counts were higher in the dry
season, while the wet season showed higher phosphate concentration, implying
the presence of ciliates and microalgae as bioindicators of river pollution across
dry and wet seasons, respectively. Together, the study enables a more
comprehensive evaluation of the transmission dynamics of microbial
eukaryotes in a freshwater environment. Moreover, the results can provide
implications for the conservation and preservation of the river system through

creating effective strategies focused on managing potential sources.

CHAPTER 6
RECOMMENDATIONS

The findings of the study can be used as a baseline information to assess
microbial eukaryotic contamination in the PAMARISAN River System. Future
research can further utilize other host or environmental sources such as soils,
sediments, agricultural wastewater, sewage effluent, etc. to determine other
potential sources that contribute to microbial contamination in the river system.
An additional collection of water samples from either similar or different sites
(other tributaries or channels leading to the river system) in different periods or
sampling events is also recommended for a more comprehensive view of the
microbial eukaryotic communities, especially pathogens present in the waters.
Discussion with farm owners on best practices is also highly encouraged to
prevent further fecal contamination of the river system. Comparison with
antibiotic resistance gene database can also be done to further establish the
importance of One Health approach in the Philippines. Furthermore,
dissemination of the results of future studies to the monitoring and/or regulatory
agencies and the public is highly encouraged to continuously improve
management strategies and inform the stakeholders of any possible human and

animal health hazards.

REFERENCES

Abdalla, F., & Khalil, R. (2018). Potential effects of groundwater and surface water
contamination in an urban area, Qus City, Upper Egypt. Journal of African Earth
Sciences, 141, 164-178. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jafrearsci.2018.02.016

Abello, J. J. M., Malajacan, G. T., Labrador, K. L., Nacario, M. A. G., Galarion, L. H.,
Obusan, M. C. M., & Rivera, W. L. (2021). Library-independent source tracking
of fecal contamination in selected stations and tributaries of Laguna Lake,
Philippines. Journal of Water and Health, 19(5), 846-854.
https://doi.org/10.2166/wh.2021.058

Abraham, W.-R. (2011). Megacities as sources for pathogenic bacteria in rivers and
their fate downstream. International Journal of Microbiology, 2011, 1-13.
https://doi.org/10.1155/2011/798292

Ahmed, W. (2007). Limitations of library-dependent microbial source tracking
methods. Journal of Australian Water, 34(1), 96-101.

Akpor, O. B., & Momba, M. N. B. (2010). Relationship of protozoan biomass to
phosphate and nitrate removal from activated sludge mixed liquor. Biotechnology
Journal, 5(3), 304-313. https://doi.org/10.1002/biot.200900135

Alaoui, A., Caduff, U., Gerke, H. H., & Weingartner, R. (2011). Preferential flow
effects on infiltration and runoff in grassland and forest soils. Vadose Zone
Journal, 10(1), 367-377. https://doi.org/10.2136/vzj2010.0076

Aljawahiry, T., Hasoon, A., Imran, A., Abdulla, A., Al-Mualm, M., & Abbas, S. (2022).
Effectiveness of aquatic plants in reducing water nitrates. Journal of

Environmental Sciences, 20(5), 1031-1037.

66

Amaral-Zettler, L. A. (2013). Eukaryotic diversity at pH extremes. Frontiers in
Microbiology, 3. https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2012.00441

Anderson, M. J. (2006). Distance-based tests for homogeneity of multivariate
dispersions. Biometrics, 62(1), 245-253. _ https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1541-
0420.2005.00440.x

Angchuan, J., Khunnamwong, P., Wongpanit, K., Limtong, S., & Srisuk, N. (2021).
Yeasts associated with the small-intestinal contents and epithelium of Pon Yang
Kham (Charolais Crossbred) fattening beef cattle. Microorganisms, 9(7), 1444.
https://doi.org/10.3390/microorganisms907 1444

Ari, §., & Arikan, M. (2016). Next-generation sequencing: Advantages, disadvantages,
and future. Plant Omics: Trends and _ Applications, 109-135.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-3 19-31703-8_5

Azuma, S., Pagayao, N., Tanchuling, M. A. N., & Hibino, T. (2017). Sediment and
water quality in the Pasig River tributaries and creeks in the Philippines. Journal
of Japan Society of Civil Engineers, Ser. B3 (Ocean Engineering), 73(2), 1_929-
1_934. https://doi.org/10.2208/jscejoe.73.1_929

Bai, H., Shiota, T., Yoshizaki, S., Saito-Obata, M., Malbas, J. F. F., Lupisan, S. P.,
Oshitani, H., Takeda, N., Muramatsu, M., Wakita, T., Ishii, K., & Li, T.-C. (2019).
Detection of subgenotype IA and IIIA hepatitis A viruses in rivers flowing through
Metro Manila, the Philippines. Japanese Journal of Infectious Diseases, 72(1),
53-55. https://doi.org/10.7883/yoken.JJID.2018.148

Balinado, L., Bahia, S., Manzano, R., & Cuibillas, J. (2019). Perceptions on the water
quality of Marikina River of selected riverbank residents of Barangays Manggahan

and Santolan, Pasig City, Philippines. Asia Pacific Higher Education Research

67

Journal, 6(1).

Bar-On, Y. M., Phillips, R., & Milo, R. (2018). The biomass distribution on Earth.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 115(25), 6506-6511.
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas. 1711842115

Baran, Y., & Halperin, E. (2012). Joint analysis of multiple metagenomic samples.
PLoS Computational Biology, 8(2), e1002373.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi. 1002373

Basti, L., Endo, M., Segawa, S., Shumway, S. E., Tanaka, Y., & Nagai, S. (2015).
Prevalence and intensity of pathologies induced by the toxic dinoflagellate,
Heterocapsa circularisquama, in the Mediterranean mussel, Mytilus
galloprovincialis. Aquatic Toxicology, 163, 37-50.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aquatox.2015.03.012

Baudelet, P.-H., Ricochon, G., Linder, M., & Muniglia, L. (2017). A new insight into
cell walls of Chlorophyta. Algal Research, 25, 333-371.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.algal.2017.04.008

Bauza, V., Madadi, V., Ocharo, R. M., Nguyen, T. H., & Guest, J. S. (2019). Microbial
source tracking using 16S rRNA amplicon sequencing identifies evidence of
widespread contamination from young children’s feces in an urban slum of
Nairobi, Kenya. Environmental Science & Technology, 53(14), 8271-8281.
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.8b06583

Belevich, T. A., Milyutina, I. A., & Troitsky, A. V. (2021). Seasonal variability of
photosynthetic microbial eukaryotes (<3 ym) in the Kara Sea revealed by 18S
rDNA metabarcoding of sediment trap fluxes. Plants, 10(11), 2394.

https://doi.org/10.3390/plants 10112394

68

Bentley, D. R., Balasubramanian, S., Swerdlow, H. P., Smith, G. P., Milton, J., Brown,
C.G., Hall, K. P., Evers, D. J., Barnes, C. L., Bignell, H. R., Boutell, J. M., Bryant,
J., Carter, R. J., Keira Cheetham, R., Cox, A. J., Ellis, D. J., Flatbush, M. R.,
Gormley, N. A., Humphray, S. J., ... Smith, A. J. (2008). Accurate whole human
genome sequencing using reversible terminator chemistry. Nature, 456(7218), 53—
59. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature07517

Bernhard, A. E., & Field, K. G. (2000). A PCR assay to discriminate human and
ruminant feces on the basis of host differences in Bacteroides-Prevotella genes
encoding 16S rRNA. Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 66(10), 4571—
4574. https://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.66.10.4571-4574.2000

Bhattacharjee, H., & Rosen, B. (2007). Arsenic Metabolism in Prokaryotic and
Eukaryotic Microbes. (D. H. Nies & S. Silver (eds.); Vol. 6). Springer.

Bik, H. M., Sung, W., De Ley, P., Baldwin, J. G., Sharma, J., Rocha-Olivares, A., &
Thomas, W. K. (2012). Metagenetic community analysis of microbial eukaryotes
illuminates biogeographic patterns in deep-sea and shallow water sediments.
Molecular Ecology, 21(5), 1048-1059. _ https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-
294X.2011.05297.x

Bjorbekmo, M. F. M., Evenstad, A., Roseg, L. L., Krabberad, A. K., & Logares, R.
(2020). The planktonic protist interactome: Where do we stand after a century of
research? The ISME Journal, 14(2), 544-559. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41396-
019-0542-5

Brown, C. (2018). Evaluation of the use and limitations of a community-based
microbial source tracking method [Doctoral dissertation, University of

Minnesota]. University Digital Conservancy,

69

https://hdl.handle.net/11299/216410.

Buana, S., Tambaru, R., Selamat, M. B., Lanuru, M., & Massinai, A. (2021). The role
of salinity and total suspended solids (TSS) to abundance and structure of
phytoplankton communities in estuary Saddang Pinrang. JOP Conference Series:
Earth and Environmental Science, 860(1), 012081. https://doi.org/10.1088/1755-
1315/860/1/012081

Burgess, L., & Bryden, W. (2012). Fusarium: A ubiquitous fungus of global
significance. Microbiology Australia, 33(1), 22.
https://doi.org/10.1071/MA12022

Burkholder, J. M. (1998). Implications of harmful microalgae and heterotrophic
dinoflagellates in management of sustainable marine fisheries. Ecological
Applications, 8(1), $37. https://doi.org/10.2307/2641362

Caceres, M. De, & Legendre, P. (2009). Associations between species and groups of
sites: Indices and statistical inference. Ecology, 90(12), 3566-3574.
https://doi.org/10.1890/08-1823.1

Callahan, B. J., McMurdie, P. J., Rosen, M. J., Han, A. W., Johnson, A. J. A., &
Holmes, S. P. (2016). DADA2: High-resolution sample inference from Illumina
amplicon data. Nature Methods, 13(7), 581-583.
https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.3869

Cardenas, E., & Tiedje, J. M. (2008). New tools for discovering and characterizing
microbial diversity. Current Opinion in Biotechnology, 19(6), 544-549.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.copbio.2008.10.010

Carson, C. A., Christiansen, J. M., Yampara-Iquise, H., Benson, V. W., Baffaut, C.,

Davis, J. V., Broz, R. R., Kurtz, W. B., Rogers, W. M., & Fales, W. H. (2005).

70

Specificity of a Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron marker for human feces. Applied
and Environmental Microbiology, 71(8), 4945-4949.
https://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.71.8.4945-4949.2005

Castro, A. E., & Obusan, M. C. M. (2023). Microbial quality and emerging pollutants
in freshwater systems of Mega Manila, Philippines: A scoping review. Urban
Water Journal, 20(6), 639-651. https://doi.org/10.1080/1573062X.2023.2209559

Chaudhary, V. B., Aguilar-Trigueros, C. A., Mansour, I., & Rillig, M. C. (2022). Fungal
dispersal across spatial scales. Annual Review of Ecology, Evolution, and
Systematics, 53(1), 69-85. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-ecolsys-012622-
021604

Chen, J., Chen, H., Liu, C., Huan, H., & Teng, Y. (2023). Evaluation of FEAST for
metagenomics-based source tracking of antibiotic resistance genes. Journal of
Hazardous Materials, 442, 130116.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2022.130116

Chen, T., Xiao, J., Liu, Y., Song, S., & Li, C. (2019). Distribution and genetic diversity
of the parasitic dinoflagellate Amoebophrya in coastal waters of China. Harmful
Algae, 89, 101633. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.hal.2019.101633

Cheung, M. K., Au, C. H., Chu, K. H., Kwan, H. S., & Wong, C. K. (2010).
Composition and genetic diversity of picoeukaryotes in subtropical coastal waters
as revealed by 454 pyrosequencing. The ISME Journal, 4(8), 1053-1059.
https://doi.org/10.1038/ismej.2010.26

Clemente, E. D. (2020). Evaluating the water quality contribution of Estero de Paco to
Pasig River and Manila Bay, Philippines. E3S Web of Conferences, 148, 07010.

https://doi.org/10.1051/e3sconf/202014807010

71

CNN Philippines Staff. (2023). SMC San Juan River cleanup: Over 90,000 MT of silt,
solid waste removed. Https://Www.Cnnphilippines.Com/News/2023/3/3/Smc-
River-Cleanup-San-Juan.Html.

Corre, P., Abadilla, M. R. C. S., Arnaldo, M. N. L., Irlanda, M. T. S., Mariano, A. C.
P., Dogma, I. J. J., & Papa, R. D. (2020). Vorticella and Colacium as epibionts of
copepods in Pasig River, Philippines. Philippine Journal of Systematic Biology,
14(1). https://doi.org/10.26757/pjsb2020a14008

Dawson, D. (2005). Foodborne protozoan parasites. International Journal of Food
Microbiology, 103(2), 207-227.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2004.12.032

del Campo, J., Mallo, D., Massana, R., de Vargas, C., Richards, T. A., & Ruiz-Trillo,
I, (2015). Diversity and distribution of unicellular opisthokonts along the
European coast analysed using high-throughput sequencing. Environmental
Microbiology, 17(9), 3195-3207. https://doi.org/10.1111/1462-2920.12759

dela Pefia, L. B. R. O., Labrador, K. L., Nacario, M. A. G., Bolo, N. R., & Rivera, W.
L. (2021). Microbial source tracking of fecal contamination in Laguna Lake,
Philippines using the library-dependent method, rep-PCR. Journal of Water and
Health, 19(5), 762-774. https://doi.org/10.2166/wh.2021.119

dela Pefia, L. B. R. O., Vejano, M. R. A., & Rivera, W. L. (2021). Molecular
surveillance of Cryptosporidium spp. for microbial source tracking of fecal
contamination in Laguna Lake, Philippines. Journal of Water and Health, 19(3),
534-544. https://doi.org/10.2166/wh.2021.059

DENR-EMB. (2021). EMB Annual Narrative Report 2021. Https://Emb.Gov.Ph/Wp-

Content/Uploads/2022/08/F INAL-EMB-ANNUAL-NARRATIVE-REPORT-

72

FOR-CY-2021.Pdf.

Deocaris, C. C., Allosada, J. O., Ardiente, L. T., Bitang, L. G. G., Dulohan, C. L.,
Lapuz, J. K. I., Padilla, L. M., Ramos, V. P., & Padolina, J. B. P. (2019).
Occurrence of microplastic fragments in the Pasig River. H2Open Journal, 2(1),
92-100. https://doi.org/10.2166/h20j.2019.001

Department of Environment and Natural Resources. (2016). 2016 Water Quality
Guidelines (WQG) and General Effluent Standards (GES) of 2016.
Http://Faolex. Fao. Org/Docs/Pdf/Phi201041.Pdf (Accessed 11 September 2023).

Dias, R. J. P., de Souza, P. M., Rossi, M. F., Wieloch, A. H., da Silva-Neto, I. D., &
D’Agosto, M. (2021). Ciliates as bioindicators of water quality: A case study in
the neotropical region and evidence of phylogenetic signals (18S-rDNA).
Environmental Pollution, 268, 115760.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.2020.115760

Dong, L., Thornion, D., Nedwell, D., & Underwood, G. (2000). Denitrification in
sediments of the River Colne estuary, England. Marine Ecology Progress Series,
203, 109-122.

Dunthorn, M., Klier, J., Bunge, J., & Stoeck, T. (2012). Comparing the hyper-variable
V4 and V9 regions of the small subunit <scp>rDNA</scp> for assessment of
ciliate environmental diversity. Journal of Eukaryotic Microbiology, 59(2), 185-
187. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1550-7408.201 1.00602.x

Duran, M., Haznedaroglu, B. Z., & Zitomer, D. H. (2006). Microbial source tracking
using host specific FAME profiles of fecal coliforms. Water Research, 40(1), 67—
74, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2005.10.019

Duret, M. T., Pachiadaki, M. G., Stewart, F. J., Sarode, N., Christaki, U., Monchy, S

"9

73

Srivastava, A., & Edgcomb, V. P. (2015). Size-fractionated diversity of eukaryotic
microbial communities in the Eastern Tropical North Pacific oxygen minimum
zone. FEMS Microbiology Ecology, 91(5). https://doi.org/10.1093/femsec/fiv037

Esch, K. J., & Petersen, C. A. (2013). Transmission and epidemiology of zoonotic
protozoal diseases of companion animals. Clinical Microbiology Reviews, 26(1),
58-85. https://doi.org/10.1128/CMR.00067-12

Escoto, J. E., Blanco, A. C., Argamosa, R. J., & Medina, J. M. (2021). Pasig River
water quality estimation using an empirical ordinary least squares regression
model of Sentinel-2 Satellite. The International Archives of the Photogrammetry,
Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, XLVI-4/W6-, 161-168.
https://doi.org/10.5194/isprs-archives-XL VI-4-W6-2021-161-2021

Farnleitner, A. H., Ryzinska-Paier, G., Reischer, G. H., Burtscher, M. M., Knetsch, S.,
Kirschner, A. K. T., Dirnbéck, T., Kuschnig, G., Mach, R. L., & Sommer, R.
(2010). Escherichia coli and enterococci are sensitive and reliable indicators for
human, livestock and wildlife faecal pollution in alpine mountainous water
resources. Journal of Applied Microbiology, no-no.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2672.2010.04788.x

Fayer, R., & Trout, J. (2005). Zoonotic Protists in the Marine Environment (S. Belkin
& R. R. Colwell (eds.)). Springer.

Fenchel, T. (2014). Respiration in heterotrophic unicellular eukaryotic organisms.
Protist, 165(4), 485-492. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.protis.2014.05.006

Field, K. G., Chern, E. C., Dick, L. K., Fuhrman, J., Griffith, J., Holden, P. A.,
LaMontagne, M. G., Olson, B., & Simonich, M. T. (2003). A comparative study

of culture-independent, library-independent genotypic methods of fecal source

74

tracking. Journal of Water and Health, 1(4), 181-194.
https://doi.org/10.2166/wh.2003.0020

Fuhrmeister, E. R., Ercumen, A., Grembi, J. A., Islam, M., Pickering, A. J., & Nelson,
K. L. (2020). Shared bacterial communities between soil, stored drinking water,
and hands in rural Bangladeshi households. Water Research X, 9, 100056.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wroa.2020.100056

Gad, M., Hou, L., Cao, M., Adyari, B., Zhang, L., Qin, D., Yu, C.-P., Sun, Q., & Hu,
A. (2022). Tracking microeukaryotic footprint in a peri-urban watershed, China
through machine-learning approaches. Science of The Total Environment, 806,
150401. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2021.150401

Garcia, B. C. B., Dimasupil, M. A. Z., Vital, P. G., Widmer, K. W., & Rivera, W. L.
(2015). Fecal contamination in irrigation water and microbial quality of vegetable
primary production in urban farms of Metro Manila, Philippines. Journal of
Environmental Science and Health, Part B, 50(10), 734-743.
https://doi.org/10.1080/03601234.2015.1048107

Geeraert, N., Omengo, F. O., Tamooh, F., Paron, P., Bouillon, S., & Govers, G. (2015).
Sediment yield of the lower Tana River, Kenya, is insensitive to dam construction:
sediment mobilization processes in a semi-arid tropical river system. Earth
Surface Processes and Landforms, 40(13), 1827-1838.
https://doi.org/10.1002/esp.3763

Gehlenborg, N. (2019). UpSetR: A more scalable alternative to venn and euler diagrams
for visualizing intersecting sets. R Package Version 1.4.0. Https://CRAN.R-
Project.Org/Package=UpSetR.

Geoportal Philippines. (2020). Geoportal Philippines: Land use map.

75

Https://Geoportal.Gov.Ph/.

Gerace, E., Presti, V. D. M. Lo, & Biondo, C. (2019). Cryptosporidium infection:
Epidemiology, pathogenesis, and differential diagnosis. European Journal of
Microbiology and Immunology, 94), 119-123.
https://doi.org/10.1556/1886.2019.00019

Gerba, C. P. (2015). Environmentally transmitted pathogens. In Environmental
Microbiology (pp. 509-550). Elsevier. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-
394626-3.00022-3

Ghanbari, M., Kneifel, W., & Domig, K. J. (2015). A new view of the fish gut
microbiome: Advances from next-generation sequencing. Aquaculture, 448, 464—
475. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aquaculture.2015.06.033

Gilbert, J. A., & Dupont, C. L. (2011). Microbial metagenomics: Beyond the genome.
Annual Review of Marine Science, 3(1), 347-371.
https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-marine-120709-142811

Gorme, J. B., Maniquiz, M. C., Song, P., & Kim, L.-H. (2010). The water quality of the
Pasig River in the city of Manila, Philippines: Current Status, management and
future recovery. Environmental Engineering Research, 15(3), 173-179.
https://doi.org/10.4491/eer.2010.15.3.173

Gostinéar, C., Zalar, P., & Gunde-Cimerman, N. (2022). No need for speed: Slow
development of fungi in extreme environments. Fungal Biology Reviews, 39, 1—
14. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.for.2021.11.002

Guizetti, J., & Frischknecht, F. (2021). Apicomplexans: A conoid ring unites them all.
PLOS Biology, 19(3), 3001105. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.3001 105

Guo, S., Shi, X., Luo, X., & Yang, H. (2020). River water intrusion as a source of inflow

76

into the sanitary sewer system. Water Science and Technology, 82(11), 2472-—
2481. https://doi.org/10.2166/wst.2020.516

Guzman, J. P. M. D., De las Alas, T. P. L., Lucban, M. C., & Sevilla, C. E. C. (2020).
Green tea (Camellia sinensis) extract inhibits biofilm formation in acyl
homoserine lactone-producing, antibiotic-resistant Morganella morganii isolated
from Pasig River, Philippines. Heliyon, 6(10), €05284.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j-heliyon.2020.e05284

Harwood, V. J., Brownell, M., Wang, S., Lepo, J., Ellender, R. D., Ajidahun, A.,
Hellein, K. N., Kennedy, E., Ye, X., & Flood, C. (2009). Validation and field
testing of library-independent microbial source tracking methods in the Gulf of
Mexico. Water Research, 43(19), 4812-4819.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2009.06.029

Harwood, V. J., Staley, C., Badgley, B. D., Borges, K., & Korajkic, A. (2014).
Microbial source tracking markers for detection of fecal contamination in
environmental waters: Relationships between pathogens and human health
outcomes. FEMS Microbiology Reviews, 38(1), 1+40.
https://doi.org/10.1111/1574-6976.12031

Harwood, V. J., Wiggins, B., Hagedorn, C., Ellender, R. D., Gooch, J., Kern, J.,
Samadpour, M., Chapman, A. C. H., Robinson, B. J., & Thompson, B. C. (2003).
Phenotypic library-based microbial source tracking methods: Efficacy in the
California collaborative study. Journal of Water and Health, 1(4), 153-166.

Hert, D. G., Fredlake, C. P., & Barron, A. E. (2008). Advantages and limitations of
next-generation sequencing technologies: A comparison of electrophoresis and

non-electrophoresis methods. ELECTROPHORESIS, 29(23), 4618-4626.

77

https://doi.org/10.1002/elps.200800456

Hewitt, K. M., Mannino, F. L., Gonzalez, A., Chase, J. H., Caporaso, J. G., Knight, R.,
& Kelley, S. T. (2013). Bacterial diversity in two neonatal intensive care units
(NICUs). PLoS ONE, 8(1), e54703. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0054703

Hideo, O., Shuichi, E., Toshiyuki, I., Yasuaki, O., & Shinji, T. (2017). Seasonal
changes in water quality as affected by water level fluctuations in Lake Tonle Sap,
Cambodia. Geographical Review of Japan Series B, 90(2), 53-65.
https://doi.org/10.4157/geogrevjapanb.90.53

Hirai, J., Nagai, S., & Hidaka, K. (2017). Evaluation of metagenetic community
analysis of planktonic copepods using Illumina MiSeq: Comparisons with
morphological classification and metagenetic analysis using Roche 454. PLOS
ONE, 12(7), 0181452. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0181452

Hooda, P. S., Edwards, A. C., Anderson, H. A., & Miller, A. (2000). A review of water
quality concerns in livestock farming areas. Science of The Total Environment,
250(1-3), 143-167. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0048-9697(00)00373-9

Hugenholtz, P., & Tyson, G. W. (2008). Metagenomics. Nature, 455(7212), 481-483.
https://doi.org/10.1038/455481a

Hundesa, A., Bofill-Mas, S., Maluquer de Motes, C., Rodriguez-Manzano, J., Bach, A.,
Casas, M., & Girones, R. (2010). Development of a quantitative PCR assay for the
quantitation of bovine polyomavirus as a microbial source-tracking tool. Journal
of Virological Methods, 163(2), 385-389.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jviromet.2009.10.029

Irvine, K., Somogye, E., & Pettibone, G. (2002). Turbidity, suspended solids, and

bacteria relationships in the Buffalo River Watershed. Middle States Geographer,

78

35.

Jeong, J.-Y., Park, H.-D., Lee, K.-H., Weon, H.-Y., & Ka, J.-O. (2011). Microbial
community analysis and identification of alternative host-specific fecal indicators
in fecal and river water samples using pyrosequencing. The Journal of
Microbiology, 49(4), 585-594. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12275-01 1-0530-6

Jeong, M., Kim, J. I., Nam, S. W., & Shin, W. (2021). Molecular phylogeny and
taxonomy of the Genus Spumella (Chrysophyceae) based on morphological and
molecular evidence. Frontiers in Plant Science, 12.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.202 1.758067

Johnson, D. B., & Aguilera, A. (2019). Extremophiles and acidic environments. In
Reference Module in Life Sciences. Elsevier. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-
809633-8.90687-3

Kamp, A., Hogslund, S., Risgaard-Petersen, N., & Stief, P. (2015). Nitrate storage and
dissimilatory nitrate reduction by eukaryotic microbes. Frontiers in Microbiology,
6. https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2015.01492

Keeling, P. J. (2019). Combining morphology, behaviour and genomics to understand
the evolution and ecology of microbial eukaryotes. Philosophical Transactions of
the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 374(1786), 20190085.
https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2019.0085

Khuram, I., Ahmad, N., Solak, C. N., & Barinova, S. (2021). Assessment of water
quality by bioindication of algae and cyanobacteria in the Peshawar Valley,
Pakistan. Turkish Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences, 22(3).
https://doi.org/10.4194/TRJFAS 19805

Kim, M., Park, T., & Yu, Z. (2017). Metagenomic investigation of gastrointestinal

79

microbiome in cattle. Asian-Australasian Journal of Animal Sciences, 30(11),
1515-1528. https://doi.org/10.5713/ajas.17.0544

Kircher, M., & Kelso, J. (2010). High-throughput DNA sequencing - concepts and
limitations. BioEssays, 32(6), 524-536. https://doi.org/10.1002/bies.200900181

Knights, D., Kuczynski, J., Charlson, E. S., Zaneveld, J., Mozer, M. C., Collman, R.
G., Bushman, F. D., Knight, R., & Kelley, S. T. (2011). Bayesian community-wide
culture-independent microbial source tracking. Nature Methods, 8(9), 761-763.
https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.1650

Ko, H. Y., Cho, K., Park, S., Kim, J. H., Kang, J.-H., Jeong, Y. S., Choi, J. D., Sin, Y.,
Lee, C., & Ko, G. (2018). Host-specific Bacteroides markers-based microbial
source tracking in aquaculture areas. Microbes and Environments, 33(2), 151-161.
https://doi.org/10.1264/jsme2.ME17166

Labana, R., Onichandran, S., Kumar, T., & Salibay, C. (2016). Surveillance of intestinal
protozoans and multi-drug resistant bacteria from various water samples from the
Philippines. Journal of Microbial & Biochemical Technology, 8(2).

Labrador, K. L., Nacario, M. A. G., Malajacan, G. T., Abello, J. J. M., Galarion, L. H.,
Rensing, C., & Rivera, W. L. (2020). Selecting rep-PCR markers to source track
fecal contamination in Laguna Lake, Philippines. Journal of Water and Health,
18(1), 19-29. https://doi.org/10.2166/wh.2019.042

Lavrinienko, A., Scholier, T., Bates, S. T., Miller, A. N., & Watts, P. C. (2021).
Defining gut mycobiota for wild animals: A need for caution in assigning authentic
resident fungal taxa. Animal Microbiome, 3(1), 75.
https://doi.org/10.1186/s42523-021-00134-z

Lazo, M., Nieto, K., Rayel, M. F., Sto. Domingo, D., Vergara, M. A., & Papa, R. D.

80

(2009). Composition, abundance and distribution of rotifers in the Pasig River,
Philippines. The Philippine Scientist, 46.

Leclerc, H., Schwartzbrod, L., & Dei-Cas, E. (2002). Microbial agents associated with
waterborne diseases. Critical Reviews in Microbiology, 28(4), 371-409.
https://doi.org/10.1080/1040-84029 1046768

Lee, J. E., Lee, S., Sung, J., & Ko, G. (2011). Analysis of human and animal fecal
microbiota for microbial source tracking. The ISME Journal, 5(2), 362-365.
https://doi.org/10.1038/ismej.2010.120

Lepak, R. F., Hoffman, J. C., Janssen, S. E., Krabbenhoft, D. P., Ogorek, J. M., DeWild,
J. F., Tate, M. T., Babiarz, C. L., Yin, R., Murphy, E. W., Engstrom, D. R., &
Hurley, J. P. (2019). Mercury source changes and food web shifts alter
contamination signatures of predatory fish from Lake Michigan. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences, 116(47), 23600-23608.
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas. 1907484116

Lepere, C., Demura, M., Kawachi, M., Romac, S., Probert, I., & Vaulot, D. (2011).
Whole-genome amplification (WGA) of marine photosynthetic eukaryote
populations. FEMS Microbiology Ecology, 76(3), 513-523.
https://doi.org/10.1111/).1574-6941.2011.01072.x

Li, J. Z., Chapman, B., Charlebois, P., Hofmann, O., Weiner, B., Porter, A. J., Samuel,
R., Vardhanabhuti, S., Zheng, L., Eron, J., Taiwo, B., Zody, M. C., Henn, M. R.,
Kuritzkes, D. R., & Hide, W. (2014). Comparison of Illumina and 454 Deep
Sequencing in participants failing Raltegravir-based antiretroviral therapy. PLoS
ONE, 9(3), €90485. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0090485

Lian, X.-Q., Zhu, G.-W., Yang, W.-B., Zhu, M.-Y., & Xu, H. (2020). Effect of heavy

81

rainfall on nitrogen and phosphorus concentrations in rivers at river-net plain.
Huan Jing Ke Xue, 41(11), 4970-4980.
https://doi.org/10.13227/j.hjkx.202003 183

Liang, H., Yu, Z., Wang, B., Ndayisenga, F., Liu, R., Zhang, H., & Wu, G. (2021).
Synergistic application of molecular markers and community-based microbial
source tracking methods for identification of fecal pollution in river water during
dry and wet seasons. Frontiers in Microbiology, 12.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.202 1.660368

Liu, L., Li, Y., Li, S., Hu, N., He, Y., Pong, R., Lin, D., Lu, L., & Law, M. (2012).
Comparison of next-generation sequencing systems. Journal of Biomedicine and
Biotechnology, 2012, \-11. https://doi.org/10.1155/2012/251364

Logrieco, A., Bottalico, A., Mulé, G., Moretti, A., & Perrone, G. (2003). Epidemiology
of toxigenic fungi and their associated mycotoxins for some Mediterranean crops
(X. Xu, J. A. Bailey, & B. M. Cooke (eds.)). Springer.

Looby, C. I., & Treseder, K. K. (2018). Shifts in soil fungi and extracellular enzyme
activity with simulated climate change in a tropical montane cloud forest. Soil
Biology and Biochemistry, 117, 87-96.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.soilbio.2017.11.014

Lu, L., Zhao, D., Li, Z., & Fernandez, L. D. (2023). Editorial: Microbial diversity and
ecosystem functioning in fragmented rivers worldwide. Frontiers in
Microbiology, 14. https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2023.1253190

Luo, C., Tsementzi, D., Kyrpides, N., Read, T., & Konstantinidis, K. T. (2012).
Correction: Direct comparisons of Illumina vs. Roche 454 sequencing

technologies on the same microbial community DNA sample. PLoS ONE, 7(3).

82

https://doi.org/10.1371/annotation/64ba358f-a483-46c2-b224-eaa5b9a33939

Luo, Y., Li, J., Zhou, H., Yu, B., He, J., Wu, A., Huang, Z., Zheng, P., Mao, X., Yu, J.,
Li, H., Wang, H., Wang, Q., Yan, H., & Chen, D. (2021). The nutritional
significance of intestinal fungi: Alteration of dietary carbohydrate composition
triggers colonic fungal community shifts in a pig model. Applied and
Environmental Microbiology, 87(10). https://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.00038-21

Lv, Q.-B., Meng, J.-X., Ma, H., Liu, R., Qin, Y., Qin, Y.-F., Geng, H.-L., Ni, H.-B., &
Zhang, X.-X. (2023). Description of gut mycobiota composition and diversity of
Caprinae animals. Microbiology Spectrum, 11(1).
https://doi.org/10.1128/spectrum.02424-22

Maccaferri, S., Biagi, E., & Brigidi, P. (2011). Metagenomics: Key to human gut
microbiota. Digestive Diseases, 296), 525-530.
https://doi.org/10.1159/000332966

Madoni, P. (2011). Protozoa in wastewater treatment processes: A minireview. Italian
Journal of Zoology, 78(1), 3-11. https://doi.org/10.1080/11250000903373797

Malajacan, G. T., Nacario, M. A. G., Obusan, M. C. M., & Rivera, W. L. (2023). Host-
associated Bacteroides 16S rDNA-based markers for source tracking of fecal
pollution in Laguna Lake, Philippines. Microorganisms, 11(5), 1142.
https://doi.org/10.3390/microorganisms] 1051142

Manini, E., Baldrighi, E., Ricci, F., Grilli, F., Giovannelli, D., Intoccia, M., Casabianca,
S., Capellacci, S., Marinchel, N., Penna, P., Moro, F., Campanelli, A., Cordone,
A., Correggia, M., Bastoni, D., Bolognini, L., Marini, M., & Penna, A. (2022).
Assessment of spatio-temporal variability of faecal pollution along coastal waters

during and after rainfall events. Water, 14(3), 502.

83

https://doi.org/10.3390/w14030502

Manitcharoen, N., Pimpunchat, B., & Sattayatham, P. (2020). Water quality analysis
for the depletion of dissolved oxygen due to exponentially increasing form of
pollution sources. Journal of Applied Mathematics, 2020, 1-7.
https://doi.org/10.1155/2020/9085981

Martin, M. (2015). Cutadapt removes adapter sequences from high-throughput
sequencing reads. Retrieved from EMBnet.Journal,
Https://Journal.Embnet.Org/Index. Php/Embnetjournal/Article/View/200/458.

Massana, R., & Pedrdés-Alid, C. (2008). Unveiling new microbial eukaryotes in the
surface ocean. Current Opinion in Microbiology, 11(3), 213-218.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mib.2008.04.004

Matsuyama, Y. (2012). Impacts of the harmful dinoflagellate Heterocapsa
circularisquama bloom on shellfish aquaculture in Japan and some experimental
studies on invertebrates. Harmful Algae, 14, 144-155.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.hal.2011.10.019

McGrath, C. L., & Katz, L. A. (2004). Genome diversity in microbial eukaryotes.
Trends in Ecology & Evolution, 19(1), 32-38.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tree.2003.10.007

McLain, J. E. T., Ryu, H., Kabiri-Badr, L., Rock, C. M., & Abbaszadegan, M. (2009).
Lack of specificity for PCR assays targeting human Bacteroides 16S rRNA gene:
Cross-amplification with fish feces. FEMS Microbiology Letters, 299(1), 38-43.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1574-6968.2009.01745.x

McLellan, S. L., Huse, S. M., Mueller-Spitz, S. R., Andreishcheva, E. N., & Sogin, M.

L. (2010). Diversity and population structure of sewage-derived microorganisms

84

in wastewater treatment plant influent. Environmental Microbiology, 12(2), 378—
392. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1462-2920.2009.02075.x

Mishra, S., Kneis, D., Berendonk, T. U., & Aubeneau, A. (2019). Optimum positioning
of wastewater treatment plants in a river network: A model-based approach to
minimize microbial pollution. Science of The Total Environment, 691, 1310-1319.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2019.07.035

Mitsi, K., Richter, D. J., Arroyo, A. S., Lépez-Escardé, D., Anté, M., Oterino, A. G.,
& Ruiz-Trillo, I. (2023). Taxonomic composition, community structure and
molecular novelty of microeukaryotes in a temperate oligomesotrophic lake as
revealed by  metabarcoding. Scientific Reports,  13(1), 3119.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-30228-4

Moreno-Vivian, C., & Flores, E. (2007). Nitrate assimilation in bacteria. In H. Bothe,
S. Ferguson, & W. Newton (Eds.), Biology of the Nitrogen Cycle (pp. 263-282).
Elsevier. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-044452857-5.50018-7

Morris, E. K., Caruso, T., Buscot, F., Fischer, M., Hancock, C., Maier, T. S., Meiners,
T., Miller, C., Obermaier, E., Prati, D., Socher, S. A., Sonnemann, I., Waschke,
N., Wubet, T., Wurst, S., & Rillig, M. C. (2014). Choosing and using diversity
indices: insights for ecological applications from the German Biodiversity
Exploratories. Ecology and Evolution, 4(18), 3514-3524.
https://doi.org/10.1002/ece3.1155

Mott, J., & Smith, A. (2011). Library-Dependent Source Tracking Methods. (C.
Hagedorn, A. Blanch, & V. Harwoord (eds.)). Springer.

Moussa, S. H., & Massengale, R. D. (2008). Identification of the sources of Escherichia

coli in a watershed using carbon-utilization patterns and composite data sets.

85

Journal of Water and Health, 6(2), 197-207. https://doi.org/10.2166/wh.2008.021

Nacario, M. A. G., dela Pena, L. B. R. O., Labrador, K. L., & Rivera, W. L. (2022).
DNA fingerprinting using BOX-AIR and (GTG)5 primers identify spatial
variations of fecal contamination along Pasig River, Philippines. Environmental
Monitoring and Assessment, 194(12), 868. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10661-022-
10504-y

NCR-DENR. (2021). DENR National Capital Region conducts cleanup in Marikina
River. Https://Ner.Denr.Gov.Ph/Index.Php/News-Events/Photo-Releases/Denr-
National-Capital-Region-Conducts-Cleanup-in-Marikina-River.

Neave, M., Luter, H., Padovan, A., Townsend, S., Schobben, X., & Gibb, K. (2014).
Multiple approaches to microbial source tracking in tropical northern Australia.
MicrobiologyOpen, 3(6), 860-874. https://doi.org/10.1002/mbo3.209

Nemec, M. D., & Massengale, R. D. (2010). The use of carbon-utilization profiling to
determine sources of fecal contamination in a central Texas watershed. Lake and
Reservoir Management, 26(2), 104-113.
https://doi.org/10.1080/07438141.2010.490769

Newbold, C. J., de la Fuente, G., Belanche, A., Ramos-Morales, E., & McEwan, N. R.
(2015). The role of ciliate protozoa in the rumen. Frontiers in Microbiology, 6.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2015.01313

Newton, R. J., Bootsma, M. J., Morrison, H. G., Sogin, M. L., & McLellan, S. L. (2013).
A microbial signature approach to identify fecal pollution in the waters off an
urbanized coast of Lake Michigan. Microbial Ecology, 65(4), 1011-1023.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00248-013-0200-9

Norf, H., & Weitere, M. (2010). Resource quantity and seasonal background alter

86

warming effects on communities of biofilm ciliates. FEMS Microbiology Ecology,
74(2), 361-370. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1574-6941.2010.00948.x

O’Brien, L., Siboni, N., Seymour, J. R., Balzer, M., & Mitrovic, S. (2023). Tributary
Inflows to a Regulated River Influence Bacterial Communities and Increase
Bacterial Carbon Assimilation. Microbial Ecology, 86(4), 2642-2654.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00248-023-02271-1

Okabe, S., Okayama, N., Savichtcheva, O., & Ito, T. (2007). Quantification of host-
specific Bacteroides—Prevotella 16S rRNA genetic markers for assessment of
fecal pollution in freshwater. Applied Microbiology and Biotechnology, 74(4),
890-901. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00253-006-0714-x

Oksanen, J., Simpson, G. L., Blanchet, F. G., Kindt, R., Legendre, P., Minchin, P. R.,
O’Hara, R. B., Solymos, P., Stevens, M. H. H., & Szoecs, E. (2022). vegan:
Community ecology package. R Package Version 2.6-4. Https://CRAN.R-
Project.Org/Package=vegan.

Olds, H. T., Corsi, S. R., Dila, D. K., Halmo, K. M., Bootsma, M. J., & McLellan, S.
L. (2018). High levels of sewage contamination released from urban areas after
storm events: A quantitative survey with sewage specific bacterial indicators.
PLOS Medicine, 15(7), €1002614. https://doi.org/10.137 1/journal.pmed. 1002614

Oliveros, A., & Vital, P. (2022). Isolation, characterization, and antimicrobial
resistance of Enterococcus sp. from irrigation waters in Metro Manila, Philippines.
Environment Asia, 5(3), 133-142.

Onichandran, S., Kumar, T., Salibay, C. C., Dungea, J. Z., Tabo, H. AL, Tabo, N., Tan,
T.-C., Lim, Y. AL, Sawangjaroen, N., Phiriyasamith, S., Andiappan, H., Ithoi, I.,

Lau, Y.-L., & Nissapatorn, V. (2014). Waterborne parasites: A current status from

87

the Philippines. Parasites & Vectors, 7(1), 244. https://doi.org/10.1186/1756-
3305-7-244

Palleja, A., Mikkelsen, K. H., Forslund, S. K., Kashani, A., Allin, K. H., Nielsen, T.,
Hansen, T. H., Liang, S., Feng, Q., Zhang, C., Pyl, P. T., Coelho, L. P., Yang, H.,
Wang, J., Typas, A., Nielsen, M. F., Nielsen, H. B., Bork, P., Wang, J., ...
Pedersen, O. (2018). Recovery of gut microbiota of healthy adults following
antibiotic exposure. Nature Microbiology, 3(11), 1255-1265.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41564-018-0257-9

Parfrey, L. W., Walters, W. A., & Knight, R. (2011). Microbial eukaryotes in the human
microbiome: Ecology, evolution, and future directions. Frontiers in Microbiology,
2. https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.201 1.00153

Parfrey, L. W., Walters, W. A., Lauber, C. L., Clemente, J. C., Berg-Lyons, D., Teiling,
C., Kodira, C., Mohiuddin, M., Brunelle, J., Driscoll, M., Fierer, N., Gilbert, J. A.,
& Knight, R. (2014). Communities of microbial eukaryotes in the mammalian gut
within the context of environmental eukaryotic diversity. Frontiers in
Microbiology, 5. https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2014.00298

Paronda, G. R. A., David, C. P. C., & Apodaca, D. C. (2019). River flow pattern and
heavy metals concentrations in Pasig River, Philippines as affected by varying
seasons and astronomical tides. JOP Conference Series: Earth and Environmental
Science, 344(1), 012049. https://doi.org/10.1088/1755-1315/344/1/012049

Pearman, W. S., Freed, N. E., & Silander, O. K. (2020). Testing the advantages and
disadvantages of short- and long- read eukaryotic metagenomics using simulated
reads. BMC Bioinformatics, 21(1), 220. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12859-020-3528-

4

88

Perlroth, J., Choi, B., & Spellberg, B. (2007). Nosocomial fungal infections:
Epidemiology, diagnosis, and treatment. Medical Mycology, 45(4), 321-346.
https://doi.org/10.1080/13693780701218689

Petroff, A. P., Pasulka, A. L., Soplop, N., Wu, X.-L., & Libchaber, A. (2015).
Biophysical basis for convergent evolution of two veil-forming microbes. Royal
Society Open Science, 2(11), 150437. https://doi.org/10.1098/rsos. 150437

Philippine Daily Inquirer. (2023, April 2). Transforming Pasig River.
Https://Opinion.Inquirer.Net/162123/Transforming-Pasig-River.

Pietryczuk, A., Cudowski, A., Hauschild, T., Swistocka, M., Wiecko, A., & Karpowicz,
M. (2018). Abundance and species diversity of fungi in rivers with various
contaminations. Current Microbiology, 75(5), 630-638.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00284-017-1427-3

Piganeau, G., Desdevises, Y., Derelle, E., & Moreau, H. (2008). Picoeukaryotic
sequences in the Sargasso Sea metagenome. Genome Biology, 9(1), RS.
https://doi.org/10.1186/gb-2008-9-1-r5

Praveen, K. P., Ganguly, S., Wakchaure, R., Para, P. A., Mahajan, T., Qadri, K.,
Kamble, S., Sharma, R., Shekhar, S., & Dalai, N. (2016). Waterborne diseases and
its effect on domestic animals and human health: A review. International Journal
of Emerging Technology and Advanced Engineering, 6(1).

Prystajecky, N., Huck, P. M., Schreier, H., & Isaac-Renton, J. L. (2014). Assessment
of Giardia and Cryptosporidium spp. as a microbial source tracking tool for
surface water: Application in a mixed-use watershed. Applied and Environmental
Microbiology, 80(8), 2328-2336. https://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.02037-13

Quast, C., Pruesse, E., Yilmaz, P., Gerken, J., Schweer, T., Yarza, P., Peplies, J., &

89

Gléckner, F. O. (2012). The SILVA ribosomal RNA gene database project:
Improved data processing and web-based tools. Nucleic Acids Research, 41(D1),
D590-D596. https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gks1219

R Core Team. (2022). R: A language and environment for statistical computing. R
Foundation for Statistical Computing Vienna, Austria. Https://Www.R-
Project.Org/.

Regmi, R. K. (2017). Urbanization and related environmental issues of Metro Manila.
Journal of Advanced College of Engineering and Management, 3.

Ren, Z., Qu, X., Zhang, M., Yu, Y., & Peng, W. (2019). Distinct bacterial communities
in wet and dry seasons during a seasonal water level fluctuation in the largest
freshwater lake (Poyang Lake) in China. Frontiers in Microbiology, 10.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2019.01167

Richardson, M., & Rautemaa-Richardson, R. (2019). Exposure to Aspergillus in home
and healthcare facilities’ water environments: Focus on biofilms. Microorganisms,
7(1), 7. https://doi.org/10.3390/microorganisms7010007

Ruecker, N. J., Braithwaite, S. L., Topp, E., Edge, T., Lapen, D. R., Wilkes, G.,
Robertson, W., Medeiros, D., Sensen, C. W., & Neumann, N. F. (2007). Tracking
host sources of Cryptosporidium spp. in raw water for improved health risk
assessment. Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 73(12), 3945-3957.
https://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.02788-06

Sabir, M. S., Shahzadi, F., Ali, F., Shakeela, Q., Niaz, Z., & Ahmed, S. (2021).
Comparative effect of fertilization practices on soil microbial diversity and
activity: An overview. Current Microbiology, 78(10), 3644-3655.

https://doi.org/10.1007/s00284-021-02634-2

90

Salazar-Ardiles, C., Asserella-Rebollo, L., & Andrade, D. C. (2022). Free-living
amoebas in extreme environments: The true survival in our planet. BioMed
Research International, 2022, 1-10. https://doi.org/10.1155/2022/2359883

Salo, T., & Salovius-Laurén, S. (2022). Green algae as bioindicators for long-term
nutrient pollution along a coastal eutrophication gradient. Ecological Indicators,
140, 109034. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolind.2022.109034

Santoferrara, L. F., Grattepanche, J., Katz, L. A., & McManus, G. B. (2014).
Pyrosequencing for assessing diversity of eukaryotic microbes: Analysis of data
on marine planktonic ciliates and comparison with traditional methods.
Environmental Microbiology, 16(9), 2752-2763. https://doi.org/10.1111/1462-
2920.12380

Schmidt, P.-A., Balint, M., Greshake, B., Bandow, C., Rémbke, J., & Schmitt, I. (2013).
Illumina metabarcoding of a soil fungal community. Soil Biology and
Biochemistry, 65, 128-132. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.soilbio.2013.05.014

Schoonover, J. E., & Lockaby, B. G. (2006). Land cover impacts on stream nutrients
and fecal coliform in the lower Piedmont of West Georgia. Journal of Hydrology,
331(3-4), 371-382. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhydrol.2006.05.031

Schuster, S. C. (2008). Next-generation sequencing transforms today’s biology. Nature
Methods, 5(1), 16-18. https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth1 156

Scott, T. M., Rose, J. B., Jenkins, T. M., Farrah, S. R., & Lukasik, J. (2002). Microbial
source tracking: Current methodology and future Directions. Applied and
Environmental Microbiology, 68(12), 5796-5803.
https://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.68.12.5796-5803.2002

Seguel, M., & Gottdenker, N. (2017). The diversity and impact of hookworm infections

91

in wildlife. International Journal for Parasitology: Parasites and Wildlife, 6(3),
177-194. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijppaw.2017.03.007

Shayo, F. K., Nakamura, K., Al-Sobaihi, S., & Seino, K. (2021). Is the source of
domestic water associated with the risk of malaria infection? Spatial variability
and a mixed-effects multilevel analysis. International Journal of Infectious
Diseases, 104, 224-231. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijid.2020.12.062

Shenhav, L., Thompson, M., Joseph, T. A., Briscoe, L., Furman, O., Bogumil, D.,
Mizrahi, I., Pe’er, I., & Halperin, E. (2019). FEAST: Fast expectation-
maximization for microbial source tracking. Nature Methods, 16(7), 627-632.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-019-0431-x

Simpson, A. G. B., & Eglit, Y. (2016). Protist diversification. In Encyclopedia of
Evolutionary Biology (pp. 344-360). Elsevier. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-
800049-6.00247-X

Simpson, J. M., Santo Domingo, J. W., & Reasoner, D. J. (2002). Microbial source
tracking: State of the science. Environmental Science & Technology, 36(24),
5279-5288. https://doi.org/10.1021/es026000b

Snel, S. J., Baker, M. G., Kamalesh, V., French, N., & Learmonth, J. (2009). A tale of
two parasites: The comparative epidemiology of cryptosporidiosis and giardiasis.
Epidemiology and Infection, 137(11), 1641-1650.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0950268809002465

Stefanidou, N., Genitsaris, $., Lopez-Bautista, J., Sommer, U., & Moustaka-Gouni, M.
(2018). Unicellular eukaryotic community response to temperature and salinity
variation in mesocosm experiments. Frontiers in Microbiology, 9.

https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2018.02444

92

Steffen, H. C., Smith, K., van Deventer, C., Weiskerger, C., Bosch, C., Brandao, J.,
Wolfaardt, G., & Botha, A. (2023). Health risk posed by direct ingestion of yeasts
from polluted ~—river — water. Water Research, 231, 119599.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2023.119599

Stewart, J., Santo Domingo, J., Wade, T., & Sadowsky, M. (2006). Fecal pollution,
public health, and microbial source tracking (J. W. Santo Domingo & M. J.
Sadowsky (eds.)). ASM Press.

Stoeckel, D. M., & Harwood, V. J. (2007). Performance, design, and analysis in
microbial source tracking Studies. Applied and Environmental Microbiology,
73(8), 2405-2415. https://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.02473-06

Strokal, M., Ma, L., Bai, Z., Luan, S., Kroeze, C., Oenema, O., Velthof, G., & Zhang,
F. (2016). Alarming nutrient pollution of Chinese rivers as a result of agricultural
transitions. Environmental Research Letters, 11(2), 024014.
https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/1 1/2/024014

Sunagawa, S., Coelho, L. P., Chaffron, S., Kultima, J. R., Labadie, K., Salazar, G.,
Djahanschiri, B., Zeller, G., Mende, D. R., Alberti, A., Cornejo-Castillo, F. M.,
Costea, P. I., Cruaud, C., d’Ovidio, F., Engelen, S., Ferrera, I., Gasol, J. M., Guidi,
L., Hildebrand, F., ... Velayoudon, D. (2015). Structure and function of the global
ocean microbiome. Science, 348(6237). https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1261359

Tan, A. P., & Hedreyda, C. (2020). Sequence analysis and cloning of alkane 1-
monooxygenase and catechol 1,2-dioxygenase genes from Acinetobacter
baumannii isolated from the Philippine Pasig River. Philippine Journal of Science,
149(1). https://doi.org/10.56899/149.01.16

Tarkington, J., & Zufall, R. A. (2021). Temperature affects the repeatability of

93

evolution in the microbial eukaryote Tetrahymena thermophila. Ecology and
Evolution, 11(19), 13139-13152. https://doi.org/10.1002/ece3.8036

Teaf, C., & Garber, M. (2011). Use of microbial source tracking in the legal arena:
Benefits and challenges. (C. Hagerdorn, A. Blanch, & V. Harwood (eds.)).
Springer Science+Business Media.

Tessler, M., Neumann, J. S., Afshinnekoo, E., Pineda, M., Hersch, R., Velho, L. F. M.,
Segovia, B. T., Lansac-Toha, F. A., Lemke, M., DeSalle, R., Mason, C. E., &
Brugler, M. R. (2017). Large-scale differences in microbial biodiversity discovery
between 16S amplicon and shotgun sequencing. Scientific Reports, 7(1), 6589.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-017-06665-3

Unno, T., Jang, J., Han, D., Kim, J. H., Sadowsky, M. J., Kim, O.-S., Chun, J., & Hur,
H.-G. (2010). Use of barcoded pyrosequencing and shared OTUs to determine
sources of fecal bacteria in watersheds. Environmental Science & Technology,
44(20), 7777-7782. https://doi.org/10.1021/es101500z

Votypka, J., Modry, D., Obornik, M., Slapeta, J., & Luke, J. (2016). Apicomplexa. In
Handbook of the Protists (pp. 1-58). Springer International Publishing.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-3 19-32669-6_20-1

Wang, X., Ran, Y., Jia, S., Ahmed, S., Long, X., Jiang, Y., & Jiang, Y. (2022). Human
disseminated protothecosis: The skin is the “window”? Frontiers in Immunology,
13. https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2022.880196

Wang, Y., Zhang, W., Lin, Y., Cao, W., Zheng, L., & Yang, J. (2014). Phosphorus,
nitrogen and chlorophyll-a are significant factors controlling ciliate communities
in summer in the Northern Beibu Gulf, South China Sea. PLoS ONE, 9(7),

€101121. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0101121

94

Wang, Y., Zhang, W. P., Cao, H. L., Shek, C. S., Tian, R. M., Wong, Y. H., Batang, Z.,
Al-Suwailem, A., & Qian, P.-Y. (2014). Diversity and distribution of eukaryotic
microbes in and around a brine pool adjacent to the Thuwal cold seeps in the Red
Sea. Frontiers in Microbiology, 5. https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2014.00037

Ward, T. L., Weber, B. P., Mendoza, K. M., Danzeisen, J. L., Llop, K., Lang, K.,
Clayton, J. B., Grace, E., Brannon, J., Radovic, I., Beauclaire, M., Heisel, T. J.,
Knights, D., Cardona, C., Kogut, M., Johnson, C., Noll, S. L., Arsenault, R., Reed,
K.M., & Johnson, T. J. (2019). Antibiotics and host-tailored probiotics similarly

modulate effects on the developing avian microbiome, mycobiome, and host gene
expression. MBio, 10(5). https://doi.org/10.1128/mBio.02171-19
Wardrop, N. A., Hill, A. G., Dzodzomenyo, M., Aryeetey, G., & Wright, J. A. (2018).
Livestock ownership and microbial contamination of drinking-water: Evidence
from nationally representative household surveys in Ghana, Nepal and
Bangladesh. International Journal of Hygiene and Environmental Health, 221(1),
33-40. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijheh.2017.09.014
Wawrzyniak, I., Poirier, P., Viscogliosi, E., Dionigia, M., Texier, C., Delbac, F., &

Alaoui, H. El. (2013). Blastocystis, an unrecognized parasite: An overview of

pathogenesis and diagnosis. Therapeutic Advances in Infectious Disease, 1(5),

167-178. https://doi.org/10.1177/20499361 13504754

West, P. T., Probst, A. J., Grigoriev, I. V., Thomas, B. C., & Banfield, J. F. (2018).

Genome-reconstruction for eukaryotes from complex natural microbial
communities. Genome Research, 28(4), 569-580.
https://doi.org/10.1101/gr.228429.117

Whitlock, J. E., Jones, D. T., & Harwood, V. J. (2002). Identification of the sources of

95

fecal coliforms in an urban watershed using antibiotic resistance analysis. Water
Research, 36(17), 4273-4282. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0043-1354(02)00139-2

Wickham, H. (2016). ggplot2: Elegant graphics for data analysis. Springer-Verlag New
York. Https://Ggplot2. Tidyverse. Org.

Wiggins, B. A. (1996). Discriminant analysis of antibiotic resistance patterns in fecal
streptococci, a method to differentiate human and animal sources of fecal pollution
in natural waters. Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 62(11), 3997-4002.
https://doi.org/10.1128/aem.62.11.3997-4002.1996

Wilhelm, S. W., Farnsley, S. E., LeCleir, G. R., Layton, A. C., Satchwell, M. F.,
DeBruyn, J. M., Boyer, G. L., Zhu, G., & Paerl, H. W. (2011). The relationships
between nutrients, cyanobacterial toxins and the microbial community in Taihu
(Lake Tai), China. Harmful Algae, 10(2), 207-215.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.hal.2010.10.001

Wilks, S., & Sleigh, M. (2008). Feeding by Euplotes mutabilis (Ciliophora,
Hypotrichida). Denisia, 23, 383-388.

Worden, A. Z., Nolan, J. K., & Palenik, B. (2004). Assessing the dynamics and ecology
of marine picophytoplankton: The importance of the eukaryotic component.
Limnology and Oceanography, 49(1), 168-179.
https://doi.org/10.4319/10.2004.49.1.0168

Wu, P.-F., Li, D.-X., Kong, L.-F., Li, Y.-Y., Zhang, H., Xie, Z.-X., Lin, L., & Wang,
D.-Z. (2020). The diversity and biogeography of microeukaryotes in the euphotic
zone of the northwestern Pacific Ocean. Science of The Total Environment, 698,
134289. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2019.134289

Wuertz, S., Wang, D., Reischer, G., & Farnleitner, A. (2011). Library-Independent

96

Bacterial Source Tracking Methods (C. Hagedorn, A. Blanch, & V. Harwood
(eds.)). Springer.

Yang, C., Li, Y., Zhou, B., Zhou, Y., Zheng, W., Tian, Y., Van Nostrand, J. D., Wu,
L., He, Z., Zhou, J., & Zheng, T. (2015). Illumina sequencing-based analysis of
free-living bacterial community dynamics during an Akashiwo sanguine bloom in
Xiamen sea, China. Scientific Reports, 5(1), 8476.
https://doi.org/10.1038/srep08476

Yang, W., Chen, P., Villegas, E. N., Landy, R. B., Kanetsky, C., Cama, V., Dearen, T.,
Schultz, C. L., Orndorff, K. G., Prelewicz, G. J., Brown, M. H., Young, K. R., &
Xiao, L. (2008). Cryptosporidium Source Tracking in the Potomac River
Watershed. Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 74(21), 6495-6504.
https://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.01345-08

Zerveas, S., Mente, M. S., Tsakiri, D., & Kotzabasis, K. (2021). Microalgal
photosynthesis induces alkalization of aquatic environment as a result of H+
uptake independently from CO2 concentration — New perspectives for
environmental applications. Journal of Environmental Management, 289, 112546.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2021.112546

Zhang, C., Li, H., Zeng, Y., Ding, H., Wang, B., Li, Y., Ji, Z., Bi, Y., & Luo, W. (2022).
Diversity and assembly processes of microbial eukaryotic communities in Fildes
Peninsula Lakes (West Antarctica). Biogeosciences, 19(18), 4639-4654.
https://doi.org/10.5194/bg-19-4639-2022

Zhang, N., Luo, Y.-J., Chen, X.-Y., Li, Q., Jing, Y.-C., Wang, X., & Feng, C.-H. (2018).
Understanding the effects of composition and configuration of land covers on

surface runoff in a highly urbanized area. Ecological Engineering, 125, 11-25.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoleng.2018.10.008
