Network Intrusion Detection System of DOST-Bicutan Network

MARLON DAVE S. REGOSO

UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES LOS BAÑOS

MASTER IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY

April 2013

Abstract

This project focused on open source tools to implement network intrusion
detection system for DOST. Open source network intrusion detection systems like Snort,
OSSEC, Suricata and Prelude were tested and evaluated using open source network
intrusion detection testing tools like Pytbull, Scapy, Netcat, Hping, Nmap, Tepdump,
Hydra and Apachebench. Installation procedures were presented for the readers to be
guided accordingly for future use. Test simulations were done to evaluate the system for
its usage, functionality and ability to detect network intruder. Using the selected open
source network intrusion detection system’s ability to detect intruder, functionality, rules
and database, a system was developed that shows a graphical representations of network
intruders. Developed network intrusion detection system for DOST-Bicutan was tested
using apachebench for its functionality. As a result, the experience gained from this
endeavor can also be used to help other government agencies to review and assess their own network security.

I. The Problem Domain

A, Statement of the Problem

As information systems have become more comprehensive and become a higher
value asset of organizations, network intrusion detection systems have been available to
the market. Although there are many vendors in the field, each with its own strategy for
detecting network intruders, they are too focused on the equipment and appliance they
sell. Thus, not all government agencies have enough budgets to purchase that equipment.

Monitoring of a network intruder is rarely practiced in the local industry
especially in the government sector. Department of Science and Technology (DOST) as.
one of the leading agencies in the field of technology has never implemented network
intrusion system in its infrastructure in Bicutan area. With the recent events and the rise
of government web sites being defaced by unscrupulous intruders, it is time that the
department reviews its own policies, strategies and security implementation in its own
infrastructure.

Intrusion detection involves determining that some entity, an intruder, has
attempted to gain, or worse, has gained unauthorized access to the system. Intruders are
classified into two groups. External intruders who do not have any authorized access to
the system they attack. Internal intruders who have at least some authorized access to the

system. Internal intruders are further subdivided into the following three categories "),

1|Page

1.Masqueraders - mere external intruders who have succeeded in gaining access

to the system and are acting as an authorized entity.

2. Legitimate intruders (misfeasor) - have access to both the system and the data

but misuse this access.

3. Clandestine intruders - have or have obtained supervisory (root) control of the

system and as such can either operate below the level of auditing or can use
the privileges to avoid being audited by stopping, modifying, or erasing the

audit records.

B. Background and Objectives of the Project

The general objective of this project is to develop network intrusion detection

system using open source tools that are available in the market. The said project will act

as a monitoring tool to alert the network and system administrators of DOST-Bicutan and

can also be a help to other government agencies to monitor their own network

infrastructure. The following are the specific objectives of the project to:

1.

design and develop network intrusion detection system using open source

tools available in the market;

. develop a system that displays real-time network traffic of network intruders;

and

. inform the administrator regularly the summary of recorded malicious activity

using open source tool.

2| Page

C. Significance and Scope of the Project

The internet is a medium for fast, efficient communication and interchange of
ideas. However, the limitless opportunities of the internet comes hand-in-hand with the
risks of people who take malicious advantage of the openness of the internet. Enterprise
networked systems are inevitably exposed to the increasing threats posed by hackers as
well as malicious internal users in the network. With DOST-Bicutan network comprising,
of twelve (12) autonomous local area networks interconnected together using fiber and
wireless technology, it is very vulnerable with attacks from the outside and inside of its
network. This project offers a new way to keep the infrastructure safeguarded from

network intruders.

D. Documentation of Existence and Seriousness of the Problem
Many reports show defacing of government websites in the Philippines is on the
tise, adding to the conflict between China and Philippines over Panatag shoal, Recto bank
and Spratly islands adds to the problem. Intruding a network to have access over its
network resources is the key in defacing those websites. According to ABS-CBN online
news, government websites in the Philippines and China were defaced by hackers "!!218_
Figure 1 shows a screenshot of a Chinese government website defaced by Anonymous
Butuan "!_ Figure 2 shows a screenshot of a Philippine government website that belongs

to DOST-PAGASA that is defaced by Team X-Fuck "!, Figure 3 shows a screenshot of a

Philippine website that belongs to Colegio San Agustin that is defaced by Chinese ",

3| Page

Figure 1. Screenshot of a Chinese government website defaced by Anonymous Butuan.

Ser Meer Genet Ie BO
altars
Dewmetticcindbemied ——Mamupsndaarrely

ached Net wet Team fick Es GHVTE6@aa cen!

Figure 2. Screenshot of a Philippine government website that belongs to DOST-PAGASA that
is defaced by Team X-Fuck.

Figure 3. Screenshot of a Philippine website that belongs to Colegio San Agustin that is
defaced by Chinese.
4|Pa


With the Cybercrime law being implemented, many Filipinos use social
networking sites like Twitter and Facebook to show their protest against the said law. But
hackers have their own way of expressing their protest. They hacked and defaced several
Philippine government websites to show that they are against the said law, thinking that
in that way, their online voices can be heard. According to ABS-CBN online news,
government and private websites in the Philippines were defaced by hackers as part of
their protest to the anti-cybercrime law "ll. Figure 4 shows a screenshot of Philippine
government and private websites that belongs to Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP),
Metropolitan Waterworks and Sewerage System (MWSS) and American Chamber of
Commerce in the Philippines that were defaced by Anonymous Philippines “!. Figure 5

shows a screenshot of Senator Tito Sotto’s website defaced by Anonymous Philippines

15}

Figure 4. Screenshot of Philippine government and private websites that belongs to Bangko
‘Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP), Metropolitan Waterworks and Sewerage System (MWSS) and
American Chamber of Commerce in the Philippines that were defaced by Anonymous
Philippines.
5|Page

Figure 5. Screenshot of Senator Tito Sotto’s website defaced by Anonymous Philippines.

ll. Review of Existing Alternatives

Firewall technology has not been able to successfully safeguard private data.
Firewalls do a great job to filter or mask ports on a host system. However, most
companies must open ports on their firewalls to provide web, email, FTP, domain name
(DNS) and other services. As soon as an administrator opens ports on their firewall then
those ports are no longer protected. A good analogy would be to lock every window in
your house with the back door, the basement door, the sliding family room door; even the
pet door locked, but leaves the front door open. Everything is very secure except the front
door. An attacker would have little problem compromising your home. Leaving the front
door open does not mean you cannot safeguard your house. You can monitor the people
who enter and exit your door by logging their every move in your house while looking

for any malicious activity.

6|Page

In the network side, implementing network intrusion detection system gives
additional security to the network as it safeguards your network. Monitoring network
intruders can be monitored through the use of network intrusion detection system. There
are many ways to acquire network intrusion detection system. One way is to procure, as
network intrusion detection system has many vendors, each with its own strategy for
detecting network intruders and features but with the price on its side. Selecting an
Intrusion Prevention System (IPS) can be a daunting task. While an independent
assessment of available solutions is strongly recommended as a best practice before
procurement and deployment, a good place to start a research effort is to look at the
market leaders and to compare their offerings. According to Infonetics Research ""!,
Cisco ranked highest among six top selling IPS solution providers -- the other five
suppliers being McAfee, Juniper, IBM, Sourcefire and TippingPoint - based on
assessments performed by large organizations on eight selection criteria, ranging from
value and pricing to technology and the product's roadmap for the future. These same six
providers also rank highest in terms of their effectiveness on the latest Gartner report,
although Cisco and IBM are considered to be challengers to the market led by the other

four vendors.

7|Page

Ill. Approach taken in this subject

A. Theoretical Framework

Intrusion attacks usually follow a logical sequence of events. The intruder will try
first to discover as much public information (such as domain name, DNS tables, machine
names, and FTP sites) about a network as possible without risking detection. Next, the
intruder will attempt to scan for more information, run utilities, look for CGI scripts, ping
to get machine status, etc. By the end of this stage, the intruder will know the operating
system and applications running on the victim’s network. Once an intruder gets access to
a user account or a machine, he/she tries to exploit possible vulnerabilities of the system
by sending commands to CGI scripts, or malicious data to buffer-overrun holes. At this
stage, the hacker may be able to gain control of the machine, and even crash the system.
On gaining a foothold on a network, the intruder will cover tracks of the attack to delay
discovery and install tools that displace the normal functioning of the system or vandalize
the site, before moving to other connected networks. Enterprises are increasingly looking
at tools that detect network security breaches to alert and protect networks from intrusion
attacks. Detection is possible through Intrusion Detection System right from the time the
intruder probes and tries to scan for information. Intrusion detection systems successfully
detect and trap attacks at a premature stage and help enterprises avoid disruption in their

systems and costs associated with the likely damage of successful attempts.

8|Page

B. Rationale for the framework

Implementing an open source based Network Intrusion Detection System (NIDS)
provides the DOST-Bicutan network the advantage of having a low cost system that can
also provide the same ability and usage compared to other equipment-based NIDS in the

market.

C. Technologies used

Implementing network intrusion detection system for DOST-Bicutan network was
developed through the use of available open source operating system, open source
network intrusion detection system and open source network intrusion detection tools in
the market.

Open source operating system Ubuntu 12.04 LTS server was used. Ubuntu is an
ancient African word meaning ‘humanity to others’. It also means 'I am what I am because
of who we all are’. The Ubuntu operating system brings the spirit of Ubuntu to the world
of computers. Ubuntu is a computer operating system based on the Debian Linux
distribution and distributed as free and open source software, using its own desktop
environment. Ubuntu is hugely popular on Amazon's EC2 and Rackspace's Cloud, and is
pre-installed on computers from Dell, Lenovo and other global vendors "71,

Open source network intrusion detection systems like Snort, Suricata, OSSEC and

Prelude was tested and evaluated for the development of DOST-NIDS.

9|Page

1. Snort is an open source network intrusion prevention and detection system
(IDS/IPS) developed by Sourcefire. Combining the benefits of signature,
protocol, and anomaly-based inspection, Snort is the most widely
deployed IDS/IPS technology worldwide 9),

2. Suricata is an open source Next Generation Intrusion Detection and
Prevention Engine. This engine is not intended to just replace or emulate
the existing tools in the industry, but will bring new ideas and
technologies to the field #"!.

3. OSSEC is anOpen Source Host-based Intrusion Detection System. It
performs log analysis, integrity checking, Windows registry monitoring,
rootkit detection, real-time alerting and active response. It runs on most
operating systems, including Linux, OpenBSD, FreeBSD, Mac OS X,
Solaris and Windows ™,

4, Prelude is a Universal "Security Information & Event Management"
(SIEM) system. Prelude collects, normalizes, sorts, aggregates, correlates
and reports all security-related events independently of the product brand

or license giving rise to such events; Prelude is "agentless" !"8),

Open source network intrusion detection systems were tested using network
intrusion detection testing tools such as; pytbull, scapy, netcat, hping, nmap, tcpdump,

hydra and apachebench to test the detection capabilities of the NIDS.

10|Page

1. Pytbull is an Intrusion D etection/Prevention System (IDS/IPS) Testing
Framework for Snort, Suricata and any IDS/IPS that generates an alert
file. It can be used to test the detection and blocking capabilities of an
IDS/IPS and to validate config "*!,

2. Scapy is a powerful interactive packet manipulation program. It is able to
forge or decode packets of a wide number of protocols, send them on the
wire, capture them, match requests and replies, and much more. It can
easily handle most classical tasks like scanning, tracerouting, probing, unit
tests, attacks or network discovery (it can replace hping, 85% of nmap,
arpspoof, arp-sk, arping, tcpdump, tethereal, pOf, etc.) '2),

3. Netcat is a feature-packed networking utility which reads and writes data
across networks from the command line. It uses both TCP and UDP for
communication and is designed to be a reliable back-end tool to instantly
provide network connectivity to other applications and users. Neat will not
only work with IPv4 and IPv6 but provides the user with a virtually
limitless number of potential uses '“),

4. Hping is a command-line oriented TCP/IP packet assembler/analyzer. The
interface is inspired to the ping(8) unix command, but hping isn't only able
to send ICMP echo requests. It supports TCP, UDP, ICMP and RAW-IP
protocols, has a traceroute mode, the ability to send files between a

covered channel, and many other features ""!,

11|Page

5. Nmap is an open source tool for network exploration and security
auditing. It was designed to rapidly scan large networks, although it works
fine against single hosts. Nmap uses raw IP packets in novel ways to
determine what hosts are available on the network, what services
(application name and version) those hosts are offering, what operating
systems (and OS versions) they are running, what type of packet
filters/firewalls are in use, and dozens of other characteristics"),

6. Tepdump a powerful command-line packet analyzer; and libpcap, a
portable C/C++ library for network traffic capture 61,

7. Hydra is a very fast network logon cracker which supports many different
services. It is a paralyzed login cracker which supports numerous
protocols to attack. New modules are easy to add, beside that, it is flexible
and very fast 8),

8. ApacheBench is a tool for benchmarking your Apache Hypertext Transfer
Protocol (HTTP) server. It is designed to give you an impression of how
your current Apache installation performs. This especially shows you how

many requests per second your Apache installation is capable of serving

16),

12|Page

IV. Project Methodology

A. Concept

The landscape of securing network infrastructure is different from the landscape
of just five years ago. Companies are more connected than ever, with the promise that
network expansion will only continue. As a result, companies have to keep up with how
to keep their network safe, without sacrificing growth, productivity and services offered.

Virtually, the first step of an organization takes to be protected from the internet is
to install a firewall with good reasons. A firewall is used to help keep a network secure.
Its primary objective is to control the incoming and outgoing network traffic by analyzing
the data packets and determining whether it should be allowed through or not, based on a
predetermined rule set.

A network's firewall builds a bridge between an internal network that is assumed
to be secured and trusted, and another network, usually an external network, such as the
Internet, that is assumed not secured and trusted. It acts as a perimeter guard for a
network, determining what traffic to allow or deny in and out. A firewall does this by
applying a policy, comprised of “accept” and “deny” rules, and based on various criteria,
such as a source, destination and protocols. By providing access control, firewalls do a
good job of providing the first layer of defense. Most firewall polices allow protocols that

enable organizations to do business on the Internet, such as SMTP, FTP, HTTP, SMTP.

13|Page

and DNS, and keep out traffic that may pose a threat to the internal systems. Figure 6

shows a typical network safeguarded by firewall.

Figure 6. Typical network safeguarded by a firewall.

The second layer of defense is to detect the presence of attacks within the traffic

allowed to flow within the network and to protect the network from those attacks. The

14|Page

most common belief today is that a Network Intrusion Detection System (NIDS) can
protect an organization from these attacks. Unfortunately, the current DOST-Bicutan
network does not have this system as an additional layer of defense from intruders.
Figure 7 shows a typical network safeguarded by firewall with network intrusion

detection system passively monitoring allowed traffic.

Figure 7. Typical network safeguarded by firewall with network intrusion detection system
passively monitoring allowed traffic.

15|Page

B. Methods

In implementing the Network Intrusion Detection System (NIDS) for DOST,

Ubuntu 12,04 LTS server as the operating system was used.

1. Selecting Open Source NIDS for Developing DOST-NIDS

In selecting what network intrusion detection system to be used, open source
network intrusion detection systems available in the market were tested. Network
intrusion detection systems like Snort, Suricata, OSSEC and Prelude were tested
individually using open source network intrusion detection testing tools such as; Pytbull,
Scapy, Netcat, Hping, Nmap, Tepdump, Hydra and Apachebench to test their ability to
detect intruders. Figure 8 shows the process on how the open source network intrusion

detection system was selected.

(Gathering of open Installation of
source network ‘open source

Intrusion networkintrusion ‘Opensource
detection systems || detection systems Network

Testing open peat

Snort, Suricata, Snort, Suricata, source Detection
‘OSSECand OSSECand Prelude network
Intrusion

detection
Tnstallation oF systems

opensource usingopen
intrusion networkintrusion ‘source
detection testing detection testing. network
tools tools intrusion
detection
Pytbull Scapy, Pytbull, Seapy, testing tools
Neteat, Hing,
Nmap, Ieadump,
Hydra,
ApacheBench

DOST-NIDS

Figure 8. Process on how the open source network intrusion detection system was selected.
16|Page

In evaluating open source NIDS, it was deployed passively monitoring the DMZ
network of DOST-Central office. Attack generator-1 and attack generator-2 were placed
on different sides of the firewall to attack the target host in the DMZ network. While the
NIDS was placed in the DMZ network, its ethO was passively monitoring the mirrored
port of the target host. The performance of the open source NIDS was tested according to
its ability to identify as many attacks as possible. Figure 9 shows where the two attack
generators, target host and network intrusion detection system were deployed during the

tests.

Bicutan Router
Gi 10 Mbps
a
(—<7 jICom

10 Mbps

‘Attack
Generator (1)

Attack
Generator (2)

Figure 9. Locations of the two attack generators, target host and network intrusion detection
system during the tests.

17|Page

2. Evaluating Developed DOST-NIDS

After selecting which open source NIDS to be used, its ability to detect intruder,
functionality, rules and database was used to create a system that shows a graphical
representations of network intruders. Figure 10 shows that process on how DOST-NIDS

was developed and tested.

Using its ability
todetect

Selected open
source

Developed

network intruders, funct DOST-NIDS
intrusion ionsand data wastested
detection base, adash using open ee
system was [f board was source
installed and developedto F network
deployedto display the intrusion
where itwill overview of its detection
serveas network testing tools

DOST-NIDS intruders

Figure 10. Process on how the DOST-NIDS was developed and tested.

In evaluating selected open source NIDS, it was deployed passively monitoring
the DMZ network of DOST - Central Office. Attack generator-1 and attack generator-2
were placed on different sides of the firewall to attack the target host in the DMZ
network. The management port is placed facing the local area network of DOST-CO as to
lessen the possibility of the system being compromised by intruders. One port monitors
the DMZ network and the other one monitors ports connected to other agencies as to

monitor the mirrored ports on both switches.

18|Page

Testing the ability of DOST-NIDS to detect intruder was tested using open source
network intrusion detection tool. ApacheBench was used to test as it was successful in
intruding and in the same way was detected by Snort while evaluating which open source
NIDS to be used. Six target host were intruded which includes: one (1) from DMZ switch
of DOST-ITD, one (1) from TAPI, one (1) from FNRI, one (1) from PTRI, one (1) from
MIRDC and one (1) from STI. They were intruded by two (2) Attack generators. Figure
11 shows the location of the six target hosts, two attack generators and DOST-NIDS

during the test.

DOST-Bicutan Network

CE >— Bicutan Router DOSTTO CENTRAL OFFICE
PLOT

10 Mbps —
10 Mbps
snerator-1 =
lal MIRDC
C <
fS SSost
E = Res Rae
coer WS sm
eae
ote a
Bio cRo &
pis a
vonrsS f=
vor coe owe @
QMersore

Figure 11. Locations of the six target hosts, two attack generators and DOST-NIDS during the
tests.

19|Page

C. User testing and project assessment

In assessing the DOST-NIDS developed, the management port of the network
intrusion detection system is placed facing the LAN of DOST-CO. One port monitors the
DMZ network and the other port monitors ports connected to other agencies as to monitor
the mirrored ports on both switches. Testing its ability to detect network intruders in
DMZ network and local area network of attached agencies, attack generators 1 and 2
were placed on different sides of the firewall to attack the target hosts in DMZ, TAPI,

FNRI, PTRI, MIRDC and STII (see Figure 11).

V. Results and Discussions

A. Selecting Open Source NIDS for Developing DOST-NIDS

Pytbull

Running Pytbull to test the ability of an open source NIDS to detect an intruder
was a fail. After so many researches over the internet and using various installations
process and configuration ended up only giving error on my side. The error message was:

Error: FTP error, 550 failed to open file.

20|Page

Scapy

Testing open source NIDS using scapy is not an easy task. If creating a rule to
inspect intrusion from Scapy is easy, configuring Scapy is another story. After so many
hours figuring what are the errors in lines on given files, I only ended up receiving error.

The error message was: AttributeError: 'str’ object has no attribute ‘route!

Netcat
In using Netcat to test the ability of open source NIDS to detect intruder, Netcat
successfully used its applications without even being detected by any of the NIDS. Netcat

applications used are: http client, remote terminal, port scanning and file transfer.

Hping

Attacking open source NIDS using Hping did not record any intrusion. But with
so many attempts to have a decent registered attack detected, I ended up hanging up the
server every time I run the command either I was using the attack generator-1 or attack

generator-2 attacking the NIDS server or the target host.

Nmap

In testing NIDS using Nmap, only Snort detected intrusion. Both Suricata and
OSSEC did not record any intruder alert. Prelude is not included in the chart because of
failure to install. Test result shows that using attack generator 2 produces more alert

compared to attack generator 1. And attacking target host detects more intrusion alert

21|Page

compared when directly targeting the NIDS server. Figure 12 shows the number of
registered attacks detected by open source NIDS using two attack generators attacking

one host and NIDS server using Nmap.

Attack Geni (NIDS)

q 3000, ‘Attack Geni (Host) |
1500 ‘Attack Gen’ (NIDS)

= Attack Gent (NIDS)
Snort Suricata ossec Attack Geni (Host) |

= Attack Gen? (NIDS) |
Attack Gen? (Host)

Network intrusion Detection System

Figure 12. Number of registered attacks detected by open source NIDS using two attack
generators attacking one host and NIDS server using Nmap.

Tepdump
Sending hundreds of thousands of packets every test using attack generator-1 and

attack generator-2 attacking NIDS and the target host generated no attacks detected. But
running on attack generator-1 and attack generator-2 at the same time, the server hangs

up for a while.

Hydra
There are many installation manuals of Hydra available in the internet, but
unfortunately every manual that I have used to install Hydra did not work. Either the

repository is not available or the tar file is not available.
22|Page

ApacheBench

In testing NIDS using ApacheBench or Apache Benchmarking, Snort and OSSEC
detected intrusions, but comparing registered number of alerts, Snort have higher number
of alerts recorded. And in all of the tests done, OSSEC did not detect any intrusion when
intruding the target host. Prelude is not included in the chart because of failure to install.
Test results shows that attacking NIDS server and target host using attack generator 2
shows more registered attacks compared to attack generator 1. And attacking target host
detects more intrusion alert compared when directly targeting the NIDS server. Figure 13
shows the number of registered attacks detected by open source NIDS using two attack

generators attacking one host and NIDS server using ApacheBench.

mAttackGen2 (NIDs) |
‘@ Attack Geni (Host)
1@ Attack Gen? (NIDS)
m Attack Gen? (Host)
= Attack Gent (NIDS)
Attack Gent (Host)
Attack Gen2 (NIDS)
Attack Gen2 (Host)
Attack Gend (NIDS)
m Attack Geni (Host)
Network intrusion Detection System 1 Attack Gen2 (NIDS)
Attack Gen2 (Host)

‘Number ofregisteredattacks

Snort Suricata ossec

Figure 13. Number of registered attacks detected by open source NIDS using two attack
generators attaching one host and NIDS server using ApacheBench.

23|Page

B. Evaluating Developed DOST-NIDS

In evaluating developed DOST-NIDS, test results shows that unlike other target
hosts, only tests on target host in DOST-CO DMZ were detected by DOST-NIDS. I
assume it is because of the location of the other target hosts. Although ports connected to
agencies where the target hosts were located are monitored, the monitoring port of the
NIDS is not directly monitoring their switches where the target hosts were directly
terminated. Figure 14 shows the number of registered attacks detected by DOST- NIDS

using two attack generators attacking six hosts using ApacheBench.

10000 Attack Generator -1

Attack Generator -2
= Attack Generator -1
Attack Generator ~
Attack Generator
1m Attack Generator ~

Number of registered
attacks

Network ntrusion Detection System

Figure 14. Number of registered attacks detected by DOST- NIDS using two attack generators
attacking six hosts using ApacheBench.

VI. Conclusions
While there were plenty of Network Intrusion Detection Systems available in the

market, we still have the option of implementing from an open source.

24|Page

Primarily, setting-up open source network intrusion detection system is not an
easy task. On the other hand, installing and configuring the testing tools for NIDS is even
more complicated. Even though only a few from open source NIDS and testing tools
worked, we can still recommend for an open source NIDS solution that can be used in
DOST-Bicutan network.

By using open source NIDS available, it makes the implementation easy. You can
also enhance their functions and abilities that they offer as you can edit the codes to suit
your needs and likes, unlike other equipment-based NIDS that you are only limited to

what they offer.

Vil. Recommendations

I would like to recommend that agencies in DOST-Bicutan area with spare servers
and with minimum of two (2) Lan cards would implement an open source NIDS for their
network as it can be a help to monitor their network and online resources from network
intruders. Combination of open source NIDSs working together in monitoring network

intruders as to enhance the functions and capabilities of DOST-NIDS.

Vill. References:

[1] ABS-CBN News: Hackers continue attacks on China websites. As retrieved from
http://www.abs-cbnnews.com/-depth/04/30/12/hackers-continue-attacks-china-
websites 11 September 2012

[2] ABS-CBN News: PAGASA website hacked. As retrieved from http://www.abs-
cbnnews.com/nation/05/09/12/pagasa-website-hacked 11 September 2012
25|Page


(3)

ABS-CBN News: Chinese hackers attack more Philippine websites. As retrieved
from http://www.abs-cbnnews.com/nation/05/12/12/chinese-hackers-attack-more-
philippine-websites 11 September 2012

[4] ABS-CBN News: Anti-cybercrime law protesters hack websites. As retrieved from
http://www.abs-cbnnews.com/business/09/26/12/hackers-deface-bsp-website-

protest-cybercrime-law 27 September 2012

[5] ABS-CBN News: Sotto's website hacked as cybercrime law debate resumes. As
retrieved from http://www.abs-cbnnews.com/nation/01/07/13/sottos-website-hacked-

cybercrime-law-debate-resumes 15 January 2013

[6

Apache HTTP server benchmarking tool. As retrieved from
http:/Mnttpd.apache.org/docs/2.2/programs/ab.html 2 October 2012

(7

Apache HTTP server benchmarking tool for apache stress test. As retrieved from
hitp://www.debianhelp.co.uk/apacheab.htm 1 October 2012

[8

How to install Nmap into Ubuntu. As retrieved from
http://namhuy.org/blog/32/how-to-install-nmap-into-ubuntu/ 2 October 2012

9)

How to install Scapy on Ubuntu 12.04. As retrieved from
http://samiux. blogspot.com/2012/05/howto-scapy-220-on-ubuntu-1204-Its.htm! 1
October 2012

[10] Hping: Home. As retrieved from http://Awww.hping.org/ 2 October 2012

[11] Hping3 on Ubuntu 9.04. As retrieved from
http://w ww.compuhowto.com/linux/ubuntu/hping3-on-ubuntu-9-04/ 2 October 2012

[12] Install THC-Hydra 6.4 in Ubuntu 11.04. As retrieved from
http://ubuntuforums.org/showthread.php?t=1800683 2 October 2012

[13] Intrusion Detection: Snort (IDS), OSSEC (HbIDS) And Prelude (HIDS) On Ubuntu
Gutsy Gibbon. As retrieved from from http://www.howtoforge.com/snort-ossec-
prelude-on-ubuntu-gutsy-gibbon 8 October 2012

[14] Netcat — Netcat for the 21* Century. As retrieved from http://nmap.org/ncat/ 2
October 2012

[15] Netcat tutorial for beginners. As retrieved from http://www. binarytides.com/netcat-
tutorial-for-beginners/ 2 October 2012
26|Page

[16] Nmap Network Scanning. As retrieved from http://nmap.org/book/man.html#man-
description 2 October 2012

17] OSSEC HIDS Manager/Agent Installation. As retrieved from
http://www.ossec.net/doc/manual/installation/index.html 24 September 2012

[18] Welcome to Prelude Universal Open-Source SIEM project. As retrieved from

https://www.prelude-ids.org/ 22 October 2012

19] Pytbull Installation Manual. As retrieved from
http://pytbull sourceforge. net/index. php?page=documentation&version=2.0 1
October 2012

[20] Pytbull Wiki. As retrieved from http://sourceforge.net/p/pytbull/wiki/Home/ 2
October 2012

[21] Scapy installation. As retrieved from
http://www. secdev.org/projects/scapy/doc/installation.htm! 1 October 2012

[22] Scapy: About Scapy. As retrieved from http://www, secdev.org/projects/scapy/ 2
October 2012

[23] Snort: Home Page. As retrieved from http://www.snort.org/ 1 October 2012

[24] Snort 2.9.3 and Snort Report 1.3.3 Installation Guide for Ubuntu. As retrieved from
http://wiki.aanval.com/wiki/Community:Snort_2.9.3_and_Snort_Report_1.3.3_Instal
lation Guide for Ubuntu 12.04 LTS 1 October 2012

[25] Suricata — Ubuntu Installation. As retrieved from
https://redmine.openinfosecfoundation.org/projects/suricata/wiki/Basic_Setup 8
October 2012

[26] Tepdump: Home Page. As retrieved from http:/www.tepdump.org/ 2 October 2012

[27] Tepdump Manual. As retrieved from
http://manpages.ubuntu.com/manpages/lucid/man8/tepdump.8.html 2 October 2012

[28] THC-Hydra: Home Page. As retrieved from http://www.the.org/the-hydra/ 2 October
2012

[29] Welcome to OSSEC’s documentation. As retrieved from http://www.ossec.net/doc/
2 October 2012

27|Page

(30] What are the top selling IDS/IPS and what differentiates them from each other. As

October 2012

[31] What is Suricata - Suricata. As retrieved from
https://redmine.openinfosecfoundation.org/projects/suricata/wiki/What_is Suricata 2
October 2012

[32] What is Ubuntu — The Ubuntu story As retrieved from
http://www ubuntu.com/project/about-ubuntu 2 October 2012

[33] Windows Security — Network Intrusion Detection Systems. As retrieved from
http://www.windowsecurity.com/whitepapers/intrusion_detection/FAQ Network In
trusion_ Detection Systems_.html 2 October 2012
