FOOD EXPENDITURE AND DIETARY DIVERSITY OF PANTAWID PAMILYANG PILIPINO PROGRAM (4PS) BENEFICIARY AND NON-BENEFICIARY HOUSEHOLDS IN SELECTED BARANGAYS IN SAN PABLO CITY, LAGUNA

KRISTINE R. VIGILLA

UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES LOS BAÑOS

Master of Science in Applied Nutrition

DECEMBER 2014

ABSTRACT

The main objective of the study was to analyze the food expenditure and dietary
diversity of Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program (4Ps) of the 270 beneficiary and non-
beneficiary households in selected barangays in San Pablo City, Laguna. A focus group
discussions (FGD) were done to investigate the practices of the beneficiary households in
terms of cash transfers management. The study also used secondary data to determine the
height and weight of the children (6 to 60 months old) and describe their nutritional
status. And lastly, the study determine the food expenditure and household dietary
diversity score (HDDS) of the households through survey. Findings show that the
beneficiary households mainly allot the cash transfers they received for school, health
and nutrition of their children. With respect to the nutritional status of the children,
frequency analysis suggest that there is a higher prevalence of malnutrition among
beneficiary households. On the other hand, survey results showed that beneficiary
households spend more on food (absolute value) and have more diverse diet when
compared using T-test for independent samples. The association of the socio-economic
and demographic profile with the food expenditure and dietary diversity of the
households were also analyzed using correlation analysis. The results suggest that
beneficiary households spend more on food and have more diverse diet with a higher
household size and income. Findings also imply that those who live in urban areas tend to
have higher food expenditure compared to those who live in rural areas. Moreover, those
who live in rural areas tend to have higher HDDS than those who live in urban areas.
Finally, female-headed households, as well as whose finances were managed by a family
member with higher educational attainment, tend to have more diverse diet. These
findings imply that there are still problems to be addressed, especially in the nutrition
aspect of the program in the area.

INTRODUCTION

Background of the Study

Malnutrition remains to be a serious problem in many countries. To address this
problem, risks factors should be identified to develop appropriate interventions.
However, risk factors of malnutrition are multifaceted and complex. The relative
importance of each of the known risk factor of malnutrition also tends to vary between
settings. For developing countries, food insecurity is often used as a determinant factor of

malnutrition (Saaka and Osman 2013).

According to FAO (1999), food security is the condition wherein all people, at all
times, have physical, social and economic access to sufficient, safe and nutritious food
which meets their dietary needs and food preferences for an active and healthy life. This
concept of food security is further supported by its four pillars, namely: availability,
access, utilization, and stability. Food availability is the condition wherein there is
sufficient, nutritious food and adequate nutrition-relevant services available for the
people. Thus, resources must first be available to achieve food security. On the other
hand, food access refers to the ability to produce and/or purchase the food needed by the
people to meet their dietary requirements and food preferences as well as the assets and
services necessary to achieve and maintain their optimal nutritional status (Ecker and

Breisinger 2012).

Another important component of food security is food utilization. Proper food

utilization that works towards food security are as follows: food should be properly used;

2
proper food processing and storage techniques are employed; adequate knowledge of
nutrition and child care techniques exists and is applied; and adequate health and

sanitation services exist (USAID 1992).

The fourth pillar of food security is food stability. The concept of food stability is
that people must have access and adequate food at all time to be food secure and that
there should be no risk of losing food as a consequence of sudden shocks or cyclical

events (FAO 2006).

One of the major obstacles to achieve food security at the household level is
poverty, thus, poverty eradication is essential to improve access to food (Ecker and
Breisinger 2012). Poverty is the driving factor in the lack of resources to purchase or
otherwise acquire food. With other socioeconomic and political problems, poverty creates

the bulk of food insecurity around the globe (FAO 1999).

In the Philippines, based on the statistics from the Philippine Statistical System
(PSS) through the National Statistical Coordination Board (NSCB), one out of every five
or 19.7 percent Filipino families is considered as poor. This figure is slightly lower than

in 2009 and 2006, which were 20.5 and 21.0 percent, respectively (NSCB 2013).

Aside from poverty incidence, the cited report also included subsistence incidence
or the proportion of Filipino families in extreme poverty which was estimated at 7.5
percent. This means, at that time, there were around 1.6 million extremely poor families

that are living below the food threshold or the means to meet their basic food needs and

3
satisfy the nutritional requirements set by the Food and Nutrition Research Institute

(FNRI) (NSCB 2013). In short, these are the food insecure Filipino households.

There has been a wide range of social protection programs implementation toward
poverty reduction in the Philippines. Findings show that inadequate human capabilities
and limited access to social services are the main culprits causing poverty as well as
inequality in the country. In response, the National Government of the Philippines
adopted the Conditional Cash Transfer (CCT) Program, which is now known as
Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino (Bridging Filipino Families out of Poverty) Program. The
Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program, or Pantawid Pamilya/4Ps for short, has the
primary objective of providing social assistance and social development (UNPAN, 2009).
In this program, cash assistance is provided to the poor to alleviate their immediate need
as a short term answer to poverty alleviation. The program also aims to break the
intergenerational poverty cycle through investments in human capital, specifically

education, health and nutrition (Reyes and Tabuga 2013).

The Department of Social Welfare and Development (DSWD) is the lead agency
in the implementation of Pantawid Pamilya. It works in partnership with key agencies
involved formalized by the government like the Department of Education (DepEd) and
the Department of Health (DOH), and Land Bank of the Philippines (LBP) which help
ensure the availability of health and education services as well as provide necessary
support services in the targeted areas. Inter-agency committees were created at the

national, regional and municipality levels (Fernandez and Olfindo 2011).

4
Currently, the program has been running for more than seven years from when it
was pilot tested. Various studies have been conducted to evaluate the program. However,

focus on the nutrition aspect of these studies is very limited.

Statement of the Problem

On the surface, CCT programs have been achieving its goals in various countries.
However, compliance with health and nutrition conditionalities still needs improvement
as compared to education conditionalities which has very high compliance (Bello et al.
2011).

One of the major objectives of Pantawid Pamilya is to break the intergenerational
poverty cycle through investments in education, health and nutrition. To achieve this, the
program provides cash grant amounting to PhP 500 per month that is intended for the
health and nutrition expenses of the beneficiary household, aside from the PhP 300 per
month per child intended for education expenses for 10 months (Reyes and Tabuga
2013). This was designed to increase the per capita income of the beneficiary households
by 23 percent with an expected outcome of 4 percent increase in food expenditure

(UNPAN 2009).

In 2012, the Australian Agency for International Development (AusAID) funded
an impact evaluation study of Chaudhury et al. (2013) on the Philippine Conditional Cash
Transfer Program — Pantawid Pamilya — with the support of World Bank, East Asia and
Pacific Region, as well as the Country Management Unit of the Philippines. The impact

evaluation study lacked data on food expenditure and dietary diversity of the beneficiary

5
households. Although there was higher spending on protein-rich foods, it failed to report
the impact of the program on the share of food expenditure in the household budget and
on the dietary diversity (as a measure of food security) of the beneficiary households,
which are the common indicators used by other CCT programs (e.g. Bolsa Alimentagao
of Brazil, Progresa of Mexico, PRAF of Honduras and RPS of Nicaragua). Data on food
expenditure and dietary diversity, as well as the implication on the program to the
nutritional status of the young children, would be helpful in improving the strategies of

the program, especially in the aspect of nutrition.

Furthermore, the government has no control over how the beneficiary households
spend the cash transfer. Thus, it may be interesting to know how the beneficiary

households manage their finances.

Objectives of the Study

This paper aims to compare the food expenditure and dietary diversity of Pantawid
Pamilyang Pilipino Program beneficiary and non-beneficiary households on selected
barangays in San Pablo City, Laguna.

Specifically, the objectives of the study were:

1. to describe the practices of the beneficiary households in managing cash transfers;

2. to describe the nutritional status of 6 to 60 months old children among beneficiary

and non-beneficiary households;

3. to analyze the food expenditure of the beneficiary and non-beneficiary

households;

6
to determine the food expenditure of the beneficiary and non-beneficiary
households;
to compare the food expenditure of beneficiary and non-beneficiary
households;
to compare the expenditure of beneficiary and non-beneficiary households
on the different food groups, and;
to determine the factors associated with the food expenditure of the

beneficiary households and non-beneficiary households.

4. to analyze the dietary diversity of the beneficiary and non-beneficiary households,

and;

a.

to determine the dietary diversity of the beneficiary and non-beneficiary
households;

to compare the dietary diversity of beneficiary and non-beneficiary
households, and;

to determine the factors associated with the dietary diversity of the

beneficiary and non-beneficiary households.

5. to suggest measures that will improve the design and implementation of the

program.

Significance of the Study

According to Adato and Bassett (2012), CCTs can affect nutrition through several
ways. The cash transfer itself can translate to increased food expenditures. CCTs also
provide workshops and trainings, which include topics on dietary diversity and
behavioral change for nutrition. These are often required in order to receive cash
transfers. In short, the increase in income, with increased nutrition awareness, directly
reduces poverty and food insecurity resulting to improved food expenditure and dietary
diversity and thus, improved children’s nutritional status. In this context, this study
analyzed food expenditure and dietary diversity of the beneficiary households of
Pantawid Pamilya by comparing it to the non-beneficiary households. As a promising
program against food insecurity and malnutrition, this study also looked at the CCT
program implications on the nutritional status of children ages 6-60 months among the
beneficiary households to better understand and help improve the effectiveness of the
program in this area. In addition, the study covered the financial management practices of
the beneficiary households over cash transfers, as well as their experiences and insights

about the program.

Results of this study can be used for planning and developing strategies and
policies to maximize the benefits of the program. This study can help in recognizing the
opportunities for improvement of the nutrition aspect of Pantawid Pamilya
implementation and in generating useful ideas, knowledge and information on how the
various implementing agencies and partners can further assist in a more precise and

effective manner.

Operational Definition

. Aggregate Expenditure — the total amount spent on goods and services at the
household level; the sum total of all the expenditures undertaken during a given time
period by the household.

. Beneficiary Households — those who are receiving cash grants and other benefits from
4Ps.

. Cash Transfer — the monetary assistance provided by a poverty alleviation program;
also known as cash grant.

. Chronic poor — those with per capita income (or consumption) levels persistently
below the poverty line during a long period of time. See also Poverty Threshold.

. Conditional Cash Transfer or CCT Programs - are programs that aim to alleviate
poverty through monetary and in-kind benefits, as well as reduce future incidence of
poverty by encouraging investments in education, health and nutrition.

. Dietary Diversity Score - the sum of the different food groups consumed. For
Household Dietary Diversity Score or HDDS, it is meant to provide an indication of
household economic access to food.

Extremely Poor Household — a household which fails to satisfy the food threshold.
Financial Manager — the person in-charge of handling finances in the household.

. Food security - exists when all people, at all times, have physical, social and
economic access to sufficient, safe and nutritious food which meet their dietary needs

and food preferences for an active and healthy life.

12.

13.

14.

15°

16.

17.

9

. Food Threshold - refers to the annual per capita cost of basic food requirements

which meet 100% adequacy of the recommended intake of protein and energy (2,000
calories) and 80% adequacy of other nutrients. The monthly food threshold for a

family of five as of 2012 is PhP 5,513.

. Household Member — those who live or belong in the same house.

Income gap — measures the amount of income required by the poor in order to get out
of poverty, in relation to the poverty threshold itself.

Non-beneficiary Households — those who are not receiving any assistance from 4Ps.
Nutrition security — is a condition when all people at all times consume food of
sufficient quantity and quality in terms of variety, diversity, nutrient content and
safety to meet their dietary needs and food preferences for an active and healthy life,
coupled with a sanitary environment, adequate health and care.

Poverty Incidence - the proportion of families/individuals whose annual per capita
income falls below the annual per capita poverty threshold to the total number of
families/individuals.

Poverty Line/Threshold - is equal to the annual per capita food threshold plus the cost
of other basic non-food requirements. The monthly poverty threshold for a family of
five as of 2012 is PhP 7,890.

Stunting — used to indicate chronic malnutrition since it reflects the failure to reach

linear skeletal growth.

10
18. Subsistence Incidence - the proportion of families/individuals whose annual per
capita income falls below the annual per capita food threshold to the total
families/individuals.
19. Transient Poor - those whose per capita income (or consumption) levels fluctuate
around the poverty line.
20. Wasting — thinness reflects the recent or current weight loss, often associated with

disease and/or acute food shortage or emergency conditions.

REVIEW OF LITERATURE

The Effect of Food Insecurity on Nutrition

Malnutrition is a condition caused by inadequate or unbalanced food intake or
from poor absorption of food consumed. The risk factors of malnutrition are known to be
multifaceted and complex. To address these, context-specific risk factors must be
identified for appropriate interventions to be implemented. One of the risk factors of
malnutrition is household food insecurity, wherein household have limited or uncertain
availability of nutritionally adequate and safe foods, or limited or uncertain ability to
acquire food in socially acceptable ways. As a result, there would be anxiety and
uncertainty about household food supply, insufficient quality of food, and insufficient

food intake by household members (Saaka and Osman 2013).

The study of Ajao et al. (2010) assessed the influence of household food security
status on the nutritional status of under-five children in Ile-Ife, Nigeria. A semi-structured
questionnaire was administered among the mothers of the households and their children.
Results showed that food-insecure households were five times more likely than secure
households to have wasted children. In conclusion, households with food insecurity were

more likely to have malnourished children.

An Overview of Food and Nutrition Security

Food security is defined as a situation “when all people, at all times, have
physical, social and economic access to sufficient, safe and nutritious food to meet their

dietary needs and food preferences for an active and healthy life” (World Food Summit

12
1996). This definition was also confirmed during the World Summit of Food Security in
2009. The four pillars of food security (i.e. availability, access, utilization, and stability)
were added to the concept and that the nutritional dimension is integral to the concept.
Since then, appeals have been made for concerted actions at all levels (i.e., individual,
household, national, regional, and global) and coordinated efforts and shared
responsibilities across institutions, societies, and economies to tackle food insecurity

effectively (Ecker and Breisinger 2012).

The first pillar of food security is availability. This ensures that there are
sufficient, nutritious food and adequate nutrition-relevant services. Adequate food supply
is one of the many preconditions of having enough food to eat (Sen 1981). Social
sectors, including primary health and education, play a critical role in the prevention of

nutritional deficiencies.

Access serves as the second pillar of food security. It refers to the ability of a
household to produce and/or purchase the food needed by all household members to meet
their dietary requirements and food preferences as well as the assets and services
necessary to achieve and maintain an optimal nutritional status (Ecker and Breisinger

2012).

The third pillar of food security is utilization. This is the condition of adequate
intake of sufficient and safe food based on individual physiological requirements. Lastly,
the fourth pillar of food security is stability, which is the condition that household or

individual must have access and adequate food at all time (Ecker and Breisinger 2012). A

13
diagram of the overview of food security is shown in Figure 1. This is similar to the
UNICEF Conceptual Framework (Appendix 1) which focuses on the causal factors of
malnutrition. This diagram shows the main factors of food security on the macro and
micro levels and their linkages across sectors and levels, which in turn determine
nutrition outcomes. The major channels through which external shocks/stress and
interventions at the macro and micro levels sequentially translate into individual
nutritional status and how this affects the economic and social developments in countries

and households (and their individual members) are also illustrated.

The macro level focuses on the national level of food security. Four critical
factors can affect the food security system at this level, namely: macroeconomic stability,
economic growth and its distribution, public spending, and governance and quality of
institutions. A country must maintain its economic ability to attain food availability, even
in times of economic crisis, to assure food security. Public spending, on the other hand, is
the key tool of the government towards improving food security. Government and certain
institutions greatly affect the macro level of food security since they determine the
allocation of resources for spending and investments that can help ease food insecurity
across different sectors (i.e. agriculture and water, trade and transport, health and
education), which contribute to food access and nutrition by providing food, generating
household incomes, and/or supplying assets and services essential for malnutrition

prevention and treatment, and regions within the country (Ecker and Breisinger 2012).

Interventions MACRO : Economy & state

> Macroeconomk
stability

> Quality of institutions > Economic growth
& governance & structure

Economic crises &

Key sectors climate change
—1—

Agriculture & Infrastructure & Public health &

water trade education

Economic policies &
investments

MICRO: Household & household members.

Social protection
‘measures

access Natural disasters &

Food Assets & services
* Income * Water

* Prices = Shelter &

* Production sanitation

for own Health care
consumption © Information &
knowledge

Resource
allocation
&care

Food & nutrient
intake

Human capacity &
productivity
ECONOMIC & SOCIAL
DEVELOPMENT

Figure 1. Overview of food security (adopted from Ecker and Breisinger 2012).

On the other hand, micro dimension of the system focuses on the economic and
physical access to food and assets and public services (which directly affect the health
status) at household and individual level. Food access is mainly affected by income and

assets necessary for own food production for intake. Poverty not only limits the access to

15
food of sufficient quantity and quality but also increases the vulnerability in increasing
food prices. These factors affect the nutritional status of an individual. Therefore, poverty
is regarded as the major obstacle to achieve food security at the household level. Thus,
poverty should be eradicated to improve access to food (Ecker and Breisinger 2012), or at

the very least should be alleviated.

According to Pangaribowo (2013), the concept of nutrition security came into the
picture when it was recognized that it is a necessity to include nutritional aspects into
food security. While food is defined as any substance that people eat and drink to
maintain life and growth, nutrition adds the aspects of health services, healthy
environment and caring practices. Thus, FAO defined nutrition security as a condition
when all people at all times consume food of sufficient quantity and quality in terms of
variety, diversity, nutrient content and safety to meet their dietary needs and food
preferences for an active and healthy life, coupled with a sanitary environment, adequate

health and care.

Furthermore, the concept of food security and nutrition security were then
combined and termed as food and nutrition security. It is a condition when all people, at
all times, have physical, social and economic access to sufficient, safe, and nutritious
food which meets their dietary needs and food preferences for an active and healthy life.
Food and nutrition security is also a condition where adequate food (quantity, quality,
safety, socio-cultural acceptability) is available and accessible for and satisfactorily

utilized by all individuals at all times to live a healthy and happy life. As a result of

16
combining the two concepts in a more integrated way as a single goal of policy, food

security and nutrition security is now more widely used (Pangaribowo 2013).

Indicators of Food and Nutrition Security

Food access can be measured in a number of ways including quantitative food
consumption surveys or income and expenditure analyses (Saaka and Osman 2013). In
the study of Melgar-Quinonez et al. (2007), the association between food insecurity,
determined by a modified version of the U.S. Household Food Security Survey Module
(US HFSSM), and total daily per capita (DPC) consumption (measured as household
expenditures) of urban and rural households in Bolivia, Burkina Faso, and the Philippines
were examined. Results showed that food-secure households had significantly higher
total DPC food expenditures as well as expenditures on animal source foods, vegetables,
and fats and oils than moderately and severely food-insecure households. Their findings
also suggested that those households facing food insecurity, even at moderate levels,
might have very poor dietary quality, characterized by the low intake of micronutrient-

tich foods.

There are numerous indicators of food and nutrition security at the global,
national, household and individual level. Each indicator reflects a specific aspect of FNS
and is only relevant for certain situations. One of these indicators is the diet diversity
score (DDS). Dietary diversity represents the number of different foods or food groups
consumed over a given reference period. It is used as an indicator of food and nutrition

security because it correlates with measures of food consumption and is a good measure

17
of household food access and caloric availability. Varied diet is a worthy outcome in

itself and is associated with a number of improved health outcomes (Pangaribowo 2013).

In the study of Saaka and Osman (2013), household dietary diversity score
(HDDS) was used to assess the magnitude of household food insecurity and their
consequences on the nutritional status of children 6-36 months and mothers in Tamale
Metropolis of Northern Ghana. Their results showed that HDDS was significantly
associated with body mass index (BMI) of mothers and chronic malnutrition (stunted
growth). Thus, these findings strengthen the evidence that improved household dietary
diversity is a proxy measure of household food and security. It implies that the economic
ability of a household to access a variety of foods improve the nutritional status among

young children and mothers.

Determinants of Food Expenditure

Various factors affect food expenditure and dietary diversity of a household and
one of these is income. Several countries studied and documented the income-related
differences in dietary intake patterns. Results showed that higher socio-economic status

had more conducive diets in achieving good health.

The food expenditure patterns between low and higher-income households were
compared in the study of Kirkpatrick and Tarasuk (2003). It was reported that total food
expenditures of the lower-income households were lower as compared with other
households. Lower-income households also purchased fewer servings of fruits and

vegetables.

18

In the study of Donkoh et al. (2014), the determinants of household food
expenditure and its effect on welfare was investigated in Ghana. Results showed that
households with female heads with little education, smaller households and households
living farther from the nation’s capital had spent greater percentages of their incomes on
food. The findings confirmed Engel’s Law which describe the relationship of household
expenditure and income; food expenditure increases with income and family size, but
food budget shares declines with income. In short, the poorer a family is, the larger the
budget it spends on nourishment.

Furthermore, the effect of gender power in intra-household in spending pattern
was explored by Gitter and Barham (2007). Results revealed that when women were
more powerful, more household resources were devoted toward children.

Moreover, location had an effect on the food expenditure of the household. In the
study of Fousekis and Lazaridis (2001), the food demand in the urban and rural areas of
Greece were estimated and compared. The study relied on nonparametric methods,
particularly on Kernel analysis. It was observed that the food expenditure of rural
households was higher than those of urban households. The differences could be
attributed to the relatively higher amount of consumption from own production of basic
food items in rural areas, higher or more availability of other consumer goods (education,

health, entertainment, etc.) in the urban areas and higher rent paid in urban areas.

Determinants of Dietary Diversity

Dietary diversity is used as proxy in assessing food and nutrition security since it

can reflect the economic access of the household to food. The strategies employed by the

19
household for the acquisition of food also play a vital role. The food access of the
households can be established by considering their ability to produce food or exchange
their assets for food (e.g. bartending, purchase and food—for-work). Thus, the income;
their access to, use of and/or ownership of land; their livestock; their labour and the
products of their labour; their inheritance; and gifts and transfers are all considered as
people’s assets. However, the value of the said assets varies with market forces, including

wages and prices of commodities (FAO 1997).

Additionally, food insecurity of the lower income groups is mainly due to
poverty. Also, most of these food-insecure people live in the rural areas. Thus, countries
must develop strategies to lift the purchasing power of the poor by helping them to have

income growth (Rosen and Shapouri 2001).

A study was conducted by Aidoo et al. (2013) to assess the determinants of
household food security among rural households in Sekyere-African Plains in Ghana
district. Results showed that with increasing household size, the household food security
decreases. The increase in household size indirectly reduces the income per head, and
thus, expenditure per head and per capita consumption. Also, in areas where households
depend on less productive agricultural land, having a larger household size leads to an
increase in demand for food. Since this demand is not matched with the existing food

supply, the household ends up becoming food insecure.

Aside from income, household size and location, factors affecting household food

security in various developing countries have been documented in some literatures.

20
Among the commonly identified determinants of food security are educational attainment
and sex of the household head.

In the study of Oluwatayo (2008), sex and educational level attained by the
household head had a positive influence on food security among the Nigerian households.
These findings are corroborated in the study of Bashir et al. (2012) regarding the
educational attainment of the household head and food security. On the other hand,
Akarue and Bakporhe (2013) reported that more male-headed households are food

insecure than female-headed households.

Food Expenditure, Dietary Diversity and Malnutrition

Increases in incomes of households can improve their food security in terms of
improving their access or capacity to acquire or avail food. Additional income can also
result to an increase in food consumption leading to improved nutritional well-being as
measured by anthropometric indicators. Generally, increases in income are associated
with increases in caloric intake of staple foods, especially for the poorer household but
still lesser than those with higher income groups. It is also associated with non-staple
food consumption, especially meats (von Braun 1992).

Brinkman et al. (2010) assessed the impact of global economic and financial
crises on food expenditure/consumption, nutrition and health using data from the World
Food Programme (WFP). It was observed that due to high prices, the households were
forced to reduce the quality and quantity of the food they buy and consume.

Consequently, a large number of vulnerable households became at risk of malnutrition,

21
and among the population group most affected were young children, pregnant and
lactating women.

On the other hand, Campbell et al. (2010) characterized the relationship of
household expenditure on rice and non-rice food with maternal and child malnutrition.
Using data from the Bangladesh Nutrition Surveillance Project, 2000-2005, the
prevalence of maternal and child malnutrition were measured in respective set of food
expenditure category. Findings revealed that households that spent a greater proportion
on non-rice foods and less rice had lower prevalence of maternal and child malnutrition.

It appears that households must not only have the means to buy food but also the
knowledge on which food to buy in order to reduce malnutrition and even prevent
mortality. Campbell et al. (2008) examined the relationships between household food
expenditures and under-5 child mortality among families in rural Indonesia using data
collected between 2000 and 2003 in the Indonesia Nutrition and Health Surveillance
System. Food expenditures were divided into 4 major categories: plant foods (fruits and
vegetables), animal foods, other non-grain foods, and grain foods (primarily rice). The
findings suggest that a greater proportion of income was spent on fruits and vegetables

and less on grains that lower under-5 child mortality.

Conditional Cash Transfer (CCT) Programs

Numerous programs have been developed to eradicate poverty such as livelihood
programs and micro financing. In recent years, the concept of Conditional Cash Transfer

Programs as an instrument to alleviate poverty became popular.

22

Conditional Cash Transfer or CCT Programs, as described by Skoufias and Di

Maro (2008), are programs that aim to alleviate poverty through monetary and in-kind
benefits, as well as reduce future incidence of poverty by encouraging investments in
education, health and nutrition. CCT Program schemes include provision of cash directly
to poor households on the condition of fulfilling specific requirements such as minimum
attendance of children in school, and/or attendance at health clinics, participation in
immunization, and the like. These requirements distinguish CCT from unconditional cash
transfers (such as pensions to senior citizens and the physically challenged children). As a
result, the schemes create motivation among households to adjust their behavior towards
nationally accepted social goals. Thus, programs like these are often used to improve the
access and consumption of available goods and services like health and education (UNDP

2009).

The amount of cash transfers received by the beneficiary households of a CCT
Program varies across countries (Appendix 2). Cash transfer is often received by the
mothers. However, in some countries, students, child’s caregiver or agents are allowed as
payee of the program. Frequency and mode of payment also differ across countries. Cash
transfers are usually distributed monthly or bi-monthly through debit cards or checks

(Appendix 3).

Aside from certain conditions and attempt to influence the behavior of the
recipient, vulnerability is also recognized in CCT. It requires eligibility criteria that

determine the vulnerable person/groups are as to constitute protective social security

23
measures (UNDP 2009). This ensures that the program is indeed providing for and
enabling the individuals and groups that are in need.

The concept of CCT started in the 1990s. It originated in Latin American
countries (notably Brazil, Argentina and Mexico) mainly in response to their
macroeconomic crisis. During that time, poorer households’ demand for social services,
such as education and health, declined drastically. With this, the focus of the government
then shifted from supply-side delivery of basic services to the demand-side. They also
shifted the distribution of general subsidies to a more sharply-targeted program which

aims to improve human capital formation and its efficiency in the long run (UNDP 2009).

CCT Programs across Countries

Nowadays, several countries adopt the schemes of the CCT program, which aim
at improving children’s human capital. Mexico’s Education, Health, and Nutrition
Program or Progresa, which was launched in 1997, is the first large-scale program to
incorporate both health and education component. However, in March 2002, Progresa
changed its name to Oportunidades and broadened its objectives. This was then followed
by Families in Action or Familias en Accién (FA) program in Colombia, Family
Assistance Program or Programa de Asignacién Familiar (PRAF) in Honduras, Program
of Advancement through Health and Education (PATH) in Jamaica, Social Protection
Network or Red de Proteccién Social (RPS) in Nicaragua, and Social Solidarity Fund

(SSF) in Turkey (Rawlings and Rubio 2005). The objectives, components,

24
conditionalities and eligibility of the respective CCT programs are summarized in
Appendix 4.

In the study of Rawlings and Rubio (2005), the impact of these CCT programs
was evaluated. Results showed that programs in Colombia, Mexico and Nicaragua seem
to be effective means for promoting human capital build-up among poor households. Its
success is evidenced by increased school enrolment rates, improved preventive health
care and increase in household consumption. These empirical evidences suggest that the
programs were efficient and effective and that the evaluation of the programs was useful
in meeting new demands at hand without compromising the primary objectives of the
programs. However, it does not suggest that similar successes can be achieved in other
countries nor imply that positive results from one program subject in the said evaluation
is necessarily the best approach in achieving a particular outcome.

As a new approach to social assistance, it faces several criticisms like weak
targeting, high administrative or component costs such as materials in workfare program,
lack of integration of disparate projects with a multiplicity of overlapping or unrelated
goals, accusations of paternalism and clientelism and excessive focus on reducing current
poverty with little attention to long-term structural poverty (Rawlings and Rubio 2005).

However, most of the CCT programs today have become multi-sectoral and
integrated in nature. Thus, the prospects of tackling short-term poverty while protecting
the formation of human capital/capabilities can now, thereby, as well address long-term

poverty. This led governments in Africa and Asia to also implement such schemes as a

25
response to reducing the daunting deprivations in multiple dimensions of human

development (UNDP 2009).

The Philippine CCT Program: Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program

With its success in other countries, the national government adopted a similar
CCT program through the leadership of the Department of Social Welfare and
Development (DSWD). It is called the Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program or
Pantawid Pamilya (UNPAN 2009).

The CCT program started in November 2006. With technical assistance from the
World Bank, DSWD started the implementation of the National Sector Support for Social
Welfare and Development Project (NSS-SWDRP). This project covers four reform areas,
namely: (a) Leading and Engaging the Sector in Social Protection; (b) Providing Faster
and Better Social Protection; (c) Introducing Financial Reforms to Sustain the Reform
Process; and (d) Improving Delivery Systems and Capacities through its (2) major
components: (i) Component 1- Policy and Program Reform Agenda Development; and
(ii) Component 2- Capacity Development and Installation of Systems and Tools
(UNPAN 2009).

Pantawid Pamilya was then proposed in support of the second reform agenda —
Providing Faster and Better Social Protection. This enabled DSWD to become more
effective in addressing issues related to social protection. Through this, issues related to
social protection can be addressed by supporting a system in targeting poor households

and maintain an updated database of such, which can also be used by other social

26
protection and poverty reduction programs, and by supporting the monitoring and
evaluation system of the Pantawid Pamilya as part of the effort of DSWD to move to
empirically based planning and policy (UNPAN 2009).

According to Fernandez and Olfindo (2011), Pantawid Pamilya was pilot-tested
in 2007 and was called Ahon Pamilyang Pilipino Program. With a planned target of
20,000 households, 6,000 beneficiary households were covered in the selected six
municipalities and two cities of the program. The six municipalities covered were the
following: four rural (Sibagat and Esperanza in Agusan del Sur, Lopez Jaena and
Bonifacio in Misamis Occidental) and two urban (Pasay City and Caloocan City in Metro
Manila) (Fernandez and Olfindo 2011).

After pilot-testing, full implementation of the Pantawid Pamilya immediately
followed in 2008. The target areas included 26 provinces and 12 cities nationwide,
including Quezon in Region IV-A.

Since then, Pantawid Pamilya has expanded significantly in coverage and scale
(Appendix 5). In March 2008, it scaled up as a response to the food and fuel price shocks
and global financial crisis. By January 2011, the program had about | million beneficiary
households, making it one of the largest social protection programs in the Philippines.
Various agencies like AusAID and Asian Development Bank (ADB) also provided
technical assistance and support in the subsequent phases (Fernandez and Olfindo 2011).

As of June 25, 2014, Pantawid Pamilya operates in 80 provinces covering 1483
municipalities and 144 key cities in all 17 regions nationwide. A total of 4,090,667

households are registered in the program (DSWD 2014).

27

Objectives of Pantawid Pamilya

The primary objectives of Pantawid Pamilya are to provide social assistance and
social development (Reyes and Tabuga 2013). Its purpose is to provide cash assistance to
the poor to alleviate their immediate need as an answer to short-term poverty alleviation.
Also, it aims to break the intergenerational poverty cycle through investments in human
capital i.e., education, health and nutrition. Furthermore, it aims to help fulfill the
country’s commitment to meeting some of the Millennium Development Goals (MDG),
which include: eradicating extreme poverty, achieving universal primary education,
promoting gender equality, reducing child mortality, and improving maternal health

(Fernandez and Olfindo 2011).

Expected Outcomes

Aside from the goals and objectives of the program, there are also set of expected
outcome from the beneficiary households in terms of their health and nutrition, education
and poverty or economic capacity (UNPAN 2009).

For health and nutrition of the households, the program expects to have a 10
percent increase in the number of pregnant women getting antenatal and post natal care,
and whose child birth is attended by a skilled health professional; 10 percent increase in
the number of children 0-5 years old availing of health preventive services and
immunization; 6 percent decrease in stunting among children age 0-5 years old; and 0.5

percent decrease from baseline level in the growth rate of the population (UNPAN 2009).

28
On the other hand, the program’s expected outcome in terms of education are: the
current attendance of children to increase by 8 percent; the transition rates from primary
to secondary school to increase by 8 percent; the years of education completed to increase
by one year; the elementary school gross enrollment rate for children 6 to 12 years to
increase by 5 percent; the attendance in a school or day care over 85 percent of school
days to increase by 10 percent; and increased enrollment of children 3-5 years old to day
care/pre-school by 5 percent (UNPAN 2009).
Lastly, the beneficiary households are expected to increase the share of food
expenditures in the household budget by 4 percent and the expenditure on nutrient dense

foods (protein rich foods, fruits and vegetables) by 2 percent (UNPAN 2009).

Eligibility Criteria

To be eligible or become a beneficiary of the cash grants, the household should be
a resident in poor areas selected by the program and classified as poor based on the
targeting system. The household must also have a pregnant woman or at least one child
aged 0-14 years. Lastly, they must be willing to commit and meet the conditionalities
implied in the program (Fernandez and Olfindo 2011).

Moreover, due to the reform of the educational system under the Administration
of President Aquino, the age coverage of children of Pantawid Pamilya has been
extended to 15-17 years old of poor households. However, this shall be applied only to
the households who exited early in the program because of having no 0-14 years old

anymore. Thus, eligible households shall be those who exited early in the Pantawid

29
Pamilya Program, or those who were not able to complete the 5-year program period due

to no longer having 0-14 years old or pregnant woman in the household (DSWD 2013).

Targeting System

The program targets poor households located in the poorest areas of the
Philippines. The official poverty incidence based on the latest Family Income and
Expenditure Survey (FIES) by the National Statistics Office (NSO) was employed to
identify the poorest provinces. From this, the poorest municipalities are selected using the
poverty incidence of Small Area Estimates (SAE) by the NSCB. On the other hand,
poorest cities are selected based on a standard set of indicators such as data on pockets of
poverty (Fernandez and Olfindo 2011).

In selecting poor households within the municipality, proxy means test (PMT)
method was used by determining the household’s economic condition based on
information such as household composition, socio-economic characteristics, assets,
housing conditions and tenure status, education, access to basic services, and regional
variables. This method later became the National Household Targeting System for

Poverty Reduction or NHTS-PR (Fernandez and Olfindo 2011).

Program Package

The identified poor households can receive PhP 6,000 annually (PhP 500 per
month) for their health and nutrition expenses. For education expenses, the program

provides PhP 3,000 per child for one school year (i.e. 10 months). Each beneficiary

30
household can only receive educational grant for up to a maximum of three children
(Reyes and Tabuga 2013).

For households with 15-17 years old, the program will provide social assistance in
the form of educational grant only. The cash grant is increased to Php500 from PhP300
per child considering that children will need to go to the city/municipal main proper

where the high school facility is most often located (DSWD 2013).

Conditionalities

Different conditionalities were set for the age-relevant members of the beneficiary
household in order to avail of the health and education grants. Conditionalities are
summarized in Table 1. The 0-5 year old children must visit the health centers regularly
to receive preventive health check-ups and vaccines, while the 6-14 year old children
must receive deworming pills twice a year. For education grant conditionalities, 3-5 year
old children must attend day care or pre-school classes and 6-14 year old children to
enroll in elementary or high school at least 85% of the time. On the other hand, pregnant
women must avail of pre- and post-natal care and be attended during childbirth by a
trained health professional. Lastly, the parents must attend the Family Development

Sessions (FDS) at least once a month (Fernandez and Olfindo 2011).

31

Table 1. Summary of the Pantawid Pamilya conditionalities (adopted from Fernandez
and Olfindo 2011).

HOUSEHOLD HEALTH GRANT EDUCATION GRANT
MEMBER CONDITIONALITIES CONDITIONALITIES

Children aged 3-5 years old who
receive education grants must be
enrolled in a day care or pre-school
program and maintain a class
attendance rate of 85 percent per
month.

Visit health centers to avail of
health services in the periodicity
defined by DOH protocol.

Children aged 0-
5 years

Must be enrolled in elementary or
Children aged 6- | Take de-worming pills twice a secondary school and maintain a
14 years year at schools. class attendance rate of 85 percent
per month.

Have at least one pre-natal
consultation each

Pregnant Women trimester during the pregnancy.

Delivery is assisted by skilled
health personnel.

Attend family development
sessions at least once
a month.

Grantee

Issues on Pantawid Pamilya

The salient features of Pantawid Pamilya and reviews were discussed and issues
surrounding the program were expounded by Reyes and Tabuga (2012). It questions the
integrity of the targeting system since it is based only on a single reference period in
identifying the extremely poor. Treating transient and chronic poor as the same will not
tackle poverty successfully. To address this, one needs to utilize more than one reference

period to account for the movements in and out of poverty.

32

The paper also reviewed the strategy of covering only selected barangays in some
of the municipalities to reduce data collection costs. This may lead to significant
exclusion, thus, may not be the most appropriate strategy. Another option suggested is the
use of community-based monitoring system (CBMS), which is an organized process of
data collection and processing at the local level and integration of data in local planning,
program implementation and impact-monitoring. CBMS also works towards poverty
reduction and is already used by LGUs. Thus, partnering with LGUs may be a more
practical solution. This would not only minimize duplication of efforts and wastage of
resources, but it would also encourage greater buy-in by the local governments in
national programs (Reyes and Tabuga 2013).

Furthermore, the effect of the amount of cash grant received by the beneficiaries
of the program was brought into question in terms of its sufficiency to encourage the
children to go to school or is there an incidence that the beneficiaries’ participation in
labor force reduced due to transfer (Reyes and Tabuga 2013).

Lastly, Llanto (2008) and Reyes and Tabuga (2012), suggested that concerns about the
program to ensure that the extremely poor experience the maximum benefits from the program
must be addressed. Furthermore, empirical evidence the 4Ps program impacts human capital

outcomes should be established before contemplating any scaling up.

CCT Program and Food Security

As a promising program, it is often correlated to improved food security. In other
countries, CCT Programs are rigorously reviewed to evaluate its impact not only in health

and education but also in terms of household expenditure and dietary diversity.

33)

Studies on impact assessment of Bolsa Alimentagdo of Brazil, Progresa of
Mexico, PRAF of Honduras and RPS of Nicaragua showed that the programs led to a
change in household expenditure. Specifically, survey revealed that there was an increase
in the average level of consumption (purchases and production) among Progresa
beneficiaries of Mexico. Their food expenditure increased from 2 to 10.6 percent of total
expenditure compared to control households. Higher expenditure was allocated on fruits,
vegetables, meats and animal products (IFPRI 2002). In terms of dietary diversity, an
increase in the number of food items purchased was also observed as an impact of cash
transfer programs (Appendix 6). In Nicaragua for example, the RPS beneficiary
households consumed additional four food items, on the average, compared to the non-
beneficiary households. Furthermore, beneficiaries also consumed food of higher
nutritional quality. They consumed less of the two staples (grain and beans) and more
nutrient dense foods such as meats, vegetables and fruits (Adato and Bassett 2012).

On the other hand, these factors have not yet been evaluated among Pantawid
Pamilya beneficiary households (Chaudhury et al. 2013). NSCB still view Pantawid
Pamilya as a useful tool in eradicating poverty, which is the driving factor in the lack of
resources to purchase or otherwise acquire food.

According to an NSCB (2013) report, food threshold should be satisfied first to
attain poverty threshold. The food threshold is the minimum income required by a family
to meet its basic food needs and satisfy the nutritional requirements set by the FNRI,
while having individuals in the family remaining economically and socially productive.

Poverty threshold, on the other hand, is a similar concept but incorporates the costs of

34
basic non-food needs, such as clothing, housing, transportation, health, and education
expenses, among others, in addition to costs of basic food needs. Poor families are
classified as those whose incomes are below poverty threshold while extremely poor are
those whose incomes are below food threshold.

Aside from this, NSCB also released other poverty-related statistics report, such
as the income gap. Income gap is the measure of the amount of income required by the
poor in order to get out of poverty, in relation to the poverty threshold itself. In 2012,
poor families need 26.2 percent increase in income to attain poverty threshold. In short,
for a poor family with five members, an additional income of PhP 2,067 per month is
needed to move out of poverty in 2012. Thus, if the government were to provide mere
cash transfer to all poor households in terms of what they would require to cross the
poverty threshold, a total of Php124 billion in 2012 would be required to eradicate
poverty. This estimation is relatively big when compared vis-a-vis to the budget of the
DSWD for the Pantawid Pamilya for the entirety of 2012 which was only Php 39.4
billion (NSCB 2013).

Furthermore, the Pantawid Pamilya program is designed to constitute
approximately 23 percent of beneficiary household per capita income. However, the
beneficiaries were receiving only 11 percent. It was concluded that to ensure that the
beneficiary households are receiving the full benefit of the program, more efforts should

be exerted (Chaudhury et al. 2013).

35

Impact Evaluation of Pantawid Pamilya

Based on the impact evaluation of Pantawid Pamilya, it appears that it is
achieving its objectives in terms of maternal and child health. Poor mothers now have
access to basic health service as evident on their use of antenatal and postnatal care.
Severe stunting has been reduced which indicates that the program is enabling the
families to better care for their children in a sustained and consistent manner. Children
(ages 0-5) are receiving age-appropriate health services including regular growth
monitoring, receipt of deworming pills, and vitamin A supplementation. The program is
also having an impact on the health of school-aged children 6-14 years old by ensuring
their access to deworming pills (Chaudhury et al. 2013). Although the program has
seemingly been achieving its goal in this area, the compliance with the health
conditionalities still need improvement compared to education conditionalities which has
very high compliance (Bello et al. 2011).

In terms of socio-economic indicators, there is a shift in spending patterns of poor
households. Increase in spending in education and medical expenses were observed.
Also, it was observed that poor household beneficiaries spend 38 percent more per capita
on protein-rich food such as dairy and eggs. However, the study did not conclude that
there was an increase in overall level of expenditure or consumption. Although, based on
the estimated per capita expenditure per day of sample households, reports suggest that
the cash grants represents an approximate 11 percent of household’s per capita

expenditure. To confirm this, data on aggregate consumption of the poor household is

36
required. Further research is needed to better understand the impact of Pantawid Pamilya
on household consumption or expenditure (Chaudhury et al. 2013).

Since Pantawid Pamilya or CCT in general is a relatively new approach
compared to other traditional social assistance programs, further studies need to be
conducted to assess its effectiveness. Although, it seems to be a promising program as it
achieves its primary objectives in other countries, its replicability in different conditions
still remains a challenge (Rawlings and Rubio 2005). Thus, in-depth qualitative study

will lead to a better understanding on the socio-economic impact of Pantawid Pamilya.

Conceptual Framework

Figure 2 shows the conceptual framework of the study. This study investigated
the implications of whether a poor household receiving cash transfer or not (independent
variable) on their food expenditure and dietary diversity (dependent variable). It also
determined the association of the respondents’ socio-economic and demographic
characteristics (modulating variable) on their food expenditure and dietary diversity.
Furthermore, nutritional status of the children ages 6 to 60 months (dependent variable)

among the respondents was also described.

Food Expenditure

Cash Grant from
Pantawid Pamilya

Dietary Diversity

Socio-economic a
Demographic
Profile

Figure 2. Conceptual framework of the study.

37

Nutritional Status
of Children
(ages 6-60 months)


METHODOLOGY

Research Design

The identified research problems and objectives of the study were addressed
through a descriptive research design. The implementation of the program, Pantawid
Pamilya of DSWD City Link in San Pablo City and the practices of the beneficiary
households in terms of financial management of the cash grant or cash transfer they
receive from the program were described. The food expenditure and dietary diversity of
the beneficiary households were also analyzed by comparing it to food expenditure and
dietary diversity of non-beneficiary households. Lastly, the food expenditure and dietary
diversity of the two groups were also correlated with various socio-economic and
demographic characteristics of the households and nutritional status of the children (ages

6-60 months) among the households.

Location of the Study

The study was conducted in San Pablo City, Laguna. The city of San Pablo is an
active participant of the program since its full implementation in 2011. This city has the
highest poverty incidence among the six cities of Laguna based on the 2003 and 2009
City and Municipal Level Poverty Estimates of NSCB. This means that compared to
other cities in Laguna, San Pablo City has the highest number of households with an

income below the poverty threshold.

39

Sampling Design

Considering the financial resources and manpower, respondents for the survey
were selected from certain barangays in San Pablo City (Figure 3). These barangays were
chosen based on the number of beneficiary and non-beneficiary households. The 10
barangays with the most number of beneficiary and non-beneficiary households were
chosen; five barangays were chosen from urban areas and five from rural areas. The

selected barangays are listed in Table 2.

Table 2. List of selected barangays for the survey.

URBAN* RURAL*
San Ignacio TI-A
Del Remedio VI-E
San Gregorio I-B
Santa Monica II-E
San Vicente Bagong Bayan

* Based on the classification of San Pablo City Planning and Development Office.

The study employed stratified random sampling using equal allocation. The
population consisted of 1262 households; 1041 of which are beneficiary household while
221 are non-beneficiary household of the program. Of these 1262 households, 270 were

selected by setting alpha to 5% and p=0.5 using the formula given as follows:

NPQ

n* IN— 1][CV(P)P]2 + PQ

40

From the sample size of 270, 135 respondents were selected from each group of

households. The respondents were randomly selected from the list of households in each

group.

Figure 3. The map of San Pablo City with the selected barangays for the survey identified

41

Data Collection

Desk Review

Information about the actual implementation of Pantawid Pamilya in San Pablo City was
gathered through interviews of the DSWD City Link. Pertinent documents that will

support the information from the interview were also obtained.

Focus Group Discussion (FGD)

Four FGD sessions, two for each group, were conducted. The FDG sessions were
participated in by household representatives who handle the finances at home. With a set
of open-ended questions, the knowledge and insights of the participants about the
program were established. For the beneficiary mothers, their cash management practices,
experience about the program and their perspective on what other ways can the program
help were explored as well (Appendix 7).

In the selection of participants, 8-10 household representatives were invited to
join each session. These household representatives were selected from the households to
be surveyed. The FGD for the beneficiary households were conducted in Bagong Bayan
and San Ignacio, while FGD for the non-beneficiary household was conducted in San

Ignacio and Barangay II-A.

Secondary Data

For the anthropometric measurements of the children ages 6-60 months, data on

their height and weight were gathered from the respective Barangay Health Center who

42

monitors the growth of the children. These data was used in determining the nutrition

status of the children based on the Child Growth Standard (CGS).

Survey

The respondents were surveyed using the modified 2006 Family Income and
Expenditure Survey (FIES) and Household Dietary Diversity Score (HDDS)
questionnaires. The FIES was used to gather data on their food expenditures on various
food groups namely: cereals and cereal preparation; roots and tubers; fruits and
vegetables; meat and meat preparations; dairy products and eggs; fish and marine
products; coffee, cocoa and tea; non-alcoholic beverages; and food not elsewhere
classified (includes sugar, oil, condiments, ice and cooked foods) as well as food
regularly consumed outside their home. Aside from food expenditures, FIES also covered
the household expenses on other major expenditure groups such as education, medical
care, etc. Data on household income, household head, financial manager and household
size were also gathered using FIES (Appendix 8).

On the other hand, Household Dietary Diversity Score (HDDS) questionnaire was
used in measuring the diet diversity of the household (Appendix 9). HDDS determined
the number of different food groups consumed by the household using the 24-hour recall
method (Appendix 10). This also reflects the economic ability of a household to access a
variety of foods. Different food 12 groups include the following: cereals; root and tubers;
vegetables; fruits; meat, poultry, offal; eggs; fish and seafood; pulses/legumes/nuts; milk
and milk products; oil/fats; sugar/honey and others (Swindale and Bilinsky 2006). HDDS

can also be used to assess food insecurity of the household (Saaka and Osman 2013).

43

Analytical Framework

Figure 4 shows the analytical framework of the study. For the content analysis of
the data gathered in FGD, all recorded information from the participants were compiled.
The compiled information were analyzed by looking for common categories or theme
across the entries for each question. Categories were then arranged from those with the
largest number of entries to those with the smallest. It was then synthesized by
summarizing the findings for each category noting the similarities and differences
between the groups.

For the survey, descriptive analysis—specifically measures of central tendency
(mean and mode), measure of dispersion (range), and frequency statistics —as well as t-
test for independent samples were used in describing the socio-economic and
demographic profile of the beneficiary and non-beneficiary households.

The food expenditure and HDDS of the beneficiary and non-beneficiary
households were compared using t-test for independent samples. It was also used in
comparing the amount and percentage of expenditure of the two groups in different food
groups. Moreover, the study used various statistical tests in the correlation analysis of
food expenditure and HDDS with the socio-economic and demographic characteristics of
the two groups. Pearson correlation coefficient was employed for continuous and discrete
quantitative variables, while Eta correlation coefficient (nominal) and Spearman

correlation coefficient (ordinal) for qualitative variables.

Furthermore, descriptive analysis particularly frequency statistics, was also used
in describing the nutritional status of the children ages 6-60 months among the

beneficiary and non-beneficiary households.

PRIMARY DATA COLLECTION SECONDARY DATA COLLECTION

Desk Review Anthropometric Measurement of
Focus Group Discussion children ages 6-60 months
Survey Height

Socio-economic and Demographic Weight

Profile

Food Expenditure
Household Dietary Diversity Score

Content Analysis

Descriptive Analysis

T-Test for Two Independent Samples
Correlation Analysis

Dd

Cash Transfers Management Practices of the Beneficiary Households

Analysis of Food Expenditure of Beneficiary and Non-beneficiary Households
Analysis of Dietary Diversity of Beneficiary and Non-beneficiary Households
Nutritional Status of Children Ages 6-60 months among Beneficiary and Non-beneficiary
Households

Figure 4. Analytical framework of the study

45
Operational Framework

On the other hand, Figure 5 shows the variables used to analyze the food
expenditure and dietary diversity of the beneficiary and non-beneficiary households.
These variables were associated with the respondents’ socio-economic and demographic
characteristics such as household size, income, location, educational attainment and sex
of the person managing the finances in the household. Furthermore, to describe the
nutritional status of the children ages 6 to 60 months among the beneficiary and non-
beneficiary households, indicators like weight-for-age, length/height-for-age, weight-for-

length/height and BMI-for-age were used.

Food Expenditure
% of Food Expenditure in
H hold E dit a
cel eel alpen ts Nutritional Status
Food Expenditure (absolute :
value) of Children
Food Expenditure per capita (Ages 6-60 months)
Cash Grant from Expenditure per Food Group weight-for-age
Pantawid Pamilya (absolute value and in %) height-for-age
weight-for-height
BMI-for-age
Dietary Diversity
Household Dietary Diversity

Score (HDDS)

Socio-economic and
Demographic Profile
Household Size
Income
Location
Educational Attainment of
Financial Manager
Sex of Financial Manager

Figure 5. Operational framework of the study

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

The following discussions encompass the implementation of the program
Pantawid Pamilya of DSWD City Link in San Pablo City and the practices of the
beneficiary households in terms of financial management of the cash grant or cash
transfer they receive from the program. The experiences and insights of the beneficiary
households, as well as the observations and comments of the non-beneficiary households,
towards the program were also documented. Furthermore, the nutritional status of the
children (ages 6-60 months years old) among beneficiary and non-beneficiary households
were described. Lastly, the results of the comparative analysis of food expenditure and
HDDS of beneficiary and non-beneficiary households of Pantawid Pamilya in the 10

selected barangays in San Pablo City, Laguna were discussed.

Pantawid Pamilya in San Pablo City

Pantawid Pamilya in San Pablo City started in the year 2011. Prior to this, they
conducted a survey and identified the households qualified for the program. However,
before the households could be registered to the program, they were asked to comply
with certain requirements (e.g. birth certificate of the children). Those who were able to
comply with the requirements were registered to the program and became beneficiary
households. However, those who were not able to provide the said requirements,
remained in the list of qualified households but not registered to the program. Thus, they
did not receive any assistance or cash grants from the program.

Like in other municipalities, city/municipality links are assigned to organize the

program operations at the city/municipal level. Ideally, one person is assigned for every

47

1000 household to better respond to program implementation needs. In the case of San
Pablo City, there are currently three city links overseeing the 2726 beneficiary
households in 67 barangays.

These city links are also in charge of presiding the meetings in the barangays and
coordinate with several nongovernment organizations or NGOs (usually religious
organizations like Jehovah’s Witness, Christians, etc.) to conduct trainings and FDS
(family development sessions) among beneficiary households. The FDS is conducted
every month and some of the topics discussed are on responsible parenting, family
development, financial management and how to become a better member of a community
(Appendix 11). They also mobilize the beneficiary households in helping their
communities by participating in various activities like Brigada Eskwela or National
Schools Maintenance Week and street sweeping.

Parent leaders are the point-person between city links and the beneficiary
households in the barangays. Aside from trainings and monthly FDS, the parent leaders
are also able to attend trainings on food and nutrition once. Usually, they are taught about
selection and utilization of available and nutritious foods that can be found or planted in
their backyards like malunggay, saluyot, and kamote tops. They are also taught on how to
prepare certain dishes out of it.

With the help of local government units (LGUs), an organization was formed to
ease the implementation and monitoring of the program in San Pablo City. The
organization is called the Barangay Action Team (BAT). This body includes the
Barangay Chairman and other health workers in the barangay. They are tasked in

monitoring and reporting any violations in relation to the conditions of the program

48

committed by the beneficiary households. They also guide these households in the areas
like drug abuse, gambling, responsible parenting and child labor (Appendix 12). The

organizational chart of the Pantawid Pamilya is presented in Figure 6.

Pantawid Pamilya
Regional

Pantawid Pamilya
San Pablo City Link

Barangay Action
Team

Pantawid Pamilya
Parent Leader

Figure 6. The organizational chart of Pantawid Pamilya from regional to household level

Aside from this, the DSWD City Link started organizing the women in various
barangays; the women organization is called Kababaihan Liping Pilipina or KALIPI.
Members of this organization are usually the beneficiary households. It aims to empower

and help the women in the community to generate income. With the help of LGU, DA

49

and DOLE, the women are given livelihood such as paper bag making which they sell to
contracted buyer. Moreover, they are also trained on possible business ventures like
pulvoron, candy and soap making. However, since the organization is still in its early
stages, the income generated is still minimal.

Furthermore, the DSWD City Link also tap various government organizations like
DA to provide seeds for beneficiary households to start their own backyard gardening
that will enable the households to have an additional source of food. However, the
provision of seeds is limited to a number of households.

Financial Management Practices, Experiences and
Insights about the Program

The Focus Group Discussion (FGD) was done to document the practices of the
beneficiary households in managing the cash transfers they receive from Pantawid
Pamilya, as well as their experiences and insights on the program. The non-beneficiary

households were also asked about their observations and comments towards the program.

Cash Transfer Management Practices of Beneficiary Households

Before the beneficiary households were registered to the program, they were
informed that the cash grant is intended for their children, specifically for their education.
Thus, this led the parents to separate the cash grant from their income and solely spend
the cash grant for the benefit of their children. They expressed that they are now able to
provide for the needs of their children especially in terms of school, health and nutrition.

Some said that they have more time and attention for their children now since they

50

stopped engaging in card games or gambling, which is prohibited to those who are

beneficiary of the Pantawid Pamilya.

However, beneficiary households still differ in the way they spend the cash grant.
Some of them spend the cash grant immediately upon receiving it. Since the cash grant is
received every other month, some of these beneficiary households pay the loans they
incurred two months after receiving their last cash grant. During the months between
May and June when classes usually begin, some use the grant to buy uniforms and school
supplies.

On the other hand, majority of the beneficiary households do not immediately
spend the cash grant. They budget the money, allot it mostly on school-related expenses
(e.g. school projects, baon, supplies). Some of the parents even allot the entire grant for
school-related expenses since they can afford to buy food for their family using their own
income. Beneficiary households also buy food for their children like bread, biscuits for
baon, fruits and milk, as well as vitamins. If there is still money left, they use it to buy
clothes, slippers, bags and other needs of their children.

Non-beneficiary household neighbors also observed these things. Unlike before,
some of their beneficiary household neighbors are now able to feed their family three
times a day. They also mentioned that their beneficiary household neighbors are now able

to buy a variety of nutritious foods, especially when they receive their cash grant.

Experiences of the Beneficiary Households in the Program

The beneficiary households are appreciative of being part of the program. They

expressed that they are now able to provide for the well-being of their children such as

51

new clothing, footwear, toys and sometimes even treat them in fast food chains.
Moreover, parents said that they can now provide the needs of their children in school
like school supplies, uniforms and tuition fees. These are the things that they cannot
easily provide when they were not yet in the program. This seems to encourage the
children to continue their studies and stay in school.

Aside from school and other basic needs, the parents also mentioned that they are
now able to attend to the health and nutrition needs of their children. These include
buying vitamins, medicines and having regular health check-up when the need arises.
Lastly, the beneficiary household parents are now able to buy food items such as rice,
bread, milk and vegetables not only for their children, but for other family members as
well.

Although the parents agreed that the cash grant is very helpful, majority of them
expressed that it is not enough. Majority of them stated that it depends on the number of
members of the household. Although the amount of cash grant depends on the number of
registered children in the program, those with larger household size do not feel the
benefits of the program as those with smaller household size. Also, since the cash grant
is intended to financially help the parents in their expenses for their children, the
households with large or no stable source of income are not as satisfied as much as the
those with smaller and stable source of income. Thus, a large size household with
unstable income tend to spend the cash transfer more on food alone, whereas a small
household with stable income can afford clothing and other supplies needed for schooling

in addition to food.

52

Insights of Beneficiary and Non-beneficiary Households about the Program

The beneficiary households were generally satisfied with the implementation of
the program. However, they preferred the cash grant to be given on a monthly schedule to
prevent them from borrowing money and incurring high interest rates. Some of the
households were obligated to borrow money when the cash grants were delayed, or when
the children needed to pay in school. This usually happens during holidays when
government offices are closed, possibly delaying the processing of the cash grant up to
four months. If cash grant will be given monthly, beneficiary households no longer need
to pay high interest rates for their borrowed money.

Monthly distribution of cash grant will also help the beneficiary households to
check the amount they are entitled to receive every month, especially among those who
transact or receive it through ATM. Beneficiary households who receive the cash grant
over-the-counter can easily check the amount of money they are entitled to get. Any
problems encountered during the transaction can easily be traced. However, for those
who transact through ATM, some expressed that they have no idea on how much they are
entitled to receive. Thus, monthly schedule of cash grant may be advantageous.

Most of the breadwinners of beneficiary and non-beneficiary households had no
stable job or sustainable income. Therefore, it will be better if they will be given
livelihood, especially for the housewives, in addition to the cash grant they receive. With
this, there will be more viable source of income for the family.

Moreover, both the beneficiary and the non-beneficiary households want the
program to continue and help more poor in the future. They mentioned that there are still

many households that are supposed to be beneficiary households of the program and until

53

now are not included as beneficiaries. They hope that in the succeeding waves of
household targeting for the program, more deserving households will be given a chance

to become beneficiary households.

Socio-economic and Demographic Profile

The survey was done in May 2014 in selected barangays in San Pablo City,
Laguna, namely: San Gregorio, San Ignacio, San Vicente, Sta. Monica, Del Remedio,
Bagong Bayan, I-B, II-A, II-E and VI-E using the FIES and HDDS questionnaires.

The socio-economic and demographic profile of the beneficiary and non-
beneficiary households in the 10 selected barangays is summarized in Table 3. Results
showed that the income (absolute value) of the beneficiary households were significantly
higher than those of the non-beneficiary households. However, no significant difference
was found in terms of income per capita between the two groups. This result implies that
the cash transfer from program was not enough to make the income per capita of the
beneficiary households significantly higher compared to the non-beneficiary households.

On the other hand, the household expenditure and household size of the
beneficiary households were significantly higher than the non-beneficiary households.
Furthermore, majority of the respondents from the two groups resided in the rural areas
and had a female financial manager. In terms of educational attainment of the financial
manager, majority among the beneficiary households were more educated than the

majority of the non-beneficiary households.

54

DOUBDIJTUBIS Jo [242] %4O1 1s

106 = ayeuoy 96 aeUay xa

6 8p Arequowayy T'Lp fooyss yar juaMUID)Y jouolwonpy
JoBeuey] jeroueuly
60L leany £69 = [einy uole007
8L10 ESE 19 91 Sle vL 6 (syjuow! ur) uaupytyD Jo ody
*8S0°0 9's £1-Z PLS o1-Zz 8ZIg pjoyssnoy,
#000 €7'EBL‘PS @2OLZE — 9761 6L'€96°€9 100°@81 — 798‘II aanypuadxg
6610 02°008'II 000‘9S - SLL‘Z 18'L66°71 009°9p — 8Zh‘E pido dad aui03uy
+7000 + $6°696'SS 000‘0b7 — 000'1Z 1766589 000007 — 008‘€I (anjea ainjosqe) owoou]

ueay] % apopyasuey uray % apoyyosuey
aNTVA-d SOILSTAALIVUVHOD

SA TOHASNOH AUVIOIANAG-NON SQ TOHASNOH AUVIOIANAL

“spjoyasnoy Asersiyouaq-uou pue Arelo1yauaq ay) Jo apijoid s1ydesSowop pue s1w0Udda0I00¢g *¢ 919421

55

Nutritional Status of Children (Ages 6-60 months old) among the

Beneficiary and Non-beneficiary Households

Table 4 summarizes the percentage distribution of the nutritional status of 6 to 60

months old children among the beneficiary and non-beneficiary households in terms of

weight-for-age, length/height-for-age, weight-for-length/height and BMI-for-age.

Table 4. Percentage distribution based on the nutritional status of 6-60 months old
children among beneficiary and non-beneficiary households.

NUTRITIONAL STATUS BENEFICIARY IN-BENEFICIARY
Weight-for-age
Normal 69.8 75.8
Underweight 22.6 16.7
Severely underweight 15 7.6
Total 100.0 100.0
Length/height-for-age
Normal 42.9 53.1
Stunted 11.4 18.8
Severely stunted 45.7 28.1
Total 100.0 100.0
Weight-for-length/height
Obese 28.0 14.3
Overweight 12.0 7A
At risk of overweight 16.0 14.3
Normal 36.0 53.6
Wasted 4.0 71
Severely wasted 40 3.6
Total 100.0 100.0
BML-for-age
Obese 25.7 15.2
Overweight 8.6 91
At risk of overweight 11.4 15.2
Normal 25.0 39.4
Wasted 7.0 6.1
Severely wasted 28.6 15.2
Total 100.0 100.0


56

Results showed that based on weight-for-age, children among beneficiary
households (30.1%) had higher percentage of underweight and severely underweight
combined, compared to children among non-beneficiary households (24.3%). On the
other hand, children among beneficiary households (57.1%) also had higher percentage
on stunting and severe stunting combined, compared to non-beneficiary households
(46.9%) based on length/height-for-age. Moreover, based on weight-for-length/height
and BMI-for-age, the children among beneficiary households (40% and 34.4%,
respectively) had higher percentage of obesity and overweight combined, compared to
children among non-beneficiary households (21.4% and 24.3%, respectively).
Furthermore, children among beneficiary households (35.6%) also had higher percentage
on wasting and severe wasting combined, compared to non-beneficiary households
(21.3%) based on BMI-for-age. On the contrary, children among beneficiary households
(8%) also had lower percentage on wasting and severe wasting combined, compared to

non-beneficiary households (10.7%) based on weight-for-length/height.

Given the cash transfer from Pantawid Pamilya, coupled with the mother’s
effective parenting and counselling sessions and the weight monitoring of children,
beneficiary households are expected to be able to translate the expected increase in their
food expenditure into better nutritional status of their families. However, results suggest
that there is higher prevalence of malnutrition (except for wasting and severe wasting
combined based on weight-for-length/height) among children in beneficiary households
compared to non-beneficiary households. These results also imply that in spite of more
than three years of implementation of the program in the area, there are still problems to

be addressed in the nutrition of the children. Probably, employing strategies that may

57

complement the cash transfers can help address these problems. Based on the study of
Langendorf et al. (2014), combining cash transfer with a nutritious supplementary food
are potentially more effective at preventing acute malnutrition than strategies relying on
either cash transfer or nutritious supplementary food alone. On the other hand, Bassett
(2008) emphasized employing nutrition-related conditionalities that generally require
participation in education workshops to increase maternal knowledge and improve
practices related to proper child care and feeding practices, sanitation and food safety.
These are some of the factors that, if neglected, can contribute to stunted growth of the
children based on the WHO Conceptual Framework on Childhood Stunting (Appendix
13). Thus, these strategies may help ensure food and nutrition security among beneficiary

households, which can lead to improved nutritional status of the children.

Food Expenditure and HDDS Survey Results

Table 5 presents the percent distribution of total household expenditure by major
expenditure group of beneficiary and non-beneficiary households. Result showed that
there was no significant difference in terms of food budget share (p-value=0492) between
beneficiary and non-beneficiary household. But supposedly, the food budget share or the
percentage of food expenditure on household expenditure of the beneficiary households
is higher than the non-beneficiary by 4 percent as per the objective of the program.
However, the results indicated otherwise; beneficiary households even had slightly lower

food budget share on food than non-beneficiary households.

58

Table 5. Percent distribution of total household expenditure by major expenditure group
of the beneficiary and non-beneficiary households for six months (November

2013-April 2014).

EXPENDITURE BENEFICIARY (%) | NON-BENEFICIARY (%)

Food 75.09 75.72
Alcoholic Beverages 1.28 1.07
Tobacco 1.42 1.61
Fuel, Light and Water 6.43 5.93
Transportation and Communication 3.95 3.32
Household Operations 1.52 1.49
Personal Care and Effects 3.86 3.93
Clothing, Footwear and Other Wear 2.15 1.62
Education 0.53 0.66
Recreation 0.10 0.11
Medical Care 0.70 0.75
Non-Durable Furnishings 0.11 0.16
Durable Furniture and Equipment 0.20 0.11
Rental 0.34 1.38
House Maintenance and Minor Repairs 0.34 0.17
Taxes Paid 0.06 0.01
Miscellaneous Expenditures 1.10 0.97
Other Expenditures 0.69 0.79

Total 100.00 100.00


59

The food expenditure (absolute value) and household dietary diversity score
(HDDS) of the beneficiary and non-beneficiary households were also compared using T-
test for independent samples (Table 6). Findings revealed that even though the
beneficiary households had lower percentage of food expenditure on household
expenditure than the non-beneficiary households, the beneficiary households had
significantly higher food expenditure (absolute value) than non-beneficiary households.
However, there was no significant difference in terms of food expenditure per capita.
Results also indicated that the HDDS of the beneficiary households was significantly
higher than the non-beneficiary households. This result implies that beneficiary

households have higher economic access to food.

Table 6. T-test analysis of food expenditure, food expenditure per capita and HDDS of
the beneficiary and non-beneficiary households for six months (November
2013-April 2014).

CHARACTERISTICS BENEFICIARY NON-BENEFICIARY P-VALUE
Food Expenditure

47,050.26 40,606.48 0.000*
(absolute value)
Bod Expencinie 8620.40 8305.21 0.589
per capita
HDDS 7.79 7.49 0.036*

at 10% level of significance

The percentage and absolute amount of expenditure per food group of the
beneficiary and non-beneficiary households were also analyzed using T-test for
independent samples. Results showed no significant differences between the two groups

in terms of percentage of expenditure on different food groups (Figure 7).

Cereal and cereal preparations
‘@ Roots and tubers,

1s Frutts and vegetables

‘= Meat and mest preparations
= Dalry products and eggs

‘= Fish and marine products

= Coffee, cocoa and tea

|= Non-alcoholic beverages

» Food not elsewhere classified

= Consumed outside the home

Beneficiary Non-Beneficiary

Figure 7. Percentage of expenditure on different food groups of the beneficiary and non-
beneficiary households for six months (November 2013-April 2014)

On the other hand, in terms of the absolute amount of expenditure per food group
(Figure 8), beneficiary households spent significantly higher than non-beneficiary
households on the following food groups: cereals (p-value=0.059); roots and tubers (p-
value=0.013); fruits and vegetables (p-value=0.000); meat and meat preparations (p-
value=0.000); fish and seafoods (p-value=0.007); foods consumed outside home (p-

value=0.017), and; foods not specified elsewhere (p-value=0.010).

61

(p10z dv-€107 JequIsAON)

SYJUOUI XIS 10} spfoyssnoy Arelolyauaq-uoU pue AreIoyaUAQ ay) Jo sdnos pooy juasaJJIP UO ainytpuddxe Jo yuNouTY *g BMI]

Aernyauaq
-UON

Aenyeueg

awoy
ay) apisino
pawinsuo>

payissey> suonesedaid
auaymasya safeianaq ea} pue sjonposd s@apue — suoyexedasd ~—sayqeyaBan jeasa>
you pooy 2yOYOIe-UON 80202 ‘aayo) aueW pue Ys|4 s}onposd AJeq eawpueIeAAW  puesiNy siaqn) pue SJooYy pue jeasa)

0

0008

o000t

dd Ut omppusdxg

62

Different socio-economic and demographic characteristics of the respondents were
also used to identify the factors associated with the food expenditure (absolute value) of
the two groups using correlation analysis. For the beneficiary households, results showed
that food expenditure was significantly associated with household size, income and
location (all had p-value=0.000). However, results also suggest that household size,
income and location had different degrees of association with food expenditure
(Appendix 14). Household size had weak association with food expenditure
(coefficient=0.266), whereas income (0.830) and location (0.440) had very strong and

moderate association with food expenditure, respectively (Table 7).

Table 7. Association of food expenditure and the different characteristics of the
beneficiary and non-beneficiary households.

CHARACTERISTICS BENEFICIARY NON: BENENICIARY)
Coefficient p-value Coefficient p-value
Household Size! 0.266 0.000* 0.316 0.000*
Income! 0.830 0.000* 0.804 0.000*
Location? 0.440 0.000* -0.067 0.352
Financial Manager
Sex? 0.022 0.400 -0.011 -0.996
Educ. Attainment? -0.003 0.921 0.080 0.180

1 Pearson correlation coefficient
2 Eta correlation coefficient
3 Spearman's correlation coefficient
*at 10% level of significance
Household size and income and location had a positive correlation with food
expenditure indicating a direct relationship. The beneficiary households who lived in

urban areas spent on the average PhP 62,009.23 on food for six months, while the

average food expenditure in six months of those who lived in rural areas was PhP

63

40,418.97. This implies that those beneficiary households who live in urban areas tend to
have higher food expenditure than those who live in rural areas.

On the other hand, food expenditure (absolute value) of the non-beneficiary
households was only found to be significantly and positively associated with household
size (p-value=0.000) and income (p-value=0.000), which also suggests a direct
association. However, the association of food expenditure with household size was weak
(coefficient=0.3 16), whereas for income, the association was strong (coefficient=0.804).

Different socio-economic and demographic characteristics of the respondents
were also used to identify the factors associated with HDDS of the two groups using
correlation analysis (Table 8).Results showed that household size (p-value=0.062),
income (p-value=0.000), location (p-value=0.000), sex (p-value=0.000) and educational
attainment (p-value=0.000) of financial manager of the beneficiary households were all
significantly and positively associated with HDDS. This implies that those who live in
rural (average HDDS: 7.99) and have female financial manager (HDDS: 7.91) in the
household tend to have higher HDDS as compared to urban (average HDDS: 7.35) and
have male financial manager (HDDS: 6.11). The degree of association of HDDS of
beneficiary households with income (coefficient=0.152), location (coefficient=0.151) and
educational attainment of financial manager (coefficient=0.139) was very weak, while it
was weak with sex of the financial manager (coefficient=0.230).

On the other hand, household size (p-value=0.006), location (p-value=0.000) and
educational attainment (p-value=0.000) of the financial manager of the household were
found to be significantly associated with the HDDS of the non-beneficiary households.

Household size had a negative (coefficient=-0.185) association with HDDS, while

64

location had a positive (coefficient=0.270) association with HDDS. This implies that
those who live in rural areas (average HDDS: 7.84) tend to have higher HDDS as
compared to those in the urban areas (average HDDS: 6.63). Lastly, educational
attainment of financial manager of the household had a positive (coefficient=0.224)
association with HDDS of the non-beneficiary households. Nonetheless, the relationship
of HDDS with household size of the non-beneficiary households was very weak
(coefficient=-0.185) whereas, it was weak for both location (coefficient=0.270) and

educational attainment (coefficient=0.224) of financial manager.

Table 8. Association of HDDS and the different characteristics of the beneficiary and
non-beneficiary households.

BENEFICIARY NON-BENEFICIARY
CHARACTERISTICS - -

Coefficient p-value Coefficient p-value
Household Size! 0.058 0.062* -0.185 0.006*

Income! 0.152 0.000* -0.061 0.368
Location” 0.151 0.000* 0.270 0.000*

Financial Manager

Sex? 0.230 0.000* 0.083 0.412

Educ. Attainment? 0.139 0.000* 0.224 0.000*

1 Pearson correlation coefficient

2 Eta correlation coefficient

3 Spearman's correlation coefficient
at 10% level of significance

Food Expenditure and HDDS Survey Discussion

The results from the t-test for independent samples revealed that the beneficiary
households had higher food expenditure (absolute value) than the non-beneficiary
households. This may be attributed to the added income from the Pantawid Pamilyang

Pilipino Program, which significantly increased the income of the beneficiary

65

households. According to Holmes and Bhuvanendra (2013), cash transfers directly
increase income which can be spent on increasing the quantity of food consumed. Similar
results were observed in a CCT program in Mexico, where beneficiary households had
higher food expenditure than for comparable control households (Hoddinott et al. 2000).
Also, based on the FGD, the beneficiary household parents said that they are now able to
buy more food not only for their children but also for their family and feed them three
times a day.

However, in terms of food expenditure per capita of the two groups, there was no
significant difference found. This implies that the cash transfer from the program was not
enough to make the food expenditure per capita of the beneficiary households
significantly higher compared to the non-beneficiary households. Also, as mentioned, the
program aimed to increase the percentage of food expenditure in household expenditure
by 4%. However, results showed no significant difference between the two groups.
Percentage statistics even showed that the beneficiary households had slightly lower food
budget share on household expenditure than the non-beneficiary households even if they
had significantly higher food expenditure and income.

Results from the correlation analysis showed that there was a positive association
between the income and food expenditure (absolute value) of beneficiary and non-
beneficiary households found in this study. According to FAO (1997), the ability of the
household to access to the food supply can be considered in terms of their income. The
result implies that those households with higher income had higher economic ability to

acquire food, and thus, have higher food expenditure.

66

Another socio-economic and demographic characteristic that was positively
associated to the food expenditure (absolute value) of the beneficiary and non-beneficiary
households was household size. Sekhampu (2012) explained that larger household sizes
require increased food expenditure. Also, the cost of providing a meal for six is little
more than the cost for four (Ridgwell 1996).

Food expenditure (absolute value) was also associated with the location of the
beneficiary households only. Beneficiary households living in urban areas tend to have
higher food expenditure than those who live in rural areas. In the paper of Stage et al.
(2009), those who live in urban areas tend to spend higher on food purchased
commercially at market prices, rather than own-produced food. Whereas, in rural areas,
almost half of their food are own produced rather than purchased. In the case of the
beneficiary households, even though they were given seeds for backyard gardening, those
living in urban areas have limited land for gardening. Meanwhile, in rural areas, there is
sufficient land for backyard gardening. This enables them to produce their own food.

Another reason cited by Stage et al. (2009) is that urban dwellers tend to have
higher income that can be used to acquire food than those in rural areas. As mentioned
earlier, households with higher income tend to have higher food expenditure. When the
income of the beneficiary households living in urban (Php 88,933.14) and rural (Php
60,151.63) areas were compared using t-test for independent samples, results showed that
beneficiary households living in urban had significantly higher income (p-value=0.001)
than those who lived in rural areas. This may also be the reason why the food expenditure

on the non-beneficiary households is not associated with their location. There was no

67

significant difference (p-value=0.917) between the income of the non-beneficiary
households who live in urban (Php 55153.63) and rural areas (Php 55774.73).

Findings also indicated that beneficiary households had significantly higher
HDDS than the non-beneficiary households. They spend more on food groups like
cereals, roots and tubers, fruits and vegetables, meat and meat preparations, fish and
seafoods, food consumed outside home, and on food not specified elsewhere. These
findings also suggest that beneficiary household are able to spend more on nutrient dense
food such as protein-rich food (meat and fish), and on fruits and vegetables than their
non-beneficiary household counterpart. This observation is consistent with the statement
of the mothers during the FGD that they use the cash grant to purchase protein-rich food,
fruits and vegetables, as well as treat their children to fast food restaurants. It seems that
having added income through the CCT program in their disposal, beneficiary households
can now avail of more diverse food as compared to the non-beneficiary households. Since
the HDDS also reflects the economic ability of a household to access a variety of foods
(Swindale and Bilinsky 2006), it seems that the cash grant that was added to their
household income helped increase their access to variety of food and thus, more food
secure. Improved quality of food consumption of beneficiary households has also been
observed in other countries. In Colombia for example, there has been an increased
expenditure on items rich in protein, such as milk, meat, and eggs among the beneficiary
households of their CCT Program, the Familias en Accién (Attanasio and Mesnard 2006).

Dietary diversity of the non-beneficiary households seems to be negatively
affected by household size. Non-beneficiary households with larger households were

observed to have lower HDDS. In study of Pelto et al. (1991), it was also observed that

68

those from larger households had significantly consumed poorer quality diets. It appears
that the resources available to the families might be getting are inadequate to support
large household size. Furthermore, according to Olayemi (2012), the implication of
having large family on food security is that there will be lesser food available to each
person within the household.

On the other hand, larger households had higher HDDS as observed among
beneficiary households. Although household size usually has a negative effect, Toulmin
(1986) stated that household size can also have a positive impact on food security and
dietary quality when there is more diversified income sources. In the case of beneficiary
households, aside from their usual sources of income such as salaries, wages and gift
from relatives, they also had other sources like cash transfers from the program, as well
as income generated by those households who are members of the women’s organization,
KALIPI.

The HDDS of the beneficiary households was significantly and positively
associated with their household income. Generally, those with high income household
have higher dietary diversity, while low income household have lower dietary diversity
(Worsley et al. 2003). According to Steward and Blisard (2011), low income households
tend to buy less meat, dairy products, fruits and vegetables. This purchasing pattern of
the low income households can lead to less varied diet, on the average, than the higher
income household. Taruvinga et al. (2013) also suggest that demand for vegetables and
fruits increase with income, while for low income households, these are considered as an
expensive source of energy, and thus, prioritize fulfilment of their basic energy

requirement to avoid hunger.

69

On the other hand, there was a negative but no significant association between the
HDDS of the non-beneficiary households and their household income. Although, based
on the correlation, coefficient suggests that those with low income households have
higher HDDS than higher income households, the p-value implies that there was no
significant difference. This is probably due to lack of nutrition knowledge, which can
also influence the household food acquisition (Kachondham 1992). Unlike the
beneficiary households, the non-beneficiary households were not trained about food and
nutrition. Thus, even with high income households, their dietary diversity is just the same
as those with low income households.

Another factor which was positively associated to HDDS of the two groups was
location. For both groups, findings showed that households living in rural areas have
more access to a variety of food than those who live in urban areas. This implies that
beneficiary households living in urban areas are more prone to food insecurity as
compared to those in rural areas. As mentioned by Browne et al. (2009), those who are
living in urban areas are likewise vulnerable to food insecurity. Further complicating the
scenario, food prices are often higher in urban areas than in rural areas (Saethre 2005;
Stage et al. 2009). Also, according to Popkin (1993), even though urban settlers generally
have greater access to a more diverse array of both domestic and imported food, it does
not necessarily mean that it can be translated into increased dietary consumption (Popkin
et a. 2001; Johns and Shtapit 2004).

These findings were also observed in Minnesotan communities in the study of
Smith and Miller (2011) as they explored the food system in urban and rural

communities. Findings showed that urban residents relied more on retail grocery stores.

70

Whereas the residents in rural areas, aside from buying from retail grocery stores for
food, also had gardening, hunting, and informal food exchange systems as their food
sources. Results also revealed that these activities may contribute valuable nutrients to
the diet of the rural communities.

The sex of the financial head or manager in the household was also associated
with HDDS of the beneficiary households. Results imply that beneficiary households
with female financial manager have more diverse diet compared to those beneficiary
households who have male counterpart. According to Pandya-Lorch et al. (2012), men
and women spend money differently. Women are likely to spend the income they control
on food, healthcare and education of their children. Furthermore, women are usually
responsible for food preparation. Therefore, women are more crucial to the dietary
diversity of their households. Women also select food to purchase by considering which
will complement their staple foods and balance the household’s diet (World Bank 2009).

According to IFPRI (2002), being a beneficiary household decreases the
probability of men as sole decision maker in the household. In fact, over time, men are
less likely to make decisions by themselves. There is a tendency that women will become
the sole decision maker on the use of their household’s extra income. This shift in pattern
on decision-making, as most evidences show, may have positive effects on household
food security (Quisumbing et al. 1995). This probably explains why sex of the financial
manager in the household is only associated with HDDS among beneficiary households
but not in non-beneficiary households. Possibly, in non-beneficiary households, although
the women or the wife handles the finances, the decision-making still lies on the men or

husbands.

71

Lastly, the HDDS of the two groups was positively associated with the
educational attainment of the financial manager in the household. This implies that the
more educated the financial manager, the more diverse the diet of the household
becomes. According to Taruvinga et al. (2013), this positive association of education to
the quality of the diet in the household may be due to greater awareness of and the ability

to better understand nutrition knowledge as well as put the knowledge into practice.

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION

The study aimed to analyze the food expenditure and dietary diversity of Pantawid

Pamilyang Pilipino Program beneficiary and non-beneficiary households on selected

barangays in San Pablo City, Laguna. The following were the major findings:

1.

Majority of the beneficiary households expressed that they allotted the cash
transfers they received for school, health and nutrition of their children.
Meanwhile, some households used the cash transfer for school-related needs of
their children alone since they can afford expenses on health and nutrition of their
household. They claimed that they see to it that the cash transfer is solely spent
for the needs of their children.

With respect to the nutritional status of the children (6 to 60 months old), results
suggest that there is a higher prevalence of malnutrition (except for wasting and
severe wasting combined based on weight-for-length/height) among beneficiary
households. These results also imply that there are still problems to be addressed
in the nutrition of the children.

Beneficiary households had higher food expenditure (absolute value) and HDDS
compared to the non-beneficiary households. However, there was no significant
difference in terms of food expenditure per capita.

The food expenditure (absolute value) of the two groups was associated with
household size and income, as well as location of the beneficiary households. On
the other hand, HDDS of the two groups was associated with household size,
location and educational attainment of the financial manager, as well as income

and sex of the financial manager in the beneficiary households.

73

5. Finally, findings suggest that the beneficiary households spend more on food and
have more diverse diet as household size and income increase. This also implies
that those who live in urban areas tend to have higher food expenditure than those
who live in rural areas. However, those who live in rural areas tend to have higher
household dietary diversity than those who live in urban areas. Moreover, female
and more educated head of the households also tend to be more diverse than the

less educated and male-headed households.

RECOMMENDATION

Due to lack of a baseline data, the study was only able to describe and compare
the food expenditures and HDDS of the beneficiary and non-beneficiary households, and
show their associations with various factors that may be affecting them. The availability
of a baseline data (eg. food expenditure, HDDS, nutritional status of children) could aid
in the assessment if the cash transfer program impacts the food expenditure and
household dietary diversity. This will also be helpful for an in-depth impact evaluation in
the future in assessing the performance of the conditional cash transfer program more
precisely, especially in terms of health and nutritional status of the households.

Moreover, results from the correlation analysis in the study imply that food
expenditure and dietary diversity of the beneficiaries of Pantawid Pamilya may depend
on socio-economic and demographic characteristics of the households. These
implications of socio-economic and demographic characteristics on the food expenditure
and dietary diversity of the beneficiary household may also be further investigated in
future studies

Furthermore, findings suggest that beneficiary households, and even among non-
beneficiary households, living in rural areas have higher access to a variety of food than
in urban areas. These observations seem to contradict the results obtained by other studies
in which households living in urban areas are said to have more access to a variety of
food. Investigation of other factors that might affect food security among urban and rural
poor may help in planning suitable strategies of Pantawid Pamilya in improving their
dietary diversity. It will be interesting to note if the socio-cultural activities (i.e. barter

system, gardening, foraging, etc.) will also be looked into in future studies.

75

For the nutritional status of the children, possible contributors like child care,
available health services and sanitation system, presence of illness, and intra-household
distribution were not considered in this study. Thus, for future investigation, it is
recommended to look further into these factors in pursuit of understanding and improving
the nutritional status among the beneficiary households.

In addition, the amount of cash transfer given for health and nutrition of the
children by Pantawid Pamilya is only Php 500. Probably, this amount is too small to
have an impact on the nutrition of the children and increasing it may significantly
improve the nutritional status of the children. Perhaps, combining cash transfer with food
transfer or supplementary food may help assure improvements in the nutritional status of
young children. Furthermore, incorporating topics that can increase the maternal
knowledge and improve practices in terms of proper child care and feeding practices,
sanitation, food safety and other factors that can contribute to nutrition status of the
children, in the trainings and FDS among the beneficiary households may help lead to
improved nutritional status of the children.

Lastly, the city link supports women empowerment and even initiated the
formation of a women’s organization in the area. However, the effects these kinds of
organization among beneficiary households have not yet been explored in the context of
Pantawid Pamilya. Thus, for future studies, it may be noteworthy to know how women
empowerment specifically affects the beneficiary households and how it could help the

program in its objectives on health, nutrition and poverty alleviation.

LITERATURE CITED

ADATO M, BASSETT L. 2012. Social protection and cash transfers to strengthen
familes affected by HIV and AIDS. Research reports. International Food Policy
Research Institute (IFPRI). Retrieved June 19, 2013 from
http://www. ifpri.org/sites/default/files/publications/rr177.pdf

AIDOO R, MENSAH JO, TUFFOUR T. 2013. Determinants of household food security
in the Sekyere-A fram plains district of Ghana. European Scientific Journal, 9(21).
Retrieved June 19, 2013 from
http://eujournal.org/index.php/esj/article/download/1488/1497

AJAO KO, OJOFEITIMI EO, ADEBAYO AA, FATUSI AO, AFOLABI OT. 2010.
Influence of family size, household food security status, and child care practices
on the nutritional status of under-five children in Ile-Ife, Nigeria. Afr J Reprod
Health. (4 Spec no.) : pp. 117-26. Retrieved June 19, 2013 from
http://www. fpconference2009.org/media/DIR_169701/15f1ae857ca97 193 ffff831f
ffffd524.pdf

AKARUE OB, BAKPORHE OT. 2013. Food Insecurity and its Determinants in Rural
Households in Ughelli North Local Government Area of Delta State Nigeria.
International Journal of Innovative Agriculture & Biology Research 1 (2):20-30,
2013. Retrieved June 19, 2013 from __ http://seahipub.org/wp-
content/uploads/2013/10/IJIABR-S-2-2013.pdf

ATTANASIO O, MESNARD A. 2006. The impact of a conditional cash transfer
programme on consumption in Colombia. Fiscal Studies 27(4): 421-42. Retrieved
July 7, 2014 from http://www. ifs.org.uk/edepo/rs_fam02.pdf

AUDSLEY B, HALME R, BALZER N. 2011. Comparing cash and food transfers: a
cost-benefit analysis from Rural Malawi in Omamo, S.W., U. Gentilini and S.
Sandstrém. Revolution: From Food Aid to Food Assistance-Innovations in
Overcoming Hunger. WFP. Retrieved July 7, 2014 from
http://documents.wfp.org/stellent/groups/public/documents/newsroom/wfp225957
pdf

BAILEY S. 2013. The Impact of Cash Transfers on Food Consumption in Humanitarian
Settings: A review of evidence. Retrieved September 23, 2014 from
www.cashlearning.org/downloads/cfgb---impact-of-cash-transfers-on-food-
consumption-may-2013-final-clean.pdf

BASHIR MK, SCHILIZZI S, PANDIT R. 2012. The determinants of rural household
food security in the Punjab, Pakistan: an econometric analysis (No. 122526).
Retrieved June 19, 2013 from
http://ageconsearch.umn.edu/bitstream/122526/2/working%20paper%201203.pdf

BASSETT L. 2008. Can conditional cash transfer programs play a greater role in
reducing child under nutrition? World Bank Social Policy Discussion Paper, 835.

77

Retrieved September 23, 2014 from
http://siteresources.worldbank.org/SOCIALPROTECTION/Resources/SP-
Discussion-papers/Safety-Nets-DP/0835.pdf

BELLO AL, BUSTOS RB, MANALO NA. 2011. Policy Issues and Strategic Directions
for Conditional Cash Transfer as a Measure to Reduce Rural Poverty and
Malnutrition in the Immediate and Medium Terms. UPLB-CEM Policy Paper
Series 1. Policy Paper 6.

BRINKMAN HJ, DE PEE S, SANOGO I, SUBRAN L, BLOEM MW. 2010. High food
prices and the global financial crisis have reduced access to nutritious food and
worsened nutritional status and health. The Journal of Nutrition, 140(1), 153S-
1618. Retrieved June 19, 2013 from
http://jn.nutrition.org/content/140/1/153S.full.pdf+html.

BROWNE J, LAURENCE S, THORPE S. 2009. Acting on food insecurity in urban
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities. Policy and practice
interventions to improve local access and supply of nutritious food, 2000-2010.
Retrieved July 7, 2014 from
http://www. healthinfonet.ecu.edu.au/uploads/resources/17213_17213_acting-on-
food-insecurity-in-urban-atsi-communities.pdf

CAMPBELL AA, DE PEE S, SUN K, KRAEMER K, THORNE-LYMAN A,
MOENCH-PFANNER R, SEMBA RD. 2010. Household rice expenditure and
maternal and child nutritional status in Bangladesh. The Journal of Nutrition,
140(1), 189S-194S. Retrieved June 19, 2013 from
http://jn.nutrition.org/content/140/1/189S.full.pdft+htm]

CAMPBELL AA, THORNE-LYMAN A, SUN K, DE PEE S, KRAEMER K,
MOENCH-PFANNER R, SEMBA RD. 2008. Greater household expenditures on
fruits and vegetables but not animal source foods are associated with decreased
risk of under-five child mortality among families in rural Indonesia. The Journal
of Nutrition, 138(11), 2244-2249. Retrieved June 19, 2013 from
http://jn.nutrition.org/content/138/11/2244.full

CHARMARBAGWALA R, RANGER M, WADDINGTON H, WHITE H. 2004. The
determinants of child health and nutrition: a meta-analysis. World Bank.

Retrieved (September 23, 2014 from
http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTEDS 1 4/Resources/child_health_nutrition.p
df

CHAUDHURY N, FRIEDMAN J, ONISH J. 2013. Philippines Conditional Cash
Transfer Program Impact Evaluation 2012. The World Bank. Report Number
75533-PH. Retrieved June 19, 2013 from
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/bitstream/handle/10986/13244/755330ES
WOP1180pact0Evaluation02012.pdf?sequence=1

DEVEREUX S, JERE P. 2008. ‘Choice, dignity and empowerment’: Cash and food
transfers in Swaziland: An evaluation of Save the Children’s emergency drought

ah)

response, 2007/08. Swaziland: Save the Children. Retrieved July 7, 2014 from
http://www.savethechildren.org.uk/sites/default/files/docs/SavetheChildren_Emer
gency_Drought_Response_Evaluation_08_1.pdf

[DSWD] DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL WELFARE AND DEVELOPMENT. 2012.
Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program Implementation Status Report 2nd Quarter
of 2012. Retrieved June 19, 2013 from _http://www.dswd.gov.ph/wp-
content/uploads/2012/09/2ndqtr2012.pdf

[DSWD] DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL WELFARE AND DEVELOPMENT. 2013.
Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program Implementation Status Report Ist Quarter
of 2013. Retrieved October 3, 2014  fromhttp://www.dswd.gov.ph/wp-
content/uploads/2012/01/Pantawid-Pamilya-Program-Implementation-Status-
Report-First-Quarter-2013.pdf

ECKER O, BREISINGER C. 2012. The Food Security System: A New Conceptual
Framework. IFPRI Discussion Paper 01166. Retrieved June 19, 2013 from
http://www. ifpri.org/sites/default/files/publications/ifpridp0 1 166.pdf

[FAO] FOOD AND AGRICULTURE. 1997. Agriculture food and nutrition for Africa -
A resource book for teachers of agriculture. Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations. Food and Nutrition Division. Rome. Retrieved June 19, 2013
from http://www. fao.org/docrep/w0078e/w0078e04.htm

[FAO] FOOD AND AGRICULTURE. 1999. The state of food insecurity in the world.
ISBN 92-5-104328-0. Retrieved June 19, 2013
fromhttp://www. fao.org/docrep/007/x3 1 14e/x3114e00.htm

[FAO] FOOD AND AGRICULTURE. 2002. The State of Food Insecurity in the World
2001. Rome. Retrieved June 19, 2013
fromhttp://www.fao.org/docrep/005/y467 le/y4671e06.htm

[FAO] FOOD AND AGRICULTURE. 2006. Food security. Forestry Policy Brief 02.
Rome. Retrieved June 19, 2013  fromhttp://www.fao.org/forestry/13128-
0e6f36f27e009 1 05Sbec28ebe830f46b3.pdf

FERNALD LC, GERTLER PJ, NEUFELDLM. 2008. Role of cash in conditional cash
transfer programmes for child health, growth, and development: an analysis of
Mexico's<i>Oportunidades</i>. The Lancet, 371(9615), 828-837. Retrieved
November 8, 2014 from
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2779574/#__ffn_sectitle

FERNANDEZ L, OLFINDO R. 2011. Overview of the Philippines’ Conditional Cash
Transfer Program: The Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program (Pantawid Pamilya).
Philippine Social Protection Note. No 2. Retrieved June 19, 2013 from http://www-
wds.worldbank.org/external/default/WDSContentServer/WDSP/IB/201 1/07/08/00033303
8 _20110708021205/Rendered/PDF/628790BRIOPhilOmeOabstractOasOno010.pdf

79

FISZBEIN A, SCHADY N. 2009. Conditional Cash Transfers: Reducing Present and
Future Poverty. The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, The
World Bank. Retrieved September 23, 2014 from
http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTCCT/Resources/5757608-
1234228266004/PRR-CCT_web_noembargo.pdf

FOUSEKIS P, LAZARIDIS P. 2001. Food expenditure patterns of the urban and the rural
households in Greece. a kernel regression analysis. Agricultural Economic
Review, 2(1), 5-19. Retrieved June 19, 2013 from
http://www.eng.auth.gr/mattas/2_1_1.pdf

GILLESPIE S, MASON J. 1991. Nutrition-relevant actions: some experience from the
eighties and lessons for the nineties. Nutrition Policy Discussion Paper, No. 10.
ACC/SCN. WHO. Geneva, Switzerland. Retrieved September 23, 2014 from
http://agris.fao.org/agris-search/search.do?recordID=XF92 18327

GITTER SR, BARHAM BL. 2007. Women's power, conditional cash transfers, and
schooling in Nicaragua. The World Bank Economic Review, 22(2), 271-290.
Retrieved June 19, 2013 from
http://wber.oxfordjournals.org/content/22/2/271 abstract

HODDINOTT J, SKOUFIAS E, WASHBURN R. 2000. The impact of PROGRESA on
consumption: A final report. International Food Policy Research Institute,

Washington, Dc. Retrieved July 7, 2014 from
http://oportunidades.gob.mx:80 1 0/es/wersd53465sdg1/docs/2000/ifpri_2000_nutr
ition.pdf

HOLMES R, BHUVANENDRA D. 2013. Social protection and resilient food systems:
The role of cash transfers. Retrieved July 7, 2014 from
http://www.odi.org/sites/odi.org.uk/files/odi-assets/publications-opinion-
files/8601.pdf

{IFPRI] INTERNATIONAL FOOD POLICY RESEARCH INSTITUTE. 2002.
PROGRESA: Breaking the Cycle of Poverty. Retrieved June 19, 2013 from
http://www. ifpri.org/pubs/ib/ib6.pdf

JAYAWARDENA R, BYRNE NM, SOARES MJ, KATULANDA P, YADAV B,
HILLS AP. 2013. High dietary diversity is associated with obesity in Sri Lankan
adults: an evaluation of three dietary scores. BMC Public Health, 13(1), 314.
Retrieved September 23, 2014 from
http://www. biomedcentral.com/content/pdff 147 1-2458-13-314.pdf

JOHNS T, STHAPIT BR. 2004.Biocultural diversity in the sustainability of developing-
country food systems. Food & Nutrition Bulletin, 25(2), 143-155. Retrieved
September 23, 2014 from
http://www. ingentaconnect.com/content/nsinf/fnb/2004/00000025/00000002/art0
0007

80

KACHONDHAM Y. 1992. 27. Rapid rural appraisal and rapid assessment procedures: A
comparison. Retrieved September 23, 2014 from http://www. idpas.org/pdf/309-
27RapidRuralA ppraisal.pdf

KIRKPATRICK S, TARASUK V. 2003. The relationship between low income and
household food expenditure patterns in Canada. Public Health Nutrition, 6(06),
589-597. Retrieved June 19, 2013 from
http://journals.cambridge.org/download.php? file=%2FPHN%2FPHN6_06%2FS1
36898000300079Xa.pdf&code=9e67937bad9f20252cf84720c1 3bb8d5,

LANGENDORF C, ROEDERER T, DE PEE S, BROWN D, DOYON S, MAMATY
AA, GRAIS RF. 2014.Preventing acute malnutrition among young children in
crises: a prospective intervention study in Niger. PLoS medicine, 11(9),
e€1001714.Retrieved November 8, 2014 from
http://www. plosmedicine.org/article/fetchObject.action?uri=info%3 Adoi%2F 10.1
371%2Fjournal.pmed.1001714&representation=PDF

LEMKE S, VORSTER HH, VAN RENSBURG NS, ZICHE J. 2003. Empowered
women, social networks and the contribution of qualitative research: broadening
our understanding of underlying causes for food and nutrition insecurity. Public
Health Nutrition, 6(08), 759-764. Retrieved September 23, 2014 from
http://journals.cambridge.org/download.php? file=%2FPHN%2FPHN6_08%2FS1
368980003001022a.pdf&code=bf3 7cef8386296270 1 f7ea49a2a202a6

LLANTO GM. 2008. Make ‘deliberate’ haste in rolling out the 4Ps. Philippine Institute
for Development Studies. ISSN 1656-5266 No. 2008-09. Retrieved June 19, 2013
from http://dirp4.pids.gov.ph/ris/pn/pidspn0809.pdf

MALUCCIO JA, FLORES R. 2005. Impact evaluation of a conditional cash transfer
program: The Nicaraguan Red de Proteccién Social. IFPRI Research Report 141.
Washington, DC: International Food Policy Research Institute. Retrieved July 7,
2014 from http://www. ifpri.org/sites/default/files/publications/rr141.pdf

MELGAR-QUINONEZ HR, NORD M, PEREZ-ESCAMILLA R, SEGALL-CORREA
A M. 2007. Psychometric properties of a modified US-household food security
survey module in Campinas, Brazil. European journal of clinical nutrition, 62(5),
665-673. Retrieved June 19, 2013 from
http://www.nature.com/ejcn/journal/v62/n5/pdf/1602760a.pdf

[NSCB] NATIONAL STATISTICAL COORDINATION BOARD. 2013. Despite rise in
the number of families, extreme poverty among families remains steady at 1.6
million in 2012—NSCB Press Release. Retrieved June 19, 2013 from
http://www.nscb.gov.ph/pressreleases/2013/NSCB-PR-
20131213_povertypress.asp

OLAYEMI AO. 2012. Effects of family size on household food security in Osun State,
Nigeria. Asian Journal of Agriculture and Rural Development, 2(2), 136-141.

81

Retrieved July 7, 2014 from http://www.pakinsight.com/pdf-files/54-AJARD-
136-141.pdf

OLORUNSANYA EO, OMOTESHO OA. 2014. A gender analysis of determinants of
poverty among rural farming households in Nigeria. Albanian J. Agric. Sci. 2014;
13 (2): 96-109. Retrieved September 23, 2014 from
https://docs.google.com/a/ubt.edu.al/viewer?a=v &pid=sites&srcid=dWJOLmVkd
SShbHxyc3NifGd4O0jJmYmZjNzA 1 OTI4NDdjZjY

OLUWATAYO IB. 2008. Explaining inequality and welfare status of households in rural
Nigeria: Evidence from Ekiti State. Hum. Soc. Sci. J., 3: 70- 80. Retrieved June
19, 2013 from http://www. idosi.org/hssj/hssj3(1)08/9.pdf

PANDYA-LORCH R, FRITSCHEL H, KARELINA Z, YOSEF S. 2012. Agriculture,
Nutrition and Health: Connecting the Dots. In 2011 Global Food Policy Report,
54-61. Washington, DC: International Food Policy Research Institute. Retrieved
September 23, 2014 from
http://www. ifpri.org/sites/default/files/publications/oc72ch06.pdf

PANGARIBOWO, E. H., GERBER, N., & TORERO, M. (2013). Food and nutrition
security indicators: a review (No. 108). ZEF Working Paper Series.Retrieved
November 9, 2014 from
http://www3.lei.wur.nl/FoodSecurePublications/05_Pangaribowo%20Gerber%20
Torero_FNS%20Indicators.pdf

PELTO GH, URGELLO J, ALLEN LH, CHAVEZ A, MARTINEZ H, MENESES L,
BACKSTRAND J.1991. Household size, food intake and anthropometric status of
school-age children in a highland Mexican area. Social Science & Medicine,
33(10), 1135-1140. Retrieved (July 7, 2014 from
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/1767283

POPKIN BM, HORTON SH, KIM S. 2001. The nutrition transition and prevention of
diet-related diseases in Asia and the Pacific. Manila: Asian Development Bank.
Retrieved September 23, 2014 from
http://www. ifpri.org/sites/default/files/pubs/pubs/books/nutran/nutran_front.pdf

POPKIN BM. 1993. Nutrition patterns and transitions. Population and Development
Review, 19: 138-157. Retrieved September 23, 2014 from
http://www jstor.org/discover/10.2307/2938388?uid=3738824 &uid=2&uid=4&si
d=21104700414583

QUISUMBING A, BROWN LR, FELDSTEIN HS, HADDAD L, PENA, C. 1995.
Women: The key to food security. Food Policy Report. International Food Policy
Research Institute, Washington DC. Retrieved September 23, 2014 from
http://www. ifpri.orgsites/default/files/publications/fpr21.pdf

RAWLINGS LB, RUBIO GM. 2005. Evaluating the Impact of Conditional Cash
Transfer Programs. The World Bank Research Observer, vol. 20, no. 1. pp. 29-55.
Retrieved June 19, 2013 from

82

http://www.crin.org/docs/Evaluating%20the%20Imapact%200f%20Cash%20Tran
sfer%20Programs.pdf

REYES CM, TABUGA AD. 2012. Conditional Cash Transfer Program in the
Philippines: Is It Reaching the Extremely Poor? Discussion Paper Series No.
2012-42. Retrieved June 19, 2013 from
http://dirp4.pids.gov.ph/ris/dps/pidsdps1242.pdf

REYES CM, TABUGA AD. 2013. Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino: Why “deepening”
matters in achieving its human capital objectives. Philippine Institute for
Development Studies. ISSN 1656-5266 No. 2013-02. Retrieved June 19, 2013
from http://dirp4.pids.gov.ph/ris/pn/pidspn1302.pdf

RIDGWELL J. 1996. Examining Food and Nutrition. Heinemann Educational. Oxford.
p.173

ROSEN S, SHAPOURI S. 2001. Effects of Income Distribution on Food Security. US
Department of Agriculture Information Bulletin, (765-2), 765-72. Retrieved June
19, 2013 from http://ageconsearch.umn.edu/bitstream/33717/1/ai017652.pdf

SAAKA M, OSMAN SM. 2013. Does Household Food Insecurity Affect the Nutritional
Status of Preschool Children Aged 6-36 Months? International Journal of
Population Research. Volume 2013, Article ID 304169, 12 pages. Retrieved June
19, 2013 from http://www.hindawi.com/journals/ijpr/2013/304169/

SAETHRE E. 2005. Nutrition, economics and food distribution in an Australian
Aboriginal community. In Anthropological Forum Vol. 15, No. 2, pp. 151-169.
Routledge. Retrieved July 7, 2014 from
http://www.anthropology.hawaii.edu/People/Faculty/Saethre/pdfs/Saethre_nutriti
on_economics.pdf

SCHWAB B, MARGOLIES A, HODDINOTT J. 2013. Impact Evaluation of Cash and
Food Transfers for the Seasonal Emergency Safety Net in Hajjah and Ibb
Governorates: Yemen Endline Report. Washington, DC: International Food
Policy Research Institute. Retrieved July 7, 2014 from
http://documents.wfp.org/stellent/groups/public/documents/resources/wfp257674.
pdf

SEKHAMPU TJ. 2012. Socio-economic Determinants of Household Food Expenditure
in a Low Income Township in South Africa. Mediterranean Journal of Social
Sciences, 449, Retrieved July 4, 2014 from
http://www.mcser.org/images/stories/2_journal/mjss_september_2012/tshediso%2
Ojoseph%20sekhampu%202%20paper.pdf

SEN A. 1981.Poverty and famines: an essay on entitlement and deprivation. Oxford
University Press. Retrieved June 19, 2013 from
http://www. ifpri.org/sites/default/files/publications/rr177.pdf
http://203.128.31.71/articles/0198284632%20Poverty%20and%20Famines.pdf

83

SKOUFIAS E, DI MARO V. 2008. Conditional cash transfers, adult work incentives,
and poverty. The Journal of Development Studies, 44(7), 935-960. Retrieved June
19, 2013 from http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/pdf/10.1080/00220380802 150730

SMITH C, MILLER H. 2011. Accessing the Food Systems in Urban and Rural
Minnesotan Communities. J Nutr Edu Behav., 2011; 43:492-504. Retrieved
September 23, 2014 from http://www jneb.org/article/S 1499-4046 (11)00379-
4/pdf

STAGE J, STAGE J, MCGRANAHAN G. 2009. Is urbanization contributing to higher
food prices? Urbanization and Emerging Population Issues Series. IIED and
UNFPA, London. Retrieved July 7, 2014 from
http://pubs.iied.org/pdfs/10573IIED.pdf

STEWART H, BLISARD N. 2011. Are Lower Income Households Willing to Budget for
Fruits and Vegetables? DIANE Publishing.

SWINDALE A, BILINSKY P. 2006. Household Dietary Diversity Score (HDDS) for
Measurement of Household Food Access: Indicator Guide (v.2). Washington,
D.C.: Food and Nutrition Technical Assistance Project, Academy for Educational
Development. Retrieved June 19, 2013 from
http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTPHILIPPINES/Resources/4PsDS WD. pdf

TARUVINGA A, MUCHENJE V, MUSHUNJE A. 2013. Determinants of rural
household dietary diversity: The case of Amatole and Nyandeni districts, South
Africa. Journal of Development and Sustainability, 2(4), 2233-2247. Retrieved
September 23, 2014 from http://isdsnet.com/ijds-v2n4-4.pdf

TOULMIN C. 1986. Access to food, dry season strategies and household size amongst
the Bambara of Central Mali. IDS Bull 17, 58-67. Retrieved July 7, 2014 from
http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/).1759-5436.1986.mp17003009.x/pdf

[UNDP] UNITED NATION DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME. 2009. Conditional Cash
Transfer Schemes for Alleviating Human Poverty: Relevance for India. Retrieved
June 19, 2013 from
http://online.wsj.com/public/resources/documents/CCT_DP.pdf

[UNPAN] UNITED NATIONS PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION NETWORK. 2009. 4Ps
Concept Paper for MCC. Retrieved June 19, 2013 from
http://unpan1 .un.org/intradoc/groups/public/documents/unge/unpan040549.pdf

[USAID] UNITED STATES AGENCY FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT.
1992. Policy Determination 19, Definition of Food Security, April 13, 1992.
Washington, Dc. Retrieved June 19, 2013 from
http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PNAA V468.pdf

VON BRAUN J, BOUIS H, KUMAR S, PANDYA-LORCH R. 1992. Improving Food
Security of the Poor: Concept, Policy, and Programs. Washington, DC:

84

International Food Policy Research Institute. Retrieved June 19, 2013 from
http://www. ifpri.org/sites/default/files/publications/oc23.pdf

WORLD BANK. 2009. Gender in Agriculture Sourcebook. The International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development, The World Bank. Washington DC. Retrieved
September 23, 2014 from
http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTGENAGRLIVSOUBOOK/Resources/Com
pleteBook.pdf

WORLD BANK. 2013. GDP per capita (current US$). Retrieved June 19, 2013 from
http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.PCAP.CD/countries/1 W?display=de
fault

WORSLEY A, BLASCHE R., BALL K, CRAWFORD D. 2003. Income differences in
food consumption in the 1995 Australian National Nutrition Survey. European
Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 57(10), 1198-1211.Retrieved November 7, 2014
fromhttp://www.nature.com/ejcn/journal/v57/n1 0/pdf/1601670a.pdf
