Effects of a National STEM Education Master Course on Teachers’ Data Literacy: Bases for a Professional Development Framework

RACHEL DORCAS A. LIM

University of the Philippines Diliman

Doctor of Philosophy in Education (Mathematics Education)

February 2024

ABSTRACT

This explanatory sequential mixed methods study aimed to develop a framework
for professional development on data literacy for Filipino teachers, assess Filipino
teachers’ level of information and data literacy, and investigate their perceptions, teacher
efficacy and attitude toward data literacy and STEM teaching. The study involved 462
STEM education teachers who participated in the STEM Education Master Course for
Teachers 2021, which was provided by the Department of Information and
Communications Technology — ICT Literacy and Competency Development Bureau in
collaboration with the University of the Philippines — College of Education through
Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs). The sample consisted of 303 female and 159
male STEM teachers. The study analyzed participants’ responses to four instruments that had been
administered through the master course: the STEM Education Master Course Survey,
which was administered as a pre- and post-course survey, the User Evaluation of the
Digital STEM Teaching and Learning Module on “/nformation and Data Literacy for
Inquiry-based Learning’, the Data-Based Decision-Making Survey for Teachers, which
was adapted from Wayman et al. (2016), and an open-ended narrative survey
questionnaire. The study utilized the paired samples t-test to determine whether the pre-
assessment and post-assessment of Filipino teachers showed significant improvements in
their information and data literacy levels. Additionally, the post-test results of
information and data literacy and four other components of digital competence were analyzed using linear regression, while multiple linear regression was employed to investigate the significant interaction between information and data literacy, perceptions
regarding STEM education, teacher efficacy, and attitude toward STEM teaching.
Qualitative data from seven open-ended narrative survey questions were analyzed using
inductive thematic analysis. The results showed a significant improvement in the participants’ level of
information and data literacy from pre-assessment to post-assessment. The study also
found that digital communication and collaboration, digital content creation, responsible
use, and digital problem solving, which are components of digital competence, are
significant predictors of information and data literacy. Furthermore, teacher efficacy and
attitude toward STEM teaching were found to have a significant effect on the teachers’
level of information and data literacy. Based on the findings of the study, a Data Literacy
Professional Development Framework for Teachers was developed. It presents a
continuum describing teachers with novice information and data literacy to highly
proficient level with the following stages: (1) Teacher Data Explorer; (2) Teacher Data
Integrator; (3) Teacher Data Expert; and (4) Teacher Data Seer. The findings and the
professional development framework have significant implications for teachers, schools,
and policy-making bodies to address issues and problems related to the integration of
information and data literacy in the classroom. Specifically, the study recommends that schools provide professional
development training and access to technological tools for enhancing data literacy among
pre-service and in-service teachers, establish Professional Learning Communities (PLCs),
data teams, and appoint data coaches to support colleagues in improving data use practices. Further research studies are needed to explore the relationship between data literacy and other digital competence components in STEM teaching. More importantly.
the study suggests including data literacy as one of the strands within the existing seven
domains of Philippine Professional Standards for Teachers (PPST) to ensure effective teaching in the 21st century.

Chapter I

INTRODUCTION

Background of the Study

Every day, educators are bombarded with a plethora of data. Data are raw pieces
of information composed of quantitative or qualitative facts, figures, and any other
material containing knowledge. Data use in education is becoming increasingly important
in making a wide range of decisions, including curriculum planning, school
improvement, classroom management, and instructional implementation. Nonetheless,
data use has received little attention in developing countries, particularly the Philippines
(Vught, 2016). Furthermore, researchers have found that few educators have taken data
use training courses. Consequently, many teachers are unprepared to use data effectively
and responsibly, and they lack adequate data literacy (Mandinach, 2012; Means et al.,
2010; Wayman & Stringfield, 2006, as cited in Mandinach & Gummer, 2016a). To date.
there has been no formal survey or assessment of Filipinos' data literacy.

Sanchez-Cruzado et al. (2021) asserted that it is “essential to focus on the
specialized training of teachers, spotting their main weaknesses and looking into them,
helping them to attain an adequate level of data literacy, in order to face the new
educational paradigm successfully” (p. 26), that is, the challenges posed by the COVID-
19 pandemic. However, Ndukwe and Daniel (2020) noted that teachers’ data literacy
training is “sporadic and scarce” (p. 4) and that it is pivotal to equip teachers with the
necessary knowledge of analytics and data literacy to avoid making ill-informed

decisions that significantly affect instruction.

Mandinach and Gummer (2016b) provided a definition of data literacy in the fielc
of education, which involves the ability to collect, analyze, and interpret data in order to
transform information into actionable instructional knowledges and practices.

Data use for teaching, as defined, must be combined with other sources of
knowledge, namely content knowledge for data analysis and interpretation and
pedagogical content knowledge for identifying appropriate instructional actions in the
classroom (Mandinach & Gummer, 2016a, 2016b; Van Geel et al., 2017, as cited in
Kippers et al., 2018). Unfortunately, many professional development providers lack the
in-depth knowledge of content and pedagogy needed for such triangulation. Furthermore,
some professional development providers admit that the transformation of information
into instructional decisions is not included in their models (Mandinach & Gummer, 2012,
2013, 2016b). Moreover, Miller et al. (2021) explored how professional development
program failed to adequately support teachers in integrating data literacy in their science
classrooms. Teachers reported that they learned a lot during professional development
and that they feel prepared to teach. However, once in the classroom, their confidence
waned, and they mostly reverted to more traditional and conservative understandings of
data literacy, which is only about graphing and analyzing data. Professional development
must incorporate not only the content of data literacy and its connection to the subject
area, but also the separate pedagogical content knowledge that teachers must implement
with complex data and new technologies (Miller et al., 2021; Wilkerson & Polman,
2020).

In addition to these, becoming data literate is an embedded skill set that teachers

must develop and cultivate throughout their careers (Mandinach & Gummer, 2016b).

Data literacy for teachers is comprised of three skill sets: problem-focused skills. such as
knowing how to identify problems and frame questions; data-focused skills, such as
knowing how to collect, generate, access, synthesize, manipulate, and interpret data, as
well as identify and understand patterns and trends yielded from analyses; and process-
focused skills, such as knowing how to actively engage in collaborative inquiry, evaluate
situations and impact, and use data systems, tools, and resources to support data-driven
decision making (Mandinach & Gummer, 2013). Therefore, teacher education programs
must prepare teachers with data literacy knowledge and skills so that they can use data to
inform and enhance their teaching practice. However, pre-service teachers often report a
lack of confidence and foundational knowledge in data-driven knowledge and skills
(DeLuca & Bellara, 2013; Piro & Hutchinson, 2014). Furthermore, Dunlap and Piro
(2016) postulated that teachers’ lack of confidence in their data literacy skills and training
prohibit them from implementing the best practice of using data to inform instructions.
Some educators, according to Mandinach and Gummer (2013), are concerned that they
will not understand the data well enough to make informed data-based decisions. In the
study of Pierce and Chick (2011), the teachers reported feeling overwhelmed by
graphical and table representations of data. Cowie and Cooper (2017) also cited findings
from a study that showed teachers having difficulty “with examining multiple data points
simultaneously (i.e., school and district scores over time), distinguishing absolute values
and proportions, and identifying patterns within data” (p. 149). These findings
highlighted the importance of teaching data literacy skills to teacher candidates before
they begin their careers, as well as providing professional development for pre- and in-

service teachers to improve their data literacy skills using authentic data in real world

contexts such as using data from their own school or local area. According to the
Philippine Professional Standards for Teachers or PPST, teachers are expected to
improve their knowledge and skills, as well as assume responsibility for personal growth
and professional development for lifelong learning. PPST serves as a framework for all
teacher learning and development programs to ensure that teachers are fully competent to
implement the K-12 Program. PPST is divided into seven domains: content knowledge
and pedagogy, learning environment, diversity of learners, curriculum and planning,
assessment and reporting, community linkages and professional engagement, and
personal growth and professional development. These domains, along with their
corresponding strands, broadly cover the specific components of digital competence,
including information and data literacy.

According to Mandinach and Gummer (2016b), relying solely on professional
development to improve teachers’ data literacy is insufficient, and that a conceptual
framework is required. The framework must integrate data literacy with other essential
aspects of teaching; that is, it should contextualize data literacy within teachers’
understanding of teaching standards, disciplinary knowledge, curricular content
knowledge, pedagogical content knowledge. and how students learn. Several frameworks
have been proposed to address data literacy competency issues. Some of these
frameworks come from fields related to education, such as library studies, while others
focus on data literacy for teaching (Mandinach & Gummer, 2016b; Prado & Marzal,
2013; Ridsdale et al., 2015). Although these proposals seek to address the same issue of

developing data literacy, their approaches differ, resulting in heterogeneous competence

descriptions that cannot be formally described and represented in a unified manner
(Papamitsiou et al., 2021).

Given the significant gaps and challenges associated with the professional
development of teachers on data literacy such as the limited emphasis on data use in
education, the lack of formal training and assessment for data literacy in the Philippines,
the inadequate depth of existing professional development programs, narrow
understandings of data literacy, challenges in preparing pre-service teachers, the lack of a
comprehensive conceptual framework, and disparities in competency descriptions within
data literacy frameworks, the primary aim of this study was to develop a framework for
professional development in data literacy for teachers. To achieve this goal, the study
drew upon substantial evidence, including an analysis of emerging and existing data
literacy frameworks and an evaluation of the competencies of Filipino teachers
concerning the integration of data literacy into STEM (Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics) education. Furthermore, the researcher explored the
teachers’ perceptions, teacher efficacy, and attitude toward data literacy and STEM

teaching.

Statement of the Problem

This study has the primary goal of developing a professional development
framework for data literacy among Filipino teachers. It aimed to explore the factors that
influence the data literacy levels of STEM teachers within the context of continuous
professional development. Employing an evidence-based approach, the researcher

reviewed relevant studies on data literacy frameworks, evaluated Filipino teachers’

competencies in integrating data literacy skills into STEM education, and investigated
their perceptions, teacher efficacy, and attitude toward data literacy and STEM teaching.
Specifically, it sought to address the following questions:
1. What is the level of information and data literacy of Filipino teachers?
2. How does information and data literacy of Filipino teachers relate to other
components of educators’ digital competence such as:
a. Digital Communication and Collaboration
b. Digital Content Creation
c. Responsible Use
d. Digital Problem Solving?
3. Is there a significant interaction among teachers’ information and data literacy,
perceptions regarding STEM education, teacher efficacy, and attitude toward
STEM teaching?
4. What are the gaps in knowledge in terms of Filipino teachers’ data literacy?
5. How should the framework for professional development on data literacy be
designed and developed to equip Filipino teachers with data literacy skills?
a. What are the best features of existing and emerging data literacy
frameworks relevant to the Philippine context?
b. What are the essential components and competencies that must be
included in a contextualized data literacy framework for professional

development of Filipino teachers?

Significance of the Study

This study is significant in the field of education because it will provide an
additional framework for teachers’ professional development on data literacy.

The findings of this study will encourage teachers to improve their data literacy
by using a variety of data sources to determine appropriate instructional strategies to
support students’ learning needs, incorporating data use into their classroom instructional
practices, and practical experiences, as well as to transform educational data into
actionable information.

This research will equip mathematics and science teachers with essential
competencies in data collection, analysis, interpretation, and visualization, enabling the
effective integration of data literacy into STEM education. Furthermore, the study will
support mathematics and science teachers in cultivating their students’ critical thinking
and problem-solving skills through hands-on engagement with authentic data.

This study could be used by school administrators and principals to address data
literacy challenges by facilitating data-driven decision making and supporting
professional development opportunities for teachers to reinforce accurate data practices.

This research will also be beneficial to curriculum developers by using the
research findings to integrate data literacy into various subject areas. Additionally, it will
serve as inspiration for curriculum developers to design real-world problem-solving
activities that require the application of data literacy skills. Furthermore, curriculum
developers might consider the development of assessment tools and methods to gauge

students’ proficiency in data literacy.

The results of this study will be useful to teacher education institutions as they
consider improving their curriculum to prepare and equip pre-service teachers with data
collection. analysis, and interpretation skills in order to assess the learning needs of
diverse students by offering a data literacy course.

The findings of this study could potentially provide insights to policy-making
bodies, such as the Commission on Higher Education (CHED) and the Professional
Regulation Commission (PRC) in the Philippines, as well as other professional
organizations for teachers. These stakeholders may consider using the outcomes of the
research to reevaluate and modify their existing policies, standards, and guidelines
(PSGs) in order to improve the data literacy competencies of Filipino teachers.

Lastly, the study will be used by researchers by replicating it with different
samples to conduct more studies and interventions to explore innovative pedagogical
approaches and technologies to enhance data literacy instruction. Additionally.
researchers may also explore the correlation between teachers’ data literacy proficiency

levels and student performance.

Scope and Delimitation of the Study

The study focused on science and mathematics teachers who participated in the
STEM Education Master Course for Teachers 2021 provided by the Department of
Information and Communications Technology — ICT Literacy and Competency
Development Bureau in collaboration with the University of the Philippines — College of
Education through the Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs). This study included a

review of related studies on data literacy frameworks, surveys, and qualitative open-

ended narrative survey questionnaire. The scope of the study includes the various
components of data literacy pertinent to data-based decision making in the field of
education. This involves the collection, analysis, and interpretation of data to transform
information into actionable instructional knowledge and practices. The limitation of this
study in terms of data collection is that both quantitative and qualitative data, such as

survey responses, were collected through online platforms.

10

Chapter II

REVIEW OF RELATED LITERATURE AND RESEARCH PARADIGM

This chapter provides an overview of the literature that informs the research and
has implications on the findings. It is divided into six major sections that examine the
literature on data-based decision making, data literacy, data literacy frameworks, data use
interventions, data literacy in STEM education, and professional development on data
literacy for teachers. Additionally, this chapter presents the research paradigm and the

definition of terms used in the study.

Data-based decision making

Over the last two decades, data-based decision making (DBDM) has emerged and
evolved as a significant field in education. DBDM is also known as data-driven decision
making, data-informed decision making or data use, for short. It has become important
due to the pressing need for education to become an evidence-based field, which
necessitates teachers to rely more on data and research evidence (Mandinach &
Schildkamp, 2021). According to Kippers et al. (2018), teachers frequently make
decisions based on intuition and experience, “which can lead to making incorrect
decisions, such as adjusting their instructional practice to the wrong group of students”
(p. 21). Teachers can use data to assess students’ learning strengths and weaknesses, and
provide differentiated instruction based on each students’ unique needs. Student learning
and achievement will improve if teachers can make high-quality, data-informed

decisions.

11

Data use is one method to promote making informed decisions. Data-based
decision making is the systematic collection and analysis of various types of data to
inform educational decisions (Hamilton et al., 2009). Mandinach and Gummer (2016b)
emphasized the importance of incorporating multiple forms of data other than assessment
or achievement data in data use practices. Ikemoto and Marsh (2007) identified data
sources that teachers can incorporate such as input data (e.g., student demographic data,
parent demographic data, teacher data, student transfer, socio economic data), process
data (e.g., school curriculum, lesson plan, student and teacher daily attendance, student
logbook, school annual policy), output data (e.g., student report card, examination result.
student daily progress, school evaluation report, teacher evaluation report), and context
data (e.g., school facilities, school financial report, school profile). These triangulation of
data sets are important in determining the accuracy and validity of information when
making instructional decisions (Vanlommel & Schildkamp, 2019).

Data has no meaning in its raw state. It only becomes valuable as result of a
transformational process facilitated and supported by technology-based tools, which
converts it from data to information to knowledge, enabling informed decisions to be
made. Mandinach et al. (2006) proposed a conceptual model for data transformation that
is rooted in the context of the classroom, school, and district. The data to knowledge
continuum. as represented in Figure 1, serves as the foundation for the conceptual

framework.

Figure 1

Framework for Data-Driven Decision Making.

DISTRICT
BUILDING
] CLASSROOM
DATA-DRIVEN
| DECISION MAKING
Tech-Tools NFORMATION
i) \ summarize —>
Wireless PDA
b DATA &
econ Reress organize —p>’ analyze
Date] 4
ae T 4
collect patil,
A 1

KNOWLEDGE
prioritize

synthesize

'

! 1
feed-back |

! |

|

|
|
|
cw 1

cecision

A

implement

~ feed-back -—-+—-——-—-—— t—--- =| impact
J

Note. Framework for Data-Driven Decision Making. Reprinted from “A Theoreticai

Framework for Data-Driven Decision Making,” by E.B. Mandinach, M. Honey and D.

12

Light, 2006, A Paper presented at the annual meeting of American Educational Research

Association, San Francisco, CA. Reprinted with permission.

At the data level of the framework, the user collects and organizes data.

Following that, data is given context and transformed into information on which meaning

can be imposed. At this point in the continuum, the user analyzes the data and

summarizes all the acquired information, which may subsequently be processed into

usable knowledge. The user then synthesizes the available information and prioritizes the

knowledge to determine actionable solutions, implement, and evaluate the outcome or

13

impact of the decision. Depending on the outcome, the decision-maker may revisit the
six-step process, forming a feedback loop. Due to the feedback loops, data-driven
decision making is viewed as an iterative process (Mandinach et al, 2006).

Numerous studies have shown that data can be used for different purposes. First,
data can be used for instructional improvement. In the study by Vught (2016), Filipino
teachers used assessment data, formative and summative tests, student attendance data,
and previous student report cards to identify student competencies, provide interventions
to students, adapt strategies to students’ needs, and plan activities and materials for use in
class. Second, data can be used for accountability purposes. Schools were accountable for
reporting the quality of their education to appropriate stakeholders such as parents and
stakeholders. Report cards and student attendance data were used to provide parents with
information about their children's performance. External evaluations from school
inspectors were also used for school improvement, as well as financial data for physical
development. Last, data can be used for school development purposes. According to
Schildkamp (2019), data can be used to monitor and improve the functioning of a school,
including policy development, curriculum development, and staff development planning.
Data such as School Improvement Plan (SIP) were used to monitor projects and activities
throughout the school year.

Despite the significant contributions of data-driven decision making in K-12
education, several schools are struggling with the use of data. Studies show that data use
is influenced by school organizational characteristics. teacher characteristics. and data

characteristics.

14

School Organizational Characteristic

Several school organizational characteristics can influence the use of data in
schools. Data use in schools can be enhanced if there is a shared vision that includes a
common understanding of the nature of effective teaching and methods for evaluating
learning. There should also be norms for data use. which means that data use in the
school should be prioritized by having a structured method for data analysis and
interpretation (Schildkamp et al., 2016).

The successful implementation of data-based decision making is usually
associated with strong leadership (Albiladi et al., 2020). Datnow and Park (2014. as cited
in Albiladi et al., 2020) emphasized that teachers and school leaders both play critical
roles in developing and sustaining a data-driven culture in the school. It is important for
school leaders to model effective data use and foster a healthy data culture. Love et al.
(2008) identified the following components as essential for the establishment of data
cultures:

e Enculturate the notion of continuous improvement
e Build support from stakeholders
e Strengthen collaboration
e Empower a data coach
e Organize a data team
© Create time for collaboration
e Provide timely access to data (pp. 29-30)
In addition to strong leadership, data use entailed both internal and external

support. Teachers need internal support by having a data expert or data coach within the

15

school who can help facilitate data use and assist colleagues in data collection, analysis.
and interpretation (Mandinach et al., 2016a). External support should also be provided to
teachers in the form of professional development programs that focus on data use
practice. School leaders should also arrange time for data use so that the teachers can
learn from the experiences of colleagues in integrating data use into classroom practices.
Additionally, teachers must collaborate and discuss students’ results with parents and

other teachers to improve student performance.

Teacher characteristics

The teachers’ level of teacher efficacy with regards to their teaching skills and
practices may affect their effectiveness in the classroom. Teachers’ perceptions about
their ability to use data to support instruction and their limited experience in the
collection of relevant data influence their attitude in integrating data into their teaching
strategies (Swain, 2018). According to studies, data use is influenced by certain
characteristics of teachers. Teachers need to have the knowledge and skills to analyze and
interpret different forms of data, as well as transform data into actionable instructional
steps. Moreover, teachers’ attitude toward data use can influence how they use data.
Teachers who believe that data is important for determining individual student needs and
improving instruction are more likely to incorporate data into their daily decision making
(Mingchu, 2008). Teacher efficacy is another factor that influences data use. van der
Sheer and Visscher (2016) found a relationship between data use and increased teacher

efficacy in instructional strategy and student engagement.

16

Data Characteristics

Furthermore, several data characteristics may have an impact on data use.
Teachers should have access to data. Schools should have an information management
system and technology tools for collecting and analyzing data. Teachers must also
determine whether the available data is usable and of high quality. High-quality data has
the following key characteristics: accuracy, validity, reliability, timeliness, relevance, and
completeness. Teachers need to be able to use high-quality data to make informed
decisions. The ability to implement data-based decision making is referred to as data
literacy (Kippers et al., 2018). Data literacy is an important prerequisite for the effective

implementation of data-based decision making in schools.

Data Literacy

Data is the new oil in the Fourth Industrial Revolution, also known as Industry
4.0. The Fourth Industrial Revolution is the technological transformation that society is
undergoing in the 21* century. A large volume of data is generated due to the emergence
of innovative technologies. Current technologies and applications are being developed to
deal with this vast amount of data. These technologies and applications can be used to
analyze and store data (Kalaian et al., 2019). The Internet of Things (loT), Automatic and
Artificial Intelligence (Al), 3D printing, Cloud Computing, and other technologies are
becoming increasingly integrated into people's lives (Ross & Maynard, 2021). According
to Dresner Advisory Services (2017), education is one of the most active sectors in
producing a vast amount of data. A large amount of data is generated in the education

sector through online courses, teaching, and learning activities (Oi et al., 2017). With the

17

advent of big data (data that is too large or complex for traditional tools to store or
process efficiently), teachers can now gain access to their students' academic
performance, learning patterns, and provide immediate feedback (Black & Wiliam,
2018). Therefore, it is essential for all teachers to have an adequate level of digital
competence, particularly in the area of information and data literacy, to perform
analytical practices with large volume of data. The other areas of digital competence are
communication and collaboration, digital content creation, safety, and problem solving.

Furthermore, information and data literacy include browsing, searching, filtering,
evaluating, and managing data, information, and digital content. Prado and Marzal (2013)
have defined data literacy as “the component of information literacy that enables
individuals to access, interpret, critically assess, manage, handle, and ethically use data.
From that perspective, information literacy and data literacy form part of a continuum.”
(p. 126). The terms “information” and “data” are always mentioned together, although no
specific standards or guidelines have been established for data literacy. Some data
literacy competences have been incorporated into the information literacy standards. In
general, these competences include the ability to recognize source data types and formats,
critically access data sources suited to the information need, manage and analyze data,
present quantitative information, use data ethically, and apply results to learning,
decision-making, or problem solving (Prado & Marzal, 2013).

Data literacy is a foundational 21* century skill that is ambiguously defined and
lacks a clear set of core competencies that are widely accepted across various disciplines
(Wolff et al., 2016). Data literacy has been defined broadly as the skills needed to collect,

manage, evaluate, and critically apply data (Ridsdale et al., 2015). D’Ignazio and

18

Bhargava (2016) defined data literacy as the ability to read, work with, analyze, and
argue with data. The definition of data literacy has evolved to include the ability to use
data productively and critically reflect on it (Stermkopf & Mueller, 2018). Khan et al.
(2018) defined data literacy as a set of skills required for data-driven decision making,
activities supporting research data services, and practices for the data lifecycle.

In the synthesis matrix provided, the researcher conducted a comparative analysis
of a wide range of data literacy definitions obtained from credible sources and references.
Table 1 highlighted the variations in their key components and the contexts in which they

apply.

Table 1

Synthesis Matrix Table for Data Literacy Definitions

Source/ Definition Key Components Context
Reference _ - a .
Prado and “Data literacy can be defined, e Understanding Information
Marzal then, as the component of data Literacy and
(2013) information literacy that enables e Finding and/or Library
individuals to access, interpret, obtaining data

critically assess, manage, handle  e ~_-Reading,
and ethically use data.” (p. 126) interpreting,
and evaluating
data
Managing data
_ __ _ _ Using data
D’Ignazio “Data Literacy includes the © Understanding Academic
and ability to read, work with, data
Bhargava analyze and argue with data as e Creating,
(2016) part of a larger inquiry process.” acquiring,
(p. 84) cleaning, and

managing data
e Filtering,

sorting,

aggregating,

comparing, and


19

Ridsdale et
al. (2015)

and
Gummer
(2016)

performing
analytic
operations
Using data to
communicate

Wolff et al.
(2016)

“Data literacy is the ability to Introduction to General
collect, manage, evaluate, and data Public
apply data, in a critical manner.” Data collection
(p. 8) Data
management
Data evaluation
Data
a ee application _ ee
Mandinach “Data literacy for teaching is the Identify Education
ability to transform information problems and
into actionable instructional frame questions
knowledge and practices by Use data
collecting, analyzing, and Transform data
interpreting all types of data into
(assessment, school climate, information
behavioral, snapshot, Transform into
longitudinal, moment-to-moment, decisions
etc.) to help determine Evaluate
instructional steps. It combines an outcomes
understanding of data with
standards, disciplinary knowledge
and practices, curricular
knowledge, pedagogical content
knowledge, and an understanding
of how children learn.” (p. 367) __ _
“Data literacy is the ability to ask Real world Community
and answer real-world questions problem -
from large and small data sets solving context
through an inquiry process, with Data inquiry
consideration of ethical use of Data ethics
data. It is based on core practical Data handling

and creative skills, with the
ability to extend knowledge of
specialist data handling skills
according to goals. These include
the abilities to select, clean,
analyze, visualize, critique and
interpret data, as well as to
communicate stories from data
and to use data as part of a design
process.” (p. 23)


20

Koltay “Data literacy as a specific skill e Data Academic
(2017) set and knowledge base, which management and Library
empowers individuals to e Data curation
transform data into information © Data sharing
and into actionable knowledge by ¢ Data quality
enabling them to access, interpret, . Data citation
critically assess, manage, and
___ __ ethically use data” (p. 17) _ _
Khan et al. Data literacy is defined as asetof e Data-driven Education,
(2018) skills required for data-driven decision Library and
decision making, activities making information
supporting research data services, e Research data science, and
a set of practices for data services Information
lifecycle. e Datalifecycle systems
__ _ _ 7 - management _
Sternkopf Data literacy is a continuous Data culture Non-
and learning journey that creates the Data ethics and governmental
Mueller ability to identify, understand, security organizations
(2018) interpret, create, communicate, e Ask questions
and compute pieces of and define
information (data) to develop e Find
knowledge and the ability to e Get
participate fully in our society. © Verify
e Clean
e Analyze
e Visualize
e Communicate
e Assess and
_ _ interpret

Data literacy is a broad set of quantitative and qualitative skills, dispositions,

attitude, and beliefs that draws from different disciplines (Bhargava et al., 2015) but does

not clearly fit into any of them. According to Mund (2022), data literacy is increasingly

being used by information literacy scholars who focus on data’s role as a source of

information. It is also commonly cited by statistical literacy researchers, who emphasize

the skills required, such as understanding statistical terminology and using statistical

techniques to work with datasets (Dunlap & Piro, 2016). Data literacy also shares

21

overlapping skills with digital literacy, which is defined as the ability and capacity to use
digital means to access, manage, integrate, analyze, and synthesize digital information
(Kaeophanuek et al., 2018), and media literacy, which refers to the ability to access,
communicate, interpret, and evaluate messages or texts across a range of digitally
mediated forms (Goessling, 2019). Researchers also see close connections between data
literacy and computational thinking, which involves problem solving and application of
logic, algorithmic thinking, and abstraction (Czerkawski & Lyman, 2015, as cited in
Ridsdale, 2015).

Data literacy competencies are the knowledge and skills required to ethically
collect, read, analyze, interpret, communicate data with visualizations, integrate data into
daily life, and comprehend the use of data in decision-making. Means et al. (2011)
investigated how teachers use data and identified the specific data literacy skills and
concepts that they should possess to successfully implement data-driven decision making.
The following data literacy skills are recommended:

e Find the relevant pieces of data in the data system or display available to them

(Data location)

e Understand what the data signify (Data comprehension)

e Figure out what the data mean (Data interpretation)

¢ Select an instructional approach that addresses the situation identified through the
data (Data use)

e Frame instructionally relevant questions that can be addressed by the data in the

system (Question posing) (p. 8)

22

Similarly, Wayman and Jimerson (2014) conducted focus group discussions and

interviews on teachers to identify the range of data-related competencies needed for them

to be competent users of data. Findings revealed the following data literacy

competencies:

Asking the right questions

Integrating data use with curriculum, instruction, and assessment
Analyzing and interpreting data

Linking data to classroom practice

Computer skills

Collaborating around data (p. 28)

Furthermore, Ridsdale et al. (2015) proposed a Data Literacy Competencies

Matrix. It is categorized into five key abilities/knowledge areas: conceptual framework,

data collection, data management, data evaluation, and data application. The five

knowledge areas encompass twenty-two competencies.

Conceptual Framework

A good introduction to data requires knowledge and understanding of data, as
well as its uses and applications.

Data Collection

The two core competencies are data discovery and collection and evaluating and
ensuring quality of data and sources. Data discovery and collection are to perform
data exploration, identify useful data, and collect data. Evaluating and ensuring
data quality and sources entails critically assessing data sources for reliability and

evaluating dataset quality for accuracy.

23

Data Management

The core competencies are data organization (organizing data and assessing data
organization requirements) and data manipulation (cleaning data and identifying
outliers). The advanced competencies include data conversion, metadata
creation and use, data curation, security, and re-use, and data preservation. Data
conversion is the process of converting data from one format or file type to
another. Metadata creation and use entail creating metadata descriptions and
assigning them to original data sets. Data curation, security, and re-use are to
curate data, analyze data curation requirements such as storage accessibility and
sharing requirements, and data security requirements such as restricted access and
encrypted drives. Data preservation is the method of preserving data in
accordance with the preservation requirements.

Data Evaluation

The competencies for data evaluation are data tools, basic data analysis, data
interpretations, identifying problems using data, data visualization, presenting
data (verbally), data-driven decision making. The ability to choose and apply
appropriate data analysis tools or techniques is referred to as data tools. Basic data
analysis entails conducting exploratory analysis, comparing, and evaluating
analysis results with other findings. Data interpretation is the process of reading
and comprehending charts, tables, and graphs to find disparities in the data.
Identifying problems using data is the use of data to detect problems in practical
situations and higher problems. Data visualization is the creation of meaningful

tables and graphical data representations to organize and visually present data,

24

and the evaluation of efficacy for data accuracy and misrepresentation. Presenting
data verbally involves using appropriate tables and visualizations to communicate
data based on the audience's needs and knowledge with the subject.

e Data Application
The competencies are critical thinking, data culture, data ethics, data citation, data
sharing, and evaluating decisions based on data. Critical thinking is the ability to
recognize high-level issues and challenges associated with data and to think
critically when working with it. The goal of data culture is to recognize the value
of data and to promote an environment that encourages the critical use of data for
learning, research, and decision-making. Data ethics is the application and use of
data in an ethical manner while being aware of the legal and ethical
considerations surrounding data. The purpose of data citation is to create correct
citations for secondary data sets. Data sharing is the process of legally and
ethically sharing data through evaluating data sharing techniques and platforms.
Evaluating data-driven decisions entails gathering follow-up data and conducting

analysis to determine the effectiveness of data-driven decisions or solutions.

The consolidated table below, denoted as Table 2, encapsulates the data literacy

competencies elucidated by different authors.

Table 2

25

Data Literacy Competencies Presented by Different Authors

Sources/References

Data Literacy Competencies

Means et al. (2011)

Data location

Data comprehension
Data interpretation
Data use

Question Posing

Wayman and Jimerson
(2014)

Asking the right questions

Integrating data use with curriculum, instruction, and
assessment

Analyzing and interpreting data

Linking data to classroom practice

Computer skills

Collaborating around data

Ridsdale et al. (2015)

Conceptual Framework

- Introduction to data

Data Collection

- Data discovery and collection

- Evaluating and ensuring quality of data and
sources

Data Management

- Data organization

- Data manipulation

- Data conversion (from format to format)

- Metadata creation and use

- Data curation, security, and re-use

Data Evaluation

- Data tools

- Basic data analysis

- Data interpretation

- Identifying problems using data

- Data visualization

- Presenting data (verbally)

- Data Driven Decision Making

Data Application

- Critical thinking

- Data culture

- Data ethics

- Data citation

- Data sharing

-__ Evaluating decisions based on data


26

Data Literacy Frameworks

Wolff et al. (2016) pointed out that “without a clear definition of what data
literacy is, it is both hard to teach and to assess the outcome of teaching” (p. 10).
Mandinach and Gummer (2016b) proposed the following definition of data literacy for
teaching to fill the gap and address the need in terms of the cognitive skills and
knowledge needed for teachers to be data literate:

Data literacy for teaching is the ability to transform information into actionable

instructional knowledge and practices by collecting, analyzing, and interpreting

all types of data (assessment, school climate, behavioral, snapshot, longitudinal,
moment-to moment, etc.) to help determine instructional steps. It combines an
understanding of data with standards, disciplinary knowledge and practices,
curricular knowledge, pedagogical content knowledge, and an understanding of

how children learn. (p. 367)

Mandinach and Gummer (2016b) also developed a conceptual framework for data
literacy for teachers. The framework for data literacy depicts “an overarching visual of
the process of using data to inform instructional decisions” (Conn, 2020, p.14). The
framework is represented as a large funnel that encompassed the entirety of Shulman’s
(1987) seven foundational knowledge integrating data use in the inquiry cycle: content
knowledge; general pedagogical knowledge; curriculum knowledge; pedagogical content
knowledge; knowledge of learners and their characteristics; knowledge of educational
contexts; and knowledge of educational ends, purposes and values. As shown in Figure 2,
these areas provide essential information and feed into the domain of data use for

teaching.

Figure 2

Conceptual Framework for Data Literacy for Teachers

Knowledge of
Educational Ends,
Purposes and
Values

Knowledge of
Leamers and Their

Content
Knowledge

Characteristics

Pedagogical
Content

Knowledge of
Educational
Contexts

General
Pedagogical

Knowledge Knowledge

Data Use
for Teaching

Identify Transform

Transform
Problems/ Data Inte Information

a Frame Information Into Decision
uestions

27

Note. Conceptual Framework for Data Literacy for Teachers. Reprinted from “What does

it mean for teachers to be data literate: Laying out the skills, knowledge, and
dispositions,” by E.B. Mandinach and E.S. Gummer, 2016, Teaching and Teacher

Education, 60, p. 369. Copyright 2016 by Elsevier Ltd. Reprinted with permission.

28

The five components in the inquiry cycle are included in the domain of data use
for teaching: identify problems/frame questions; use data; transform data into
information; transform information into decision; and evaluate outcomes.

Teachers must have a strong content and curriculum knowledge so that they can
find ways for the students to demonstrate their mastery of the subject matter. Teachers
must be able to relate their content understanding to the representations in the teaching
materials (pedagogical content knowledge). Data such as demographics, attendance, and
behavior can help teachers gain a better knowledge of their students and their
characteristics. Teachers’ knowledge of educational contexts, education ends, purposes,
and values are necessary to effectively use data at the school and district levels in order to
develop instructional plans, as well as support their students in attaining the educational
goals and objectives (Mandinach & Gummer, 2016b).

The five-stage inquiry cycle exemplified the iterative process of extracting
meaning from data, translating and transforming it into actionable instruction. Mandinach
and Gummer (2016b) identified the knowledge and skills necessary for each component.
In total, there are fifty-three (53) skills.

The cycle of inquiry begins with identifying a problem of practice and framing a
question or issue. Teachers should be able to understand the context not only at the
student level, but also at the school level, to provide them with a broad perspective when
looking for solutions to practice problems. They should include other educators, parents,
and students who can provide valuable insights into students' performance to assist them
in making decisions. Most importantly, teachers must be aware of the regulations

governing student privacy and confidentiality.

29

The second and largest component of the inquiry cycle is using data. This
component focuses on the knowledge and skills needed by teachers, such as identifying
and evaluating the right data that is relevant to the problem of practice and actionable,
understanding different types of assessment and their purposes, understanding data
properties and qualities, using technologies to support data use, understanding statistics
and psychometrics, and so on.

The next phase in the inquiry cycle is transforming data into actionable
information. Teachers should be able to interpret data as well as use data displays and
representations. The next step is transforming information into a decision by monitoring
student performance, diagnosing students' needs, and making instructional adjustments
based on their needs.

The final component of the inquiry process is evaluating the outcomes that result
from the decision. Teachers must monitor changes in classroom practices and students
changes in performance.

Wayman et al. (2016) presented an additional conceptual framework for teachers,
as shown in Figure 3, that explains how teachers use data to improve student learning.
The authors also created a Teacher Data Use survey based on the five components of the
conceptual framework: actions, organizational supports, competence in using data,
attitude toward data, and collaboration. The research-based model situates teachers’
data-related actions within an inquiry cycle. These actions are influenced by other four
components of the framework: their competence in using data, their attitudes toward data,

their collaboration with other teachers, and the organizational supports available to them.

30

These actions inform changes in teachers’ knowledge and practice, which in turn can

improve student learning.

Figure 3

Conceptual Framework for Teacher Data Use

[EON Make ; Evaluate

/ Competencein \

\ ey ™, decisions problems
ate Actions

Synthesize fom
(Ex ON information questions
| Collaboration

data
Organizational
supports

Student
learning

Knowledge
and practice

Note. Conceptual Framework for Teacher Data Use. Reprinted from “Guide to using the
Teacher Data Use Survey,” by J.C. Wayman, S.B. Wilkerson, V. Cho, E.B. Mandinach,
and J.A Supovitz, 2016, U.S. Department of Education, Institute of Education Sciences,
National Center for Education Evaluation and Regional Assistance, Regional Educational

Laboratory Appalachia. Reprinted with permission.

The central point of the conceptual framework, as illustrated in Figure 3, is the
actions that teachers take with data. It includes actions for various types of data and the

processes involved in using them, as well as data team actions as part of a collaborative


31

inquiry cycle. These actions are supported by a few organizational components. The first
organizational component is data competence. It is concerned with teachers’ perceptions
of their ability to use data to inform various aspects of their practice. The attitudes toward
data are the second organizational component. It includes perceptions of the effectiveness
of data in pedagogy, as well as attitudes and opinions about data. The third organizational
component is collaboration. When using data, it is beneficial for teachers to
collaborate. The beliefs about trust while working in teams is an important factor. The
final component is organizational support. Teachers should seek support from their
district and school. Supports include the computer data system, which is the
appropriate technology for accessing and analyzing data, principal leadership that
promotes and enables data use, and school staff who can assist teachers in using data.
Raffaghelli (2019) developed a conceptual framework for educators’ data literacy
to empower them and their students to thrive in a datafied society. The author aligned the
proposed reference framework to the European Framework for the Digital Competence of
Educators (DigCompEdu). The six areas of the framework are as follows:
1. Professional Engagement
Area | focuses on educators developing their data literacy by actively
participating in research data practices; using available data to improve
organizational communication with colleagues, students, and others; using open
data approaches to engage in professional collaboration; reflecting data-driven
practices within teaching; and using data sources for continuous professional

development.

32

. Data as a Resource for Learning

Area 2 focuses on developing educators’ data competency through data selection
as a resource for teaching and learning, data collection and extraction as a
resource for learning, and data management, protection, and sharing.

. Teaching and Learning

Area 3 involves planning and implementing data-driven activities and
visualizations in the teaching and learning process to improve the effectiveness of
teaching interventions; integrating data-driven guidance; utilizing data-driven

approaches to cultivate learner collaboration and support self-regulated learning.

. Assessment

Area 4 involves integrating data obtained throughout formative and summative
assessment strategies; analyzing data as evidence of student performance and
progress to guide teaching and learning; and using data to provide learners with
timely feedback.

Empowering Learners

Area 5 focuses on ensuring that all learners, including those with special needs,
have access to the data generated and used during learning activities; using digital
technologies to address learners’ diverse learning needs; actively engaging
learners through data storytelling and the creation of infographics; and
investigating and solving problems using real-world contexts of data usage.
Facilitating Learners’ Data Literacy

Area 6 focuses on enhancing learners’ data literacy by incorporating learning

activities, assignments and assessments that promote data visualization and data

33

storytelling; using data effectively and responsibly; and sharing data using digital

platforms.

Moreover, Raffaghelli (2019) also identified and described the progression of

proficiency levels for the development of educators’ data literacy.

Newcomer

Newcomers are aware of data as a possible resource, data-driven practices, data
issues in teaching, learning, and assessment, and the need to understand data in
order to empower learners to use data beyond the discipline, uncertainty, and
basic use.

Explorer

Explorers explore data-driven professional practices, data as a resource for
learning, teaching, and learning activities using data, meaning of data on
traditional assessment. They also encourage learners to comprehend data by
exploring learner-centered strategies for promoting data-driven practices.
Integrator

Integrators broaden professional practice through data use, filter data as a resource
to the learning context, meaningfully integrate data into teaching, improve
traditional assessment using available data, address learner empowerment in data-
driven practices, and implement activities to foster learners’ data literacy.

Expert

Experts use data to improve professional practices, use interactive strategies and

resources strategically, use data to enhance the teaching and learning activities,

34

use data-driven assessment and evaluation effectively, use a variety of tools to
empower learners in data-driven practices, and foster learners’ learning.

e Leader
Leaders discuss and renew data-driven professional practices, comprehensively
use advanced strategies and resources for exploring and using data, strategically
and purposely renew teaching practice by understanding and using data, critically
reflect on the ways of understanding and using data in assessment and evaluation,
holistically empower learners in data-driven practices, and comprehensively and
critically foster learners’ data literacy.

e Pioneer
Pioneers innovate towards a critical perspective of data-driven professional
practices, promote innovative ways of exploring and using data, innovate ways of
understanding and using data in teaching, learning, and assessment, innovate
learner involvement in data-driven practices, and use innovative formats to foster

learners’ personal, professional, and social data literacy (pp. 10257-10258).

Data Use Interventions

van der Sheer and Visscher (2016) investigated the effects of an intensive data-
based decision making intervention on Grade 4 teacher efficacy. The teachers went
through a DBDM training course and coaching sessions in which they were coached on
how to implement DBDM in mathematics lessons. The intervention was developed using
five important criteria for effective professional development by Desimone (2009), and

Van Veen et al. (2012): active learning, a considerable duration of the intervention,

35

content focus, coherence between the intervention and (school) policy. and collective
participation. Teachers analyzed their own classroom data, created their own instructionai
plans, and provided feedback to peers. The findings revealed the significant strong
intervention effects on teachers’ efficacy for instructional strategies and student
engagement. The in-service primary teachers felt more confident in their instructional
strategies and ability to engage students after the intervention. However, no significant
effects of the intervention on classroom management were found since most in-service
teachers, with many years of experience, already considered themselves to be quite adept
at classroom management.

Ebbeler et al. (2016) examined the effects of the data team intervention on
educators’ satisfaction and learning outcomes (data literacy skills and attitude toward data
use). The data teams were composed of 4 to 6 teachers, 1 to 2 team leaders, and an
internal data expert. The data use intervention consists of eight steps: (1) problem
definition, (2) formulating hypothesis, (3) data collection, (4) data quality check, (5) data
analysis, (6) interpretation and conclusions, (7) implementing improvement measures, (8)
evaluation (Schildkamp & Ehren, 2013, p. 56). This eight-step approach guided team
members in using data to solve a problem that emerged in their own school context. The
findings revealed that respondents were very satisfied with the support they received
during the intervention. In addition, respondents learned new data literacy skills such as
creating scatterplots, conducting statistical analyses in Excel, and learning about
qualitative research. The authors also found out that the respondents had a more positive

attitude toward data use.

36

Similarly, Kippers et al. (2018) investigated the extent to which educators develop
data literacy components (set a purpose, collect data, analyze data, interpret data, and
take instructional actions to implement) during data use intervention, as well as what they
learn and struggle with regarding these data literacy components. Teams of teachers,
school leaders, and a data expert utilized data to solve an educational problem at their
school during the data use intervention. The authors employed a mixed methods
approach, merging data from a data literacy test, interviews, meeting evaluations, and
logbooks. The data literacy test included twelve open-ended questions. The examples of
the questions are:

(1) A data team that wants to work on the problem of poor mathematics results in the first
year of secondary education thinks this problem is mainly caused by the poor quality of
arithmetic lessons in the primary schools their students are from. Identify two data
sources this team could use to investigate this cause.

(2) A mathematics data team has implemented the instructional action that every lesson
in the 8th grade (general secondary education) is started with a short repetition of
fractions. The team would like to evaluate how the action was implemented and is
experienced by teachers. Specifically, they want to answer the question “How do
colleagues experience this action?” Mention two instruments that can be used to answer
this evaluation question.

(3) Data have to be of a sufficient quality to take conclusions about the problem. Mention
two data quality criteria and explain each of them.

The findings revealed that after a data-use intervention, educators' data literacy

increased significantly. The results revealed that educators had learned the importance of

37

correctly storing data in the student monitoring system, using Excel to analyze data, and
refuting misconceptions. However, educators struggled with formulating a plausible,
concrete, and measurable data use purpose, reporting data collection concretely enough,

and clearly describing data quality criteria.

Data Literacy in STEM Education

Data literacy is a fundamental competency for educators, which enables them to
collect, analyze, and interpret data to make data-based decisions. Schreiter et al. (2022)
highlighted the importance of developing data literacy competencies across all STEM
fields throughout primary school and secondary education. Several teachers integrate data
literacy skills into their STEM education approaches such as problem-based and project-
based learning, collaborative interactions, personal contexts, game-based learning, and
student-led data collection, are utilized to promote statistical and data literacy. Schreiter
et al. (2002) stated that the use of authentic problems and real-world data has been shown
in several studies as an effective cross-curricular approach to increase students’
knowledge, interest, and motivation towards statistics and data literacy. An important
component of both STEM integration and data literacy is that they are grounded in
authentic, real-world problems that require authentic real-world data, which is often
complex, messy, and unlike most of the data typically used in secondary school
classrooms (Bowen & Bartley, 2014; Finzer et al., 2018; Hardy et al., 2020, as cited in
Miller, 2022). Lee and Wilkerson (2018) also support the notion that work with data
should be conducted within the context of meaningful scientific investigations and add

that the interdisciplinary nature of data should be highlighted with connections between

38

math and science classes. Wolff et al. (2019) propose six design principles to facilitate
the advancement of data literacy: First, the inquiry principle, which suggests that data use
should be scaffolded through a full inquiry cycle. Second, the expansion principle
suggests beginning with a smaller, less complex dataset and gradually expanding as
students develop comfort and expertise. Third, the context principle emphasizes the
importance of choosing data that is familiar and relatable to students. Fourth, the
foundational competencies principle encourages teaching of skills by connecting to larger
ideas and transferable skills. Fifth, the STEAM principle encourages the addition of arts
to STEM exploration, encouraging students' creativity. Lastly, the personal data
collection principle suggests engaging students in data collection activities themselves,
enabling them to understand the process of data collection even when working with

larger, external datasets.

Professional Development on Data Literacy for Teachers

COVID-19 has turned the world upside down. With the implementation of strict
lockdown measures throughout the country, the schools transitioned from face-to-face
classes to remote or distance learning, which has become the new normal in the
Philippines. As a result, teachers were forced to adjust to the new normal in the
educational landscape and provide effective remedial education (Guillasper et al., 2020).
Remote education in the Philippines consists of a variety of modalities, including online
instruction, blended learning, streaming media, and printed lesson materials (de Guzman,
2021; Luz, 2021). However, many issues, difficulties, and challenges have emerged such

as poor internet connectivity, insufficient learning resources, and a lack of teacher

39

training in the use of Information and Communication Technologies (ICT). Despite the
challenges of remote learning, teachers keep finding ways to transform their students’
homes into spaces of innovation and discovery by continuing to equip themselves with
the necessary skills and competencies through professional development. As stated in
D.O. 42, s. 2017, the Philippine Professional Standards for Teachers (PPST) makes
explicit what teachers should know, be able to do, and value to achieve competence,
improved student learning outcomes, and eventually, quality education. Quality teachers
in the Philippines should value personal growth and professional development to improve
their practice and exhibit high personal regard for the profession by maintaining qualities
that uphold the dignity of teaching.

Professional development is defined as activities that enhance a teacher's skills,
knowledge, expertise, and other characteristics (OECD, 2009). Teachers can participate
in the following activities, ranging from formal to informal:

© courses/workshops (subject matter or methods or other education-related topics)
e education conferences, seminars

e qualification programme

e observation visits to other schools

¢ participation in a network of teachers

e individual or collaborative research

e mentoring, peer observation or coaching

e reading professional literature (e.g. journals, thesis)

© engaging in informal dialogue with peers on how to improve teaching (OECD,

2009, p. 50)

40

Aside from the activities listed above, most Filipino teachers attend Continuing
Professional Development (CPD) training courses, webinars and virtual conferences, and
take MOOC (Massive Open Online Courses) courses to strengthen their skills in the
positive use of Information and Communications Technology (ICT) within and outside
the school to facilitate the teaching and learning process, as outlined in Strand 1.3 of the
PPST.

Technology is inextricably linked to Data Literacy. Training on how to use
technology to access, store, and analyze data should be provided to pre- and in-service
teachers. These technological tools include the use of massive data systems to mobile
devices and simple spreadsheets. Data warehouses, student information systems,
assessment systems, instructional management systems, diagnostic devices, data
dashboards, electronic grade books, spreadsheets, and many other platforms must be
learned by teachers in order to navigate, extract data, and interpret visualizations

(Henderson & Corry, 2020; Mandinach, 2016a).

Individual and Institutional Initiatives
Teachers, schools, and policy-making bodies have taken various individual and
institutional initiatives to issues and problems related to the integration of data literacy

skills in the classroom. Here are some of the actions taken by:

Teachers. Teachers involve students in authentic activities and projects that allow
them to put their data literacy skills to use. Teachers use data literacy skills to assess

teaching methods and practices to make data-driven decisions. Teachers use data that is

41

readily available, useful, and reliable to teach and demonstrate lessons and concepts.
Teachers incorporate data literacy into the classroom by understanding the purpose of
data and presenting concepts using data visualizations. Teachers collect, analyze, and
interpret data in order to assess students’ progress and academic performance. Teachers
engage in various types of professional development activities including seminars,
workshops, webinars, trainings, conferences, courses, and Massive Open Online Courses
(MOOCs) such as the STEM Education Master Course and other MOOCs offered by
organizations like the Department of Information and Communications Technology
(DICT), DepEd ICTS, and SEAMEO INNOTECH, in order to enhance their data literacy
competencies. In their efforts to analyze data, teachers employ different assessment tools
such as surveys, checklists, and interviews, and utilize digital and software tools and apps

like Microsoft Excel and Google Forms to assess students’ data literacy skills.

Schools. Schools offer various professional development opportunities for
teachers. Schools provide access to appropriate technologies, software, and digital tools
such as Microsoft Excel and Google form, to help teachers collect, analyze, and interpret
data to make data-based decisions. Additionally, schools provide teachers with accessible
and usable data literacy resources such as textbooks, lesson plans, and STEM teaching
materials. Moreover, schools promote collaborative learning among teachers through
professional learning communities, which encourage teachers to discuss and share their
innovative teaching strategies and methods in integrating data literacy skills in the

classrooms.

42

Policy-making bodies. As part of their efforts to enhance data literacy skills,
policy-making bodies are partnering with various stakeholders to facilitate the provision
of training and workshops for teachers. These initiatives aim to equip teachers with the
necessary skills to integrate data literacy into their classroom activities and curricula.
Additionally, policy-making bodies are committed to enhance teachers’ proficiency in
data analysis, visualization, and interpretation, while also providing them resources such

as software, equipment, content, and skills to support their teaching practices.

Research Paradigm

In this study, the researcher conducted a review of existing literature on data-
based decision making, data literacy, data literacy frameworks, data use intervention, data
literacy in STEM education, and professional development on data literacy for teachers.
The purpose of the research paradigm, as shown in Figure 4, is to develop a framework
for professional development on data literacy for Filipino teachers. This framework will
integrate both quantitative and qualitative data including surveys to provide a

comprehensive understanding of the interplay among the key components.

43

Figure 4

Research Paradigm

Factors Affecting the
Development and
Application of Data
Literacy Skills in the

Classroom

Existing and
Ee Emerging Data
y N Literacy
/ Framework for » Frameworks and
/ _ Professional Local Standards

on Data
Literacy for
Teachers 7

Development

The first component investigates the characteristics of teachers, such as
competencies, perception, teacher efficacy, and attitude, which may influence their ability
to effectively incorporate data literacy skills into their teaching practices. The second
component highlights the current practices used by teachers to incorporate data literacy
skills into STEM education. The third component explores the different factors that may
impact the development and application of data literacy skills in the classroom. Finally,
the fourth component explores the existing and emerging data literacy frameworks and
standards that give guidance for the development and application of data literacy in the

classroom.

44

In general, these components play a crucial role in building a framework for
professional development on data literacy for teachers. By considering these components,
teachers can be better equipped to effectively integrate data literacy skills into their

teaching practices.

Research Hypotheses

The Null hypotheses (Ho) of the study are:

1. There is no significant correlation between the information and data literacy of
Filipino teachers and the components of educators’ digital competence such as:
a. digital communication and collaboration
b. digital content creation
c. responsible use
d. digital problem solving
2. There is no significant interaction among teachers’ information and data literacy,
perceptions regarding STEM education, teacher efficacy, and attitude toward

STEM teaching.

The Alternative hypotheses (H1) are:

1. There is a significant correlation between information and data literacy of Filipino
teachers and the components of educators’ digital competence such as:
a. digital communication and collaboration
b. digital content creation

¢. responsible use

45

d. digital problem solving
2. There is a significant interaction among teachers’ information and data literacy,
perceptions regarding STEM education, teacher efficacy, and attitude toward

STEM teaching.

Definition of Terms
The following terms are defined as used in this study:
Data — is a raw piece of information composed of quantitative or qualitative facts,

figures, and any other material containing knowledge.

Data-based decision making — is the systematic collection and analysis of various types
of data to inform educational decisions (Hamilton et al., 2009). It encompasses school

organizational characteristics, teacher characteristics, and data characteristics.

Data literacy — is defined as “ability to transform information into actionable
instructional knowledge and practices by collecting, analyzing, and interpreting all types
of data...to help determine instructional steps. It combines an understanding of data with
standards, disciplinary knowledge and practices, curricular knowledge, pedagogical
content knowledge, and an understanding of how children learn” (Mandinach &

Gummer, 2016b, p.367).

46

Data Literacy Framework for Teachers — is a visual representation of the overarching

concepts related to data literacy as well as specific steps teachers take in to make data-

based instructional decisions (Conn, 2020).

Digital Competence — is broadly defined as the “confident, critical and creative use of

ICT to achieve goals related to work, employability, learning, leisure, inclusion and/or

participation in society” (Redecker, 2017, p. 90).

Information and Data Literacy — includes browsing, searching, filtering,
evaluating, and managing data, information, and digital content. In this study, this
was determined based on the participants’ mean scores in the information and
data literacy assessments obtained from the STEM Education Master Course
Training Survey, which was conducted before and after the course.

Digital Communication and Collaboration — includes interacting, sharing,
engaging in citizenship, and collaborating through digital technologies and
netiquette, as well as, managing digital identity. This was determined by the
participants’ post-test results obtained from the STEM Education Master Course
Training Survey.

Digital Content Creation — includes developing, integrating, and re-elaborating
digital content, as well as understanding how copyright and licenses apply to data,
information, and digital content, and programming. This was determined by the
participants’ post-test results obtained from the STEM Education Master Course

Training Survey.

47

¢ Responsible Use — includes protecting devices and digital content, safeguarding
personal data and privacy, ensuring one's health and well-being, and being aware
of the impact of digital technologies and their use. This was determined by the
participants’ post-test results obtained from the STEM Education Master Course
Training Survey.

e Digital Problem Solving — includes solving technical problems, identifying needs
and technological responses, creatively using digital technologies, and identifying
digital competence gaps. This was determined by the participants’ post-test results

obtained from the STEM Education Master Course Training Survey.

Philippine Professional Standard for Teachers (PPST) — serves as framework of teacher
quality in the K to 12 Reform through well-defined domains, strands, and indicators that

provide measures of professional learning, competent practice, and effective engagement.

STEM education — is an approach to teaching and learning that integrates the contents
and skills of the four disciplines, namely Science, Technology, Engineering, and

Mathematics.

Teacher characteristics — are qualities of the teachers including personality traits,
knowledge, abilities, experiences, values, and beliefs that influence the process of
teaching.

¢ Attitude toward STEM education — is a feeling that shows one’s disposition

toward STEM subject content and teaching. This was determined by the

48

participants’ responses obtained from the STEM Education Master Course
Training Survey.

© Competencies — are the knowledge and skills required to ethically collect, read,
analyze, interpret, communicate data with visualizations, integrate data into daily
life, and comprehend the use of data in decision-making.

e Perceptions regarding STEM education — refer to how teachers view, interpret,
and understand STEM education. This was determined by the participants’
responses obtained from the STEM Education Master Course Training Survey.

© Teacher efficacy — is “the teacher’s belief in his or her capability to organize and
execute the courses of action required to successfully accomplish a specific
teaching task in a particular context” (Tschannen-Moran et al., 1988, p. 22). This
was determined by the participants’ responses obtained from the STEM Education

Master Course Training Survey.

Teacher Professional Development — is defined as activities that develop a teacher’s

skills, knowledge, expertise, and other characteristics (OECD, 2009)

Teacher Professional Development framework — provides overarching principles and

domains to guide the professional development of teachers.

49

Chapter III

METHODOLOGY

This chapter provides a discussion of the research design, research locale, sample,

instrumentation, data collection procedures, and data analyses employed in the study.

Research Design

An explanatory sequential mixed methods design was used in this study. The
purpose of the study was to develop a contextualized framework for professional
development on data literacy for Filipino teachers. This involved assessing Filipino
teachers’ level of information and data literacy and competencies in integrating data
literacy skills in STEM education, as well as their perception, teacher efficacy, and
attitude toward data literacy and STEM teaching.

This research design entails a two-phase data collection approach in which the
researcher collects quantitative data in the first phase, analyzes the results, and then
builds on the results to explain the quantitative results with in-depth qualitative data in
the second phase (Creswell & Creswell, 2018).

During the first quantitative phase of the study, the collected data were analyzed
to obtain the quantitative results. In the second qualitative phase, the researcher followed
up with the participants to obtain in-depth qualitative data through an open-ended
narrative survey questionnaire. The qualitative data helped explain the results of the

quantitative analysis of the survey responses.

50

Research Locale

This research was conducted in the Philippines and involved Filipino teaching
professionals in the primary and secondary education sectors who taught Science and/or
Mathematics subjects. The participants were selected from different regions and
provinces of the Philippines, including NCR, CAR, Cagayan Valley, Central Luzon,
CALABARZON, MIMAROPA, Bicol, Western Visayas, Central Visayas, Soccsksargen,

Caraga, Zamboanga Peninsula, and Northern Mindanao.

The Sample

The sample of the study consisted of science and mathematics teachers who
actively participated in the STEM Education Master Course for Teachers 2021 provided
by the Department of Information and Communications Technology — ICT Literacy and
Competency Development Bureau in collaboration with the University of the Philippines
— College of Education through the Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs). The study
included a total of 462 STEM teachers, with 303 female and 159 male teachers.
Specifically, among them, 280 were science teachers, and 157 were mathematics
teachers. Notably, 25 participants did not provide information about their subject
specialization. Additionally, among these teachers, there were 60 teaching at the
elementary level and 389 teaching at the secondary level. However, 13 participants did
not specify the grade or year level they are teaching. Furthermore, the participants
displayed a wide range of teaching experience, ranging from 0 to 35 years.

In this study, an open-ended narrative survey questionnaire was administered to a

selected group of 42 STEM teachers. Within this group, there were 21 male and 21

51

female participants who had voluntarily agreed to participate and provided their informed
consent to participate in the narrative survey. This sample consisted of 21 mathematics

teachers and 21 science teachers, with teaching experience ranging from 2 to 29 years.

The Instruments
Data-based Decision-Making Survey for Teachers

The researcher used the Teacher Data Use Survey developed by Wayman,
Wilkerson, Cho, Mandinach, and Supovitz (2016). The survey was developed with the
goal of identifying the extent to which the teachers apply data-based decision making in
teaching and learning. In the pilot tests of the survey, Cronbach’s alpha statistics for each
scale were 0.85 or higher (Wayman et al., 2016). It indicates a very good level of internal
consistency for the Teacher Data Use Survey. The sample items included in the data-

based decision-making survey for teachers can be found in Appendix B.

Open-ended Narrative Survey Questionnaire

The researcher created a survey questionnaire, as detailed in Appendix C, to elicit
comprehensive and descriptive responses from the participants. To ensure the validity of
the questionnaire, a validation process was undertaken. The questionnaire underwent
expert review by two highly experienced PhD educators. Additionally, the questionnaire
was tested with a targeted group of participants to identify and address any potential
ambiguities, inconsistencies, or confusions within the survey questions. Modifications,
including the revision of questions for improved clarity and the elimination of redundant

ones, were made based on the feedback received. Specifically, from an initial set of 10

52

questions, the survey was refined to seven questions. The extensive data collected
through this instrument were then analyzed to derive insightful conclusions relevant to
the research objectives. The questionnaire was comprised of seven questions to explore
the extent to which Filipino teachers use data in educational decision making, and
incorporate data literacy competencies in their mathematics and science classes.
Additionally, the questionnaire aimed to identify potential gaps and areas where further

training or support may be needed.

STEM Education Master Course Training Survey

The researcher used data from the STEM Education Master Course Training 2021
survey, which assessed participants’ knowledge, skills, and attitude toward digital literacy
and STEM teaching. Part A measured components of digital competence for facilitating
teaching and learning, utilizing a measurement scale ranging from 1 to 6, with
proficiency levels categorized as Newcomer (1.0), Explorer (2.0), Integrator (3.0), Expert
(4.0), Leader (5.0), and Pioneer (6.0). Meanwhile, Part B measured participants’
perceptions and difficulties in STEM education, and Part C measured teacher efficacy
and attitude toward STEM teaching. The participants responded to Part B and C using a
five-point scale. The researcher sought permission from the Director of DICT, as

detailed in Appendix D. to use the survey data in this study.

User Evaluation of Digital STEM Teaching and Learning Module
The researcher made use of the data from the "User Evaluation of Module", which

was developed by Dr. Sheryl Lyn C. Monterola from the UP College of Education to

53

evaluate the DICT-UPCED Online Master Course on Digital STEM Teaching and
Learning Module A on Information and Data Literacy for Inquiry-based Learning. The
module was structured into three units: (1) Fostering Information Literacy through
STEM, (2) Understanding Data in a Data-Filled World, and (3) Applying Information
and Data Literacy in Inquiry-Based Learning. This evaluation aimed to gather valuable
insights and feedback from module users regarding its quality, usability, and overall
effectiveness in the development of the framework aimed at enhancing the information
and data literacy skills of STEM teachers. The evaluation questionnaire consisted of ten
questions measured on a 5-point Likert scale, two open-ended questions, and five

demographic questions.

Data Collection Procedure

This study used a quantitative survey design in the first phase to collect
information about Filipino teachers' digital competencies for facilitating teaching and
learning, as well as their perceptions, teacher efficacy, and attitude toward data literacy
and STEM teaching. The survey instruments were administered to the teachers from
STEM Education Master Course 2021 using a web-based survey program. The survey
data were also collected using the same web-based program. Participants were assured
that their responses would be kept confidential and secure in accordance with the Data
Privacy Act (Republic Act No. 10173). In the second phase of the study, a qualitative
open-ended narrative survey questionnaire, along with the Data-Based Decision-Making
Survey (DBDM), were administered to a selected group of 42 participants. This phase

aimed to explore how the participants integrated data literacy skills into STEM education.

54

The researcher included a diverse sample of male and female teachers. teachers with
varying years of teaching experience, different subject specializations, and

representations from different grade or year level.

Data Analysis Procedure

Both quantitative and qualitative data analysis procedures were used in this
mixed-methods research study. In the first phase of the study, a descriptive survey
research design was employed to obtain information regarding Filipino teachers’
competencies, teacher efficacy, and attitude toward data literacy and STEM teaching
using a quantitative method. The aggregated data collected and downloaded via the web-
based survey program were analyzed using a statistical software. The paired samples t-
test was used to determine whether there were improvements in the pre-assessment and
post-assessment of Filipino teachers in terms of their level of information and data
literacy. Moreover, simple linear regression was used to determine if the information and
data literacy and the other four components of digital competence are correlated. The
multiple linear regression was utilized to determine the significant interaction of
information and data literacy, perceptions regarding STEM education, and teacher
efficacy, and attitude toward STEM teaching. All the hypotheses of the study were tested
at .05 level of significance.

In the second phase of the study, the researcher used an open-ended narrative
survey questionnaire to triangulate data. The qualitative data gathered from the
questionnaire were analyzed using inductive thematic analysis. Inductive coding was

used to develop codes based on the themes that emerged from the data. Further rounds of

55

qualitative data coding were performed to re-examine the codes and categories in order to
generate new theories, ideas, or concepts.

An integrative literature review of existing and emerging data literacy frameworks
was then conducted by the researcher to investigate the best features that are relevant to
the Philippine context, as well as essential competencies and framework components that
should be included in the contextualized data literacy framework for Filipino teachers’
professional development. Following that, all the findings during the first and second
stages of analysis were merged to develop a framework for professional development on

data literacy for Filipino teachers.

56

Chapter IV

PRESENTATION, ANALYSIS, AND INTERPRETATION OF RESULTS

This chapter presents the analysis and interpretation of data collected from both
quantitative and qualitative surveys to develop a framework for professional development
on data literacy for teachers. The discussion encompasses the comparison of the mean
scores of Filipino teachers in pre- and post-information and data literacy assessments,
correlational analyses to explore the relationship between information and data literacy of
Filipino teachers and other components of educators’ digital competence, and an
investigation of the interaction among teachers’ information and data literacy,
perceptions regarding STEM education, teacher efficacy, and attitude toward STEM
teaching. Furthermore, the chapter delves into examining the factors influencing the
development and application of data literacy skills in the classroom. Additionally, the
chapter examines existing and emerging data literacy frameworks and local standards and
highlights the most relevant features to the Philippine context. Lastly, the chapter
discusses the essential components and competencies that should be incorporated into a
contextualized data literacy framework to support the professional development of

Filipino teachers.

Information and Data Literacy Level of STEM Teachers
A paired-samples t-test was performed to evaluate whether there was a difference
between the level of information and data literacy of STEM teachers before and after the

assessment, with the results presented in Table 3.

57

Table 3

t-test for Paired Mean Scores on Information and Data Literacy

Paired Differences Mean sD t df Sig (2-tailed)
Pre-assessment — Post- - .268 1.55 -3.72 461 .000
assessment

*p<.05

The results indicated that the participants’ mean score from the post-assessment
(M = 3.98, SD = 1.48) was significantly higher than the pre-assessment (M = 3.71, SD =
1.44), t(461) = -3.72, p < .001. This difference was statistically significant indicating
improvements in their information and data literacy skills following the course training.
This implies that the training program had a positive impact on the teachers’ information
and data literacy skills.

The findings suggest that the participants made progress in their proficiency level,
as evidenced by an increase in the mean score from 3.71 during the pre-assessment to
3.98 in the post-assessment. This shift signifies progress from the Integrator level (3.0)
toward the threshold of the Expert level (4.0). At the Integrator level, the teachers
implement learning activities that utilize digital technologies to facilitate learners’
competence. Furthermore, they teach learners to find and retrieve information, assess its
reliability, compare, and combine information from different sources. On the other hand,
at the Expert level, teachers employ a range of different pedagogic strategies to enable
learners to critically analyze and synthesize information from different sources and teach
learners how to cite sources appropriately.

The outcomes of the study have significant implications for both theory and
practice, specifically concerning data literacy training for teachers. The results

demonstrate a notable improvement in the information and data literacy skills of

58

participants after completing the training program, demonstrating the effectiveness of
such interventions in enhancing teachers’ proficiency in these areas.

Furthermore, the teachers evaluated the interactive digital module on
“Information and Data Literacy for Inquiry-based Learning”, which they utilized in the
training. Nearly all participants strongly agreed that the module had a positive influence
on their professional development. They found the contents and activities to be engaging
and stimulating, and the concepts were thoroughly discussed. Notably, STEM teachers
reported significant improvements in their information and data literacy competencies,
particularly in their application within the context of inquiry-based learning, indicating
the module’s effectiveness in enhancing their teaching practices. These positive outcomes
are consistent with the findings of Kippers et al. (2018), who found a significant increase
in educators’ data literacy after a data-use intervention. This suggests that professional
development programs focused on data literacy can positively impact teacher
competencies.

Furthermore, the progression of teachers from the Integrator level toward the
Expert level indicates that the training not only equipped them with fundamental data
literacy skills but also empowered them to implement more advanced pedagogic
strategies. This finding aligns with van der Sheer and Visscher’s (2016) research, which
revealed that teachers felt more confident in their instructional strategies and ability to
engage students after the intensive data-based decision-making intervention.
Additionally, Mandinach and Gummer (2016b) noted that teachers can master data use
knowledge and skills through classroom work and further reinforce them through

subsequent professional development.

59

Moreover, the researcher utilized an open-ended narrative survey to explore how
participants integrated data literacy skills into their mathematics or science classes. The
findings revealed that teachers implemented data literacy skills into their classrooms by
engaging in data-driven decision making, designing activities and project with real-world
connections, and using data as a resource. These identified themes provide detailed
insights into the current practices of data literacy integration in the classroom and

highlight areas where improvement may be necessary.

1. Engaging in data-driven decision making

The prevalent theme that emerged from the inductive thematic analysis was
identified in fourteen instances and pertains to the process of collecting, analyzing, and
interpreting data to assess student progress and academic performance, as well as
utilization of data literacy skills by teachers for evaluating teaching methods, strategies,
and lesson plans in order to make data-driven educational decisions.

Teachers used different types of data, including assessment data, to gauge student
performance. One participant (participant #37), utilized data gathered from diagnostic,
formative, summative assessments, and culminating activities to assess learning
outcomes of students. Teachers utilized basic statistical tools and methods to analyze
assessments and calculate grades. Another participant (participant #29) reported using a
“quantitative interpretation of student progress”.

Mandinach and Gummer (2016b), emphasized the importance of teachers using
all types of assessment data, rather than just summative results, as well as triangulating
multiple sources of data, to gain a comprehensive understanding of students from

performance to context and to inform their classroom and instructional practice.

60

Utilizing a variety of assessment methods and triangulating multiple sources of
data are necessary to gain a holistic view of student learning and progress. Therefore, it is
recommended that schools should provide trainings on data analysis and foster a culture
of data use to inform instructional practices and decision making.

Furthermore, teachers acknowledged the significance of data in determining
student proficiency level, differentiating instructions, and tailoring teaching strategies and
methods based on individual needs. One of the participants, a math teacher (participant
#5), said, “Data served as a basis for further improvement of instructions and strategies”.
Another participant (participant #27) employed data literacy skills by analyzing student
examination results to identify the least leamed competencies to develop targeted
interventions. Additionally, participant #25, another math teacher, used data to
“determine the level of understanding of learners about the competencies needed to be
developed and adjust teaching strategies based on their level”. Other teachers utilized
data literacy skills to inform educational decisions and learning goals. For instance,
participant #35 incorporated data literacy skills in her decision-making process while
developing educational/learning plans for students. Similarly, participant #36
incorporated data literacy skills in lesson planning and teaching, which included
experiential learning.

Denny (2020) remarked that assessing student learning and implementing data-
driven adjustments is an ongoing part of teaching. Teachers in Wagaman’s (2015) case
study felt that data-driven decision making in classrooms was an essential component of
instruction in order to address the needs of all students while also enhancing student

achievement (Wagaman, 2015, as cited in Denny, 2020).

61

Using data literacy skills enables teachers to improve their teaching methods and
assess student proficiency levels. It allows them to make data-based decisions to address
their students’ diverse learning needs. Therefore, it is recommended that teachers be
encouraged to participate in professional development trainings that focus on data
analysis and interpretation, equipping them with the necessary skills to make data-based
decisions. Moreover, schools should provide teachers with access to data tools to

regularly assess student progress and adjust their teaching methods and strategies.

2. Designing activities and projects with real-world connections

The second emergent theme that has been identified and subsequently coded on
twelve different occasions pertains to student engagement in authentic activities and
projects, such as research projects and scientific investigations that require the collection,
analysis, interpretation, and visualization of data. Teachers provided a variety of
activities, assignments, and projects that enabled students to apply their data literacy
skills. For instance, one of the participants (participant #6) incorporated data literacy
skills into his physics class by "designing activities that involve scientific method" while
another (participant #1 1) utilized a deductive problem-solving method in his class.
Similarly, participant #2 facilitated students to “become competent in gathering,
analyzing, and even visualizing the data such as in an investigatory project.”, whereas
participant #10 said, " I incorporate it with the project skills, which train my students to
extract data from charts, graphs and the likes". Moreover, participant #18 integrated data
literacy into his math class through solving or addressing real-world problems by making

use of available data. These results are corroborated by Erwin (2015), who indicated that

62

“by using real-world data sets in project-based instructional units, teachers can guide
students in analyzing, interpreting, and reporting quantitative data. Working with
authentic unfiltered, and previously un-interpreted data enables students to integrate data
literacy with their disciplinary learning” (p.18).

Engaging students in real-world activities and projects that involve data
collection, analysis, interpretation, and visualization can develop their problem-solving
and critical thinking skills. Therefore, it is recommended to encourage teachers to design
more authentic activities and project-based learning opportunities that integrate data
literacy skills into mathematics and science classes. Moreover, providing teachers with
the necessary resources and trainings on effectively utilizing actual data sets can

significantly improve student learning outcomes.

3. Using data as a resource

The third theme, which emerged nine times in the coding, pertains to the use of
accessible, available, useful, and reliable data to teach and illustrate lessons and concepts.
Participant #19 incorporated data literacy into his science lesson by “getting relevant data
about a certain topic as additional text or as examples to explain or elaborate further the
topic/lesson”. Participant #17, on the other hand, downloads credible and updated data
from the internet to be utilized during discussions on the subject matter. Participant #28
emphasized, “With proper data literacy skills, it is easy to gather valid information and
get the proper result or output”. This is similar to Vught’s (2016) study, in which the data

obtained by the teachers were accurate, on time and relevant, and based on these data

63

characteristics, the teachers were able to use specific data to make the right decisions for
a particular goal.

Furthermore, one of the participants (participant #33) emphasized that “Students
must know first the reason why and how we collect data, instill to their minds the
accuracy of data to be gathered and analyzed.” On the other hand, participant #4 shared
that he incorporated data literacy in his classes by “presenting students with data
visualizations and research results and with that, students are able to appreciate the
usefulness of data in any field of disciplines”. According to Shreiner and Dykes (2020),
"if teachers are to effectively teach about data visualizations, they must feel confident in
their own data literacy knowledge and skills" (p. 291). Teachers play a crucial role in
ensuring that students understand the purpose of data and accuracy for analysis.

Access to credible and relevant data can significantly improve students’
understanding of mathematics and science concepts. Teachers should be encouraged to
develop their data literacy skills, particularly data collection, to find accessible and
reliable data to enhance their discussions. Schools should provide teachers with access to
updated data sources and offer professional development workshops on how to
effectively integrate data into their lessons and critically evaluate data quality,
accessibility, and accuracy. Through the implementation of these strategies, educators
can create more informative and enriching learning experiences for their students.

As emphasized by Shreiner and Dykes (2020), it is recommended that teachers
undergo training to enhance their own data literacy knowledge and skills to effectively

teach about data visualizations and present data in visually engaging ways. Furthermore,

teachers should collaborate with data experts to gain valuable insights into integrating

data visualizations within specific mathematics and science topics.

Digital Communication and Collaboration as a Predictor of Information and Data
Literacy

A simple linear regression was calculated to predict information and data literacy
based on digital communication and collaboration. A significant regression equation was
found (F(1, 460) = 387.743, p < .001), with an R? of 0.457. Participants’ predicted level
of information and data literacy is equal to 1.146 + .699 (level of digital communication
and collaboration). Participants’ level of information and data literacy increased .699 for
every unit increase in the level of digital communication and collaboration, as reported in

the findings detailed in Table 4.

Table 4
Regression Analysis for Digital Communication and Collaboration Predicting

Information and Data Literacy

Unstandardized Standardized
Coefficients Coefficients
Model B Std. Error___ Beta T Sig
(Constant) 1.146 153 7.501 .000
(Digital Communication .699 035 676 19.691 .000
and Collaboration)
*p <.05

As shown in Table 4, there is a statistically significant correlation between the
digital communication and collaboration level of Filipino teachers (p < 0.001), and their

information and data literacy level. The correlation coefficient (R = 0.676) indicates a

65

strong positive relationship between digital communication and collaboration and
information and data literacy, which implies that an increase in the level of digital
communication and collaboration is associated with a corresponding increase in

information and data literacy. See Table 5 for the ANOVA table.

Table 5

ANOVA
Model Sum of Squares _ df Mean Square F Sig.
Regression 460.979 1 460.979 387.743 000
Residual 546.883 460 1.189
Total 1007.861 461

The coefficient of determination of 0.457 indicates that 45.7% of the variability in
the information and data literacy is attributed to the level of digital communication and
collaboration while 54.3% is attributed to other factors.

The implication of this finding is that teachers with high level of digital
communication and collaboration skills including the ability to access, analyze, organize,
and share information through appropriate digital tools and technologies, are more likely
to demonstrate proficiency in information and data literacy. These competencies
empower teachers to adeptly present, interpret, and collaborate on information with
others, thus enhancing their proficiency in these areas. The research conducted by
Midtlund et al. (2021) substantiates these findings, underscoring the significance of
considering ethical issues, particularly privacy concerns, when engaging in
communication and collaboration through digital tools. Additionally, Guan et al. (2023)

have explicitly highlighted the violations of privacy concerning educational data

66

throughout the stages of data collection, processing, storage, and sharing. For instance, a
Grade 10 Math teacher shared that “There is very little danger in what I share since I do
most of my materials and video lessons myself, so the necessity to ‘curate online sources’
is somewhat unnecessary. Also, we only have 2-hour meeting per week, so it is very
likely that we focus on our lessons, making it short and relevant, easy to understand and
not be bothered by contents from other online sources.” Based on these findings, it is
advisable for teachers to receive comprehensive training in digital communication and
collaboration, along with the provision of access to appropriate digital tools and
resources. By doing so, educators can further enhance their proficiency in information
and data literacy.

According to the survey findings, teachers incorporate assignments, learning
activities and pedagogical approaches that motivate learners to use digital technologies
responsibly and effectively for purposes such as knowledge co-creation, civic
participation, communication, and collaboration with other learners, educators, and
others. Additionally, teachers exhibit a proactive attitude by engaging in critical self-
reflection, collaborative discussions, and innovative modifications to their pedagogical
strategies for fostering learners’ digital communication and collaboration skills.

Furthermore, amidst the Covid-19 pandemic, STEM teachers utilized video-
conferencing tools like Zoom, Google Meet, and Microsoft Teams to conduct their
lessons and presentations. They also incorporated digital tools, adaptive learning
platforms, and learning management systems to evaluate students’ progress. Teachers
said that they gather data from students using the enrollment form and student

profile. For instance, a teacher shared that “from the BOSY, I used to collect my data

67

from my students through their enrollment form. Aside from that, I also ask my students
to answer a short survey regarding students’ preferences and learning styles so that J can
figure out what teaching strategies/methods I can apply for my teaching-learning
process.”

To enhance their students’ learning experience, teachers implemented a variety of
strategies, including integrating gamification and game-based learning, as well as
assigning home-based experiments and investigatory projects. Moreover, students had the
convenience of communicating with their peers and teachers through online platforms,

where they could also engage in group study and exchange learning materials.

Digital Content Creation as Predictor of Information and Data Literacy

A simple linear regression was calculated to predict information and data literacy
based on digital content creation. A significant regression equation was found (F(1, 460)
= 284.166, p < .001), with an R? of 0.382. Participants’ predicted level of information and
data literacy is equal to 1.410 + .685 (level of digital content creation). Participants’ level
of information and data literacy increased .685 for every unit increase in the level of

digital content creation, as presented in Table 6.

Table 6

Regression Analysis for Digital Content Creation Predicting Information and Data

Literacy
Unstandardized Standardized
Coefficients Coefficients
Model B Std. Error Beta t Sig
(Constant) 1.410 162 8.705 .000
(Digital Content 685 041 618 16.857 .000

Creation)

*p<.05

As shown in the table, the Filipino teachers’ level of digital content creation
significantly predicts their level of information and data literacy (p < 0.001). The degree
of relationship between digital content creation and information and data literacy is
strong positive (R = 0.618). These results suggest that a higher level of digital content

creation is associated with a higher level of information and data literacy. See Table 7 for

the ANOVA table.

Table 7

ANOVA
Model Sum of Squares df Mean Square F Sig.
Regression 384.860 1 384.860 284.166 000
Residual 623.001 460 1.354
Total 1007.861 461

The coefficient of determination of 0.382 indicates that 38.2.% of the variability
in the level of information and data literacy is attributed to the level of digital content

creation while 61.8% is attributed to other factors.

69

This implies that teachers who are proficient in creating digital content in the
form of text, images, videos or publish digital products, e.g. creating websites, blogs,
games, apps, are also likely to develop their level of information and data literacy by
using their skills in gathering, analyzing, visualizing, interpreting, and evaluating digital
content. Paskevicius (2021) supports the present findings, demonstrating that educators,
in their role as digital content creators, use multiple resources accessible through the
internet, provided by educational publishers, or physically located within educational
institutions. They combine materials from different sources to create and develop
educational content while adhering to copyright practices. Furthermore, Czerniewicz
(2016) argues that educational content creators, who are unable to recognize and locate
relevant materials might miss out on valuable opportunities to utilize creative works
authored by others and are consequently more prone to copyright infringement. As a
result, it becomes imperative for teachers to acquire the knowledge and skills necessary
to responsibly source and ethically use the increasingly diverse digital media available to
them (Paskevicius, 2021).

According to the survey results, teachers implement various teaching strategies
and learning activities such as assignments, projects, and presentations to inspire students
to use digital technologies for creating digital content like texts, images, videos, and
more. Teachers create educational videos and use digital images to teach concepts. For
instance, a Math teacher said that “depending on the topic being discussed, I usually
download reliable and updated data from the internet to be utilized during discussions.”
Another elementary math teacher used different applications in the gadget to create

lesson materials. Additionally, the teachers mentioned that they critically assess and

evaluate the effectiveness of their teaching approaches in promoting their students’
creative expression through digital means.

Therefore, teachers should be offered professional development opportunities that
focus on the use of digital tools and resources, data visualization and storytelling,

multimedia creation, and other relevant skills.

Responsible Use as Predictor of Information and Data Literacy

A simple linear regression was calculated to predict information and data literacy
based on responsible use. A significant regression equation was found (F(1, 460) =
206.842, p <.001), with an R? of 0.310. Participants’ predicted level of information and
data literacy is equal to 1.781 + .550 (level of responsible use). Participants’ level of
information and data literacy increased .550 for every unit increase in the level of

responsible use. The findings of this analysis are reported in Table 8.

Table 8

Regression Analysis for Responsible Use Predicting Information and Data Literacy

Unstandardized Standardized

Coefficients Coefficients
Model B Std. Error _ Beta t Sig
(Constant) 1.781 -163 10.900 .000
Responsible Use 550 .038 557 14.382 __.000

*p<.05
As shown in the table, the Filipino teachers’ level of responsible use significantly
predicts their level of information and data literacy (p < .001). The degree of relationship

between responsible use and information and data literacy is moderate positive (R =

71

0.557). It means that the higher the level of responsible use, the higher the level of

information and data literacy. See Table 9 for the ANOVA table.

Table 9

ANOVA
Model Sum of Squares df Mean Square F Sig.
Regression 320.107 1 320.107 206.842 .000
Residual 711.893 460 1.548
Total 1032.000 461

The coefficient of determination of 0.310 indicates that 31% of the variability in
the level of information and data literacy is attributed to the level of responsible use while
69% is attributed to other factors.

This implies that teachers who are aware of the risks and threats in sharing data
and use digital technologies safely and responsibly are more likely to develop their
information and data literacy skills in critically evaluating the credibility and reliability of
information and its sources and storing and retrieving data. These findings are
corroborated by Mandinach et al. (2015) that ethical and appropriate data use requires
data literacy. Ethical and responsible data use entails understanding how to protect
student privacy and maintain confidentiality while using student data responsibly.
Moreover, it involves knowing when it is appropriate or inappropriate to discuss a
student’s performance in public settings.

Based on the survey results, teachers encourage learners to adopt a positive
attitude toward digital technologies while still being aware of potential risks and

limitations. They are aware of the positive and negative effects of digital technologies on

72

students’ physical, psychological, and social well-being. Moreover, they empower
students to recognize and comprehend the potential risks and threats that exist in digital
environments. Additionally, teachers reflect on, discuss, re-design, and innovate teaching
strategies to help students use digital technologies for their own well-being. Moreover, a
STEM teacher cited that he addressed the needs of data ethics in decision making “by
using data-based decision making on ethics and by choosing not just reliable but
legitimate sites with regards to its domains”. Another teacher shared that he interprets
data by first getting relevant data and assessing if it would be useful or not. Meanwhile,
another teacher emphasized the importance of “following the proper protocols and ethics
just like when conducting a research". Moreover, one teacher highlighted that the data

gathered "should be free from biases".

Digital Problem Solving as Predictor of Information and Data Literacy

A simple linear regression was calculated to predict information and data literacy
based on digital problem solving. A significant regression equation was found ((F(1, 460)
= 261.003, p < .001), with an R? of 0.362. Participants’ predicted level of information and
data literacy is equal to 1.067 + .680 (level of digital problem solving). Participants’ level
of information and data literacy increased .680 for every unit increase in the level of

digital problem solving. The findings of this analysis are reported in Table 10.

73

Table 10

Regression Analysis for Digital Problem Solving Predicting Information and Data

Literacy
Unstandardized Standardized
Coefficients Coefficients
Model B Std. Error Beta t Sig
(Constant) 1.067 189 5.656 000
(Digital Problem -680 042 602 16.156 .000

Solvin;
¥*p <.05

As shown in the table, the Filipino teachers’ level of digital problem solving
significantly predicts their level of information and data literacy (p < .001). The degree of
relationship between digital problem solving and information and data literacy is strong
positive (R = 0.602). It means that the higher level of digital problem solving, the higher

the level of information and data literacy. See Table 11 for the ANOVA table.

Table 11

ANOVA
Model Sum of Squares Df Mean Square F Sig.
Regression 364.845 1 364.845 261.003 000
Residual 643.016 460 1.398
Total 1007.861 461

The coefficient of determination of 0.362 indicates that 36.2% of the variability in
the level of information and data literacy is attributed to the level of digital problem
solving while 63.8% is attributed to other factors.

Vanek (2017) supports these findings, affirming that digital problem solving

involves the application of digital technologies and communication tools to acquire,

74

evaluate, and make use of information. These include being aware of the credibility of
information sources, critically assessing the content provided, and applying the useful
information obtained.

The survey results revealed that teachers facilitated students in exploring various
technological solutions to address a problem and develop new solutions or products.
Additionally, teachers engaged in critical reflection, collaborative discussion, and
innovative approaches to improve pedagogical strategies for enhancing students’ digital
problem-solving skills.

This implies that teachers who are skilled in identifying, evaluating, selecting, and
using digital technologies and possible technological responses to solve a given task or
problem are more likely to enhance their information and data literacy skills by using
these data analysis and data interpretation to solve problems. For example, a mathematics
teacher in senior high school said that he integrated digital problem-solving skills “by
solving or addressing real-world problems based on available data”. Additionally, another
teacher highlighted her utilization of “deductive method for problem solving of my
students”. Therefore, teachers should receive trainings and professional development
workshops to improve their own digital problem-solving skills. Moreover, teachers
should engage students with project-based leaning, hands-on experiences, and real-world
simulations to enhance students’ problem solving and critical thinking skills.

Overall, the study shows that digital communication and collaboration is highly
correlated with information and data literacy, whereas responsible use has the lowest

correlation with information and data literacy compared to the other components of

7s

digital competence. Thus, it is essential to enhance this competency to further improve
the level of information and data literacy among Filipino educators.

The results indicate that teachers can enhance their information and data literacy
skills by improving their proficiency in the other four components of digital competence.
Moreover, this improvement can also help teachers integrate data literacy into STEM

education.

Interaction among Information and Data Literacy, Perceptions Regarding STEM
Education, Teacher Efficacy, and Attitude Toward STEM Teaching

A multiple linear regression was calculated to predict STEM teachers”
information and data literacy based on their perceptions regarding STEM education,
teacher efficacy, and attitude toward STEM teaching. A significant regression equation
was found (F(2, 459) = 22.460, p < .001), with an R? of .089. Teachers’ predicted level of
information and data literacy is equal to -.814 + .930 (Teacher Efficacy and Attitude
Toward STEM Teaching) + .247 (Perceptions Regarding STEM education). Teachers’
level of information and data literacy increased .247 for every unit increase in the level of
perceptions regarding STEM education and .930 for every unit increase in the level of
teacher efficacy and attitude toward STEM teaching. Only teacher efficacy and attitude
toward STEM teaching were predictors of teachers’ level of information and data

literacy, as shown in Table 12.

Table 12

76

Regression Analysis for Perceptions Regarding STEM education, Teacher Efficacy, and

Attitude Toward STEM Teaching Predicting Information and Data Literacy

Unstandardized Standardized

Coefficients Coefficients
Model B Std. Error__ Beta t Sig
(Constant) -.814 1.038 -.784 433
Perceptions 247 287 040 861 389
Teacher Efficacy and -930 151 285 6.153 000

Attitude

As shown in the table, the Filipino teachers’ perceptions regarding STEM

education do not significantly predict the level of information and data literacy. Only

teacher efficacy and attitude toward STEM teaching statistically significantly predicted

the teachers’ level of information and data literacy. See Table 13 for the ANOVA table.

Table 13

ANOVA

Model Sum of Squares Df Mcan Square F Sig.
Regression 89.841 2 44.921 22.460 000
Residual 918.020 459 2.000

Total 1007.861 461

The correlation coefficient of 0.299 indicates a low positive relationship while the

coefficient of determination of 0.089 indicates that 8.9% of the variability in the level of

information and data literacy is attributed to the perceptions regarding STEM education,

teacher efficacy, and attitude toward STEM teaching while 91.1% is attributed to other

factors.

77

Based on the survey results, nearly all teachers (98.5%) demonstrated positive
attitude and efficacy toward STEM education. They stated that they are always striving to
improve their STEM teaching practices. Furthermore, when teaching STEM, teachers are
confident in addressing students’ questions and explaining why STEM experiments work.
According to McMullin and Reeve (2014), the most significant factors in the successful
implementation of a STEM program in the classroom are teachers’ positive attitude
toward STEM education. Additionally, Knowles (2017) stressed the critical role of
teacher self-efficacy in effectively teaching STEM subjects and the significance of well-
supported teacher training programs in ensuring successful integration of STEM
education, which has a direct impact on student academic achievement. However,
teachers identified some barriers to successful implementation of STEM education such
as finding an idea, enhancing integrated knowledge beyond the individual fields/majors,
assessing students’ achievement, allotting extra time for STEM activities, and cost of
materials and equipment for STEM lessons.

Despite their confidence in their ability to help students better understand the
concepts and increase their interest in STEM, 30.5% of teachers are unsure if they have
the essential skills to effectively teach STEM concepts. According to Yildiz et al. (2019),
it is critical for teachers to have the skills and knowledge to incorporate different STEM
disciplines into their teaching in order to train students in this digital era.

Moreover, the results of the survey reveal that 95.2% of teachers display a
positive attitude toward integrating data into their teaching practices. They recognize that
data can be helpful in planning and delivering effective instruction, identifying learning

goals, and monitoring student progress. Nevertheless, 4.8% of teachers questioned the

78

necessity of using data to inform their teaching practice and the extent to which it
enhances their teaching effectiveness.

Furthermore, almost all (97.2%) teachers exhibit a strong belief in their own
ability to use data to inform their instructional practices. This high level of teacher
efficacy suggests that teachers are confident in their ability to incorporate data literacy
into their teaching practices, thereby improving student outcomes. They perceive
themselves as competent in using data to diagnose students’ learning needs, design
lessons, set learning objectives, and make necessary adjustments to their instructions.

For example, a general science teacher at the Senior High School, considered
himself as data literate. He mentioned that “I was able to chunk the data into usable
format. Meaning I can understand the data and transform into varied format which is
beneficial for my teaching and learning process.” Another teacher highlighted that “I
always incorporate data literacy in most of my classes like presenting them with data
visualizations and research results. With that students are able to appreciate the
usefulness of data in any field of disciplines.” However, there are cases where some
teachers consider themselves to be somewhat data literate. Moreover, a SHS Physics
teacher shared that “Given the lack of trainings provided for teachers regarding planning
and data literacy, I am not quite confident given that all of the things I am currently
applying on my profession are based on experience and self-study.” This suggests that
teachers who have confidence in their data literacy skills and knowledge are more likely
to integrate data effectively into their teaching methods. Hence, it is crucial to provide
professional development opportunities to teachers to enhance their efficacy in

implementing STEM education and use data in their instructional approaches. As

79

emphasized by Dunlap and Piro (2016), professional development plays a vital role in
increasing teachers’ efficacy and enabling them to successfully incorporate data-driven

decision-making practices.

Barriers to Data Literacy Development of Filipino STEM Teachers

The study identified gaps in knowledge in terms of Filipino STEM teachers’ data
literacy. The gaps include lack of computer systems, insufficient data literacy
competencies, inadequate professional learning community, lack of school organizational

support, and lack of accessible and usable data for making data-based decisions.

1. Lack of computer systems

According to the responses received from the teachers, 66.7% of them reported
having access to appropriate technologies that facilitate efficient data analysis. This
indicates that many schools are making progress in integrating technology to enhance
their data-based decision making and instructional practices. However, 33.3% of the
teachers reported difficulties using their school’s computer systems, which included
programs, systems, and other technologies. Specifically, 14 teachers encountered issues
when using their school’s computer systems. Furthermore, 16 teachers reported that the
school’s computer systems do not enable them to analyze multiple forms of data at the
same time, such as attendance, achievement, and demographics. Additionally, 17 teachers
stated that their school lacks computer systems that can provide them with data

visualization tools, including reports, tables, and graphs. The study also revealed that

80

some teachers experienced inadequate access to computers, poor internet connectivity in
their classrooms, and a lack of learning management system in their schools.

The results of this study align with Vught's (2016) research, in which teachers and
principals similarly reported encountering challenges with the use of online systems for
data utilization. One teacher specifically mentioned that their access to the online system
was hindered by a slow internet connection, leading to difficulties in using the platform
effectively. The teachers’ reports on the problems with their school’s computer systems,
encompassing issues with programs, systems, and other technologies, underscore the
significance of not only providing access to technology but also ensuring its functionality
and usability. Moreover, teachers should be proficient in using technologies such as data
warehouses, assessment systems, student information systems, instructional management
systems, data dashboards, simple spreadsheets, apps, and other relevant technologies that
facilitate data access, analysis, and reporting (Mandinach & Gummer, 2016b). Therefore,
it is recommended that schools should have an information management system and
technology tools to effective gather and analyze the required data (Schildkamp & Kuiper,

2010).

2. Insufficient data literacy competencies
A majority of participants (92.8%) agreed or strongly agreed that they possessed
several competencies related to data literacy. These competencies included the following:
© understanding the uses and applications of data.
e gathering, organizing, visualizing, and managing data using appropriate software,

tools, and processes such as spreadsheets and databases.

81

© understanding and reading tables, charts, and graphs.

e developing meaningful graphical representations (e.g., tables, charts, graphs) to
visually present and communicate data.

¢ transforming data into actionable information

© supporting a learning environment that encourages the use of data for learning,
research, decision making, and problem solving.

e utilizing, assessing, and sharing data in an ethical manner

e knowing widely accepted data citation methods and properly citing secondary
data sources.

e evaluating the outcomes of data-driven decisions or interventions by tracking
changes in classroom practice and student progress and recognizing the iterative
nature of the teaching and learning process.

However, a small minority of participants (7.2%) disagreed or strongly disagreed
that they were able to recognize possible sources of data and understand their purposes,
use data to identify problems and frame questions, locate, access, and retrieve multiple
sources to address a problem or issue. Furthermore, seven teachers recognized that they
needed to enhance their competencies in choosing and applying relevant data analysis
tools as well as advanced statistical and analytic methods such as regression or ANOVA
to discover and predict relationships between data.

The present findings corroborate previous research indicating a general lack of
sufficient data literacy skills among teachers (Sun et al., 2016). Similarly, Filderman et
al.’s (2021) study revealed that most of the teachers encountered difficulties in locating,

comprehending, and interpreting data, emphasizing the prevalence of insufficient data

82

literacy competencies. Such inadequacies in data literacy can lead to analytical
misinterpretations, resulting in negative real-world consequences for students (Ndukwe &
Daniel, 2020). Consequently, it is imperative to develop targeted professional
development programs that prioritize data literacy as a key aspect. These programs
should equip teachers with both basic and advanced data analysis skills, data sourcing
techniques, and data-based decision-making abilities enabling them to identify trends,
patterns, and learning gaps in their students. Integrating data literacy with their existing

skill sets will empower teachers to teach more effectively (Raffaghelli, 2019).

3. Inadequate professional learning community

Results indicate that a substantial percentage of teachers (45.2%) engage in
professional learning community or collaborative team meetings once or twice a month.
However, five teachers reported not having any scheduled meetings to work in a
collaborative team. The findings also show that the most frequently reported actions
taken by data teams as part of the collaborative inquiry cycle were using data to make
links between instruction and student outcomes, as well as predicting possible student
outcomes when considering changes in practice. On the other hand, the least frequently
reported actions were exploring data by looking at patterns and trends, as well as
revisiting predictions made in previous meetings. Moreover, 15 or 35.7% of teachers
reported that their collaborative teams did not engage in six actions:

¢ exploring data by looking for patterns

e drawing conclusions based on data

e identifying additional data to offer a clear picture of the issue

83

e using data to make links between instructions and student outcomes
© revisiting predictions made in previous meetings

e identifying actionable solutions based on conclusions

The results of the study emphasize the importance of integrating data literacy
within the collaborative inquiry cycle to enhance teaching practices. Means et al. (2011)
conducted a study revealing that collaboration around data can serve as a useful
professional discourse and can be beneficial for teachers who lack data skills. Moreover,
Vught’s (2016) research indicated that data use may improve when teachers are provided
with sufficient time for collaboration, including the time to review data. However,
Jimerson and Wayman (2015) observed that although some school districts developed
policies to support teacher data collaboration, the actual implementation support was
found to be lacking. This highlights the need to address this gap by fostering a culture of
collaborative inquiry and data-based decision making in the schools. To bridge the gap
between student data and academic results, educators need to engage in a process of

collaborative inquiry (Datnow & Hubbard, 2016).

4. Lack of school organizational support

The results indicated that a majority of teachers (95.2%) felt adequately prepared
to use data. Nevertheless, 15 teachers pointed out the lack of someone available to
address their data-related questions. Similarly, 11 teachers claimed that no one was
available to assist them in improving their data-driven teaching practices. Despite these

findings, 30 or 71.4% of teachers agreed that their schools provided adequate

84

professional development opportunities to help them improve their data literacy skills.
However, ten teachers reported that their schools do not provide enough opportunities for
professional development in data literacy.

The results of the study indicate that while many teachers express confidence in
utilizing data effectively, there is a clear need for educational institutions to establish a
support network where teachers can seek guidance, address data-related inquiries, and
exchange best practices in integrating data literacy into the classroom. This could be
achieved through implementation of a data team and appointment of a data coach.
Ebbeler et al. (2016) conducted research on the impact of a data team intervention on
teachers’ data literacy skills and attitude toward data utilization. The outcomes
demonstrated high levels of satisfaction among participants regarding the support
received during the intervention. Moreover, the respondents acquired new data literacy
skills, including the ability to create scatterplots, perform statistical analyses in Excel,
and comprehend qualitative research. Furthermore, the respondents exhibited a more

positive attitude toward the use of data.

5. Lack of accessible and usable data for making data-based decisions
The results revealed that 38 or 90.5% of teachers have access to their students’
data in both hard copy and soft copy formats (e.g., student information system), and can
easily find and view all relevant data on their students in a cloud storage system or on
their computers. The data are well-organized and presented using visualization tools to

monitor student progress. Moreover, 76.2% of teachers stated that student data are

85

available at the start of each school year, and in cases where students enter school in the
middle of the year, data on them are immediately available.

The study also examined the forms of data (input, process, output, and context)
accessible and usable to teachers for making data-based decisions. The survey results for
input data showed that student demographic data and teacher data are the most readily
available to teachers, while access to socioeconomic data is limited. For process data,
almost all reported having access to the school curriculum, lesson plans, student and
teacher daily attendance, and school annual policy, but some lacked access to the student
logbook, which provides information about students' daily activities and attitudes.
Concerning output data, all teachers stated having access to examination results, while
almost all indicated having access to the students’ daily progress, including daily
assessment and homework scores, and the student report card. However, some teachers
did not have access to school or teacher evaluation reports. Finally, for context data,
many teachers reported lacking access to information about school facilities, financial
reports, or school profiles.

According to the study’s analysis of survey responses and open-ended questions,
it was observed that output data are the most accessible and usable form of data for
teachers when making data-based decisions. Output data, as defined by Ikemoto and
Marsh (2007), include information about student assessment and achievement results and
were found to be the most common type of data. The qualitative findings indicated that
STEM teachers heavily rely on output data, with process data being the second most
utilized form. Teachers use output data, such as student report cards, examination results,

student daily progress record, school evaluation reports, and teacher evaluation reports, to

86

inform and enhance their teaching and learning practices, plan instructional interventions,
and make data-driven decisions.

These results align with Vught’s (2016) survey, which also highlighted that data
characteristics significantly influence data use for instruction. Moreover, previous
research has indicated that limited access to data is often a barrier to school data use.
These findings emphasize the importance of providing teachers with accessible, accurate,
and useful data to facilitate data-based decision making and improve instructional

strategies.

Existing and Emerging Data Literacy Frameworks and Standards

The researcher identified the best features from emerging and existing data
literacy frameworks developed by Mandinach and Gummer (2016b), Wayman et al.
(2016), and Raffaghelli (2019). Mandinach and Gummer (2016b) created a conceptual
framework for data literacy for teachers by integrating Shulman's (1987) seven domains
of teacher knowledge with data use in the inquiry process: content knowledge, general
pedagogical knowledge, curriculum knowledge, pedagogical content knowledge,
knowledge of learners and their characteristics, knowledge of educational contexts, and
knowledge of educational ends, purposes, and values. These areas give essential
information and feed into the domain of data use for teaching. The domain of data use for
teaching comprises the following components of the inquiry cycle: identify
problems/frame questions; use data; transform data into information; transform
information into decision; and evaluate outcomes. Wayman et al. (2016) also developed a

conceptual framework to describe how teachers use data to increase student learning. The

87

framework places teachers’ data-related actions within an inquiry cycle, which
are influenced by their data competence, data attitudes, collaboration with other teachers,
and organizational supports. These actions inform changes in teachers’ knowledge and
practice, which can lead to improvements in student learning. Furthermore, Raffaghelli
(2019) created a framework to address educators' professional development by
incorporating six dimensions: professional engagement, data as a resource for learning,
teaching and learning, assessment, empowering learners, and facilitating learners' data
literacy, as well as levels of proficiency for each dimension with areas of competence.
Teachers must be continuously upskilled and reskilled with knowledge and skills
through effective professional development to fill knowledge gaps in Filipino teachers’
data literacy. According to research, professional development can help teachers increase
their self-efficacy and successfully implement data-driven decision-making practices
(Dunlap & Piro, 2016). However, the findings of this study revealed that some teachers
did not have enough professional development opportunities to learn how to use data
effectively. Furthermore, these findings were supported by the Potts’s (2022) study, in
which teachers reported that most of their data use trainings focused on how to conduct
assessments or access reports. None reported formal training in data analysis procedures
or use of available data. Similarly, Jimerson and Wayman (2015) discovered that
professional development opportunities are often focused on data retrieval rather than on
data analysis or implementation. The synthesis table matrix table for data literacy

frameworks and PPST are demonstrated in Table 14.

Burpoday pue juouissessy “¢ eyep Buyoea} Joy asn Byeq “7
Suruuelg pue wnjnouma “yy SururesT premo} sopnyiny “¢ a]oho
souls] Jo AusIoAIq ‘¢ | JO} sd0INOsSoY yep Buisn Aambur ay} ul asn eyep
quowuodAug Suruesy] *Z eseeeq ‘Z|  uraouajoduioo BunjerZayut o3pa;mouy sa}ouataduto)
AB03epag quowesesuq siayoeay, ‘7 [euonepunoy usaas pur SIPS 10D
pure o3pajmouy juajuog “| | [euorssajorg “]| wep YyMsuONoyY | (861) S,uewynys “| | /syusuoduiog fay
juouidoaaap
Jeuorssayord 105
uioddns apraoid pur ‘spsau
Ajtuept ‘soueuuoysed
Joyoea} Ssasse 0} aMseoUl Rusuidorena
unlogiun e Ajdde o “¢ Tea2p
Aouatoyord Sururene Teuoyssajoud
Ul WoJJa Buinuyuos <Sdoyeonpa
B aoBIquia AJOATIOR Ssoippe
0} siayoea} a8eSue oO] ‘Z| yey) syuouMsUT Byep asn A[qisuodsar
sonoeid dojaaap 0} Japso syuepnys s18y) pue Ajaaroayye 0}
Paysindunsp 01 Supuuideq Ul syJomaeY | Jo sowloojno Suwa] | paau sisyous} suontsodsip
wox jwaudojenap Aoerott a, dl Ze) ue ‘S|[PyS ‘aspaymor
Jeuotssajoid Jo sadeys 1 BIeP OF ot SAOICUIT O} P TPIS “28P9|MOuy
saareo pauljap-|[am Buoye parejas amyesoyy] | sayoes) Aq pakojdure | o1stoads ay) soijnuap! yey?
siayoea} Jo suoneyoadxa Sunsixo sordojopoyjour srayoray Joy Aovloyl] eep
Tea] No 39S OL “| MOIAQI OL ayy aquosap of | Jo ylomourey ev yno Ae] OL | aatjoafqo/esodmg
(LSdd)
Staqoua] 10J sprepuejys (6107) (9102)
Jeuorssajyoig aurddyyg Wpouseyey (910Z) ‘Je 39 UeWAeM | JoUTUMDH pue YoeuIpUe, 41082382)
Spiepueyg [800] sysomomesy Avra] BEG

siayoea | JO} sprepueig [euorsseyorg autddiiyg pue syiomouresy Aowsoy'] Byeq Joj XUV 919] SIsopUAS

vl Gel

88

“suryoesy Jo AusIp

2y) Surpjoydn ayiym yMord
Jeuossajoid pue jeuossod
pure ‘sdryssourred Arunumu09
-]OoYps ‘sardayens JUSUUSSasse
aSIOAIp ‘Juowlorbar
umMyNoLLM9 0} souaTeype
sajowoid ylomourey

aU ‘eyep juoussesse

Sutsn pure ‘AjISIOAIp JOWIeS]
0} Sunjdepe ‘syuoumuomAus
Suruzes] aatjoddns

Sunjeaio ‘espa; mouy JUu9}U09
Jo Alojsew Suiziseyduio

Aq uoneyuawe;duit

uresSoud Z| 0} y aanoayyo
JO} s1oyors} dinba 0} sure

J ‘suresdoid yuowidojaaap
pue Sururea] Joyoee} Joy siseq
B SB SOAIOS YIOMOUTEY OY

*SUOUDAIOIUL
Jeuoneonps
aaroayjo
quowsjdut

0} siseq

se sty) 3uisn

pure saurooino
Sutures] polsep
Suljapour pue
spoou Jo sisAjeue
2U) SOATOAUT

YW “Ajat90s usALIp
-Bqep B Ul SALTY)
0} sjuepmys pue
siayora} y}0q
Sunlemodula
“Koeloul]

vyep SIowoNpo
aoueyus 0} SUITE
ylomowrey oy]

“samnjonys
SATIOGETIOS
pur ‘suzaysAs

Byep Joyndwio0o
‘yuauidojaaop
Jeuotssayoid se yons

‘yoddns 3uroZuo ued

0} aseq aoUapIAd Ue se

S@Alas 31 ‘QIOULIOyMN

“srayous) Aq
poateosed st asn eyep
Moy UO ealyoadsiod
datsuayoiduios

® Siajjo I] “BIep

JO SULIOJ JUDIOIJIP
ayy asn Apjuenms
sioyoro} Moy JO

MOIAIOAO Ue SaptAoid

ylomourey oy

‘ajoho Aumnbut aanesoyt

ue UIYIM o8esn ejJep
Sulouen [Jul s1o}ORy pue
“purl Jo syiqey ‘sapnyiye
‘s][PJs ‘o8po]mouy Itsy)
Bursseduiooua ‘sioyous}
Joy Aovsoyt] eyep Jo daou09
oy) Jo Sulpuejsiopun
aatsuayordur0

e sopraold yy

‘saouatiadxe jeonoeid pur
B[NOLLM Jay} oyu! AdeIOII]
yep ayeIZo;Ut 0} sureBo1d
uoneredaid rayora) pue
suonniysul jeuoleonpa
Jo} [00} Burpmnd

B SB SdAJOS JIOMIUBY SY

sonoelg Buryora]
ur uonjeoryddy

quauidojanag euolssayoig
pure yon jeuosIag “1

juowosesuq [euoissajorg
pue saseyury Aununu0g “9

Aoeiowy eyeq
(SIOWIeaT
Sunenpoes “9
SIOUIeoT]
Suuemoduq “¢
quoulssassy ‘hp
Sutures]
pue Buryoeay “¢

soyoray
0} 91qe]TeAe
syioddns

JeuoneziuesiQ ‘¢
eyep punore

uonelogeljop “p

sauooyno
ayenyead ‘UoIsIsap
our UOHeULOyUT
wuojsuey ‘uoreULIOyUt
OjUT eyep WoJsueN)
‘eyep asn ‘suonsanb
ourey/surs|qoid
AJuept :9]940 Aumbur

ayy jo syuouoduiog “¢

68


90

Based on the quantitative and qualitative findings, as well as an integrative
literature review of existing and emerging data literacy frameworks, the researcher
developed a data literacy professional development framework relevant to the Philippine
context, shown in Figure 5, with the goal of providing a roadmap for establishing a data

literacy program for mathematics and science teachers.

91
Figure 5

Proposed Data Literacy Professional Development Framework

~ Conduct a “Develop || © Plan “Implement || ‘© Evaluate ©Collect
/ needs Ga Data || 2 professional || Sthe Steachers' |} Sand utilize
“assessment || SLiteracy || © development || @strategies. || Sproficiency || “feedback.
“ forteachers. |/Vision || % strategies. a Glevel on a

and data

Goals. literacy.


92

This framework adheres to the seven domains of the Philippine Professional
Standards for Teachers (PPST), including content knowledge and pedagogy, learning
environment, diversity of learners, curriculum and planning, assessment and reporting,
community linkages and professional engagement, and personal growth and professional
development. It unfolds in an iterative segmented cycle (as represented by the arrows)
consisting of six distinct phases. At the core of the framework, it demonstrates the
interplay of data literacy with the other four components of digital competence. These
components serve as the foundation for the development of data literacy among STEM
teachers.

The first phase of the framework is to conduct a needs assessment to determine
the particular needs of the teachers related to data literacy, teacher efficacy and attitude
toward data literacy and STEM teaching, as well as the other four components of digital
competence: digital communication and collaboration, digital content creation,
responsible use, and digital problem solving.

The second phase of the framework is to create a vision and goals for data
literacy. To build a healthy data-driven culture in the school, teachers should have a clear
data literacy vision and goals. To attain data literacy goals, a framework for data-driven
decision making is required.

The third phase of the framework is to plan professional development strategies
such as creating interactive digital data literacy training modules that incorporate the five
components of digital competence to provide teachers with a variety of learning

activities, coursework, tools, and resources to help them develop their data literacy skills.

93

The fourth phase of the framework involves implementing professional
development strategies. Teachers should reskill and upskill their data literacy skills by
participating in seminars, workshops, and training courses, particularly massive open
online courses (MOOCs), as well as establishing data teams and providing data coaches
(teachers or school leaders skilled in data use ) to facilitate effective data use to make
informed decisions and assist in data analysis, interpretation, and visualization to
communicate data. Teachers should also participate in a Professional Learning
Community (PLC). PLC fosters teachers’ professional development and collaborative
learning in order to improve teaching and alter instructional approaches. Teachers
strengthen relationships among team members by meeting regularly to reflect on new
ideas for increasing student achievement, share their knowledge, inform about emerging
classroom technology tools, and discuss student progress using accessible and relevant
data. Mentoring and coaching are also strategies that help teachers grow professionally
and personally.

The fifth phase of the framework is to evaluate teachers’ proficiency level on data
literacy at different career stages: beginning teachers, proficient teachers, highly
proficient teachers, and distinguished teachers. Teachers should be given feedback on
their data-use practices and assess whether they possess the necessary data literacy skills
through performance evaluations.

The final phase of the framework is to examine, reflect on, and revise the results.
It is essential to evaluate the results to ensure that they are aligned with and progressing

toward the data literacy vision and goals.

94

Moreover, based on the result of this study, the researcher aligned the proposed
contextualized data literacy framework for Filipino teachers’ professional development
with the Philippine Professional Standards for Teachers (PPST), including the essential
components and competencies.

This section encompasses seven domains, including Content Knowledge and
Pedagogy, Learning Environment, Diversity of Learners, Curriculum and Planning,
Assessment and Reporting, Community Linkages and Professional Engagement, and
Personal Growth and Professional Development. Each domain features specific indicators

and data literacy competencies.

1. Content Knowledge and Pedagogy

Domain | recognizes the need for teachers having in-depth knowledge of content
and pedagogy to enable data triangulation for teaching. This domain includes teachers’
ability to incorporate data literacy into the teaching and learning process, and also its
interconnectedness within and across curriculum areas, as well as pedagogical content
knowledge combined with teaching strategies and digital technologies required in
analyzing and interpreting data and identifying appropriate instructional actions to meet

the learning needs of diverse learners.

Strand 1
Knowledge of content and pedagogy in integrating data literacy skills within and

across curriculum teaching areas.

95

Indicators
1.1 Demonstrate broad knowledge of content and pedagogical content to enhance
teaching and assessment practices
1.2 Engage in collaborative inquiry to make data-based decisions to improve
teaching and learning process.
1.3 Promote strategies in using digital technologies specifically data analytics and
visualization tools to facilitate teaching and learning process.
1.4 Encourage other educators and colleagues by modelling data use strategies
and evaluate the effectiveness of the strategies for data-based decision making.
Data Literacy Competencies
e Evaluate the outcomes of data-driven decisions or interventions by
tracking changes in classroom practice and student progress and recognize
the iterative nature of the teaching and learning process.
e Transform data into actionable information and implement decisions and

solutions.

2. Learning Environment

Domain 2 highlights the role of teachers in providing conducive
learning environments that are safe, fair, and secure. This domain emphasizes the
importance of teachers using digital technologies to engage students with authentic data
in real-world contexts through hands-on activities, problem solving, and scientific

investigation.

96

Strand 2
Safe, fair, and secure learning environment to empower students to be data-
literate
Indicators
2.1 Demonstrate knowledge of the data ethics policies and data privacy law.
2.2 Foster learning environments that promote effective and ethical use of data by
protecting student privacy and maintaining confidentiality of student data.
2.3 Engage students to use data to identify and solve practical, environmental, and
scientific problems.
2.4 Facilitate the use of authentic learning experiences that focus on real-world,
complex problems, and hands-on analysis work such as problem-based activities,
case studies, etc. using digital tools.
Data Literacy Competencies
e Locate, access, and retrieve data from multiple sources to address a
problem or issue
e Use data to identify problems and frame questions
e Utilize, assess, and share data in an ethical manner, considering legal and
ethical issues
e Support a creative learning environment that encourages the use of data

for learning, research, and decision making or problem solving.

97

3. Diversity of Learners
Domain 3 emphasizes the critical role of teachers in ensuring that all learners,

including those with special needs, have access to data during learning activities. This
domain expects teachers to respond to their students’ expectations, competencies, and
misconceptions on data by providing differentiated instruction to address the diverse
needs of their students.

Strand 3

Accessibility of data during learning activities for all learners, including those

with special needs.

Indicators

3.1 Demonstrate knowledge and understanding of differentiated instructions that

are responsive to learner diversity.

3.2 Adapt appropriate teaching strategies and use data to provide learners with

differentiated instructions that support diverse learning needs, characteristics,

and experiences.

3.2 Evaluate with colleagues to identify knowledge gaps and construct individual

assessments using analytical assessment tools to improve individualized student

learning.

3.3 Lead colleagues in creating and modifying lesson plans and instructional

strategies to ensure that data literacy learning outcomes are achieved.

Data Literacy Competencies

e Locate, access, and retrieve data from multiple sources to address a

problem or issue.

98

e Gather, organize, visualize, and manage data using appropriate software,
tools, and processes such as spreadsheets and databases.

e Choose and apply relevant data analysis tools as well as advanced
statistical and analytic techniques such as regression or ANOVA to

discover and predict relationships between data.

4. Curriculum and Planning
Domain 4 focuses on the importance of teachers’ strong content and curriculum

knowledge in planning and designing well-structured and sequenced lessons, both
individually and collaboratively with colleagues, to facilitate and empower learners’ data
literacy skills using computer data systems and appropriate technologies for accessing
and analyzing data.

Strand 4

Curriculum sequencing and alignment of data literacy competencies across

curriculum

Indicators

4.1 Identify learning outcomes that are aligned with data literacy competencies.

4.2 Plan and design well-structured and sequenced lessons that align data literacy

competencies in the current teaching practices.

4.3 Participate in professional discussions to implement strategies that enrich

teaching practices.

4.4 Exhibit exemplary data literacy skills and guide colleagues in identifying data

literacy instructional resources that can be used or adapted.

99

Data Literacy Competencies
e Understand the uses and applications of data.
e Recognize possible sources of data and understand their purposes.
e Locate, access, and retrieve data from multiple sources to address a
problem or issue.
e Use data to identify problems and frame questions.
e Transform data into actionable information and implement decisions and

solutions.

5. Assessment and Reporting

Domain S refers to teachers' selection, analysis, and interpretation of data using a
variety of assessment tools, teaching strategies, and digital technologies to monitor,
evaluate, and report learners’ progress, performance, and achievement in order to inform
and improve the teaching and learning process and programs. This domain is concerned
with the use of data as evidence to provide learners with timely, accurate, and

constructive feedback on learning outcomes.

Strand 5
Assessment and reporting of data using a variety of assessment tools and teaching |

strategies to evaluate learners’ progress and achievement

Indicators —
9.1 Collect and analyze data using digital technologies and data analysis tools to

evaluate learning outcomes.

100

9.2 Seek feedback from peers before implementing the intervention or
instructional modification.

9.3 Implement the new teaching strategy and approaches using digital tools and
resources.

9.4 Lead colleagues in applying strategies that effectively provide timely and
targeted feedback data instantly with students.

Data Literacy Competencies

e Gather, organize, visualize, and manage data using appropriate software,
tools, and processes such as spreadsheets and databases.

e Choose and apply relevant data analysis tools as well as advanced
statistical and analytic techniques such as regression or ANOVA to
discover and predict relationships between data.

e Understand and read tables, charts, and graphs.

e Develop meaningful graphical representations (e.g., tables, charts, graphs)

to visually present and communicate data.

6. Community Linkages and Professional Engagement
Domain 6 recognizes teachers’ involvement in establishing school-community

collaborations in order to model effective data use and build a data-informed culture.

ablishment of sch comm : collaborations for building


101

Indicators

6.1 Demonstrate awareness of the critical roles of teachers and school leaders in
fostering and sustaining a healthy data-driven culture in the school.

6.2 Build relationships and involve parents/guardians and the wider community
in the development of an effective school improvement plan by conducting a needs

assessment that include student achievement data and surveys of all stakeholders.

6.3 Strengthen the partnerships between parents/guardians and the wider
community and support the implementation of data-driven decisions and

solutions for school improvement.

6.4 Evaluate process data such as school annual policies and curriculum to make

them more responsive to the needs of students, parents, and other stakeholders.

Data Literacy Competencies
e Locate, access, and retrieve data from multiple sources to address a
problem or issue.
e Gather, organize, visualize, and manage data using appropriate software,
tools, and processes such as spreadsheets and databases.
e Evaluate the outcomes of data-driven decisions or interventions by
tracking changes in classroom practice and student progress and recognize

the iterative nature of the teaching and learning process.

102

7. Personal Growth and Professional Development

Domain 7 is concerned with teachers' participation in formal and informal
professional development activities that promote data use practices. This domain
highlights teachers’ obligation to reflect on, assess, and improve their data-driven

approaches in the classroom.

Strand
Participation in professional learning networks to share knowledge and enrich
data-driven teaching practices.
Indicators
13.1 Express interest in joining professional development programs and
professional learning communities to develop data literacy skills and knowledge.
13.2 Attend data use training courses, seminars, and conferences for Continuing
Professional Development (CPD).
13.3 Discuss and collaborate with colleagues on how to incorporate data use into
classroom practices.
13.4 Build data teams to facilitate the effective use of data to make
informed decisions and to assist one another in data analysis and interpretation.
Data Literacy Competencies

e Support a learning environment that encourages the use of data for

learning, research, and decision making or problem solving.
e Know widely accepted data citation methods and properly cite secondary

data sources

103

In addition, the researcher proposed a categorization of four stages in the career
progression of teachers. These stages include “teacher data explorers” for beginning
teachers, followed by “teacher data integrators” representing proficient teachers.
Advancing to a higher level are “teacher data experts”, signifying highly proficient
teachers. At the pinnacle of the career progression continuum are “teacher data seers”,
symbolizing distinguished teachers. The proposed career stages, illustrated in Figure 6,
serve as a comprehensive framework for evaluating the proficiency level of Filipino

teachers in data literacy.

Figure 6

Proposed Career Stages

Teacher Data

Experts Teachers)
Teacher Data (Highly
Integrators Proficient
Teacher Data (Proficient Teachers)
Explorers Teachers)
(Beginning

Teachers)

104

Domain Career Stage 1 | Career Stage 2 | Career Stage3 | Career Stage 4
Teacher Data Teacher Data Teacher Data Teacher Data
Explorers Integrators Experts Seers
Demonstrate Engage in Promote : Encourage
@ broad Tlaborati strategies in other
g co a noeenhed using digital educators and
knowledge of | inquiry to technologies colleagues by
content and make data- specifically modelling
pedagogical based data analytics data use
Content | content to decisions to and strategies and
Knowledge | enhance improve visualization evaluate the
. i tools to effectiveness
and teaching and teaching and on
Ped t i facilitate of the
‘agogy bees anes learning teaching and strategies for
practices. process. learning data-based
process. decision
making.
Demonstrate Foster Engage Facilitate the
knowledge of | learning stidenisto use use of
the data environments data to identify authentic
ethics that promote and.selve. learning
policies and effective and practical, experiences
0 data privacy ethical use of environmental, that focus on
i law. data by andiscientific real-world,
Py protecting problems. complex
aaa student problems, and
privacy and hands-on
Learning i ies cig work
Environment conngentialsty such 38
of student problem-based
data. activities, case

studies, etc.
using digital
tools.


105

Domain Career Stage 1 | Career Stage2 | Career Stage3 | Career Stage 4
Teacher Data Teacher Data Teacher Data Teacher Data
Explorers Integrators Experts Seers
Demonstrate Adapt Evaluate with Lead
knowledge and | appropriate colleagues to colleagues in
understanding teaching identify creating and
0 @) of strategies and knowledge modifying
@) differentiated use data to gaps and lesson plans
(Ss) CY instructions provide construct and
ea that are learners with individual instructional
Diversity | responsive to differentiated assessments strategies to
of learner instructions using ensure that
Learners | diversity. that support analytical data literacy
diverse assessment learning
learning tools to outcomes are
needs, improve achieved.
characteristics, individualized
and student
experiences. learning.
—
Identify Plan and Participate in Exhibit
learning design well- professional exemplary
outcomes that structured and discussions to data literacy
F are aligned sequenced implement skills and
with data lessons that strategies that guide
literacy align data enrich colleagues in
Curriculum | competencies. literacy teaching identifying
and competencies practices. data literacy
Planning in the current instructional
teaching resources that
practices. can be used or

adapted.


106

Domain Career Stage 1 | Career Stage 2 Career Stage 3 | Career Stage 4
Teacher Data Teacher Data Teacher Data Teacher Data
Explorers Integrators Experts Seers
Collect and Seek feedback Implement the Lead
ro} analyze data from peers new teaching colleagues in
Aa using digital before strategy and applying
x— technologies implementing approaches strategies that
Rise and data the using digital effectively
A analysis tools | interventionor | tools and provide
ssessment to evaluate instructional resources. timely and
and 5 ETE
Reporti learning modification. targeted
‘eporting outcomes. feedback data
instantly with
students.
—
D strat i Evaluat
Nenana Build } Strengthen the masa
awareness of relationships _ process data
ate i partnerships
the critical and involve such as
between
roles of parents/ school annual
i parents ae
teachers and guardians and a policies and
: /guardians and :
school the wider : curriculum to
(8) P a the wider
leaders in community in 4 make them
IN : community and
fostering and the more
= ae support the i
sustaining a development 3 és responsive to
implementation
. healthy data- of an effective i the needs of
Community 2 of data-driven
. driven culture | school a students,
Linkages | . . decisions and
in the school. improvement : parents, and
and Jan bi solutions for “iter
Professional P i y . school neD hold:
Engagement concucuugia improvement. ahaa
needs
assessment
that include
student
achievement
data and
surveys of all
stakeholders.


107

Domain Career Stage 1 | Career Stage 2 Career Stage 3. | Career Stage 4
Teacher Data Teacher Data Teacher Data Teacher Data
Explorers Integrators Experts Seers
Express Attend data Discuss and Build data
interest in use training collaborate teams to
courses, with facilitate the

professional
development
Personal | programs and
Growth and | professional
Professional | learning
Development| communities
to develop
data literacy
skills and

Sy |
(1% joining
ne eo

ll)

knowledge.

seminars, and
conferences
for Continuing
Professional

_ Development
| (CPD).

colleagues on
how to
incorporate
data use into
classroom
practices.

effective use
of data to
make
informed
decisions and
to assist one
another in data
analysis and
interpretation.

In the initial stage known as the “Teacher Data Explorer”, educators exhibit

extensive knowledge, including content expertise and pedagogical methods, to improve

teaching and assessment practices. They also display a solid understanding of data ethics

policies and data privacy laws, while recognizing the importance of differentiated

instruction for diverse learners. Teacher Data Explorers align learning outcomes with

data literacy competencies and effectively utilize digital technologies and data analysis

tools to assess learning outcomes. Additionally, they understand the vital role of teachers

and school leaders in promoting a data-driven culture within the school. Furthermore,

Teacher Data Explorers express a keen interest in participating in professional

development programs and learning communities to further develop their data literacy

skills and knowledge.

108

The “Teacher Data Integrator” stage comprises educators who collaboratively use
data to improve teaching and learning. They promote effective and ethical use of data and
safeguard student privacy. Teacher Data Integrators adapt their teaching strategies based
on data to cater diverse learning needs. They design well-structured lessons aligned with
data literacy competencies and actively seek peer feedback for instructional
modifications. Additionally, they involve parents and the community in school
improvement plans using data assessments. Teacher Data Integrators actively pursue
continuous professional development through data literacy training, seminars, and
conferences.

In the "Teacher Data Expert” stage, educators actively promote the use of digital
technologies, particularly data analytics and visualization tools, to facilitate the teaching
and learning process. They encourage students to use data in identifying and resolving
practical, environmental, and scientific issues. Teacher Data Experts collaborate with
colleagues to identify knowledge gaps and construct individual assessments using
analytical assessment tools to enhance individualized student learning. They actively
participate in professional discussions to implement innovative strategies that enrich
teaching practices, incorporating digital tools and resources. Moreover, Teacher Data
Experts strive to strengthen partnerships between parents, guardians, and the wider
community, supporting the implementation of data-driven decisions and solutions for
school improvement. They also engage in discussions and collaboration with colleagues
to integrate data use effectively into classroom practices.

In the final stage, known as the “Teacher Data Seer”, educators assume leadership

roles by exemplifying data use strategies and evaluating their impact on data-driven

109

decision making. They facilitate authentic learning experiences centered on real-world,
complex problems, employing digital tools for hands-on analysis, such as problem-based
activities and case studies. Teacher Data Seers guide colleagues in designing and
modifying lesson plans and instructional strategies to ensure successful attainment of data
literacy learning outcomes. They exhibit exemplary data literacy skills and assist
colleagues in identifying appropriate instructional resources for data literacy.
Additionally, they spearhead the implementation of strategies to provide students with
timely and targeted feedback instantly. Teacher Data Seers analyze process data,
including school policies and curriculum, to align them with the needs of students,
parents, and stakeholders. Moreover, they establish data teams to promote effective data
utilization, enabling informed decision making and mutual support in data analysis and

interpretation.

110

Chapter V

SUMMARY, CONCLUSIONS, AND RECOMMENDATIONS

This chapter outlines the summary, findings, conclusions, and recommendations

for the study.

Summary

This explanatory sequential mixed methods study aimed to develop a framework
for professional development on data literacy for Filipino teachers, review relevant
research on data literacy frameworks, and assess Filipino teachers’ level of information
and data literacy and competencies in integrating data literacy skills in STEM education,
as well as their perceptions, teacher efficacy, and attitude toward data literacy and STEM
teaching. It sought to determine if information and data literacy and other four
components of digital competence are correlated. Moreover, this research also
investigated the significant interactions among the Filipino teachers’ information and data
literacy, perceptions regarding STEM education, teacher efficacy, and attitude toward
STEM teaching.

The study involved 462 teachers who participated in the STEM Education Master
Course for Teachers 2021 training, which was provided by the Department of
Information and Communications Technology — ICT Literacy and Competency
Development Bureau in collaboration with the University of the Philippines — College of
Education through Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs). The STEM Education

Master Course Training Survey was administered as a pretest and posttest. The researcher

111

also used the Data-Based Decision-Making (DBDM) Survey for Teachers, which was
adapted from Wayman et al. (2016), and an open-ended narrative survey questionnaire.
The results of the paired samples t-test were used to determine whether there were
improvements in the pre-assessment and post-assessment of Filipino teachers in terms of
their level of information and data literacy. Moreover, linear regression was computed
using the post-test results if the information and data literacy and the other four
components of digital competence, namely digital communication and collaboration,
digital content creation, responsible use, and digital problem solving are correlated. The
multiple linear regression was utilized to determine the significant interaction of
information and data literacy, perceptions regarding STEM education, and teacher
efficacy, and attitude toward STEM teaching. Inductive thematic analysis was conducted
on seven open-ended narrative survey questions to generate themes within the qualitative
data by finding patterns and meanings from the data. The researcher then went over each

individual response, created codes, and categorized them into themes.

Findings
Based on the data analyses, the following are the findings from this study:

1. The paired samples t-test result revealed a significant difference in the pre-
assessment and post-assessment of the participants in terms of their level of
information and data literacy. The participants’ mean scores significantly
increased from pre-assessment (M = 3.71, SD = 1.44) to post-assessment (M =
3.98, SD = 1.48). The teachers made progress from the Integrator level toward the

threshold of the Expert level.

112

. It was found out that digital communication and collaboration is a significant
positive predictor of information and data literacy with r = .699 (p < .001). This
implies that an increase in the level of digital communication and collaboration is
associated with a corresponding increase in information and data literacy.

. The results revealed that digital content creation is a significant positive predictor
of information and data literacy with r = .685 (p < .001). It means that a higher
level of digital content creation is associated with a higher level of information
and data literacy.

. The results indicated that responsible use is a significant positive predictor of
information and data literacy with r = .550 (p < .001). It means that increasing the
level of responsible use will improve the level of information and data literacy.

. The study identified digital problem solving as a significant positive predictor of
information and data literacy with r = .680 (p < .001). It means that the higher the
level of digital problem solving, the higher the level of information and data
literacy.

. The teacher efficacy and attitude toward STEM teaching have a significant effect
on the teachers’ level of information and data literacy. It implies that teachers who
have a high level of teacher efficacy and a positive attitude toward STEM
teaching are more likely to be motivated to develop their information and data
literacy skills.

. The study identified gaps in knowledge in terms of Filipino STEM teachers’ data
literacy including lack of computer systems, insufficient data literacy

competencies, inadequate professional learning community, lack of school

113

organizational support, and lack of accessible and usable data for making data-
based decisions. Targeted interventions are needed to enhance data literacy and
promote effective data-driven decision-making among Filipino teachers.

. The findings reveal that the contextualized data literacy framework for the
professional development of Filipino teachers must incorporate essential
components and competencies, such as the components of digital competence and
the seven domains outlined in the Philippine Professional Standards for Teachers
(PPST). Furthermore, the framework incorporates six phases for developing and

enhancing teachers’ data literacy skills.

Conclusions
Based on the findings, the following conclusions are drawn:

1. There is a substantial increase in the mean scores of STEM teachers
between the pre-assessment and post-assessment in the information and
data literacy. These results suggest that the training program implemented
was effective in enhancing the information and data literacy skills of the
teachers. This implies that professional development programs focused on
data literacy can positively impact teacher competencies (Kippers et al.,
2018).

2. Teachers integrate data literacy into their mathematics or science classes
through engaging in data-based decision making, designing activities with
real-world connections, and using data as a resource. This indicates that

teachers can enhance their proficiency in data literacy by engaging in

114

classroom activities (Mandinach & Gummer, 2016b). Additionally, the
incorporation of authentic and real-world data has been proven to increase
students' knowledge, interest, and motivation for data literacy (Schreiter et
al., 2002).

. There is a significant positive correlation between information and data
literacy and the other four components of digital competence. Developing
the skills in digital communication and collaboration, digital content
creation, responsible use, and digital problem solving will lead to an
improvement in the level of information and data literacy. Therefore, it is
essential to incorporate these components in the professional development
of teachers to improve their data literacy skills.

. There is a strong association between information and data literacy and
teacher efficacy and attitude toward STEM teaching. This implies that
teachers should cultivate these characteristics to enhance their proficiency
in information and data literacy, leading to more effective instructional
strategies and a positive impact on student engagement (van der Sheer &
Visscher, 2016).

. The implementation of a Data Literacy Professional Development
Framework, specifically designed and developed for Filipino educators, is
essential for the development of their information and data literacy skills.
This contextualized framework addresses the gaps and challenges
associated with the professional development of Filipino teachers. It

outlines a continuum that describes the progression of teachers from

115

novice to a highly proficient level in information and data literacy,
comprising four stages: (1) Teacher Data Explorer; (2) Teacher Data
Integrator; (3) Teacher Data Expert; and (4) Teacher Data Seer. The
utilization of this framework to enhance the data literacy skills of Filipino
teachers is crucial for promoting educational resilience, particularly in the

post-COVID era.

Recommendations

In light of the findings and conclusions of this study, the researcher recommends

the following:

1.

The Commission on Higher Education (CHED) and the Department of
Education (DepEd) as policy-making bodies to adapt the Data Literacy
Professional Development Framework and ensure that pre-service and in-
service teachers continually improve their data literacy skills.
Furthermore, conducting further research on the effectiveness of this
framework would be beneficial for its successful implementation.

The evaluation of the Data Literacy Professional Development Framework
is important, emphasizing the need for a thorough validation process. It is
recommended that the framework undergo a series of validations through
testing and application across disciplines beyond STEM tracks.

Schools must provide extensive professional development, including

training programs on data literacy, for both pre-service and in-service

116

teachers, and incorporate it in the pre-service teacher education
curriculum.

. A learning management system and advanced technology tools such as
data analytics software, visualization platforms, and assessment tools,
should be available and accessible in schools to assist teachers in
efficiently gathering, analyzing, visualizing, and interpreting data.

. A professional learning community (PLC) must be established by the
school leadership team to support colleagues in enhancing their learning,
teaching, and data use practices.

. Schools should develop data teams and appoint data coaches to assist and
answer queries from their colleagues in gathering, analyzing, and
interpreting data to make informed decisions.

. Pre-service and in-service teachers must continually improve their data
literacy skills and take responsibility for their personal and professional
development by attending data literacy training courses, seminars, and
workshops and engaging in a PLC.

. Further research studies should be conducted to examine the relationship
between Filipino teachers’ information and data literacy, the four other
components of digital competence, and their integration of data literacy
skills into STEM teaching.

. The Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM)
curricula should incorporate data-driven approaches through the

integration of authentic and complex real-world data sets into STEM

10.

117

education. Mathematics and Science teachers need be equipped with
adequate competencies in data literacy, enabling them to effectively
integrate these skills into their STEM teaching methods.

To comply with the National Adoption and Implementation of the
Philippine Professional Standards for Teachers (PPST), it is recommended
that data literacy be included as one of the strands within the existing

seven domains that teachers must attain to be effective in the 21st century.

118

References

Abdusyakur, I. (2015). Data-based decision making in the school environment: A study
on data use in Indonesian primary schools. (Master’s Thesis). University of
Twente. Enschede, Netherlands.
https://essay.utwente.nl/68368/1/Abdusyakar%201.%20-%20S 1427326%20-
%20masterscriptie.pdf

Albiladi, W., Lasater, K., & Bengtson, E. (2020). Data Use Among Principals and
Teachers: Divergent Paths or Common Ground? Journal of School Administration
Research and Development, 5(2), 63-76. https://doi.org/10.32674/jsard.v5i2.2240

Bandura, A. (1997). Self-efficacy: The exercise of control. New York: Freeman.

Black, P., & Wiliam, D. (2018). Classroom assessment and pedagogy. Assessment in
Education: Principles, Policy & Practice, 25(6), 551-575.
https://doi.org/10.1080/0969594x.2018.1441807

Bhargava, R., Deahl, E., Letouzé, E., Noonan, A., Sangokoya, D., & Shoup, N. (2015).
Beyond Data Literacy: Reinventing Community Engagement and Empowerment
in the Age of Data. Data-Pop Alliance White Paper Series. Data-Pop Alliance
(Harvard Humanitarian Initiative, MIT Media Lab and Overseas Development
Institute) and Internews.

Carlson, D., Borman, G. D., & Robinson, M. (2011). A Multistate District-Level Cluster
Randomized Trial of the Impact of Data-Driven Reform on Reading and
Mathematics Achievement. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 33(3),

378-398. https://doi.org/10.3102/01623737 11412765

119

Chick, H., & Pierce, R. (2012). The statistical literacy needed to interpret school
assessment data. Mathematics Teacher Education and Development, 15(2), 5-26.
https://eric.ed.gov/?id=EJ1018712

Conn, C., Bohan, K., Bies-Hernandez, N., Powell, P., Luzader, J., Scholz, C., &
Frederking, D. (2020). Teaching and Assessing Data Literacy: Resource Guide
for Supporting Pre-Service and In-Service Teachers.
https://ceedar.education.ufl.edu/wp-
content/uploads/2021/02/NAU_Teaching_and_Assessing_Data_Literacy_Resourc
e_Guide_for_Supporting Pre-Service_and_In-
Service_Teachers_August_2020_Updated_2162021 .pdf

Cowie, B., & Cooper, B. (2017). Exploring the challenge of developing student teacher
data literacy. Assessment in Education: Principles, Policy & Practice, 24(2), 147—
163. https://doi.org/10.1080/0969594x.2016.1225668

Creswell, J. W., & Creswell, D. J. (2018). Research Design: Qualitative, Quantitative,
and Mixed Methods Approaches (Sth ed.). SAGE Publications, Inc.

Czerniewicz, L. (2016). Student practices in copyright culture: Accessing learning
resources. Learning, Media and Technology, 42(2), 171-184.
https://doi.org/10.1080/17439884.2016.1160928

Czerkawski, B., & Lyman, E. W. (2015). Exploring Issues About Computational
Thinking in Higher Education. TechTrends, 59(2), 57—

65. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11528-015-0840-3

120

Datnow, A., & Hubbard, L. (2016). Teacher capacity for and beliefs about data-driven
decision making: A literature review of international research. Journal of
Educational Change, 17 (1), 7-28.

D’ Ignazio, C., Bhargava, R. (2016). DataBasic: design principles, tools and activities for
Data Literacy Learners. The Journal of Community Informatics, 12(3), 83—107.

de Guzman, C. (2021). The Philippines Still Hasn't Fully Reopened Its Schools Because
of COVID-19. What Is This Doing to Children? Time.
https://time.com/6124045/school-closures-covid-education-philippines/

DeLuca, C., & Bellara, A. (2013). The current state of assessment education: Aligning
policy, standards, and teacher education curriculum. Journal of Teacher
Education, 64, 356-372. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/00224871 13488144

Denny, M. (2020). Data-Driven Decision Making: Improving Student Achievement.
(Master’s Thesis). Northwestern College. Orange City, Iowa.
https://nwcommons.nwciowa.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1233&context=edu
cation_masters

Desimone, L. M. (2009). Improving Impact Studies of Teachers’ Professional
Development: Toward better conceptualizations and Measures. Educational
Researcher, 38(3), 181-199. https://doi.org/10.3102/0013189x08331140

Dresner Advisory Services. (2017). Big data analytics market study.
https://www3.microstrategy.com/getmedia/cd052225-be60-49fd-ab1c-
4984ebc3cde9/Dresner-Report-Big_Data_Analytic_Market_Study-

WisdomofCrowdsSeries-2017.pdf

121

Drushlyak, M. (2019). Glossary of “visual” education: graphical competence, visual
competence. Physical and Mathematical Education, 21(3), 59-65.
https://doi.org/10.31110/2413-1571-2019-021-3-009

Dunlap, K., & Piro, J. S. (2016). Diving into data: Developing the capacity for data
literacy in teacher education. Cogent Education, 3(1), 1132526.
https://doi.org/10.1080/2331186x.2015.1132526

Ebbeler, J., Poortman, C. L., Schildkamp, K., & Pieters, J. M. (2016). The effects of a
data use intervention on educators’ satisfaction and data literacy. Educational
Assessment, Evaluation and Accountability, 29(1), 83-105.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s1 1092-016-9251-z

Erwin, R. W. (2015). Data Literacy: Real-World Learning Through Problem-Solving
With Data Sets. American Secondary Education, 43(2), 18-26.
http://www. jstor.org/stable/43694208

Filderman, M. J., Toste, J. R., Didion, L., & Peng, P. (2021). Data Literacy Training for
K-12 Teachers: A Meta-Analysis of the Effects on Teacher Outcomes. Remedial
and Special Education, 43(5), 328-343.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0741932521 1054208

Goessling, K. P., & Vadeboncoeur, J. A., PhD. (2019). Media Literacy. Salem Press
Encyclopedia.

Gonzalez, M. T., Espinel, M. C., & Ainley, J. (2011). Teachers’ Graphical Competence.
Teaching Statistics in School Mathematics-Challenges for Teaching and Teacher

Education, 187-197. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-94-007-1131-0_20

122

Guan, X., Feng, X., & Islam, A. A. (2023). The dilemma and countermeasures of
educational data ethics in the age of intelligence. Humanities and Social Sciences
Communications, 10(1). https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-023-01633-x

Guillasper, J. N., Soriano, G. P., & Oducado, R. M. F. (2020). Psychometric Properties of
‘Attitude towards e-learning Scale’ among Nursing Students. International
Journal of Educational Sciences, 30(1-3), 1-5.
https://doi.org/10.31901/24566322.2020/30.1-3.1135

Hamilton, L., Halverson, R., Jackson, S., Mandinach, E., Supovitz, J., & Wayman, J.
(2009). Using student achievement data to support instructional decision making
(NCEE 2009-4067). Washington, DC: National Center for Education Evaluation
and Regional Assistance, Institute of Education Sciences, U.S. Department of
Education.
https://ies.ed.gov/ncee/wwc/Docs/PracticeGuide/dddm_pg_092909.pdf

Henderson, J., & Corry, M. (2020). Data literacy training and use for educational
professionals. Journal of Research in Innovative Teaching & Learning, 14(2),
232-244. https://doi.org/10.1108/jrit-11-2019-0074

Ikemoto, G. S., & Marsh, J. A. (2007). chapter 5 Cutting Through the “Data-Driven”
Mantra: Different Conceptions of Data-Driven Decision Making. Yearbook of the
National Society for the Study of Education, 106(1), 105-131.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1744-7984.2007.00099.x.

Jimerson, J. and Wayman, J. (2015), “Professional learning for using data: examining

teacher needs and supports”, Teachers College Record, Vol. 117 No. 4, pp. 1-36.

123

Kaeophanuek, S., Jaitip, N. S., & Nilsook, P. (2018). How to Enhance Digital Literacy
Skills among Information Sciences Students. Jnternational Journal of Information
and Education Technology, 8(4), 292-297.
https://doi.org/10.18178/ijiet.2018.8.4.1050

Kalaian, S. A., Kasim, R. M., & Kasim, N. R. (2019). Descriptive and Predictive
Analytical Methods for Big Data. Web Services, 314-331.
https://doi.org/10.4018/978-1-5225-7501-6.ch018

Khan, H. R., Kim, J., & Chang, C. H. (2018, March 25-28). Toward an understanding of
data literacy [poster presentation]. iConference 2018. Sheffield, UK, England.
https://www.ideals.illinois.edu/items/106307

Kippers, W. B., Poortman, C. L., Schildkamp, K., & Visscher, A. J. (2018). Data literacy:
What do educators learn and struggle with during a data use intervention? Studies
in Educational Evaluation, 56, 21-31.
https://doi.org/10.1016/.stueduc.2017.11.001

Knowles, J. G. (2017). Impacts of Professional Development in Integrated STEM
Education on Teacher Self-Efficacy, Outcome Expectancy, and Stem Career
Awareness (Order No. 10270934). Available from ProQuest Dissertations &
Theses Global. (1933320146). https://www.proquest.com/dissertations-
theses/impacts-professional-development-integrated-
stem/docview/1933320146/se-2

Koltay, T. (2017). Data literacy for researchers and data librarians. Journal of

Librarianship and Information Science, 49(1) 3-14.

124

Lee, V. R., & Wilkerson, M. (2018). Data use by middle and secondary students in the
digital age: A status report and future prospects. Commissioned Paper for the
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine, Board on Science
Education, Committee on Science Investigations and Engineering Design for
Grades 6-12. Washington, D.C.

Love, N., Stiles, K. E., Mundry, S., & DiRanna, K. (2008). A data coach's guide to
improving learning for all students: Unleashing the power of collaborative
inquiry. Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin Press.

Luz, J. M. (2020). 3 case studies: How ready are Philippine schools for distance
learning? RAPPLER. https://www.rappler.com/nation/ase-studies-how-ready-are-
philippine-schools-for-distance-learning/

Mandinach, E. B. (2012). A Perfect Time for Data Use: Using Data-Driven Decision
Making to Inform Practice. Educational Psychologist, 47(2), 71-85.
https://doi.org/10.1080/00461520.2012.667064

Mandinach, E. B., & Gummer, E. S. (2012). Navigating the landscape of data literacy: It
IS complex. Washington, DC/Portland, OR: WestEd/Education Northwest.
https://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/ED582807.pdf

Mandinach, E. B., & Gummer, E. S. (2013). A Systemic View of Implementing Data
Literacy in Educator Preparation. Educational Researcher, 42(1), 30-37.
http://www. jstor.org/stable/23360475

Mandinach, E. B., & Gummer, E. S. (2013). Defining data literacy: A report on

convening experts. Journal of Educational Research and Policy Studies, 13(2), 6-

125

28. http://www.waymandatause.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/04/JERPS_april-
2013.pdf

Mandinach, E.B., Parton, B.M., Gummer, E.S., & Anderson, R. (2015). Ethical and
appropriate data use requires data literacy. Phi Delta Kappan, 96 (6), 25-28.

Mandinach, E. B., & Gummer, E. S. (2016a). Data Literacy for Educators [E-book].
Amsterdam University Press.

Mandinach, E. B., & Gummer, E. S. (2016b). What does it mean for teachers to be data
literate: Laying out the skills, knowledge, and dispositions. Teaching and Teacher
Education, 60, 366-376. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tate.2016.07.011

Mandinach, E. B., Honey, M., & Light, D. (2006). A theoretical framework for data-
driven decision making. Paper presented at the meeting of the American
Educational Research Association, San Francisco.

Mandinach, E. B., & Schildkamp, K. (2021). Misconceptions about data-based decision
making in education: An exploration of the literature. Studies in Educational
Evaluation, 69, 100842. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.stueduc.2020.100842

McMullin, K., & Reeve, E. M. (2014). Identifying Perceptions That Contribute to the
Development of Successful Project Lead the Way Pre-Engineering Programs in
Utah. Journal of Technology Education, 26(1).
https://doi.org/10.21061/jte.v26i1.a.2

Means, B., Chen, E., DeBarger, A., Padilla, C., Department of Education, E. O. of P. E.
and P. D., & SRI International. (2011). Teachers’ Ability to Use Data to Inform

Instruction: Challenges and Supports. Office of Planning, Evaluation and Policy

126

Development, US Department of Education.
https://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltex/ED516494.pdf

Midtlund, A., Instefjord, E. J., & Lazareva, A. (2021). Digital communication and
collaboration in lower secondary school. Nordic Journal of Digital Literacy,
16(2), 65-76. https://doi.org/10.18261 /issn.1891-943x-202 1-02-03

Miller, K. M., (2022). "Developing Pedagogical Content Knowledge For Stem
Integration Through Data Literacy: A Case Study Of High School Science
Teachers". Publicly Accessible Penn Dissertations. 4956.
https://repository.upenn.edu/edissertations/4956

Miller, K., Yoon, S., Shim, J., & Cottone, A. (2021). Integrating Data Literacy into
Secondary School Science: An Exploratory Study of a Pilot Professional
Development. In de Vries, E., Hod, Y., & Ahn, J. (Eds.), Proceedings of the 15th
International Conference of the Learning Sciences - ICLS 2021. (pp. 781-784).
Bochum, Germany: International Society of the Learning Sciences.

Mingchu L. (2008). Structural Equation Modeling for High School Principals’ Data-
Driven Decision Making: An Analysis of Information Use Environments.
Educational Administration Quarterly, 44(5), 603-634.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0013161x08321506

Montoya, S. (2018). Defining literacy. UNESCO Institute for Statistics. Hamburg,
Germany. https://gaml.uis.unesco.org/wp-
content/uploads/sites/2/2018/12/4.6.1_07_4.6-defining-literacy.pdf

Mund, S. (2022). Defining and measuring data literacy for the 21" century (Order No.

28777135). Available from ProQuest Dissertations & Theses Global.

127

(2629097862). https://www.proquest.com/dissertations-theses/defining-
measuring-data-literacy-2 l-sup-st/docview/2629097862/se-2

Ndukwe, I. G., & Daniel, B. K. (2020). Teaching analytics, value and tools for teacher
data literacy: a systematic and tripartite approach. /nternational Journal of
Educational Technology in Higher Education, 17(1).
https://doi.org/10.1186/s41239-020-00201-6

OECD (2009). "The Professional Development of Teachers", in Creating Effective
Teaching and Learning Environments: First Results from TALIS (pp. 47 — 86).
OECD Publishing, Paris. https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264068780-5-en

Oi, M., Yamada, M., Okubo, F., Shimada, A., & Ogata, H. (2017). Reproducibility of
findings from educational big data. Proceedings of the Seventh International
Learning Analytics & Knowledge Conference.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3027385.3029445

Opulencia-Calub, S. C. (2016). Data literacy is about saving lives as well. School of
Data. https://schoolofdata.org/2015/05/19/data-literacy -is-about-saving-lives-as-
well/

Papamitsiou, Z., Filippakis, M. E., Poulou, M., Sampson, D., Ifenthaler, D., &
Giannakos, M. (2021). Towards an educational data literacy framework:
enhancing the profiles of instructional designers and e-tutors of online and
blended courses with new competences. Smart Learning Environments, 8(1).

https://doi.org/10.1186/s40561-021-00163-w

128

Paskevicius, M. (2021). Educators as content creators in a diverse digital media
landscape. Journal of Interactive Media in Education, 2021(1).
https://doi.org/10.5334/jime.675

Pierce, R. & Chick, H. (2011). Reacting to quantitative data: Teachers’ perceptions of
student achievement reports. In J. Clark, B. Kissane, J. Mousley, T. Spencer, & S.
Thornton (Eds.), Mathematics: Traditions and [new] practices (Proceedings of
the 34th Annual Conference of the Mathematics Education Research Group of
Australasia, Alice Springs, (pp. 631-639). Adelaide: AAMT/MERGA.

Piro, J., & Hutchinson, C. (2014). Using a Data Chat to teach instructional interventions:
Student perceptions of data literacy in an assessment course. The New Educator,
10, 95-111. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/1547688X.2014.898479

Prado, J.C., & Marzal, M. N. (2013). Incorporating Data Literacy into Information
Literacy Programs: Core Competencies and Contents. Libri, 63(2).
https://doi.org/10.1515/libri-2013-0010

Potts, J. (2022). An Analysis of Elementary Educators' Use of Student Data in Making
Instructional Decisions (Order No. 28970076). Available from ProQuest
Dissertations & Theses Global. (2641529998).
https://www.proquest.com/dissertations-theses/analysis-elementary-educators-
use-student-data/docview/264 1529998/se-2

Raffaghelli, J-E. (2019). Developing a framework for educators’ data literacy in the
European context: proposal, implications and debate, EDULEARN19

Proceedings, pp. 10520-10530.

129

Redecker, C. (2017). European Framework for the Digital Competence of Educators:
DigCompEdu. Punie, Y. (ed). EUR 28775 EN. Publications Office of the
European Union, Luxembourg, 2017, ISBN 978-92-79-73494-6,
doi:10.2760/159770, JRC107466

Ridsdale, C., Rothwell, J., Smit, M., Ali-Hassan, H., Bliemel, M., Irvine, D., Kelley, D.,
Matwin, S., & Wuetherick, B. (2015). Strategies and best practices for data
literacy education. Dalhousie University.

Ross, P., & Maynard, K. (2021). Towards a 4th industrial revolution. Intelligent
Buildings International, 13(3), 159-161.
https://doi.org/10.1080/17508975.2021.1873625

Sanchez-Cruzado, C., Santiago Campion, R., & Sanchez-Compaiia, M. T. (2021).
Teacher Digital Literacy: The Indisputable Challenge after COVID-19.
Sustainability, 13(4), 1858. https://doi.org/10.3390/su13041858

Schifter, C. C., Natarajan, U., Ketelhut, D. J., & Kirchgessner, A. (2014). Data-Driven
Decision Making: Facilitating Teacher Use of Student Data to Inform Classroom
Instruction. Contemporary Issues in Technology and Teacher
Education, 14(4). https://citejournal.org/volume-14/issue-4-14/science/data-
driven decision-making-facilitating-teacher-use-of-student-data-to-inform-
classroom-instruction

Schildkamp, K. (2019). Data-based decision-making for school improvement: Research
insights and gaps. Educational Research, 61(3), 257-273.

https://doi.org/10.1080/00131881.2019.1625716

130

Schildkamp, K., & Ehren, M. (2013). From “Intuition”-to “Data”-based Decision Making
in Dutch Secondary Schools? In Data-based decision making in Education (pp.
49-67). Springer Netherlands.

Schildkamp, K., & Kuiper, W. (2010). Data-informed curriculum reform: Which data,
what purposes, and promoting and hindering factors. Teaching and Teacher
Education, 26(3), 482-496. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tate.2009.06.007

Schildkamp, K., & Lai, M. K. (2013). Data-based decision making: conclusions and a
data use framework. In K. Schildkamp, M. K. Lai, & L. Earl (Eds.), Data-based
decision making in education: Challenges and opportunities (pp. 177-191).
(Studies in educational leadership; Vol. 17, No. 17).

Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-94-007-4816-3_10
Schildkamp, K., Poortman, C., Luyten, H., & Ebbeler, J. (2016). Factors promoting and
hindering data-based decision making in schools. School Effectiveness and School
Improvement, 28(2), 242-258. https://doi.org/10.1080/09243453.2016.1256901
Schreiter, S., Vogel, M., Friedrich, A., Malone, S., Briinken, R., Becker-Genschow, S.,
Lehmann, J., Mosetter, T., HaaB, S., & Kuhn, J. (2022). Cross-Curricular
Approaches to Promoting Statistical and Data Literacy in STEM School
Education: A Systematic Review. In Bridging the Gap: Empowering and
Educating Today’s Learners in Statistics. Proceedings of the Eleventh
International Conference on Teaching
Statistics. https://doi.org/10.5204 1 /iase.icots11.t14c4

Schroth, S. T., PhD. (2020). Information literacy. Salem Press Encyclopedia.

131

Shen, J., & Cooley, V. E. (2008). Critical issues in using data for decision-making.
International Journal of Leadership in Education, 11(3), 319-329.
https://doi.org/10.1080/13603 120701721839

Shreiner, T. L., & Dykes, B. M. (2020). Visualizing the teaching of data visualizations in
social studies: A study of teachers’ data literacy practices, beliefs, and
knowledge. Theory and Research in Social Education, 49(2), 262—

306. https://doi.org/10.1080/00933 104.2020.1850382

Shulman, L. (1987). Knowledge and Teaching:Foundations of the New Reform. Harvard
Educational Review, 57(1), 1-23.
https://doi.org/10.17763 /hhaer.57.1.j463w79156455411

Sternkopf, H., & Mueller, R. M. (2018). Doing Good with Data: Development of a
Maturity Model for Data Literacy in Non-governmental Organizations. In
Proceedings of the 51st Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences.

Sun, J., Przybylski, R., & Johnson, B. J. (2016). A review of research on teachers’ use of
student data: from the perspective of school leadership. Educational Assessment,
Evaluation and Accountability, 28(1), 5-33. https://doi.org/10.1007/s1 1092-016-
9238-9

Swain, J. (2018). Elementary Teachers’ Perceptions Regarding the Use of Data Decision-
Making for Instructional Practice.

Tschannen-Moran, M., Woolfolk Hoy, A., & Woolfolk Hoy, K. (1998). Teacher
efficacy: Its meaning and measure. Review of Educational Research, 68(2), 202-

248.

132

Tucker, L. A. (2021). Teachers‘ Perceptions of Using Data to Inform Instruction: A
Mixed Methods Approach (Order No. 28413482). Available from ProQuest
Dissertations & Theses Global. (2552051132).
https://www.proquest.com/dissertations-theses/teachers-perceptions-using-data-
inform/docview/255205 1 132/se-2?accountid=47253

Ulep, S. (2020). Digital Competence for Industrial Revolution 4.0: Implications to
Teacher Professionalism. Journal of Southeast Asian Education, 2, 109-118.
https://www.criced.tsukuba.ac.jp/pdf/SEAMEOJournal2020V2.pdf

van der Scheer, E. A., & Visscher, A. J. (2016). Effects of an intensive data-based
decision making intervention on teacher efficacy. Teaching and Teacher
Education, 60, 34-43. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tate.2016.07.025

Vanek, J. (2017). Using the PIAAC framework for problem solving in technology-rich
environments to guide instruction: An introduction for adult educators. Program
for the International Assessment of Adult Competencies.

Vanlommel, K., & Schildkamp, K. (2019). How Do Teachers Make Sense of Data in the
Context of High-Stakes Decision Making? American Educational Research
Journal, 56(3), 792-821. https://doi.org/10.3102/000283 1218803891

Van Veen, K., Zwart, R., & Meirink, J. (2012). What makes teacher professional
development effective? In M. Kooy & K. Van Veen (Eds.), Teacher learning that
matters: International perspectives (pp. 3-21). London, England: Routledge.

Vught, E. C. (2016). Data use in public secondary schools in the Philippines. (Master’s
Thesis). University of Twente. Enschede, Netherlands

https://essay .utwente.nl/71584/1/family%20name_MA_faculty.pdf

133

Wagaman, R. M. (2015). Understanding the private school: How do private school
teachers understand and describe data-driven decision making?(Order No.
3700924). Available from ProQuest Dissertations & Theses Global.
(1680593634). https://www.proquest.com/dissertations-theses/understanding-
private-school-how-do-teachers/docview/1680593634/se-2

Wayman, J. C., & Jimerson, J. B. (2014). Teacher needs for data-related professional
learning. Studies in Educational Evaluation, 42, 25-34.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.stueduc.2013.11.001

Wayman, J. C., Wilkerson, S. B., Cho, V., Mandinach, E. B., & Supovitz, J. A. (2016).
Guide to using the Teacher Data Use Survey (REL 2017-166). Washington, DC:
U.S. Department of Education, Institute of Education Sciences, National Center
for Education Evaluation and Regional Assistance, Regional Educational
Laboratory Appalachia. http://ies.ed.gov/ncee/edlabs

Wilkerson, M. H., & Polman, J. L. (2020). Situating Data Science: Exploring How
Relationships to Data Shape Learning. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 29(1),
1-10. https://doi.org/10.1080/10508406.2019.1705664

Wohistetter, P., Datnow, A., & Park, V. (2008). Creating a system for data-driven
decision-making: applying the principal-agent framework. School Effectiveness
and School Improvement, 19(3), 239-259.
https://doi.org/10.1080/09243450802246376

Wolff, A., Gooch, D., Cavero Montaner, J. J., Rashid, U., & Kortuem, G. (2016).

Creating an Understanding of Data Literacy for a Data-driven Society. The

134

Journal of Community Informatics, 12(3).
https://doi.org/10.15353/joci.v12i3.3275

Wolff, A., Wermelinger, M., & Petre, M. (2019). Exploring design principles for data
literacy activities to support children’s inquiries from complex data. International
Journal of Human-computer Studies, 129, 41-
54. https://doi.org/10.1016/..ijhcs.2019.03.006

Yildiz, E., Alkan, A., & Cengel, M. (2019). Teacher candidates attitudes towards the
stem and sub-dimensions of stem. Cypriot Journal of Educational

Sciences, 14(2), 322- 344. https://doi.org/10.18844/cjes.v14i2.4144
