Knowledge, Self-Efficacy, and Practices of Barangay Nutrition Committee Chairs on Nutrition Program Management in Quezon Province, Philippines

Ma. Ysabel Leanne P. Brual, RND

University of the Philippines Manila

Master of Science in Public Health (Nutrition)

July 2024

ABSTRACT

Undernutrition in children under five years is still a significant health problem in the
Philippines. The barangay being the most direct link to the community, has the
responsibility to manage nutrition challenges, through the guidance of the BNCCs. The
study aimed to determine the association of knowledge, self-efficacy, and practices (KSP)
on NPM of the BNCCs in Quezon Province, Philippines. The study also determined the
demographic characteristics associated with the KSP on NPM of BNCCs. Across 307
BNCCs interviewed, results showed significant weak associations between knowledge and
self-efficacy (ρ=0.1994, ρ=0.0004), knowledge and practice (ρ=0.1687, ρ=0.0030), and
self-efficacy and practice (ρ=0.1710, ρ=0.0026). Results of regression analysis showed that
age and educational attainment were not significantly associated with KSP on NPM.
However, sex had a weak significant association with knowledge scores (rₚᵦ=-0.127,
ρ=0.026), with females being 2.54 times more likely to have high knowledge levels compared to males. Moreover, years in service had a weak significant association with self-efficacy (ρ=0.059,
ρ=0.002) and practice (ρ=0.132, ρ=0.021), indicating that longer service correlates with
higher self-efficacy and practice scores. Training attendance also showed weak significant
associations: nutrition training was linked to higher self-efficacy (rₚᵦ=0.127, ρ=0.026) and
practice (rₚᵦ=-0.300, ρ<0.001), and nutrition program management training was linked to
practice (rₚᵦ=-0.215, ρ<0.001). Holding other variable constant, BNCCs with nutrition
training were 2.43 times more likely to have higher self-efficacy and 1.948 times more likely to have higher practice scores.

CHAPTER I

INTRODUCTION
Background of the Study

Malnutrition is one of the greatest global health challenges, and children are one of
the most at risk. The childhood period, especially during the first 1000 days of life, greatly
impacts the growth, mental development, and overall health of an individual (UNICEF,
2017). This means that malnutrition may result in increased healthcare cost, reduced
productivity, and slow economic growth, which may eventually perpetuate a cycle of
poverty and malnutrition (WHO, 2021). Despite numerous efforts by the Philippine
government to address malnutrition, including Presidential Decree No. 491, and the
devolution of responsibilities under the Local Government Code of 1991, malnutrition
remains a significant problem. Undernutrition in children under five years of age remains
a public health significant challenge wherein 19% are underweight, 29.5% are stunting,

and 5.7% are wasting (DOST-FNRI, 2022).

According to NNC (2005), NPM is a decision-making process of identifying
nutrition problems and addressing them by allocating resources to prevent and control
malnutrition and performing monitoring and evaluation (M&E) activities. An effective
nutrition program ensures appropriate community interventions, efficient resource
allocation, legislative and policy support, and continuity despite political changes (Mason,

et al., 2006).

The National Nutrition Council serves as the highest policymaking and

coordinating body on nutrition and nutrition-related activities at the national level. The

1

functions of the NNC are carried out at the local level through interagency local nutrition
committees (LNC), chaired by the local chief executive, which coordinate and implement
nutrition program down to the barangay level (NNC, 2005). At the barangay level, the BNC
mirrors this structure, with the barangay captain assigned as BNCC (Ignacio, 2014). The
BNC is headed by the Barangay Chair, and should be composed of Barangay Nutrition

Scholars, and representatives of different sectors related to nutrition at the barangay level.

In the Letter of Instruction 441 of 1976 to launch a nationwide nutrition program,
the Department of the Interior and Local Government (DILG) was directed to mandate
LGUs to develop a local nutrition action plan through the nutrition committees at the
provincial, city, municipal, and barangay level. The local nutrition action plans should be
guided by the PPAN 2023-2028, as per DILG Memorandum Circular 2024-071. This is
also supported by the Local Budget Memorandums 77a, 78, and 80 to prioritize funding

for the local nutrition action plans in accordance with the PPAN.

To ensure funding for nutrition programs, local nutrition action plans should be
integrated from the barangay to the provincial level and included in the local development
plan, executive legislative agenda, and annual investment program, despite not being
mandated by national government policies (NNC, 2021). This means that stronger
advocacy at the local level is needed for nutrition programs and activities to be prioritized,

funded, and implemented.

Statement of the Problem

Several studies show that effective community-led nutrition strategies
characterized by integrated holistic approach, culturally appropriate strategies, and
community engagement has resulted in positive outcomes such as positive nutrition
behavior change, and reduction of acute malnutrition, stunting, and underweight (Bigool,

et al., 2023; Gajbhiye, et al. 2024; Thar Key Myo & Bigool, 2024).

In the Philippines, there is lack of evidence on the impact of NPM due to limitations
on effective M&E systems especially at the barangay levels (Africa, et al., 2021; IPA,
2019). As one of the prime movers of barangay NPM, the BNCCs should have the capacity
to carry out their duties to manage nutrition challenges in their community. Hence, this
study aims to determine the level and association of knowledge, self-efficacy, and practices

on NPM of BNCCs in Quezon Province.
Research Objectives

The study aimed to determine if there was an association between the knowledge,
self-efficacy, and practices on NPM of the BNCCs in Quezon Province, Philippines.

Specifically, the study intended:
1. To describe the demographic characteristics of BNCCs in Quezon Province;

2. To assess the level of knowledge, self-efficacy, and practices on NPM of BNCCs

in Quezon Province;

3. To determine if there was an association between knowledge and self-efficacy,
knowledge and practices, and self-efficacy and practices on NPM of BNCCs in

Quezon Province;

4, To determine if there was an association between the demographic characteristics
and the knowledge, self-efficacy, and practices on NPM of BNCCs in Quezon

Province;
Significance of the Study

A good indicator of NPM success is not only having an improved nutritional
situation, but also the community becoming more competent and self-reliant in managing
their nutrition challenges. Thus, it is important that we explore the capacity gaps, and other

challenges and opportunities in local nutrition program management.

The findings of this study can potentially aid concerned agencies such as the DILG,
the NNC, and academic institutions in developing evidence-based capacity-building
programs for the local government units, particularly for BNCCs, that would address
identified challenges. This could highlight specific areas in the NPM that BNCCs would

still need improvement on and support with.

With improved capacities to perform NPM, there is a potential for improved local
NPM practices in the barangays. This would heavily influence the NPM of the cities and
municipalities. Consequently, with the integration of nutrition services and with improved
NPM practices, this may influence the quality of the planning, implementation, M&E of

nutrition programs at all levels of the local government units, including the entirety of the

Quezon Province. This could help cater to more nutritionally vulnerable populations and

address the most relevant nutrition problems of the country.

Scope and Delimitations

This study investigated the KSP of BNCCs on NPM in Quezon Province,
Philippines. The coverage of NPM was limited to its four phases: planning,
implementation, M&E, and re-planning. It focused on identifying the relationship between
the knowledge, self-efficacy, and practices, as well as the demographic characteristics
linked to these. The study has delved to understand how these factors are correlated with

the NPM cycle at the barangay level, which is crucial in addressing nutrition problems.

The research includes developing and validating a research instrument to assess the
KSP of BNCCs in the context of the four NPM phases. It was developed based on literature
review on the NNC Local NPM Manual, as well as policies on NPM at the barangay level.
A survey was conducted among BNCCs across randomly selected barangays in Quezon
Province. The study is confined to the province of Quezon Province, excluding island
municipalities and Lucena City, due to logistical constraints and to avoid skewing results
due to their unique socioeconomic and geographic characteristics. The target population is
BNCCs from barangays with BNCCs who have served more than one political term, to

ensure adequate experience in NPM.

Environmental factors and broader organizational influences were not explored.
The study aims to provide actionable insights into the capacities of BNCCs in NPM,
contributing to the development of targeted capacity-building programs for local

government units.

CHAPTER II

THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
Review of Related Literature
Nutrition Situation

Despite decreasing trend in malnutrition in the Philippines among children under 5
years old, undernutrition, stunting, and wasting, remains as a public health significant
problem (FNRI-DOST, 2022). The survey indicated a decrease in underweight prevalence
from 21.5% to 19%, with higher rates in rural areas (21.4%) and the poorest wealth quintile
(29.4%). Stunting prevalence improved from 33.4% to 29.5% but remained higher in rural
areas (32.4%) and the poorest quintile (44.2%). Wasting prevalence decreased from 7.1%

to 5.7%, with higher rates in rural areas (6.2%) and among the poorest (7.6%).

Another raising concern would be the double burden of nutrition, wherein aside
from the burden of having undernourished individuals, there is also increasing prevalence
of overweight and obesity (NNC, 2023). The latest national survey showed that among
children under 5 years old, the prevalence of overweight/obesity has increased from 8.5%
to 10.4%. This rise in overweight and obesity among young children indicates a shift in
nutritional challenges, where issues of overnutrition are becoming as prevalent as

undernutrition (FNRI-DOST, 2022).

The ENNS also showed that the prevalence of overweight/obese adult has increased
from 32% to 38% (2022). This trend among adults reflects broader changes in lifestyle and

diet, contributing to a growing public health concern of non-communicable diseases

associated with obesity. Addressing these issues requires comprehensive, targeted, and

sustained efforts to ensure the health and well-being of all children and adults.
National Strategy for Nutrition

The implementation of nutrition programs in the Philippines follows a top-down
process beginning in strategic planning at the national level and cascaded down to regional,
provincial, municipal, and barangay levels (NNC, 2005). This hierarchical approach
ensures that nutrition strategies are systematically developed and implemented across all
levels of governance, which allows coherence and alignment of nutrition interventions with

the national goals and directives (Kennedy, et al., 2015).

The PPAN outlines strategies and targets to address malnutrition, serving as the
foundation for nutrition strategies across various agencies and local government units, and
guiding stakeholders in planning, implementing, conducting M&E, and developing
nutrition policies and programs to achieve desired outcomes for all Filipinos (NNC, 2023).
The PPAN 2023-2028 aligns strategies with global agendas including the Sustainable
Development Goals, United Nations Decade of Action for Nutrition 2016-2025, World
Health Assembly targets, and ASEAN Strategic Framework and Action Plan on Nutrition
2018-2030, emphasizing intensified efforts to transform food systems, promote universal
health care, and implement a Life Cycle Approach tailored to varying nutritional needs

across different stages of life.

The PPAN strategies starts at the national level through the NNC, which are then
cascaded to the local government units to serve as a guide in formulating the provincial,

municipal, and barangay nutrition action plans, on which nutrition guides are anchored

7

(NNC, 2022). Municipalities adapt these strategies through the Municipal Nutrition Action
Plan (MNAP) based on local contexts, resources, and their specific nutritional challenges,
and is cascaded to the barangays for the development and implementation of the BNAP
(NNC, 2005).

NPM in the Philippines

According to NNC (2005), NPM is a decision-making process of identifying
potential nutrition problems through situational analysis, resource allocation, action-
taking, and M&E, to address nutritional problems. The NPM guides local chief executives
and key stakeholders in addressing priority nutrition issues and ensures continuity of
actions during political transitions (Mason, et al., 2006). The NPM cycle has four phases

which can be seen in Figure 2.1

PHASE 1 |
Planning, Preparation,
and Adop! |
] |Siae
PHASE 4 baresd
Action, Activation,
Re-planning | and Adjustment |

PHASE 3 <

Monitoring and Evaluation

Figure 2.1 Four phases of the nutrition program management cycle
The NPM cycle, as summarized by NNC (2005), involves the following phases:

1. Planning - identify actions for achieving nutritional objectives, integrating
nutrition considerations into sectoral plans, and ensuring program

sustainability.

2. Implementation - puts developed plans into action and adjusts based on
monitoring results

3. M&E - assess objective attainment and identify factors that facilitated or
hindered achievement, shaping future planning cycles.

4. Re-planning - results from M&E activities inform improvements in

nutrition interventions, programs, and strategies.
Role of BNC in NPM

As mentioned earlier, the barangays are mandated to develop a barangay nutrition
action plan through the BNC, per the LOI 441 of 1976. The BNC, headed by the BNCC is
composed of Barangay Nutrition Scholars, Rural Health Midwife, Barangay Nutrition
Action Officers, Kagawad on Health, SK Chairperson, Day Care Worker, Agriculture
Technicians, School Principal, and Heads of Local Organizations (NNC, 2005). The
functions of the BNC are the following: (1) to assess the barangay nutrition situation, (2)
to formulate a barangay nutrition action plan, (3) to coordinate nutrition activities of the
barangay, (4) to organize groups to implement nutrition intervention activities, (5) to assess
progress of nutrition interventions, and (6) to hold regular quarterly meetings to monitor

program performance (NNC, 2021).

Based on the Guidelines on Establishing a Database on Functional Local Nutrition
Committees (NNC, 2015), the functionality of the BNCs is monitored by the regional office
of the NNC through the annual MELLPI. The guideline stated that a nutrition committee
may be identified as fully functional if all indicators are present, substantially functional if

it lacks 1-2 indicators, partially functional if it lacks 3-4 indicators, and non-functional if it

9

lacks more than 5, or half of the indicators. The indicators followed by the NNC in

identifying the functionality of BNC are summarized in Table 2.1.

Table 2.1 Checklist on barangay nutrition committee database (NNC, 2015)

Key Activities Indicators
1. Capacity Development Barangay Nutrition Scholar completed training
on Basic Course for Barangay Nutrition Scholar
2. Program Planning a. Local nutrition committee meetings regularly
2.1 Organization/ Re-organization / held at least once every quarter presided by
Strengthening of local nutrition the local chief executive or designated
committees representative
b. Minutes of meetings documented and filed
2.2 Conduct of Nutritional Assessment c. OPT Plus & school weighing report updated
d. Nutrition situation report prepared
2.3 Formulation of nutrition action plan e. Nutrition Action Plan integrated into local

development plan with budget
f. Nutrition Action Plan is integrated in the
Annual Investment Plan
2.4 Resource generation and mobilization g. Funds allocated and expended for nutrition
and related activities from annual budget
3. Delivery of nutrition and related services Targeted groups provided with nutrition and
related interventions
4. Monitoring and Evaluation Monitoring visits conducted and documented at
least twice a year

The local chief executive of the barangay, or the barangay chairperson is the
assigned BNCCs which should fulfill the following duties: (1) preside over meetings and
deliberations of the committee; (2) organize a barangay core planning group; (3)
recommend a barangay nutrition scholar for appointment; (4) provide leadership in the
formulation, implementation, supervision, and evaluation of barangay nutrition action

plan; and (5) secure and provide funds for nutrition program (NNC, 2021).

Ina study conducted by Ignacio (2015), it was highlighted that the political support

of the local chief executive on PPAN localization is crucial, which includes appointment

10

of BNS and organization of the BNC. In a separate study by the same author in 2014, it
was found that nutrition activities implemented at the barangay level are highly dependent
on the commitment of the BNS, and the adequacy of logistical support. The study also
emphasized that while the BNC are composed of different sectors of local agencies, the

priorities of these agencies were still their own programs and projects.
Gaps in NPM in the Philippines

Delays in cascading PPAN to the barangays and municipalities has been
highlighted, which impacted the subsequent planning and orientation at local levels and
revealing discrepancies in cascading mentoring sessions and aligning PPAN strategic

thrusts with nutrition program planning and implementation in LGUs (IPA, 2019)

Several studies have also highlighted the challenges in nutrition program planning
and implementation particularly in the effect of political and administrative power of LCEs
or Barangay captains (Ignacio & Bullecer, 2016; IPA, 2019; Mallari et al., 2020; Viajar et
al., 2020; Dodd et al., 2021). Low prioritization of nutrition programs from the lack of
knowledge and insights on the nutrition problems (IPA, 2019) and lack or insufficient
budget appropriation and support to nutrition initiatives (Viajar et al., 2020) can lead to the
abandonment or restructuring of ongoing programs. It was emphasized by Ignacio &
Bullecer (2016) that nutrition related resolutions and ordinances should be emphasized to

ensure funding of nutrition programs and increasing honorarium for the BNS.

Furthermore, administrative changes were found to disrupt continuity and
consistency of barangay program implementation, such as the Municipal Nutrition Action

Officer (MNAO) and the rest of the Municipal Nutrition Committee being appointed by
11

and co-terminus with the incumbent mayor (Ignacio & Bullecer, 2016). Turnovers of
community health workers (CHWs) at the barangay level due to changes in local
administration have also posed challenges in ensuring adequate training and have strained
local health budgets with additional training needs and insufficient human resource

capacity (Mallari et al., 2020; Dodd et al., 2021).

Nutrition M&E gaps were also identified in the Philippines, where despite
availability of M&E systems such as Operasyon Timbang Plus (OPT) and Monitoring and
Evaluation of Local Level Plan Implementation (MELLPI), its utilization by most
municipalities has been limited in recent years (IPA, 2019). Furthermore, a field trial of
the Local Nutrition Organizational Capacity Assessment Component (LNOCAC), a
component of the Local Government Nutrition Monitoring and Evaluation System
(LGNMES), revealed inconsistencies and lower performance scores compared to existing
M&E system, particularly at the barangay levels, and suggesting the need for refinement

to enhance reliability and consistency (Africa et al., 2021).

Garcia et al. (2016) also revealed the weaknesses in the M&E of nutrition
education, noting that most M&E activities focused on outputs and outcomes without
formal monitoring processes, further limiting the analysis if the desired outcomes of
nutrition education programs were achieved. In addition, IPA (2019) also highlighted the
lack of nationwide M&E systems to track program-specific inputs and outputs, alongside

developing a coherent system for tracking complex nutrition budgets and expenditures.

12

Factors affecting NPM at the Local Level

Policy, Advocacy, and Funding

Policy support is vital in creating a supportive environment for nutrition programs
to be successful by aligning the resources, efforts, and stakeholders towards a common
goal (Bhutta, et al., 2008; Ghodsi, et al., 2021). Advocacy efforts through coalition-
building, engaging with stakeholders, and using strategic communication were found to be
essential in driving policy changes (Cullerton, et al., 2018). Several studies (Tontisirin &
Winichagoon, 1999; Pelletier, et al, 2012; Huang, et al., 2020) have highlighted the
importance of having strategic and effective communication strategies to get the “buy-in”
of supporters of the program through effective communication of nutritional concerns,
having strategic and effective messengers, evidence of interventions to sustain interests,
and active promotion of the programs through social mobilization and community

organization.

This buy-in could facilitate policy and funding support from the national level down
to the local level, especially that limited financial, human, and material resources are
integral for the sustainability of nutrition programs (Tontisirin & Winichagoon, 1999;

Pelletier, et al, 2012; Acosta & Fanzo, 2012; Haddad, et al, 2015; Huang, et al, 2020.)

Vertical and Horizontal Integration

The presence of a national nutrition strategy, strong leadership and strategic
management at all levels, political and managerial commitment, and vertical integration of

nutrition programs from national to community levels are critical for program success,

13

promoting leadership authority, accountability, and community ownership, as emphasized
by Acosta & Fanzo (2012), Pelletier et al. (2012), Black et al. (2015), and Huang et al.

(2020), ensuring the progress and sustainability of strategies and plans.

Haddad et al. (2015) underscored the necessity of a whole-of-government approach
to address malnutrition, emphasizing the importance of horizontal integration through
multi-sectoral collaboration to ensure efficient delivery of nutrition interventions,
availability of technical expertise, and avoidance of duplication efforts across sectors.
Multi-sectoral collaboration can facilitate integration of nutrition-specific and nutrition-
sensitive interventions, and coordinated efforts across different sectors of the government,
NGOs & private organizations (Tontisirin & Winichagoon, 1999; Black, et al, 2015;
Huang, et al, 2020). However, the presence of multisectoral policies, established
multisectoral council, and formalized platforms for collaborations should be ensured to
functionalize the practices of multisectoral collaboration, and collaborative problem-
solving (Pelletier, et al., 2012; Black, et al., 2015; Kennedy, et al., 2015; Shreshta, et al.,

2019).

Implementation Capacity

Kennedy et al. (2015) emphasizes that despite having a national strategy on
nutrition, and governance structures from national, regional, and district level, there are
certain capacities that still need to be improved to sustain the program. There is a need for
adequate and competent implementers, where appropriate staff workload, training, and
technical guidance should be present (Black, et al., 2015; Shrestha, et al., 2019; Huang, et
al., 2020; Ouedraogo, et al., 2020). Strategic management capabilities should also be

14

present both at the national and local level, to build relationships, resolve conflicts, respond
to recurring challenges and opportunities, and undertake strategic communications

(Pelletier et al., 2012; Black, et al., 2015).

The capacities for NPM should cover the four phases of the program management
cycle; however, one of the major challenges in NPM is having poor M&E systems,
especially with the integrated interventions (Black, et al., 2015; Huang, et al., 2020). Thus,
the need for improved capacity for M&E, and quality M&E system (Acosta & Fanzo, 2012;

Pelletier, et al., 2012; Ouedraogo, et al., 2020).
Knowledge on NPM

In implementing community nutrition projects and activities, it is a prerequisite to
have good knowledge in analyzing the nutrition situation and problems that need to be
improved, selecting and planning strategies, and conducting evaluation procedures
(Calderon, 2002). Bryce et al. (2008) has emphasized the urgent need for strategic
capacities specifically on knowledge, skills, leadership, and human resources to envision,

shape, and guide nutrition agendas.

In their study across Bangladesh, Ethiopia, Kenya, and India, Nisbett et al. (2015)
identified that stakeholders outside the nutrition sector often have limited awareness of
nutritional issues, particularly lacking local-level knowledge, evidence, and data essential
for effective policy, programming, and advocacy, highlighting significant implementation
challenges. This aligns with Aryeetey and Covic's (2020) findings that sectors related to
nutrition exhibit gaps in nutrition literacy due to insufficient training in nutrition
competence, particularly evident in sectors such as agriculture, which influences nutrition-

15

sensitive interventions, indicating that comprehensive nutrition understanding is primarily

observed among those directly engaged in nutrition-related work.

Ezezika et al. (2021) conducted a scoping review revealing that lack of
understanding among decision makers regarding nutrition issues and their significance has
hindered program productivity, highlighting barriers such as information access,
comprehension, time constraints, and varying knowledge levels across sectors,
implementers, and decision makers. They found that capacity-building initiatives like
trainings, observation visits, and regular monitoring and feedback are crucial for managing
these knowledge gaps, emphasizing that adequate knowledge can bolster implementation
efforts and foster systems thinking in collaborative service delivery, whereas gaps in

knowledge may impede the development of effective action plans.
Self-efficacy on NPM

According to Bandura (1997), self-efficacy is an individual’s belief in their capacity
to execute behaviors necessary to produce specific performance attainments. High self-
efficacy in responsive environments generally leads to a higher likelihood of achieving
better outcomes (Feist, 2013). These two studies suggest that individuals with higher self-

efficacy are more likely to accomplish tasks, even under challenging circumstances.

Leadership self-efficacy (LSE), the belief in one's leadership capabilities, directly
influences leadership effectiveness (Bandura, 1986). In the context of leadership, strong
self-efficacy among community leaders in nutrition program management enables
effective mobilization of motivation and cognitive resources, enhancing their confidence

in managing events and achieving objectives (Ali et al., 2017). However, with regards to

16

nutrition program management, little is known on self-efficacy, especially among the

community leaders.

The influence of age on self-efficacy was found to be inconsistent: older individuals
gain self-efficacy from experience, enhancing productivity, while younger individuals
exhibit more enthusiasm, ambition, innovation, and engagement (Priyadharsan &
Saravanabawan, 2021). On the contrary, higher educational levels and longer work
experience were found to be positively correlated with self-efficacy as it improves task and
contextual performance (Abun et al., 2021). To enhance self-efficacy, training programs
and processes were identified as essential (Arghode et al., 2020; Bandura, 1986; Ferrari,

2023).

The following studies have shown that on top of the gaps on the knowledge for
nutrition program implementation, there are also challenges with regards to the self-
confidence and self-efficacy of leaders and implementers. Seguin, et al. (2008) found that
support of friends and family, program-related self-efficacy, and leadership competence
are significant factors in program implementation according to the program leaders of a
community-based exercise program. Handayani, et al (2018), found evidence regarding
implementation of interventions of cadres, or community health workers, where there have
been challenges on lack of knowledge on what to do, feeling of not being involved, lack of
self-confidence due to lack of knowledge and skills, lack of self-motivation, and poor
coordination with cadre chief. Capacity-building activities and communities of practice

were found effective in enhancing maternal and child health nutrition strategic planning

17

implementation, yet barriers such as uncertainty, self-doubt when working independently,

slow progress, and challenges in team engagement were identified (Herman, et al., 2022).

Apart from the objectives of this study, the researcher also aims to contribute to the
literature available on self-efficacy on NPM, especially at the community level which is

not usually explored.
Practices on NPM

Limitations in capacity to implement nutrition interventions were observed among
local leaders, particularly in partnership development and maintenance, particularly
aligning interests with political leaders, prompting local leaders to seek capacity-building
support such as training, access to resources, and technical expertise for effective planning,
implementation, and evaluation (Shah, et al., 2019). Other gaps in effective nutrition
program management are attributed to inconsistent planning approaches, political
dynamics, availability of resources, and geographical and environmental situation

(Department of Health, et al., 2018).

In the scoping review of Ezezika, et al (2021), to implement successful nutrition
interventions, there are certain capacities that should be present, which includes (1)
creating supportive policy environments to encourage multisectoral collaborations,
scalability, and sustainability, (2) engaging formal and informal external partners, (3)
conducting program M&E, (4) leveraging and utilizing funds, human resources, goods, and
services, and (5) ensuring interventions are data-driven and culturally-relevant to the local
needs. This is consistent in a study by (Lapping, et al. 2014) in Vietnam, which highlights

the importance of leadership in nutrition planning, emphasizing the necessity for capacity

18

in advocacy, multisectoral coordination, contextualized planning, and resource

mobilization at both national and local levels due to the interdisciplinary nature of nutrition.

A nutrition champion with strong political commitment and a systems thinking
mindset is crucial for multisectoral coordination, addressing governance concerns, and
ensuring coherence and coordination, which requires strategic and operational capacities
in complex systems, relationship-building, conflict resolution, and responding to

challenges and opportunities (Gillespie, et al., 2015).
Theoretical Framework

This study is anchored with the Social Cognitive Theory (SCT), one of the
behavioral theories used in public health which recognizes a “triadic reciprocality” among
the personal factors of the individual (personality, demographic characteristics, etc.),

environmental, and behavior Bandura (2004) (Figure 2.2).

Personal
Factors

Environment <——> Behavior

Figure 2.2 The social cognitive theory of Bandura (2004)
Bandura (1997, 2004) introduced the concept of Observational Learning in Social
Cognitive Theory (SCT), demonstrating how individuals learn and adopt behaviors

through their social environment by observing others, mentally processing these behaviors

19

(personal factors), which then influence their own actions and subsequently alter their

environment.

As illustrated in Figure 2.3, SCT emphasizes that self-efficacy and outcome
expectations are crucial for motivating behavioral change, as without these elements, the

motivation to initiate or sustain change would be insufficient (Bandura, 2004).

Individual |==>| Behavior |==>| Outcome

Self-efficacy Outcome
Expectations

Figure 2.3 Self-efficacy and outcome expectations in SCT (2004)

Self-efficacy, an individual’s belief in their ability to execute behaviors necessary
for specific performance attainments, affects behavior by influencing choices, effort, and
persistence, resulting in higher self-efficacy leads to proactive behavior and lower self-
efficacy leads to avoidance and decreased effort (Bandura, 1986, 1989, 1997). Outcome
expectations refer to the beliefs or expectations individuals have about the results of certain
behaviors, influencing their motivation to perform and sustain these behaviors; thus,
individuals are more likely to engage in behaviors they believe will lead to valued

outcomes.

SCT acknowledges the significant impact of environmental factors, such as
physical surroundings, social norms, cultural values, and institutional structures, as
facilitators and barriers to behavior (Bandura, 1986). Bandura also highlighted that
individuals are not merely passive recipients of the environmental influences; rather, they

actively engage with their environment through their behaviors.

20

Conceptual Framework

In this study, the SCT is applied by exploring the personal or cognitive factors of
an individual including demographic characteristics, knowledge and self-efficacy on NPM
as determinants of behavior change. The behavior change we are referring to is the practice
of NPM of the BNCC. Knowledge and demographic characteristics of the BNCs, or the
personal/cognitive factors, influences the self-efficacy to perform nutrition program
management, which in turn influences the practice or behavior change. While we
understand that environmental factors also influence behavior change by being a facilitator

or barrier for behavior change, this would not be explored in the study.

The Conceptual Framework (Figure 2.4) reflects the relationship of variables in
accordance with the statement of the problem which would be investigated in this research.
The study would explore the association of demographic characteristics, KSP on NPM of
BNCCs which would explain the double arrows between the identified variables. The
demographic characteristics of the BNCC is described through their sex, age range, highest
educational attainment, years in position, training on NPM, and training on Nutrition. The
broken lines indicated that the variables were not explored in the study. The operational

definition of terms would describe each of the identified variables in this framework.

21

Environment of BNC Chair
(Policy, advocacy, funding support)

_£

Demographic

characteristics of |

BNC Chair | Self-efficacy of |
| BNC Chair on NPM |
|

| Knowledge of BNC |
Highest educational Chairon NPM |

Years in position

'

'

'

'

'

'

'

_ 1
Age f =] 1
1

'

'

'

'

Training on nutrition (fe pat
; | Practice of BNC 14
Training on NPM | Chair on NPM |

ae asin

Figure 2.4 Conceptual framework of the study
Operational Definition of Terms

Knowledge on NPM. In this study, this is referred to as the knowledge of the BNCC on
NPM, covering Planning, Implementation, M&E, and Re-planning phases. The scores of
BNCC in the survey on Knowledge of BNCC will be calculated using the following scoring

system, and will be distributed to categories based on Bloom’s cut-off.

no. of correct answers in Knowledge on NPM Questionnaire

Ki ledge =
nowleage total no. of items in Knowledge on NPM Questionnaire

x100%
The total scores were interpreted as:

(1) low - <60%

(2) moderate - 60-80%

(3) high - >80%

22

Self-efficacy on NPM. This refers to an individual’s belief in his or her capacity to execute
behaviors necessary to accomplish a specific task (Bandura, 2004). The self-efficacy of
study participants on NPM will include areas on Planning, Implementation, M&E, and Re-
planning phases. The score of BNCC in the survey based on their level of confidence in
performing the identified activities and skills as BNCCs related to NPM will be calculated
using the following scoring system, and will be distributed to categories based on Bloom’s
cut-off.

Self — efficacy

score’ on Self — Ef ficacy on NPM Questionnaire — minimum possible score

= 100%
maximum score in Self — Ef ficacy on NPM Questionnaire — minimum possible score * ie

' Self-Efficacy questionnaire uses a 5-point Likert scale with the following ratings:

5- very confident, 4-fairly confident, 3-neutral, 2-slightly confident, 1-not confident at all
The total scores were interpreted as:

(1) low - <60%

(2) fair - 60-80%

(3) high - >80%
Practice on NPM. This refers to the level of practice of the BNCCs with regards to their
identified functions on all the NPM Phases: Planning, Implementation, M&E, and Re-
planning. The scores of BNCC in the survey based on the identified functions of the BNC,
and responsibilities of the BNCC using the scoring system below and should be supported
with documents. The level of practice shall be interpreted into three categories: (1) poor,
(2) fair, (3) good.

23

no.of practices on NPM being implemented
Practice = fp = Bui x100%
total no. of items

The total scores were interpreted as:
(1) poor - <60%
(2) fair - 60-80%
(3) good - >80%
Sex. This pertains to the biological sex of the BNCC assigned at birth and coded as:
(0) female
(1) male

Age range. This referes to the age of the BNCC at the time of data collection, this is

reported in mean+SD and using the following ranges:
(1) $35 years old
(2) 36-45 years old
(3) 46-55 years old

(4) 56-65 years old
Highest educational attainment. This refers to the highest educational attainment of the

BNCC reported using the following categories:
(1) high school graduate
(2) vocational course graduate

(3) bachelor’s degree graduate
24

(4) post-graduate

Years in position. This refers to the length of service as the BNCC in years using the

following ranges:
(1) 5-6 years
(2) 7-10 years
(3) above 10 years

Training on Nutrition Program Management. This is the status of BNCC on training

related to NPM:

(0) Without training on NPM- no previous training related to Nutrition

Program Management

(1) With training on NPM-— has previously attended any training related to

Nutrition Program Management

Training related to nutrition. This referes to the status of BNCC on training

related to nutrition
(0) Without training on nutrition — no previous training related to nutrition

(1) With training on nutrition - has previously attended any training related to

Nutrition

25

CHAPTER III

METHODOLOGY
Study Design

The study utilized a cross-sectional analytical study design to evaluate the BNCCs
based on their KSP on NPM. Although a cross-sectional study design would have difficulty
in establishing causality, data collection over a brief period of time would require less
resources, and result in reduced loss to follow-up of study participants. Study results were

generalized to the target population.
Study Setting

The province of Quezon was chosen as the setting of the study due to the prevalence
of malnutrition in the area; this posed significant nutrition problems that need to be
addressed. There are 39 municipalities, 1 city, and 1,209 barangays, with a total population
of 1,950,459 and population density of 220/km?, according to the 2020 Census of
Population and Housing. Lucena City, also located in Quezon, is considered as a 1‘ class
highly urbanized city, and is considered as politically independent from the province. It
consists of 33 barangays, has a population of 278,924, and a population density of

3,500/km?.

Based on the PPAN 2023-2028, Quezon Province was identified as having one of
the highest magnitudes of food insecurity and malnutrition, ranking highest within Luzon,

with a malnutrition need score of 44.59 and financial support priority of “medium”.

26

Malnutrition among children under 5 years old in Quezon had the highest among the

provinces in Region IV-A, with 25.4% underweight, 36.1% stunting, and 7.5% wasting.

Figure 3.1 Political map of Quezon Province
Population and Sampling Design

The BNCCs of Quezon province were the target population, while the sampling
population were the BNCCs in randomly selected barangays in Quezon. The following
criteria was considered in the study recruitment: (1) must be the incumbent Barangay
Chairman in the province of Quezon; (2) must have an established BNC; (3) must be

assigned as the BNCC; (4) must have more than 1 political term as a BNCC. However, if

27

the BNCC was unable or unwilling to provide information that is vital to the study, they

were withdrawn from the study, amongst other reasons for withdrawal.

Due to budget and capacity limitations, and to ensure the safety of the researcher,
the island municipalities of the province were excluded from the study, namely the
municipalities of Quezon, Alabat, Perez, Panukulan, Polilio, Burdeos, Patananungan, and
Jomalig. Lucena City, identified as a highly urbanized city, was also excluded from the
study as its socioeconomic and geographic characteristics, and nutrition situation may
influence and possibly skew the results of the study. Thus, the component barangays of the

said cities/municipalities were excluded in the study.

The researcher applied a two-stage random sampling method to select the
participants for the survey which was summarized in Figure 3.2. The following were the

designated sampling units in this study:
1, Primary sampling units (PSU) — cities and municipalities in Quezon

2. Secondary sampling units (SSU) -— barangays in the selected

cities/municipalities in Quezon

Province of Quezon

Randomly selected 18 municipalities (PSU)

|

Randomly selected 335 barangays from the 18 PSUs

|

335 barangay chairmans / Barangay Nutrition Committee
Chairs

Figure 3.2 Schematic diagram of two-stage simple random sampling design

28

The list of cities, municipalities, and barangays were obtained from the Philippine
Statistics Authority Philippine Standard Geographic Code (PSGC). On the other hand, the
SSU were randomly selected from the list of barangays in the city/municipality which met
the criteria, based on the list provided by the Provincial Department of Interior and Local
Government. A set of cities/municipalities were randomly selected as part of our first stage
of sampling. Fifty percent (50%) of the cities/municipalities were selected to ensure
representativeness of the sample. The target number of barangays were randomly selected

in the identified cities/municipalities.
Sample Size Calculation

The minimum sample size for the study was determined by computing the sample
size required for each specific objective of the study using the Cochran Method, Power
analysis for correlations, and Power analysis for general linear model. The computed

minimum sample size per objective was summarized in Table 3.1.

Table 3.1 Computed minimum sample size per specific objective of the study

Objective Method Sample
Size

To determine the demographic characteristics of BNCC in
Quezon Province

To identify the level of knowledge, self-efficacy, and
practices of BNCC Chairs in Quezon on NPM

To determine if there is an association between knowledge

Descriptive -
Cochran’s Method 292

Power analysis for

and self-efficacy, knowledge and practices, and self- lati 194
efficacy and practices of BNCC in Quezon on NPM correlations
To determine if there is an association between the P lysis f
demographic characteristics and the KSP of BNCs in ‘ower analysis Tor 304

Quezon on NPN linear model

29

The objective that yielded the highest computed minimum sample size was used in

computing the final sample size requirement of the study. This was done using Power

Analysis for General Linear Models, with a significance level set at 0.05, and power set at

0.8, giving a computed sample size of 304. The computation for the sample size for all the

objectives was shown in Appendix 3.1. In consideration of possible non-response of

randomly selected participants, the computed minimum sample size of 304 BNCCs was

inflated by 10%. Therefore, the final minimum sample size used for the study was at least

335 BNCCs.

Research Instrument

1.

Participants Profile and Demographic Characteristics. This tool collected the
general information of participants, including their name, address, contact
information, and the items referring to their demographic profiles such as
birthdate/age, years in service, educational attainment, and experience in any

training related to nutrition and NPM.

Knowledge on NPM. This tool was developed as part of the study protocol based
on the eLearning Course on Local Nutrition Program Management modules and
policies referring to BNC and BNCC’s responsibilities. The tool was validated
through face validation among 5 experts on NPM and was subjected to reliability
testing. This questionnaire measured the knowledge of the BNCC on NPM at the
barangay level, related to their role across the four phases (planning,
implementation, M&E, and re-planning). The knowledge scores were interpreted

using the Blooms cut-off points (Table 3.2).

30

3. Self-efficacy on NPM. This tool was developed as part of the study protocol based
on the eLearning Course on Local Nutrition Program Management modules and
policies referring to BNC and responsibilities of the BNCC. The tool was subjected
to the same validation and reliability testing as the knowledge questionnaire. The
questionnaire measured the confidence of the BNCC on performing tasks on NPM,
based on their role across the four phases (planning, implementation, M&E, and re-
planning). The respondents accomplished the questionnaire by identifying whether
they are confident or not confident on the statements through a 5-point Likert scale.
The self-efficacy scores were interpreted using Blooms cut-off points summarized

in Table 3.2.

4. Practices on NPM - Like the tools above, this tool was developed as part of the
study protocol based on the eLearning Course on Local Nutrition Program
Management modules and policies referring to BNC and BNCC’s responsibilities.
The tool was subjected to the same validation and reliability testing as the
knowledge and self-efficacy questionnaire. The questionnaire identified whether
BNCCs were performing tasks on nutrition program management based on their
role across the four phases (planning, implementation, M&E, and re-planning). The
respondents accomplished the questionnaire by identifying whether they were able
to practice it by answering yes or no. The practice was considered present if the
respondent has presented documents supporting this practice and was validated by
the data collector. The practice scores were interpreted using Bloom’s cut-off points

(Table 3.2).

31

Table 3.2 Cut-off points for assessing the level of KSP of BNCCs on NPM (Bloom,

1968).
Cut-off points Knowledge Self-efficacy Practices
> 80% High High Good
60-80 Moderate Fair Fair
<60% Low Low Poor

Development of Research Instrument

Prior to the conduct of the study, there were no available research instruments to
measure the knowledge, self-efficacy, and practices on NPM, especially among
community leaders. Figure 3.3 summarizes the activities conducted to develop the data

collection tools.

Review of literature conducted on Local Nutrition Program Management training
materials and policies referring to responsibilities of BNC and BNCCs on NPM

I

Developed the research instrument regarding functions, tasks, knowledge, and
skills of BNCCs regarding barangay NPM

i

Content validity ratio conducted of the research instrument with 5 NPM experts

J

Revised the research instrument based on the content validity ratio

I

Reliability of the research instrument tested through pilot-testing

I

Revised the research instrument based on the results of reliability testing

I

Reproduced the research instrument and informed consent

i

Data Collection

Figure 3.3 Flowchart of activities on research instrument development

32

Development of the research parameters on KSP on NPM. To develop the
research instrument assessing the KSP on NPM for the BNCCs, a review of
literature on the eLearning Course on Local Nutrition Program Management
modules and policies referring to BNC and BNCC’s responsibilities was
conducted. The relevant information regarding Barangay NPM were selected and
included, specifically on the functions and contributions of the BNCC on NPM and

the specific tasks, knowledge and skills a BNCC should have to fulfill their role.

The number of items for each questionnaire in the research instrument were
as follows: (1) Knowledge on NPM - 25 items; (2) Self-efficacy on NPM — 15
items; and (3) Practice on NPM — 15 items. Each questionnaire was subdivided into
four parts, based on the phases of NPM which are: planning, implementation,
M&E, and re-planning. Additionally, each item in the research instrument was

translated into Filipino to ensure clarity and understanding among participants.

. Evaluation of the content validity ratio. The developed research instrument in
both the English and Filipino language was subjected to content validation. The
validity methods of this study were based on the instrument development and
validation methods study conducted by Oktari, et al. (2019). A content validation
was conducted with five identified experts on NPM using a validation instrument
presented in Appendix 3.2. The composition of the experts are two experts from
the field of research and nutrition, one expert from health policy, one of the authors
of the eLearning Course on Local Nutrition Program Management, and one expert

from the non-government sector with expertise on health and nutrition capacity-

33

building for political leaders. Each expert was provided with a copy of the research
instrument and were asked to rate the items according to its essentiality by “Yes”
or “No”, and a space for remarks is provided so that the expert can provide their

additional feedback.

To estimate the content validity, Lawshe’s Content Validity Ratio (CVR)
was used. The CVR shall calculate the level of agreement of each item in the data
collection tool based on the identified essentiality using the following formula:

Ne — &

CVR =

Where n,= number of experts indicating an item is essential; and
N = total number of experts

With a panel size of 5, according to Ayre & Scally (2014), all five members
of the panel should agree that the item is essential for it to be included in the
research tool. Based on the feedback of the validation, the tool was revised to

include only valid questions for the study before proceeding to reliability testing.

The summary of the results is shown in Table 3.3, and the per item
validation is shown in Appendix 3.3. In terms of the knowledge questionnaire, 17
out of the 25 items were revised based on the feedback of the panel, and one item
was removed. The item was removed because it measured the same parameter as
another item. Moreover, 11 out of the 15 items were recommended to be revised in

the self-efficacy questionnaire, but all items were deemed essential by all the

34

members of the panel. Lastly, 10 out of the 15 items were revised in the practice
questionnaire, but all 15 were identified as essential by all the panel members.

Table 3.3 Content validity ratio of the research instrument, 2023 (n=5)

Research Content Validity

Instrument # of items with # of items with 100% # of items
100% CVR CVR, but revised eliminated

Knowledge 7 17 1

Self-efficacy 4 11 0

Practice 5 10 0

. Testing the reliability of the research instrument. To test for reliability, a pilot
study among 13 BNCCs in Los Bafios, Laguna was conducted to ensure the
applicability of the modified research instrument to be used in evaluating the level
of KSP on NPM of BNCCs. Cronbach's alpha was used to estimate and interpret
the reliability of the research instrument, with a minimum score of 0.7 achieved to

ensure acceptable reliability of the instrument.

Results of the pilot test and its interpretation is summarized in Table 3.4,
statistical analysis for reliability test can be seen in Appendix 3.4. The reliability
was achieved across the three questionnaires. All 24 items for the knowledge
questionnaire were retained, as well as the 15 items from the self-efficacy
questionnaire. For the Practice questionnaire, 3 items were dropped as it remained

constant in the analysis, as well as to increase the reliability of the questionnaire.

Results of the pilot test were used to revise the questionnaire before its
finalization for data collection. Additional steps in confirming the consistency and

reliability of tool through another round of validity and reliability testing were not

35

conducted before the reproduction of forms. It is recommended that this should be
conducted in future studies. Duration of individual interviews in the pilot study
were also timed and averaged to arrive at a realistic time duration of face-to-face

interview for the main study.

Table 3.4 Reliability of data collection tool during pre-testing, 2024 (n=13)

Research instrument Cronbach’s Alpha Interpretation
Knowledge 0.7693 Acceptable
Self-efficacy 0.7059 Acceptable
Practice 0.8461 Good

4. Reproduction of research instrument and informed consent form. After
finalizing the research instrument, final formatting was done to enhance the clarity
and ease of use. This included ensuring clear instructions and adequate spacing for
responses. The research instrument, as well as the informed consent form were
reproduced, ensuring that all text was legible and that the physical integrity of the
documents was maintained. Each copy was reviewed to ensure there were no
printing errors or missing pages. To anonymize study participants while
maintaining data integrity, each research instrument and informed consent form
was assigned a unique control number. These control numbers were carefully
placed on each form to link responses with participants without revealing personal
identities. The research instrument and consent forms were organized and prepared
for data collection, with each copy being carefully checked and packaged in a

brown envelope, also labeled with the assigned control number.

36

Data Collection Procedures

A series of activities were conducted in the preparation and conduct of data

collection. This is summarized in Figure 3.4.

Principal Investigator Data Collectors

Secured ethical clearance from UP Manila
Research Ethics Board

Obtained permission and endorsements from
Provincial Health Office, Provincial Department
of Interior and Local Government (P-DILG),
and/or Municipal/City Health or Nutrition Office

Data collector was trained on protocol of the
study, ethical consideration, rights of

respondents, standard data collection

obtained from list provided by P-DILG procedures, and research instrument

I

{ Randomly-select 335 barangays
Coordinated with the randomly-selected
barangays for the conduct of interview

BNCC
within
criteria?

| List of BNCCs within the inclusion criteria

Yes

No

Provided
consent?

veo

| Conduct Interview using research instrument |

Validate responses from participants, including
identified practices (document validation)

| Data Encoding using coding manual |

{
Proceed to Data Processing and Analysis |

Figure 3.4 Flow of activities on study preparation and data collection

37

Securing ethical clearance

Social preparation and pre-survey activities were conducted to secure permission
from the randomly selected study sites in Quezon. The Provincial Health Officer II of the
Quezon Province reviewed the protocol of the study, and acknowledged the conduct of the
study upon application for the ethics review. Prior to the pilot test of the research
instrument, ethical clearance, as seen in Appendix 3.5, was secured from the UPM REB.
The ethical clearance with the number UPMREB 2023-0604-01, was obtained on
December 1, 2023.

Training of Data Collector

The principal investigator had previous experience in conducting research data
collection such as face-to-face interviews and key informant interviews. The research
assistant assigned in the study is a BS Nutrition graduate, to ensure that she has adequate
knowledge on the study and in conducting the field interviews on NPM.

An orientation was conducted by the principal investigator regarding the protocol
of the study, the ethical considerations, and the rights of the respondents, as approved by
the UPM-REB and as indicated in the informed consent form. The research instrument was
discussed thoroughly, as well as the data collection procedures. This was done to ensure
that the data collection was standard. A data collector guide was also provided to the
research assistant as reference.

Coordination with the local government units

The researchers coordinated with the Provincial Health Office, and the Provincial

Department of Interior and Local Government (P-DILG) Office through a letter, for

permission to conduct the research in the province. The letter also indicated the objectives,

38

methodology of the study, and other pertinent details. Letters of endorsement received from
the offices were received and can be seen in Appendix 3.6.

A list of BNCCs within the inclusion criteria was requested and obtained from the
P-DILG. The list was utilized in randomly selecting 335 BNCCs as study participants.

The researchers have also coordinated with the Municipal/City Health Office or
Nutrition Office, as applicable, for permission to conduct the research in the randomly
selected study sites. Letters were also sent out to each of the municipal/city mayors and
municipal/city health offices explaining the objectives, methodology of the study, and other
pertinent details. However, there were challenges in receiving timely endorsements from
some of the offices. In these cases, the endorsements of the Provincial Health Office and
P-DILG were used in coordinating with the barangays, which they have honored. In
municipalities which acknowledged and provided written or verbal permissions to conduct
the study, point persons were endorsed to help the data collectors in coordinating with the
barangays.

Strategies in coordinating with the barangays varied across the municipalities/city,
depending on the applicability. In some areas, the data collectors were allowed to discuss
about the study during the barangay assembly, which facilitated easy scheduling of
interviews with the BNCCs. Some municipalities shared the contact numbers of the
BNCCs, which also helped in scheduling the interviews and preventing delays by ensuring
timely communication and coordination with the study participants. In other areas,
coordinating with the BNS were observed to be effective, as they have direct

communication with the BNCC, and were aware of their whereabouts. Coordinating with

39

the BNS were also helpful in the data validation through document reviews as they were
the keepers of these documents.

Interview and validation

A face-to-face interview using the survey questionnaire was given to the eligible
participants and lasted approximately from 30 minutes to an hour, depending on the amount
and depth of the data provided by each participant. This included the explanation of the
Informed Consent Form (Appendix 3.7) which stated that their participation in the study
is: voluntary nature of participation, purpose and procedures of the study, features of the
cross-sectional study design, duration of participation, possible risks, discomfort and pain,
benefits of participation, token to be provided, access to data, and privacy and
confidentiality of information to be obtained. Data privacy and anonymity were

emphasized and contact details of the researcher was provided.

Once the participant agreed to participate, they were asked to indicate agreement in
participating and complete understanding of participation in the study by signing the
Informed Consent form. In cases where the BNCC refused to provide consent, the data
collectors acknowledged their refusal and proceeded to the next barangay. In cases where
the BNCC was unavailable for an interview, the data collectors coordinated to identify a

suitable time and revisited the barangay according to the agreed schedule.

The research instrument (Appendix 3.8) covers the BNCC’s general information,
demographic profiles, and the validated questionnaires on knowledge, self-efficacy, and
practices on NPM. The data collector facilitated the interview using the aforementioned

questionnaires to ensure completeness, clarity, and validity of data collected. Before ending

40

face-to-face interviews, the data collector reviewed all collected data to ensure that no
question was skipped. Validation and clarification of respondents’ answers were
accomplished, and legibility of handwriting and decoding of abbreviations and symbols

were ensured.

The researcher reviewed the accomplished data collection form and made callbacks
for verification and clarification of vague and incomplete answers after the interview. The
researcher was also responsible for checking inconsistencies and incorrect entries after
receiving the questionnaires from the field. Following a verification process, inappropriate
data entries were replaced with a proper answer by reviewing other responses in the
questionnaire. Any changes of the original entry were done only with sufficient
justification from the data collector and data encoder. Corrections were done without
erasing the original data entries and with a different colored marker. For each edited form,

the editor affixes their signature and indicates the date of editing.
Data Processing and Analysis

Coding of answers were accomplished and summarized in a coding manual
(Appendix 3.9). After data collection, coding of responses on the different data collection
tools were completed by the researcher. After the data was encoded into the database, the
data was double checked for inconsistencies and incorrect entries. Frequency distribution
tables were created to check the completeness of data obtained and logical distribution of
data entries. All data were encoded using Microsoft Excel in accordance with the coding

manual. The researcher encoded all valid responses from the survey forms.

41

Standardization of scores

To ensure that the measurement of Knowledge, Self-Efficacy, and Practices were
consistent and meaningful, range standardization was done. This would convert a given
scale, in this case, the Knowledge, Self-Efficacy, and Practices score into a bounded scale

from 0 to 100. The formula for the method is given below:

X —min
Z=——— x 100
max — min

Where Z = standardized score, X = raw score obtained from the original scoring
system of the variable, min = minimum possible score for the original scale, and max =
maximum possible score of the original scale. The range standardized score showed how
far away from the maximum score on the scale a given observed score is, in percentage
terms. The resulting standardized scores were used in the analysis of the correlation of
BNCCs’ knowledge, self-efficacy, and practices with their sociodemographic

characteristics.
Data Analysis

After the collection and processing of data for the study, data analysis was
performed based on the study objectives using Stata v14.2 and IBM SPSS Statistics.
Descriptive statistics using mean and standard deviation (Mean + SD) were used to
summarize the quantitative data for the study. This included the age, and years in service
as BNC. Frequency tables with percentages were used to summarize the categorical data
in the study. This included sex, age range, highest educational attainment, years in service

as BNC range, training in nutrition program management, and training related to nutrition.

42

The KSP of the BNCCs on NPM were summarized using the mean+SD and the
minimum and maximum value. It was also summarized according to the Bloom’s cut-off
mentioned in Table 3.2. Since the KSP scores were all measured as quantitative variables,
Pearson’s Correlation was used to determine their association. The same method was used
in determining the association between the KSP scores with the quantitative demographic
factors, age and years of service. Point biserial correlation was used in determining the
association between the KSP scores with dichotomous variables such as sex, training on
NPM, and training on nutrition. Spearman rank correlation was used in determining the
association between the KSP scores with the educational attainment. The results of the

analyses were reported in coefficients and level of significance was set a=0.05.

To determine the strength and direction of the association between the demographic
characteristics of BNCC and the KSP scores, linear regression was used. Linear regression
was particularly suitable for analyzing the relationship between the dependent variable
(KSP scores) and multiple independent variables (demographic characteristics such as age,
sex, educational attainment, length of service, and training attendance). It quantified these
relationships and provided insights on how changes in demographic characteristics

influence the KSP scores.

However, several assumptions of linear regression were not met in this analysis.
The Shapiro-Wilk W test for normality was conducted and showed that the residuals were
not normally distributed (Appendix 4.1). To test for the linear relationship between the
independent and dependent variables, The results of the correlation analysis was used to

test the linear relationship between the independent and dependent variables, showing

43

weak associations across the independent variables with varying significance. This

suggested that the assumption for the linearity of relationships was violated.

Due to these violations, the analysis could not proceed using linear regression.
Instead, multiple logistic regression was employed to examine the associations between
the demographic characteristics of BNCCs and their KSP scores in NPM. Multiple logistic
regression was used in modeling the probability of a binary outcome based on one or more
predictor variables, making it suitable when the data does not meet the assumptions
required for linear regression. In this case, the KSP scores were categorized into binary

outcomes which are:
1. Having high knowledge vs. not having high knowledge
2. Having high self-efficacy vs. not having high self-efficacy
3. Having good practice vs. not having good practice

The results of the logistic regression were reported using odds ratios and level of
significance was set at a=0.05.
Ethical Considerations

The study conducted has no conflict of interest coming from financial, familial, or
propriety considerations. Furthermore, approval of the study proposal was obtained from
the UPM-REB before conducting the research. The research has abided by the set
principles and practices found in both local (National Ethical Guidelines for Health
Research, Philippine Health Research Ethics Board) and international (Declaration of

Helsinki) guidelines throughout the whole conduct of the study.

Recruitment, distribution of informed consent and autonomy of study participants

An ethical clearance from UPM-REB was obtained by the investigator before they
proceeded to the recruitment of participants for the study. The investigator coordinated
with the local stakeholders such as the City/Municipal Mayors, Health Officers, Nutrition
Action Officers, BNCCs, and BNS.

The BNCCs have provided their consent to be included in the study. All study
participants who met the inclusion criteria and expressed willingness to participate in the
study were invited for a brief orientation where the study protocol and other important
information about the study were discussed. The orientation and informed consent were
conducted in a private or secluded environment to ensure that the conversation was
exclusive for the participant and data collector/ investigator only. During the orientation,
prospective study participants were allowed to clarify or ask questions related to the study
to the members of the research team.

After the investigator conducted the study orientation, the informed consent was
provided to the participant. The informed consent was translated to Filipino, the primary
language of the province for easy understanding for the participants. It contained the
following information about the study: (1) voluntary nature of participation, (2) purpose
and procedures of the study, (3) duration of participation, (4) possible risks, discomfort and
pain, (5) benefits of participation, (6) token to be provided, (7) access to data, and (8)
privacy and confidentiality of information to be obtained.

All interested study participants were asked to sign and submit their informed

consent. For those who cannot read, a thumb mark was requested together with the name

45

and signature of a witness. Selection of participants were done only through a voluntary
basis.

The participants’ personal dignity and human rights were always respected. Also,
those who expressed to be withdrawn or dropped out during the duration of the study were
not questioned by the investigator. In case the study participant opted to withdraw their
participation at any time during the study, the project team respected their decision without
the need for any explanation or reason. Moreover, their withdrawal from the study did not
affect the relationship between the study participant and the principal investigator. All data
or information collected from those who withdrew from the study were either returned or
destroyed. All data received from the said participant were not included in the statistical
analyses. All participants can access their personal data at any time they ask. They were
also informed on their right to ask to delete the data if they found any erroneous entry or
deemed to withdraw from the study and ask for alteration of their data if they find any
erroneous entry. A form noting the withdrawal of the participant was prepared in case they
decided to withdraw from the study.

Privacy and Confidentiality

All information about the study participants, including their identity, were not
disclosed to anyone or to any other agency or organization. To ensure anonymity, each
study participant was given a unique control number (subject code) in the study which was
used throughout the study. Only the principal investigators had complete access to the data
files. The UPM-REB may be granted access to the data for verification only. The personal
information of the participants was only accessible within the research team. Only the

principal investigators had access to all encoded data that were stored in password-

46

protected computers. The database for the study did not include the names of the study
participants and only unique control numbers were encoded. All physical forms and
questionnaires were filed and stored in a secured location to which only the principal
investigators have access to. After one year from data collection, all forms will be
destroyed and disposed of properly.

Risk and Benefits

All participants were informed of the risks of the procedures that were present
during the conduct of the study. The proposed study imposed very minimal risk to the
participants based on the questions during the data collection that was conducted. These
were addressed by assuring that the data collected were treated with utmost confidentiality
and were used for the purpose of the study. The interview was done in a private or secluded
environment to ensure that the conversation was exclusive for the participant and data
collector/ investigator only. Furthermore, the respondents were given the right to skip or
not answer those questions that may be offensive to their judgment. However, in times that
the respondent felt uncomfortable during the interview, the data collector may opt to stop
the data collection process. By taking these steps, the safety and well-being of the
participants from emotional stress and social discrimination was assured.

The BNCCs, their respective community, and the Quezon province could benefit
from the study. Participants would receive information regarding the results of the study,
providing insights regarding their current situation and possibly identifying root causes of
certain problems. In relation to this, the participants, along with their respective LGUs,

could take more concrete and evidence-based actions. Moreover, the study could also

47

provide recommendations regarding the situation in the province which could aid in
solving problems by serving as a guide and reinforcing nutrition programs.
Vulnerability of research participant

No vulnerable groups were recruited during the conduct of the study. Interested
study participants under the legal age of 18 were not recruited in the study. Similarly,
participants who were previously diagnosed with cognitive impairments, intellectual
disability or lack the capacity to understand the information and decide on their own were
not interviewed after the investigators provide them with an explanation. This included the
elderly that were unable to competently provide consent due to conditions that hinder or
reduce their cognitive functions.
Payment and Compensation

Study-related insurance was not provided during the conduct of the study as there
is no identified risk of acquiring a physical injury due to participating in the research. Other
risks stated beforehand were to be addressed through other means. Study participants who
completed the study were given a set of community nutrition measuring tools and education
materials to compensate for the effort, time, and inconvenience that the study has caused
to them.
Community Involvement and Consideration

The Municipal/City Health Office were involved with this study as they contributed
through assistance in contacting and coordinating with the randomly selected barangays
and their respective BNCC. As for each individual barangay, they were coordinated during
the approval and conduct of the study which includes finding an appropriate site for the

interview. Their efforts and participation were acknowledged with a simple token to show

48

appreciation. The culture and tradition of the community were always considered when
communicating with the locals. Furthermore, the study also sought to empower the
community, with results potentially being a great benefit for the community, arming them
with knowledge for them to act accordingly, independent of the researcher or the study.
Data Dissemination

All participants as well as the provincial and City/Municipal Health Offices would
receive information on the results of the study once completed. An online access link to
the approved paper along with a summary of the results, conclusions, and
recommendations of the research would be provided either as a softcopy through email or
as a printed hardcopy if the barangay does not have capacity to access the internet. To
further disseminate the results of the study, the researcher might submit the findings of the
study for publication or presentation in research fora. The Provincial and City/Municipal
Health Offices would be informed on any submissions made by the researchers and would
be given a softcopy and printed hardcopy of the submission.
Conflict of Interest

The principal investigator was a recipient of the Department of Science and
Technology Science Education Institute (DOST-SEI) through the Accelerated Science and
Technology Human Resource Development Program (ASTHRDP). There was no known
conflict of interest regarding the publication of this thesis. There were no other financial or
personal relationships that could inappropriately influence or bias the work reported in this

thesis.

49

CHAPTER IV

RESULTS

This chapter presents the findings of the study involving 307 BNCC from Quezon

Province. The respondents per municipality is summarized in Table 4.1.

Table 4.1 Distribution of BNCC respondents per municipality, 2024 (n=307)

Municipality Frequency (n) Percentage (%)
Calauag 38 12.38
Candelaria 11 3.57
Catanauan 23 7.49
Dolores 6 1.95
Gumaca 24 7.82
Infanta 15 4.89
Lopez 43 14.01
Lucban 12 3.91
Macalelon 10 3.26
Mauban 17 5.54
Padre Burgos 9 2.93
Pagbilao 13 4.23
Pitogo 15 4.89
Real 4 1.30
Sampaloc 3 0.98
Sariaya 16 5.21
Tayabas 28 9.12
Unisan 17 5.54

Demographic characteristics of BNCCs in Quezon Province

Table 4.2 summarizes the sociodemographic characteristics of the 307 BNCCs in

Quezon Province. Most (35.83%) of the BNCCs were aged 46-55 years old and majority

50

(78.50%) were male. Educational attainment among the BNCCs reveals that 44.63% have
completed secondary school, while 36.16% have completed undergraduate courses. A
smaller percentage, 4.23%, have pursued postgraduate education, indicating a varied but
relatively moderate level of formal education among the participants. In terms of years of
service, nearly half of the BNCCs have been serving for 5 to 6 years (43.97%), with
significant portions also having 7 to 10 years (25.41%) and over 10 years (30.62%) of

service, demonstrating a high level of experience in their roles.

Training attendance data shows that the majority (65.8%) of BNCCs had
participated in NPM training. However, only 43.32% have attended broader nutrition-
related training. Training programs frequently mentioned include Halina't Magtanim ng
Prutas at Gulay (HAPAG) Barangay. Project, Barangay Newly Elected Officials program,
Brgy. Council for the Protection of Children, Pabasa sa Nutrisyon, Kapit-Bisig Laban sa
Kahirapan-Comprehensive and Integrated Delivery of Social Services (KALAHI-CIDSS),

and Philippine Multisectoral Nutrition Program.

51

Table 4.2 Sociodemographic characteristics of BNCCs in Quezon Province, 2024

(n=307)
Frequency

Demographic Variable n(%)
Age

Mean+SD 54.66+10.06

35 years old and below 9 (2.93)

36 to 45 years old 48 (15.64)

46 to 55 years old 110 (35.83)

56 to 65 years old 96 (31.27)

66 years old and above 44 (14.33)
Sex

Female 66 (21.50)

Male 241 (78.50)
Educational Attainment

Secondary school graduate 137 (44.63)

Vocational course graduate 46 (14.98)

Undergraduate course graduate 111 (36.16)

Postgraduate course graduate 13 (4.23)
Years in Service

Mean+SD 8.9844.68

5 to 6 years 135 (43.97)

7 to 10 years 78 (25.41)

Above 10 years 94 (30.62)
Attended Training for NPM

No 105 (34.20)

Yes 202 (65.80)
Attended Nutrition-related Training

No 174 (56.68)

Yes 133 (43.32)

52

Level of KSP on NPM of BNCCs in Quezon

Table 4.3 presents the summary statistics for the levels of KSP among the selected
BNCCs in Quezon Province. The average knowledge score was 72.52+7.91. Majority
(81.11%), have scores within the moderate level, 13.36% are within the high level, and

5.54% are within the low level of knowledge scores on NPM.

Table 4.3 Knowledge, Self-efficacy, and Practices on NPM of BNCCs in Quezon

Province, 2024 (n = 307)

Characteristic Frequency
n(%)
Knowledge
Mean Knowledge 72.5247.91
High 41 (13.36)
Moderate 249 (81.11)
Low 17 (5.54)
Self-efficacy
Mean Self-efficacy 86.10+11.88
High 227 (73.94)
Fair 69 (22.48)
Low 11 (3.58)
Practices
Mean Practice 53.31439.03
Good 123 (40.07)
Fair 24 (7.82)
Poor 160 (52.12)

Moreover, the self-efficacy mean score of the BNCC on NPM was 86.10 + 11.88.
Around 74% of the respondents rated a high level, 22.48% are fair level, and 3.58% are

low level in performing tasks as BNCC (Table 4.3).

53

The practice mean scores was 53.31 + 39.03, with the majority (52.12%) of the
respondents reporting poor practices on NPM. Forty percent (40%) reported that they had

good practices on NPM, while 7.82% have fair practices. Details are shown in Table 4.3.

Association between the knowledge scores with self-efficacy scores, and practice

scores on NPM of BNCCs in Quezon

Table 4.4 present the association among KSP scores for BNCCs in relation to the
NPM. There was a significant positively weak correlation between knowledge and self-
efficacy on NPM (p=0.20, p <0.001). The knowledge and practice were also found to have
significant positively weak correlation (p=0.17, p=0.003). Additionally, there was a
significant positively weak correlation (p=0.17, p=0.003) between self-efficacy and

practice.

Table 4.4 Correlation Analysis of the Knowledge, Self-Efficacy, and Practice Scores

on NPM of BNCCs in Quezon Province, 2024 (n=307)

NPM scores Knowledge Self-Efficacy Practice
Knowledge 1 - -
0.20
Self-efficacy (<0.001) 1 -
. 0.17 0.17
Bractice (0.003) (0.003) U

Factors affecting the level of KSP on NPM of BNCCs in Quezon
Association of demographic factors with the KSP scores on NPM of BNCCs in Quezon

Table 4.5 shows the correlation between demographic factors and knowledge, self-

efficacy, and practices of BNCCs on NPM. There was a significant association between

54

the knowledge and sex of BNC. Moreover, the association was found to be negatively weak
(tpb=-0.13, p=0.026). However, there was no sufficient evidence to conclude that the other

demographic factors were associated with knowledge scores of the BNCCs.

In terms of self-efficacy scores, positively weak associations were found with
training on nutrition (rp>=0.18, p=0.002). There was no sufficient evidence to conclude that

the other demographic factors were associated with self-efficacy scores of the BNCCs.

Table 4.5 Correlation of demographic factors to the KSP scores on NPM of BNCCs

in Quezon Province, 2024 (n=307)

Demographic Factors Knowledge Self-efficacy Practices
Coefficient Pp Coefficient p Coefficient Pp

Age 0.00 0.977 0.03 0.587 0.04 0.491
Sex -0.13* 0.026 -0.07 0.240 -0.11* 0.050
Educational attainment 0.09 0.106 0.10 0.089 0.09 0.126
Years of service -0.02 0.792 0.11 0.059 0.13* 0.021
Training on NPM 0.06 0.299 0.06 0.263 0.22* <.001
Training on Nutrition -0.01 0.822 0.18* 0.002 0.30* <.001

*Significant association was observed at a=0.05

A significant negatively weak association (rpp=-0.11, p=0.050) had been observed
between practice scores and sex, which suggests that having higher practice scores is
associated with females (Table 4.5). On the other hand, significant positively weak
associations were observed between the practice scores and the demographic
characteristics of years of service (p=0.13, p=0.021), attendance to NPM training (rp»=

0.22, p=<0.001), and attendance to nutrition training (rp»=-0.30, p=<0.001). There was no

55

sufficient evidence to conclude that the other demographic factors were associated with

practice scores of the BNCCs. Details are shown in Table 4.5.
Factors associated with the KSP scores of BNCCs in Quezon Province on NPM

Table 4.6 shows the demographic factors associated with the KSP of BNCC on
NPM. After controlling for the confounding effect of age, educational attainment, years in
service, and training on NPM and nutrition, the knowledge score was lower by 2.41
(p=0.031) among male BNC compared to their female counterpart. Holding the other
variables constant, the self-efficacy score of those with nutrition training increased by 3.90
(p=0.014) when compared to those without nutrition training. Lastly, the practice score
was likely to increase by 17.97 (p=0.000) when BNCC had attended a training on nutrition
compared to those without any training. However, the normality was not satisfied in this

regression model.

Association of demographic profile to the level of KSP of BNCCs in Quezon Province

on NPM

Given the normality of the data, Table 4.7 summarizes the factors associated with
the level of KSP of BNCC in Quezon on NPM. Holding the other variables constant, the
odds of having a higher level of knowledge increased by 2.52 times among females
compared to their male counterparts (OR=0.40, p=0.031). After controlling for the
confounding effect of other variables, the odds of a BNCC to have a high level of self-

efficacy increases by 7.7%. (OR=1.08, p=0.038) for each additional year in service.

56

Holding other variables constant, the odds of having a high level of self-efficacy on
NPM is 1.08 among those 2.19 (p=0.015) times higher among those who had training on
nutrition than those who had not. After controlling for the confounding effect of other
variables, the odds of a BNCC to have a high level of practice increases by 7.1%.

(OR=1.07, p=0.011) for each additional year in service.

Lastly, after controlling for the confounding effects of the other variables, the odds
of having a high level of practice on NPM was 2.00 (p=0.016) times higher among those

who attended training on nutrition than those who did not attend.

57

8s

000°0 (2L'L7 ‘17'8) LOLI v100 (00'L ‘08°0) 06°€ Ost'O = ($$'0 ‘8S°E-) ZSI- Surrey WAN
aouasafay aouadafay anuasafoy Sururey Noy

UOHLNA Go Suraesy,
070 (0L'91 ‘6S"€-) 95°9 £85°0 (€€°7 “EL'b-) 060" €1l0 (68'€ ‘1P'0-) PL’ Suyuren WAL
aouadafay aouasafay aouadafay Sulurey Noy AA

WAN 40 Sarasa,

£80°0 (Z2'1 ‘11'0-) 18°0 16€'0 (0L'0'87'0-) 170 86L°0 (L1'0'7Z'0-) €0°0- SdIAAIS JO S1VIZ
6790 (2€'92 ‘26'S 1-) 02'S 610 (96'€ ‘8b'6-) 9L'7- 1s0'0 (070 “€6'8-) Sh’ oyenpesd-ysod
1970 (pL'Pl ‘Z0°p-) 9E°S sz10 (E's *$9'0-) vE'Z 1s0'0 (L6'€ ‘10°-) 86'1 oyenpesd o82]]0D
$90°0 (Lr 1€ ‘96'0-) 97'S 1 8re0 (8's ‘L0'7-) 68° oer'0 (69°€ ‘8S'1-) 901 ayenpesd [euoNes0 A,
aouasafay aouasafay aouasafay ayenpesd fooyos y3iH]

JUIIUIENE [eUOWENPA
661'0 (LS"E “SO'LI-) PL'9- 1ps'0 (97° ‘O€'b-) Z0'I- 1€0°0 — (€7'0-‘09°b-) Ih oyeway
aouadafay aouadafay anuadafoy ae

xg

S80 (840 ‘0v'0-) 70'0 1z€'0 (€Z'0'1L'0-) ¥7'0- €07'0 _(60'0 ‘10°0-) 10°0- 3By

[(7e) (a %$6)
d (9 %S6) 892A Parsnipy d %S6) 99945 parsnipy d sy9aqyq porsn{py
saad AdBIII-F12S a8 pa] Mouyy $10}98,q d1qdusZouTg

(LOE=8) 2001A01g 10ZANd UI SQONA JO WAN UO $2.1098 {Sy 94) 0} s10}9¥y DIydeasoulap Jo sisA[eue UOIsse1da1 AWUTT O°} 214E,L

6S

910°0 (6b'€ “vI'1) 966'1 $100 (Erp LUD) 61% 92%7'0 (€0'p ‘2L'0) 0L'1 Suu YALA
aouasafay aouadafay aouasafoy Sururey Noy A

TONLIYNN Go Suraesy,
8£60 (98°1 ‘9S°0) 201 0990 (29'1 “Lb'0) L8°0 £910 (62'I ‘@Z'0) ¥S'0 Suyuren WAN
aouasafay aouasafay aouadafay Buuren ynoy A,

WAN 00 Surmesy,

110°0 (Ell ZOD) 201 8£0°0 (STI ‘00'1) 80°1 ssv'0 (s0'I ‘06'0) L6°0 SIAIIS JO SIDA
y9E0 (85's “€5°0) ZL'1 €e1'0 (Z€1 ‘Z1'0) 0F'0 v6L'0 (€b'9 *88°0) $L°0 ayenpesd-s0d
1070 (9p'7 “€8'0) EFI 1810 (28° ‘78'0) ZS'1 9500 (€€'y 860) 90°7 ayenpesd o89][0D
8b'0 (v6'S “€b'0) 091 9560 (612 84'0) 20" loro (z1'z ‘s1'0) LS"0 ayenpesd [eUoHEDOA,
oyenpeis
aouadafay anuadafay aouasafay Jooyps y3ny

yUMINIEe [EUOHeONpY
vero (Zl “ph'0) 6L°0 z19°0 (9'l ‘@r'0) v8'0 $100 (v8°0 “61'0) 0v'0 ajewey
aouadafoy anuadafay aouasafay ae

xg

LL60 (€0'1 ‘L6'0) 00°1 LOL'0 (€0°1 ‘86'0) 10° 8690 (0'1 “L6°0) 10° aay

d (1D %S6) HO Pasnipy qd (19 %S6) UO Pasn{py d 9 %S6) UO Parsnipy
saonovig AQBIYJ2-J]IS aspajmMouy $10}98q d1Gdeis0MIg

(Log=4) WOZAND UI SJONA JO WAN UO [2A] ASH 24) 03 s10j9ey 1Gdeasourap Jo sisAjeue UoIssazded SISO] L*p 2198,

Summary of notable findings

This present study revealed that majority of the BNCCs in the Quezon Province,
Philippines were aged 46-55 years old (35.83%), male (78.50%), with educational
attainment varying from secondary school completion (44.63%) to postgraduate education
(4.23%). Nearly half of the BNCCs had been serving for 5 to 6 years (43.97%), indicating
significant experience in their roles. Most BNCCs participated in NPM training (65.8%),
with a smaller percentage attending broader nutrition-related training (43.32%). However,
NPM trainings reported were found to be not specific to NPM, and are more generic to the

barangay captains’ role or are more relevant to other programs.

BNCCs exhibited moderate knowledge scores (72.52+7.91) on NPM, high self-
efficacy mean scores (86.10 + 11.88) while majority (52.12%) reported poor practices.
Significant weak positive correlations were found between knowledge and self-efficacy,
knowledge and practice, and self-efficacy and practice. Significant associations were
observed between knowledge and sex of BNCC (negatively weak), self-efficacy and
training on nutrition (positively weak), and practice scores and sex (negatively weak), years
of service (positively weak), attendance to NPM (positively weak) and nutrition (positively

weak) training.

Lastly, the study found that females were 2.52 times more likely to have a higher
level of knowledge than males. Each additional year of service increases the likelihood of
a BNCC having high self-efficacy by 7.7% and high practice levels by 7.1%. Additionally,

those who received training on nutrition were 2.19 times more likely to have high self-

60

efficacy and 2.00 times more likely to have high practice levels compared to those who did

not receive such training.

61

CHAPTER V

DISCUSSION
Demographic characteristics of BNCCs in Quezon Province

According to the Letter of Instruction (LOI) 441 of 1976, the barangays are
mandated to develop a BNAP through the BNC. According to the DILG Memorandum
Circular 2015-10, a functional BNC is able to perform activities following the NPM cycle,
specifically: (1) assess the barangay nutrition situation, (2) formulate a BNAP, (3)
coordinate nutrition activities of the barangay, (4) organize groups to implement nutrition
intervention activities, (5) assess progress of nutrition interventions, and (6) hold regular

quarterly meetings to monitor program performance.

The elected local chief executive of the barangay, or the incumbent barangay
captain is assigned as the chair of the BNC and should lead in the processes of NPM (NNC,
2005). The BNCC is also expected to: (1) preside over meetings and deliberations of the
committee; (2) organize a barangay planning core group; (3) recommend BNS for
appointment; (4) provide leadership in the formulation, implementation, supervision, and
evaluation of the BNAP; and (5) secure and provide funds for the nutrition program (NNC,

2005, 2003).

As outlined by the Local Government Code of 1991, the qualifications for barangay
captains are: Filipino citizenship, an age of at least 18 years old, resident of the barangay
for at least one-year, registered voter in the barangay, and literacy of the Filipino or local

language. Previous research suggests that educational qualifications and need-based

62

training programs for barangay officials should be enhanced to perform efficiently and

effectively (Profugo, et al., 2023).

In terms of age, more than half of the BNCCs in Quezon Province belonged to the
older age groups 46 to 55 years old and 56 to 65 years old. This is consistent with findings
of related literature suggesting the same age profile of barangay captains (Floranza, 2021;
Negradas-Varona, et al., 2017). According to the United Nations, young people have low
participation in political leadership roles, and politicians aged 35-40 years old are often
considered as “young”. In countries with tight cultures such as Asian countries, leadership
preferences are influenced by assumptions that people with higher age and experience are
better equipped to handle leadership roles in business and politics (Vaughan-Johnston, et
al. 2021). These cultural norms could explain why older individuals tend to be elected as

political leaders compared to younger ones.

In this present study, it was observed that almost half of the BNCCs were high
school graduates. Several studies also observed that most of the barangay officials are of
this level (Rodil, et al., 2021; Gabriel & Manuzon, 2016). As stated in the Local
Government Code of the Philippines, the minimum qualification for barangay officials is
to have a literacy in the local language and to date, there are still no qualifications on formal

educational requirements.

The results also showed that the BNCCs were in service at an average of 9 years,
with the majority serving 5-6 years. This is consistent with the study of Negradas-Varona,
et al (2017) suggesting that around half of the barangay officials from Baler, Aurora are in

service for 3-8 years. This can be explained by Section 43 of the Local Government Code

63

stating that the elected officials at the barangay shall serve a three-year term, with a
maximum of three consecutive terms. Through the years, there have been various attempts
in pushing to increase the term duration of Barangay Captains such as House Bill 7123 and
Senate Bill No. 2629 but were not successful as it is against the Local Government Code.
These bills indicate that a three-year term is too short for the barangay program to be carried
out properly, as well as to implement policies and projects from municipal, provincial, and

national directives.

In terms of sex, BNCCs is predominantly male which indicates that there are gender
imbalances in leadership roles within the barangays. This is consistent with a study
conducted by Rodil, et al. (2021) in Cavite where only 28% of the barangay officials were
females, and that the higher position of barangay captains poses greater gender imbalance.
According to Firmase and Prieto-Carolino (2021), participation of women in barangay
politics are often limited due to patriarchal social norms, gender stereotypes, and
assumptions on public and private life divide. It was also highlighted that female barangay
officials often attained their positions primarily through family connections, business
ventures, and active community engagement. This explains why female presence in

leadership roles is limited.

In terms of attendance training, more than half of the respondents did not receive
training related to nutrition, while one-thirds did not receive training related to NPM.
However, the training mentioned by the respondents regarding NPM are found to be
generic to the responsibilities of the Barangay Captains and were not specific to their

deliverables as the BNCC.

64

Despite having mandates for BNCCs to lead NPM at the barangays, capacity-
building activities are still very limited and highly dependent on initiatives and funding
from the municipality, province, national agencies, and non-government organizations
(Gabriel & Manuzon, 2016). As of now, the mandated trainings for barangay captains are
somewhat limited, focusing primarily on broader aspects of governance, disaster

management, and gender sensitivity.

The Barangay Newly Elected Officials (BNEO) Program is mandated by the DILG
(Memorandum Circular 2010-082) for the newly elected officials to enhance their
competencies in performing their mandated tasks and responsibilities in delivering basic
services to their constituents. The Philippine Disaster Risk Reduction and Management
Act (Republic Act 10121) mandates the barangay officials to undergo training in disaster
preparedness and response which is offered by the Office of Civil Defense through the
Community-Based Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Training. The Executive
Order No. 273 which institutionalizes the Philippine Plan for Gender-Responsive
Development, 1995-2025, requires government officials, including barangay captains, to
undergo gender sensitivity training hosted by the Philippine Commission on Women.
Lastly, as chairs of the Barangay Anti-Drug Abuse Council, Barangay Captains are
required to undergo training provided by PDEA to effectively lead anti-drug initiatives at
the barangay level, in accordance with Republic Act 9165 or Comprehensive Dangerous
Drugs Act of 2002. There is currently a notable gap in the inclusion of trainings specifically

tailored to NPM among the mandated training programs for the BNCCs.

65

The trainings deployed have also been decreased due to past criticisms on the
number of trainings being conducted at the local level, which limits the availability of focal
persons providing services for the constituents (Innovations for Poverty Action, 2019).
However, a study by Gabriel and Manuzon (2016) found evidence where although around
42% of the barangay officials consider their training on public administration as adequate,
around 21% expressed the need for more training to further improve their skills and service

delivery.
Level of KSP on NPM of BNCCs in Quezon Province
Level of knowledge on NPM of BNCCs in Quezon Province

In implementing community nutrition projects and activities, it is a prerequisite to
have good knowledge in analyzing the nutrition situation and problems that need to be
improved, selecting and planning of strategies, and conducting evaluation procedures
(Calderon, 2002). Study results showed that the knowledge level of the BNCCs is

moderate, with only a few percent having high level, and low level.

Delays in cascading PPAN 2017-2022 hindered planning and orientation to the
municipal and barangay levels, highlighting a disconnect on nutrition program planning
and implementation with the national strategic thrusts (IPA, 2019). Despite having a
national strategy on nutrition, lack of awareness was cited as a barrier in implementing and
sustaining national nutrition programs (Kennedy, et al., 2015). Insufficient knowledge of
nutrition issues and inadequate budgetary support (IPA, 2019; Viajar, et al., 2020) may

result in the discontinuation of existing programs, underscoring the critical role of

66

nutrition-related resolutions and ordinances in securing funding (Ignacio & Bullecer,

2016).

Knowledge gaps on nutritional issues and program implementation are still
common among sectors who do not directly work in the nutrition sectors particularly the
BNCCs (Nisbett, et al., 2015; Aryeetey and Covic, 2020). These gaps can be explained by
their access to information, time constraints, and differing knowledge across sectors are
barriers in understanding the nutrition problems and its importance leading to decreased

program productivity (Ezezika, et al., 2021).
Level of self-efficacy on NPM of BNCCs in Quezon Province

In this present study, around 75% of the BNCCs have reported having a high level
of self-efficacy in their ability to perform NPM activities. Not much has been explored on
self-efficacy among community leaders, especially in the Philippine context. Leaders with
high self-efficacy and positive self-assessment can better mobilize motivation and
cognitive resources to successfully execute tasks, enhancing their confidence in managing
events and reaching desired objectives (Ali, et al., 2017). A study by Davari & Rashidi
(2016) have identified that among community nutrition managers, low self-efficacy can act
as an important barrier in developing their most in-need competencies such as planning,
organization, effective communication skills, M&E, reporting and documentation, and

intra- and inter-sector coordination.

In an initiative to increase maternal and child health nutrition strategic planning, it

was found that uncertainty and self-doubt, working alone, slow progress, and weak team

67

engagement as barriers to implementation, while capacity-building activities and

community of practices facilitate the implementation (Herman, et al., 2022).
Level of practice on NPM of BNCCs in Quezon Province

In the study, the presence of practice on NPM was verified with actual documents
supporting the said practices. These documents include minutes of the BNC meetings,
BNAP of the previous and current term, BNS certification, monitoring visit documentation,
and nutrition component present in the Annual Investment Plan and Barangay
Development Plan. There was a clear disparity between the practices of BNCC on NPM,
with a little more than half demonstrating poor practices, while almost half exhibited good

practices.

Local leaders were found to have difficulty in introducing, implementing, and
integrating policy, systems, and environmental change interventions related to public
health nutrition at both the conceptual and practical levels (Shah, et al., 2019). Although
the BNCCs are designated as leaders for NPM, it is often the BNS who coordinates with
the BNC to develop the BNAP, which leads to BNS merely replicating previous plans that
are rarely implemented due to funding issues (Ignacio, 2016). This aligns with a previous
finding which revealed that nutrition committee chairs often serve as symbolic
chairpersons only and are typically unaware or not actively involved in formulating their

BNAP (IPA, 2019).

68

These gaps should be supported through conducting capacity building activities,
providing access to sample documents, and having technical expertise for planning,

implementation, and evaluation (Black, et al., 2015; Shrestha, et al., 2019).

Association between the knowledge scores with self-efficacy scores, and practice

scores on NPM of BNCCs in Quezon
Association of knowledge with self-efficacy and practice

Using the SCT of Bandura (1986, 1989), personal factors such as demographic
characteristics and knowledge, and environmental factors influence the self-efficacy and
subsequently influence behavior change or practice of an individual. In this present study,
weak association was observed between knowledge and self-efficacy on NPM among
BNCC including the association of knowledge with practice on NPM among BNCC. This
suggests that knowledge on NPM alone may influence an individual’s confidence and

practice to perform NPM, but not strongly.

SCT implies that individuals who have had positive experiences applying their
knowledge are more likely to develop high self-efficacy, while past difficulties can weaken
it (Bandura, 1986, 1989, 1997). Studies show that lack of knowledge, feeling uninvolved,
low self-confidence, poor self-motivation, and poor coordination result in challenges in
implementing community interventions (Handayani et al., 2018). Having higher self-
efficacy on non-communicable diseases health promotion are associated with higher
knowledge, favorable attitude towards implementation, and better practices than those with

lower self-efficacy (Yenit, et al., 2023).

69

In terms of knowledge and practice, local studies suggest challenges among
barangay leaders when applying their knowledge to barangay programs. In a related study
on Gender and Development programs, despite having a high level of knowledge among
barangay focal persons, there are still challenges in translating it into actual practice such
as preparation of GAD plans and budget allocation (Moyani, et al. 2023). LCEs at the sub-
national level prioritized visible projects like infrastructure and livestock distribution for
political gain over behavior change campaigns due to their limited understanding of local

nutrition concerns and appropriate interventions (IPA, 2019).
Association of self-efficacy with practice

Self-efficacy has been found to be significantly associated with practice, albeit
weakly. There is little to no evidence exploring the relationship of self-efficacy and practice
on program management, especially at the community level. Previous research emphasized
the need for efforts to improve population health through leaders focusing on supporting

the self-efficacy of the leaders in taking actions that promote health (Williams et al, 2024)

Study results showed weak associations between the personal factors (knowledge
and self-efficacy) and behavior, which suggests that the environmental factor could have
had a stronger influence than the personal factors for behavior or practice on NPM to be

implemented. However, this was not explored in the study.

Shah, et al., (2019) identified that feasibility of programs, local politics, limited
capacity, and lack of resources as underlying challenges in managing public health

nutrition interventions. Cascading PPAN, participatory planning and improving NPM are

70

predominantly observed at the regional and provincial levels, but these processes are
fragmented and the local nutrition council lacks functionality at the municipal and

barangay levels (Innovations for Poverty Action, 2019).

In terms of the financial capacity of the provincial government, the income of
Quezon Province is considered as first class, however, more than half of the component
city or municipalities belong to the lower (4th to 6th) income classes, which may indicate
that the resources at the local level are very limited (PSA). Barangays consistently express
insufficient budget support from the national government for implementing nutrition
programs, requesting more financial support as issues arise with nutrition program
allocations often being subsumed under other categories like agriculture and child

protection, suggesting lower prioritization for nutrition (IPA, 2019).
Factors affecting the level of KSP on NPM of BNCCs in Quezon

In the context of Social Cognitive Theory, understanding the demographic factors
of BNCC is important because it provides a clear definition on how self-efficacy improves
behavior. This provides a better understanding of the characteristics of the people, their

confidence, and the role of the environment on their behavior.

The study of Liao et al (2022) described the Knowledge, Attitude, and Practice
(KAP) model as combined principles from Bandura’s Social Learning Theory, Roger’s
Diffusion of Innovation Theory, and Ajzen’s Theory of Planned Behavior. The KAP model
is related to this study, with self-efficacy identified as a factor in influencing the attitude of

an individual towards and engagement in desired behaviors. The KAP model suggests that

71

demographic characteristics such as sex, age, and educational attainment can influence
individuals’ access to information and their understanding of certain topics such as NPM.
On the other hand, SCT suggests that these demographic characteristics can also influence

the availability of role models and opportunities for observational learning.

Study results showed that age and educational attainment are not correlated with
the KSP scores on NPM of the BNCC. This was also observed in the studies of Taburnal
(2020) and Moyani, et. al. (2023) suggesting that educational attainment did not affect the
competency of community focal persons on health and gender and development. These
results suggest that factors other than age and education may play a more significant role

in determining KSP.

In terms of sex, the results of this study showed that female BNCCs were 2.52 times
more likely to have a high knowledge level on NPM compared to their male counterparts.
Female BNCCs are associated with better NPM practices than males, as Firmase and
Prieto-Carolino (2021) demonstrated that female barangay officials, often assigned to
committees traditionally viewed as feminine as health and nutrition, have led to improved
child nutrition and enhanced community health and sanitation, underscoring the positive

influence of women in NPM leadership roles (Firmase and Prieto-Carolino, 2021).

Study results showed that the BNCC’s length of years in service is associated with
the self-efficacy and practice on NPM, showing a 7.7% increase in odds of having high
self-efficacy level, and a 7.1% increase in odds of having high practice level for each
additional year in service. A similar phenomenon was observed by Taburnal (2020)

suggesting that the health leaders with longer tenure in their positions demonstrated greater

72

confidence in providing health services and managing challenging situations, suggesting
that work experience is a more reliable indicator of self-efficacy and practice, as it provides
repeated opportunities to perform tasks, solve problems, and build relationships, ultimately

fostering trust and collaboration within the community.

Results of the study showed that training on NPM did not translate to improvement
in knowledge and self-efficacy scores but have provided a very weak correlation on the
practice scores. On the other hand, BNCCs who had training on nutrition have been found
to be 2.43 times more likely to have higher self-efficacy scores and 1.948 times more likely
to have higher practice scores than those who did not have training. This suggests that
nutrition training programs have been helpful to BNCCs especially in understanding the
nutrition problems of their community. Results showed that weaker influence of NPM
training might be because the training on NPM reported by the BNCCs are aligned more

on the general responsibilities of barangay captains, and not specific to NPM.

Having extensive experience enhances productivity; however, there is a natural
decline in the willingness and ability to learn as people age, this can be enhanced through
education, training, and practical work interventions considering normative patterns of

adult development (Kanfer & Ackerman 2004, Priyadharsan & Saravanabawan, 2021).

SCT of Bandura suggests that practice is the synthesis of knowledge and self-
efficacy, enhanced through continuous experience and training (Bandura, 1986).
Demographic factors age, sex, and educational attainment influence the initial acquisition
of knowledge, while practical experience and training build self-efficacy and refine the

application of that knowledge in practice through interaction with the environment.

73

Training, particularly in specific areas like nutrition, equips individuals with the necessary
skills and knowledge to feel competent, thereby enhancing their self-efficacy and

positively impacts readiness to change (Ferrari, 2023; Bandura, 1986).

Training processes are essential for developing self-efficacy as this reinforces their
belief in their capabilities and making self-efficacy more reliant on practical experience
and specialized training rather than inherent demographic characteristics (Bandura, 1986;
Arghode et al., 2020). SCT highlights the importance of social interactions, observational
learning, and real-life experiences in learning, which boosts their confidence, and increases
the likelihood of behavior change (Bandura, 1986, 2004). Various learning models such as
Experiential Learning Theory and Situated Learning theory have supported this, which
emphasizes the importance of having opportunities to learn from others and apply what

they have learned in their day-to-day work to improve their competency.

Various studies support the need for formal training to be complemented with social
and experiential learning. The experience of Herman, et al. (2022) identified that apart from
capacity-building initiatives, communities of practice facilitate the implementation of
maternal and child health nutrition strategic planning. The scoping review of Ezezika, et
al. (2021) also emphasized that the capacity of decision-makers can be enhanced through
training, observation visits, and regular monitoring and feedback. This is also emphasized
by Gabriel and Manuzon (2016) suggesting that barangay officials in Nueva Ecija consult
with other local leaders and bank on their personal and work experiences as factors in

making decisions for the barangay.

74

Limitations of the Study

This research focuses on determining the association of KSP of BNCCs on NPM.
This also explores the association of demographic factors on the KSP of BNCCs. There
might be other factors influencing the NPM such as environmental factors which were not
measured in this study. The study included the development of the data collection tool
which were developed after the conduct of key informant interviews among 5 identified
experts from the academe and the non-government sector. Feedback from experts other
than those mentioned were not obtained and considered in the development of tools. A
reliability testing was also conducted among BNCCs of Los Bafios, Laguna. The tools were
revised to ensure that acceptable reliability was achieved, which resulted to eliminating of
three items in the practice questionnaire. It is recommended that the revised questionnaire
undergo content validation and reliability testing once again to confirm consistency and

reliability of the tool. However, we were not able to carry out these additional steps.

During data collection, possible occurrences of recall bias and response bias among
participants, and observer bias among the researchers may have happened. To control for
possible occurrence of observer bias, a standard procedure for the data collection was used
and all the persons responsible for collecting and validating the data were trained. The
content of the research instrument was also reviewed and validated by experts to ensure
that the questions accurately measure the intended variables. To control for the recall and
response bias among BNCCs, strategies such as triangulating data sources such as
requesting for documents supporting the NPM practice to be presented, asking the specific

trainings attended, and validating the age with the birthdate.

75

CHAPTER VI

SUMMARY, CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Summary

The study aims to determine the association of KSP on NPM of the BNCCs in
Quezon Province, Philippines. The study also aims to determine the demographic
characteristics associated with the KSP on NPM of BNCCs. A total of 307 BNCCs from
Quezon Province were interviewed. Correlation analysis was conducted to determine the
association between knowledge, self-efficacy, and practices on NPM of the BNCCs, while
regression analysis was conducted to determine the demographic characteristics associated

with the KSP on NPM of BNCCs.

Significant weak associations have been observed between knowledge and self-
efficacy (p=0.1994, p=0.0004), knowledge and practice (p=0.1687, p=0.0030), and self-
efficacy and practice (p=0.1710, p=0.0026). Age and educational attainment did not have
any significant associations with the KSP on NPM of the BNCCs. Sex had a weak
significant association with knowledge scores (rpb=-0.127, p=0.026), with females being
2.54 (p=0.013) times more likely to have high knowledge level on NPM, compared to their

male counterparts.

Moreover, length of years in service has a weak significant association with self-
efficacy (p=0.059, p=0.002) and practice (p=0.132, p=0.021) on NPM, indicating BNCCs
with longer years in service tend to have higher self-efficacy and practice scores on NPM.
Attendance to training on nutrition has a weak significant association with self-efficacy

(tpb=0.127, p=0.026) and practice (rpb=-0.300, p=<0.001) on NPM, while attendance to
76

training on NPM has showed weak significant association to practice only (rpb=-0.215,
p=<0.001). BNCCs who had training on nutrition had been found to be 2.43 times more
likely to have higher self-efficacy scores and 1.948 times more likely to have higher

practice scores than those who did not have training.
Conclusions

The findings of the study showed that KSP were significantly correlated with each
other, albeit weakly. Demographic analysis indicated that age and educational attainment
are not significantly correlated with the KSP on NPM among BNCCs. However, the sex
of the BNCC has shown an influence on the knowledge levels. Length of service positively
correlates with both self-efficacy and practice, suggesting that more experienced BNCCs
exhibit greater confidence and better practices in NPM. Furthermore, attendance to
nutrition training is positively associated with higher self-efficacy and practice scores,

while attendance to NPM training has exhibited weak association to practice only.
Recommendations

Based on the study findings, the following recommendations are suggested to the

different sectors in enhancing the NPM of the BNCCs.

Key agencies on NPM. National agencies on health and nutrition such as the Department
of Health, and the National Nutrition Council should ensure that the PPAN is cascaded to
the LGUs in a timely manner to give them enough time to develop their nutrition action
plans and allocate budget for these. M&E activities should be routinely conducted, to

ensure that the local government units have developed plans that are aligned both to the

7

PPAN and the community nutrition challenges. To ensure adequate allocation of resources
for nutrition programs at the barangay level, budgetary support should be given to the local
government units, which should only be used for nutrition and related activities.
Conducting annual reviews and audits of barangay nutrition programs should be done to

ensure compliance and identify areas for improvement.

To improve BNCCs’ support for nutrition programs, awareness campaigns using
various channels (radio, television, social media) highlighting the importance of addressing
nutrition challenges should also be implemented. There is also a need to advocate for
policies that mandate regular training for BNCCs to ensure they are well-equipped to

manage local nutrition programs effectively.

The Department of the Interior and Local Government could advocate for better
integration of NPM into barangay governance structures, such that nutrition programs
could be prioritized in barangay development plans and budgets. Separate and specific line-
item budgets must be identified for nutrition programs and activities, to ensure that they
are prioritized. The qualifications of the barangay officials for candidacy may also be
reviewed, especially on formal education and management trainings. For better integration
both horizontally and vertically, organizing coordination meetings could be an avenue for
communicating challenges and sharing best practices across sectors and local government
units. Open communication channels between the higher and lower levels of government

should be in place to streamline efforts and resources for NPM.

Capacity-building providers. There is a clear need for a more structured and

consistent approach to capacity building that ensures all BNCCs receive the necessary

78

training and support they need in fulfilling their responsibilities. To address concerns in
time constraints, a unified training on program management may be conducted to discuss
the technical know-hows that are applicable across several programs (health, nutrition,
agriculture, etc.) such as planning, budgeting, M&E, among others. Specific training on
the program contexts must be conducted to inform the decision-makers on the importance
of the different programs, such as nutrition. This could involve development of
standardized training modules targeted to the BNCCs, as well as other learning
opportunities. Capacity-building interventions should be strengthened by incorporating
practical, hands-on training sessions that focus on real-life scenarios BNCCs may
encounter. Establishing robust support systems such as mentorship programs between
newly-elected and re-elected barangay officials, as well as other peer learning opportunities
could also help strengthen the competencies of BNCCs in managing nutrition programs

effectively.

To ensure that the objectives of training provided to BNCCs are met, regular M&E
mechanisms should be in place to assess the effectiveness of training programs and the
outcomes of capacity-building initiatives on BNCCs’ performance. Feedback mechanisms
where BNCCs can provide insights and suggestions for improving training programs and

support structures should also be in place.

Provincial and municipal leaders Policies prioritizing nutrition and health
programs should be in place to advocate for sufficient budgetary resources supporting
NPM at the barangay level. These policies should be aligned with the national and

provincial directives, and should be adequately funded. To further aid the BNCCs, the

79

provincial and municipal LGUs could further aid the barangays by assisting them in
seeking grants and building partnerships with non-government organizations and the
private sector that support nutrition advocacies. A comprehensive M&E system would also
allow for accurate and timely progress-tracking of nutrition programs. This would help the
BNCCs in making informed decisions for nutrition programs and activities. Organizing
incentive programs to reward outstanding performance on nutrition programs could also

boost the support for effective nutrition program implementation among the barangays.

Barangay leaders. The BNCC’s support and leadership in NPM can significantly
influence success of nutrition programs in the community. It is crucial that the BNCCs,
together with their committee members, are well-informed of their roles and
responsibilities, as well as the means of verifications, to ensure effective management and
implementation of nutrition programs. This includes establishing clear benchmarks and
performance indicators can help in monitoring progress and assessing the effectiveness of
the interventions. Having a genuine understanding of the nutrition situation of the
community through reviewing of OPT reports and other related documents, and organizing
community meetings and consultations would help make informed decisions regarding

nutrition programs to implement.

Prioritizing nutrition programs, including allocating adequate budget for activities
is necessary to address nutrition problems in the community. Adopt the whole-of-
government approach by collaborating with different agencies or departments to integrate
nutrition programs with other health and social services. This holistic approach ensures a

more effective and comprehensive delivery of services. Lastly, to further enhance

80

knowledge on NPM, barangay leaders should actively participate in training programs

focused on nutrition and NPM offered by various institutions.

Researchers To address gaps on the limitations of the research instrument, content
validation to more nutrition experts and social scientists may be conducted again to ensure
its accuracy. If there were additional changes on the instrument, reliability testing must be
implemented once again, a good reliability score must be achieved before conduct of data

collection.

The study suggests that environmental factors, such as availability of resources,
support from higher levels of government, and others, would need further exploration to
understand their influence on the KSP of BNCCs. These factors play a crucial role in
enhancing the effectiveness of nutrition program management. To consider the influence
of the environmental factors, performing comparative analyses between barangays with
different levels of resources and government support could help identify key factors that

contribute to successful nutrition program management.

To further address the research gaps, it is recommended to utilize a mixed-methods
approach that combines both quantitative data through surveys, with qualitative data
through interviews and focus groups, to provide a holistic view of the factors influencing
KSP of BNCCs. Conducting key informant interviews and focus group discussions with
various stakeholders, including the BNCCs, BNS, MNAOs, community members, etc.,
could contribute to the understanding of the unique challenges and barriers faced by

different barangays in NPM. Data from previously excluded areas, such as Lucena City

81

and island municipalities may also be included to ensure a comprehensive understanding

of the province-wide context.

Research findings may be utilized to advocate for policies and programs supporting
NPM at the local, provincial, and national levels. This could be coursed through policy
briefs, stakeholder meetings, and presentations at relevant conferences and forums. The
results of the study may also be communicated with the concemed policy makers and

government officials for it to be translated into policy recommendations.

82

REFERENCES

Abun, D., Asuncion, S., Lazaro, J., Magallanes, T., & Nimfa, C. (2021). The effect of
educational attainment, length of work experience on the self-efficacy of teachers
and employees. Jnternational Journal of Business Ecosystem & Strategy, 3(2), 16-
28. https://doi.org/10.36096/ijbes.v3i2.258

Acosta, A. M., & Fanzo, J. (2012). Fighting maternal and child malnutrition: Analysing
the political and institutional determinants of delivering a national multisectoral
response in six countries. Comparative study prepared for DFID by the Institute of

Development Studies.

Africa, L. S., Tandang, N. A., Theresa, Ma., Jose, N., Carada, W. B., Montecillo, K. V.,
Bustos, A. R., De, A. R., Amit, G. C., Gawe, C. B., & Anne, J. (2021). Field trial
of local nutrition plans and programs monitoring and evaluation protocol in the
Philippines. Jurnal Gizi Dan Pangan, 16(2), 71-80.

https://doi.org/10.25182/jgp.2021.16.2.71-80

Ali, H., Schalk, R., Van Engen, M., & Assen, M. (2017). Leadership self-efficacy and
effectiveness: The moderating influence of task complexity. Journal of Leadership
Studies, 11. https://doi.org/10.1002/jls.21550

Arghode, V., Heminger, S., & McLean, G. N. (2020). Career self-efficacy and education
abroad: Implications for future global workforce. European Journal of Training
and Development, 45(1), 1-13. https://doi.org/10.1108/EJTD-02-2020-0034

Aryeetey, R., & Covic, N. (2020). A review of leadership and capacity gaps in nutrition-
sensitive agricultural policies and strategies for selected countries in Sub-Saharan
Africa) and Asia. Food and Nutrition Bulletin, 41(3), 380-396.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0379572120949305

Ayre, C., & Scally, A. (2013). Critical values for Lawshe’s content validity ratio.
Measurement and Evaluation in Counseling and Development, 47(1), 79-86.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0748175613513808

83

Bandura, A. (1986). Social foundations of thought and action: A social cognitive theory.
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.

Bandura, A. (1989). Regulation of cognitive processes through perceived self-efficacy.
Developmental Psychology, 25(5), 729-735.

Bandura, A. (1997). Self-efficacy: The exercise of control. New York, NY: W. H. Freeman.

Bandura, A. (2004). Health promotion by social cognitive means. Health Education &
Behavior, 31(2), 143-164. https://doi.org/10.1177/1090198104263660

Barba, C. (2000). The Philippine Plan of Action for Nutrition: An overview. Food &
Nutrition Bulletin, 21(4), 523-528. https://doi.org/10.1177/156482650002100431

Bhutta, Z. A., Ahmed, T., & Black, R. E. (2008). Effective nutrition interventions in
developing countries: A review of evidence. The American Journal of Clinical

Nutrition.

Bigool, M., Osei Owusu, N., & Frimpong, A. A. (2023). Effects of the community-based
health planning and services on anemia and acute malnutrition amongst under-fives
in Ghana: A comparative study. Journal of Public Health in Africa, 14(1).
https://doi.org/10.4081/jphia.2023.2169

Black, M. M., Pérez-Escamilla, R., & Rao, S. F. (2015). Integrating nutrition and child
development interventions: Scientific basis, evidence of impact, and
implementation considerations. Advances in Nutrition, 6(6), 852-859.

https://doi.org/10.3945/an.115.010348

Bloom, B. S. (1968). Learning for mastery. Instruction and curriculum. Regional Education

Laboratory for the Carolinas and Virginia, Topical Papers and Reprints, 1(2), 1-
12.

Bryce, J., Coitinho, D., Darnton-Hill, I., Pelletier, D., & Pinstrup-Andersen, P. (2008).
Maternal and child undernutrition: Effective action at national level. The Lancet,
371(9611), 510-526. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(07)61694-8

84

Calderon, T. A. (2002). Nutrition education training of health workers and other field staff

to support chronically deprived communities. Public Health Nutrition.

Champely, S. (2020). pwr: Basic functions for power analysis (1.3-0) [Software].

https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=pwr

Davari, A., & Rashidi, A. (2015). Assessing the most-in-need leadership skills among
community nutrition managers: A qualitative exercise in Iranian health system.

International Journal of Health Management, 9(1).

Department of Science and Technology - Food and Nutrition Research Institute (DOST-
FNRI). (2016). Philippine Nutrition Facts and Figures 2015: Anthropometric
Survey. FNRI Bldg., DOST Compound, Gen. Santos Avenue, Bicutan, Taguig City,
Metro Manila, Philippines.

Department of Science and Technology - Food and Nutrition Research Institute (DOST-
FNRI). (2022). Philippine Nutrition Facts and Figures: 2018-2019 Expanded
National Nutrition Survey (ENNS). FNRI Bldg., DOST Compound, Gen. Santos
Avenue, Bicutan, Taguig City, Metro Manila, Philippines.

Dodd, W., Kipp, A., Nicholson, B., Lincoln, L. L., Little, M., Walley, J., & Wei, X. (2021).
Governance of community health worker programs in a decentralized health
system: A qualitative study in the Philippines. BMC Health Services Research,
21(1), 1-14. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12913-021-06452-x

Ezezika, O., Gong, J., & Abdirahman, H. (2021). Barriers and facilitators to the
implementation of large-scale nutrition interventions in Africa: A scoping review.
Global Implementation Research and __ Applications, 1, 38-52.

https://doi.org/10.1007/s43477-02 1-00007-2
Feist, J., & Feist, G. J. (2013). Theories of personality (7th ed.). McGraw-Hill Education.

Ferrari, F. (2023). Skills mismatch and change confidence: The impact of training on
change recipients’ self-efficacy. European Journal of Training and Development,
47(10), 69-90. https://doi.org/10.1108/EJTD-02-2020-0034

85

Firmase, J. T., & Prieto-Carolino, A. (2021). Women’s participation in Barangay politics:
A view from the ground. Philippine Journal of Social Sciences and Humanities, 26,
1-15.

Floranza, J. M. (2021). Barangay governance in northeast of Catanduanes, Philippines:
Basis for Catanduanes State University Panganiban Campus extension program.
European Journal of Social Impact and Circular Economy.
https://doi.org/10.13135/2704-9906/5058

Gabriel, A. G., & Manuzon, E. D. (2016). Management and decision making styles and
training preferences of Barangay officials in the province of Nueva Ecija,
Philippines. North Asian International Research Journal of Social Science &
Humanities, 2(11).

Gajbhiye, A., et al. (2024). Community-led approach to combat malnutrition among
children (0-5 years) in India: A systematic review of interventions and impact.
Educational Administration: Theory and Practice, 30(6), 1072-1080.
https://doi.org/10.5355S/kuey.v30i6.5437

Garcia, L., Ma. Charina Maneja, Lalap, B., Miranda, M., Castafieda, A., Gonzales, P.,
Lorraine, A., Aileen De Juras, Cabrera, L., & Abuyog, A. (2016). The current state
of nutrition education in the Philippines. Journal of Human Ecology, 5(1).
Retrieved last May 20, 2024, from _https://ovcre.uplb.edu.ph/journals-

uplb/index. php/JHE/article/view/405

Ghodsi, D., Omidvar, N., Nikooyeh, B., Roustaee, R., Shakibazadeh, E., & Al-Jawaldeh,
A. (2021). Effectiveness of community nutrition-specific interventions on
improving malnutrition of children under 5 years of age in the Eastern
Mediterranean region: A systematic review and meta-analysis. International
Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 18(15), 7844.
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph18157844

86

Gillespie, S., Menon, P., & Kennedy, A. L. (2015). Scaling up impact on nutrition: What
will it take? Advances in Nutrition, 6(4), 440-451.

https://doi.org/10.3945/an.115.008276

Haddad, L., Cameron, L., & Barnett, I. (2015). The double burden of malnutrition in SE
Asia and the Pacific: Priorities, policies and politics. Health Policy and Planning,
30(9), 1193-1206. https://doi.org/10.1093/heapol/czul 10

Handayani, O., Rahayu, S., Nugroho, E., Hermawati, B., Nguyen, T. V., & Nguyen, H. L.
(2018). Effectiveness leadership and optimization of local potential in nutrition
status improvement effort. Jurnal Kesehatan Masyarakat, 13(3), 423-429.
https://doi.org/10.15294/kemas.v13i3.13593

Herman, D. R., Blom, A., Tagtow, A., & Cunningham-Sabo, L. (2022). Implementation of
an individual + policy, system, and environmental (I+ PSE) technical assistance
initiative to increase capacity of MCH nutrition strategic planning. Maternal and
Child Health Journal, 26(Supp| 1), 216-228. https://doi-org/10.1007/s10995-022-
03435-0

Huang, X., Yang, B., Liu, Q., Zhang, R., Tang, S., & Story, M. (2020). Improving maternal
and child nutrition in China: An analysis of nutrition policies and programs initiated
during the 2000-2015 Millennium Development Goals era and implications for
achieving the Sustainable Development Goals. Journal of Health, Population and
Nutrition, 39(12). https://doi.org/10.1186/s41043-020-00221-y

Ignacio, M. S. (2014). Assessment of Barangay Nutrition Action Plan (BNAP)
implementation in selected municipalities in Ifugao, Bulacan and Siquijor:
Barangay nutrition scholars’ perspective. Acta Medica Philippina, 50(3).

https://doi.org/10.47895/amp.v50i3.823

Ignacio, M. S. (2015). Assessment of the preparedness of the Barangay Nutrition Scholars
(BNS) in implementing Barangay Nutrition Action Plan in selected municipalities
in Ifugao, Bulacan, and Siquijor. Philippine Journal of Health Research and
Development (PJHRD), 19(3).

87

Ignacio, M. S., & Bullecer, E. R. (2016). Assessment of the Philippine Plan of Action for
Nutrition (PPAN) localization in selected municipalities in Ifugao, Bulacan and
Siquijor, Philippines. Retrieved from htips://www.tm.mahidol.ac.th/seameo/2016.
47-4/29-CPH1312p852.pdf

Innovations for Poverty Action (IPA). (2019). Final evaluation report: Formative
evaluation of the Philippine Plan of Action for Nutrition 2017-2022. Retrieved from
https://nep.neda.gov.ph/storage/document/1601889407_1597123454 2019 10 3

|_PPAN Evaluation Report Final.pdf

Kanfer, R., & Ackerman, P. (2004). Aging, adult development, and work motivation.
Academy of Management Review, 29(3), 440-458.
https://doi.org/10.5465/amr.2004. 13670969

Kennedy, E., Tessema, M., Hailu, T., Zerfu, D., Belay, A., Ayana, G., Kuche, D., Moges,
T., Assefa, T., Samuel, A., Kassaye, T., Fekadu, H., & Van Wassenhove, J. (2015).
Multisector nutrition program governance and implementation in Ethiopia:
Opportunities and challenges. Food and Nutrition Bulletin, 36(4), 534-548.
https://doi.org/10.1177/03795721 15611768

Lapping, K., Frongillo, E. A., Nguyen, P. H., Coates, J., Webb, P., & Menon, P. (2014).
Organizational factors, planning capacity, and integration challenges constrain
provincial planning processes for nutrition in decentralizing Vietnam. Food and
Nutrition Bulletin, 35(3), 382-391. https://doi.org/10.1177/15648265 1403500310

Liao, X., Nguyen, T. P. L., & Sasaki, N. (2022). Use of the knowledge, attitude, and
practice (KAP) model to examine sustainable agriculture in Thailand. Regional

2022.03

Sustainability, 3(1), 41-52. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.regsus.2022.03.005

Mallari, E., Lasco, G., Sayman, D. J., Maever, A., Balabanova, D., McKee, M., Mendoza,
J., Palileo-Villanueva, L. M., Renedo, A., Seguin, M. L., & Palafox, B. (2020).

Connecting communities to primary care: A qualitative study on the roles,

88

motivations and lived experiences of community health workers in the Philippines.
BMC Health Services Research, 20(1). https://doi.org/10.1186/s12913-020-05699-
0

Mason, J. B., Sanders, D., Musgrove, P., et al. (2006). Community health and nutrition
programs. In D. T. Jamison, J. G. Breman, A. R. Measham, et al. (Eds.), Disease
Control Priorities in Developing Countries (2nd ed., Chapter 56). Washington, DC:
The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank.
Retrieved June 2, 2024, from https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK11726/

Moyani, S. A. P., Moyani Jr., G. C., Dajao, G. A., Bautista, M. A., & Maguate, G. S.
(2023). Knowledge, commitment and compliance of Barangay focal persons on
gender and development: Basis for an action plan. International Journal of
Scientific Research and Management, 11(11).
https://doi.org/10.18535/ijsrm/v1 1il1.sh02

National Nutrition Council (NNC). (2005). Winning in Nutrition, A Nutrition Program
Management Manual for Local Government Units. Makati: NNC.

National Nutrition Council (NNC). (2018). Guidelines on Establishing a Database on

Functional Local Nutrition Committees.

National Nutrition Council (NNC). (2021). eLearning Course on Local Nutrition Program
Management Module 3: Integrating NPM in the Local Governance and

Development System.
National Nutrition Council (2023). Philippine Plan of Action for Nutrition 2023-2028.
Taguig City, Philippines.

Negradas-Varona, R., Bolla, D. A. H., Bolinget, M. S., & Illab, H. D. (2017). Knowledge,
attitude and practices on disaster risk reduction and management of the Barangay
officials of Baler, Aurora, Philippines. International Journal of Advanced
Research, 5(7). https://doi.org/10.21474/1JARO1/4851

89

Nisbett, N., Wach, E., Haddad, L., & El Arifeen, S. (2015). What drives and constrains
effective leadership in tackling child undernutrition? Findings from Bangladesh,
Ethiopia, India and Kenya. Food Policy, 53, 33-45.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodpol.2015.04.001

Oktari, R., Comfort, L., Syamsidik, & Dwitama, P. (2019). Measuring coastal cities’
resilience toward coastal hazards: Instrument development and validation.
Progress in Disaster Science, 5, 100057.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pdisas.2019.100057

Ouedraogo, O., Doudou, M., Drabo, K., Kiburente, M., Cissé, D., Mésenge, C., & Donnen,
P. (2021). Facilitating factors and challenges of the implementation of multisectoral
nutrition programmes at the community level to improve optimal infant and young
child feeding practices: A qualitative study in Burkina Faso. Public Health
Nutrition, 24(12), 3756-3767. https://doi.org/10.1017/S136898002000347X

Pelletier, D. L., Frongillo, E. A., Gervais, S., Hoey, L., Menon, P., Ngo, T., Stoltzfus, R.
J., Ahmed, A. M. S., & Ahmed, T. (2012). Nutrition agenda setting, policy
formulation and implementation: Lessons from the Mainstreaming Nutrition
Initiative. Health Policy and Planning, 27(1), 19-31.

https://doi.org/10.1093/heapol/ezr011

The Pennsylvania State University. (n.d.). Logistic Regression. STAT 462: Applied
Regression Analysis. Department of Statistics, The Pennsylvania State University.

Retrieved June 22, 2024, from htips://online.stat.psu.edu/stat462/node/207/

Profugo, J. R., Imperio, W. L., & Rodil, N. R. P. (2023). Training needs assessment of
barangay officials in the municipalities of Torrijos and Buenavista, Marinduque.

Asian Intellect Research and Education Journal, 27(June), 34-40.

Priyadharsan, S., & Saravanabawan, A. (2021). Does age matter to influence self-efficacy:
Review of related literature. Journal of Management, 16(2). Retrieved from

2_03.pdf

90

R Core Team. (2022). R: A language and environment for statistical computing (4.2.1)
[Software]. R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria. Retrieved

from htty vw.R-project.org,

Seguin, R. A., Palombo, R., Economos, C. D., Hyatt, R., Kuder, J., & Nelson, M. E. (2008).
Factors related to leader implementation of a nationally disseminated community-
based exercise program: A cross-sectional study. International Journal of
Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity, 5, 62. https://doi.org/10.1186/1479-
5868-5-62

Shaari, R., Abdul Rahman, S. A., & Rajab, A. (2014). Self-efficacy as a determined factor
for knowledge sharing awareness. International Journal of Trade, Economics and
Finance, 5(1). https://doi.org/10.7763/IJTEF.2014.V5.337

Shah, H. D., Adler, J., Ottoson, J., Webb, K., & Gosliner, W. (2019). Leaders' experiences
in planning, implementing, and evaluating complex public health nutrition
interventions. Journal of Nutrition Education and Behavior, 51(5), 528-538.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jneb.2019.02.005

Shrestha, R. M., Ghimire, M., & Shakya, P. (2019). School health and nutrition program
implementation, impact, and challenges in schools of Nepal: Stakeholders’
perceptions. Tropical Medicine and Health, 47, 32. hitips://doi.org/10.1186/s41182-
019-0159-4

StataCorp. (2015). Stata Statistical Software: Release 14. College Station, TX: StataCorp
LP.

Taburnal, M. V. M. (2020). Knowledge and competence of Barangay Health Workers
(BHW5). International Journal of Innovation, Creativity and Change, 14(1).

Thar Kei Myo, S., & Bigool, M. (2024). Impact of community nutrition project on
malnutrition in children under five: A case of SPRING Ghana project. Healthcare
Low-Resource Settings. Advance online publication.

https://doi.org/10.4081/hls.2024.12272

91

Tontisirin, K., & Winichagoon, P. (1999). Community-based programmes: Success factors
for public nutrition derived from the experience of Thailand. Food and Nutrition
Bulletin, 20(3), 315-322. https://doi.org/10.1177/156482659902000308

UNICEF. (2017). First 1000 Days. UNICEF.
https://www.unicef.org/southafrica/media/55 1/file/ZAF-First-1000-days-brief-

017.pdf

Viajar, R. V., Dorado, J. B., Azafia, G. P., Ibarra, H. A., Ferrer, E. B., & Capanzana, M. V.
(2020). Process evaluation of nutrition intervention strategy in a local Philippine
setting. Journal of Primary Care & Community Health, 11, 215013272091540.

https://doi.org/10.1177/2150132720915407

Williams, N., Newton-Hoe, E., & Kovac, M. (2024). How attitudes of state and community
leaders regarding health equity and social determinants of health are associated with
behavioral intentions to improve population health. PLoS ONE, 19(4).

World Health Organization. (2021). Malnutrition key facts. Retrieved October 17, 2023,
from https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-

sheets/detail/malnutrition#:~:text=Globally%20in%202020%2C%20149%20milli

on,age%20are%20linked%20to%20undernutrition

Yenit, M. K., Kolbe-Alexander, T. L., Gelaye, K. A., Gezie, L. D., Tesema, G. A., Abebe,
S. M., Azale, T., Shitu, K., & Gyawali, P. (2023). An evaluation of community
health workers’ knowledge, attitude and personal lifestyle behaviour in non-
communicable disease health promotion and their association with self-efficacy
and NCD-risk perception. Jnternational Journal of Environmental Research and
Public Health, 20(9).
