Ophiolite-Hosted Epithermal Vein Mineralization in the Malabeg Prospect, Cabangan Massif, Zambales, Philippines

John Emmanuel Sevilla Fungo

UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES DILIMAN

Master of Science in Geology

September 2022

ABSTRACT

The Malabeg prospect is one of the few reported peridotite-hosted gold and base metal
vein-type mineralization within the Cabangan Massif, Zambales Ophiolite Complex.
Mineralization is associated with NW-trending quartz-adularia veins along contacts between the
middle Eocene serpentinized harzburgites and Late Oligocene to Late Eocene diabases of the
Cabangan Massif and in open spaces within host rocks, wherein veins and floats have gold concentrations up to 74.5 ppm. Four stages of alteration and mineralization were determined for the Malabeg prospect.
Stage 1 consists of talc-carbonate alteration of the serpentinized peridotites. Stage 2 consists of
dolomite veins found adjacent to host rocks. Stage 3 consists of quartz-carbonate veins, where
thombic boundaries are observed between quartz and calcite. Arsenopyrite is present in Stages 2-
3. Stage 4 consists of quartz-adularia exhibiting massive, comb and brecciated textures. Ore
mineralogy consists of chalcopyrite + galena + sphalerite ± pyrite ± pyrrhotite ± electrum.
Supergene alteration is represented by iron oxides ranging from limonite to hematite, pyrolusite
and secondary chalcocite, aside from the thin laterite capping the ultramafic regolith. Six electrum
grains in Stage 4 quartz-adularia reveal an average composition of 74.33% Au and 21.55% Ag.
Mean iron-sulfide mole percent for nine sphalerite points coexisting with pyrite or pyrrhotite is
14.91. Two-phase fluid inclusions in Stage 4 quartz-adularia reveal bimodal homogenization
temperatures range from 170 to 180 °C and 190 to 200 °C while salinity values range from 1.4 to
10.23 wt.% NaCl. From these, depths of 67-144 meters below the paleo-water table was estimated while the trend of values plotted on the homogenization temperature versus salinity graph is inconclusive. An intermediate sulfidation state is recognized for the Malabeg prospect, which is supported by ore assemblage, sphalerite mineral chemistry and fluid inclusion properties. The results suggest initial pulses intermediate sulfidation (IS) fluids from a nearby
magmatic source related to the Bataan Volcanic Arc. Fluid-rock reaction with the serpentinized
harzburgites, together with evolved fluids, produced listwanitization (Stages 1-3), while the high
buffering capacity of the host rocks lowered the sulfidation state of the system and precipitated
arsenopyrite along with the initial quartz-carbonate veins. Faulting and reaction-induced self-
cracking within listwanites promoted growth of open spaces in structurally weak planes that served
as loci for the precipitation of the succeeding IS fluids into Stage 4 quartz-adularia veins. Shift
towards an oxidizing environment produced supergene alteration minerals such as hematite, pyrolusite and secondary chalcocite. Ore content along the various lithologies also suggest different affinities for transport and
precipitation. As, Zn, Co, Cr and Ni peak in Stages 1-3 which may have been precipitated favorably
with the carbonates while Au, Cu and Pb peak in Stages 3-4 which may have precipitated favorably with silica. Overall, the results suggest shallow hydrothermal activity in the area as a part of a larger
porphyry-epithermal system associated to the Bataan Volcanic Arc. The results can also serve as
a guide for the exploration of other peridotite-hosted epithermal deposits with similar tectonics settings.

CHAPTER 1

INTRODUCTION

1.1 INTRODUCTION

Epithermal deposits are shallow metallic deposits that form at depths between 50 meters to
1 kilometer (White & Hedenquist, 1990; White & Hedenquist, 1990; Cooke and Simmons, 2000;
Richards, 2009; Hedenquist & Arribas, 2017). Their economic importance lies in being significant
sources of gold, silver and base metals globally (Singer, 1995; Frimmel, 2008). Epithermal
deposits are usually associated with volcanic arcs hosted by acidic to intermediate subaerial
volcanic rocks (Hedenquist, 1986; Hedenquist & Lowenstern, 1994; Hedenquist et al., 1996;
Sillitoe & Hedenquist, 2003; Sillitoe, 2010). For example, epithermal deposits in the Philippines
are mostly hosted by andesitic to dacitic domes with plutons ranging from granodiorites to gabbros

(e.g. Mitchell & Leach, 1991; Chang et al., 2011; Cooke et al., 2011).

However, there are very limited occurrences of epithermal mineralization hosted in
peridotites. In Papua New Guinea, the first epithermal PGE (platinum group of elements) deposit
known as the Doriri lode is hosted in carbonatized peridotite and norite (Lindley, 2016). Although
its temperature of formation (100-220 °C) from chlorite thermometry, depth of mineralization, and
other hydrothermal characteristics express its epithermal nature, its main ore are platinum,

palladium and nickel unlike typical Au-Ag or Au-Cu epithermal deposits.

Aside from this, a few similar occurrences have been found among orogenic gold deposits.
In contrast to epithermal deposits, these are formed in orogenic belts along continental settings and
are usually hosted in intrusive rocks that experienced regional metamorphism (Groves et al., 1998;
Tomkins, 2013). These are also geologically older, ranging from Archean to Triassic, and have
different cnvironment of formation and hydrothermal activity that result in distinct mineral

assemblage, deposited metals and alteration patterns (Goldfarb et al., 2015; Tomkins, 2013).

Reported orogenic gold deposits associated to ophiolites are the mesothermal deposits in British
Columbia (Ash, 2001) and listwanite-hosted gold deposits in the Tavsan and Kaymaz prospects in
Turkey (Yigit, 2006), although the latter pertains to silicate-carbonate veins rather than

hydrothermal quartz veins.

Compared to the sheer number of gold-bearing quartz veins in other lithologies (Goldfarb
et al., 2015; Wang et al., 2019), the occurrences of ophiolite-hosted mineralized quartz veins are
limited. Nonetheless, Cordillera Exploration Company Inc. (CEXCI) discovered precious- and
base-metal-bearing quartz veins hosted on the peridotite suite of the NEWMINCO Pacific Mining
Corp. property EXPA000062-III. This tenement lies in the Cabangan Massif, one of the three
tectonic blocks that comprise the Zambales Ophiolite Complex (Rossman et al., 1989). Among the
various prospects in the tenement, ocular inspection revealed mineral assemblage and alteration
textures that are possibly related to epithermal mineralization in the Malabeg Prospect. It is
therefore the objective of this study to describe the mineralization characteristics of the Malabeg
Prospect and elucidate the processes behind the unusual ophiolite-hosted epithermal vein

mineralization.

1.2 STATEMENT OF THE PROBLEM

Ophiolite-hosted epithermal vein mineralization is one of the least studied occurrences of
precious- and base-metal deposition. Additionally, the Malabeg Prospect has very limited
published information. Hence, its mineralization characteristics and metallogenic potential is not
well-comprehended. It is necessary to investigate the mineralization characteristics of the Malabeg

Prospect to further elucidate the process of epithermal mineralization in ultramafic host rocks.

1.3 SIGNIFICANCE OF THE STUDY

The available information on the mineralization characteristics and underlying processes
in ophiolite-hosted epithermal deposits, such as wall-rock interaction and fluid evolution, are
limited to only a few studies. Furthermore, associated mineralization may be deduced if the
mineralization style is determined, which could add potential target deposits in the vicinity of the
area. Lastly, determination of the mineralization style of the deposit may serve as guide for mineral

exploration and prospecting of other ophiolite-hosted epithermal deposits.

1.4 OBJECTIVES OF THE STUDY

This research aims to investigate the mineralization characteristics of the Malabeg

Prospect. The following are its specific objectives:

e Describe the vein occurrence and textures,

e Identify the ore and gangue mineral assemblage,

e Determine the ore-forming conditions using fluid inclusion petrography and
microthermometry, and

e Classify the sulfidation state of the deposit.

1.5 SCOPE AND LIMITATIONS

Geologic mapping was limited to the area of the Malabeg Prospect. The study was
constrained by the availability of exposed outcrops and drill core samples. Temporal relationships
of veins and host rocks were limited to field and microscopic evidence of cross-cutting and

depositional relationships.

The Malabeg Prospect is currently in the exploration stage under Cordillera Exploration
Company Inc. Due to limitations on drill hole depth and locations, the study of other associated

deposits was not included in this study.

1.6 THESIS ORGANIZATION

This thesis is organized as follows:

Chapter 2 (Review of Related Literature) presents a review of epithermal deposits and
types, as well as literature on ophiolite-hosted vein-type mineralization. Then it describes the
regional geology and mineralization in Western Luzon where the study area is located. It ends with
the discussion on relevant studies regarding mineral chemistry and fluid inclusion analysis that

were used in the study.

Chapter 3 (Methodology) discusses the methods done in this study to address the research
objectives. This includes field survey, petrography and ore microscopy, X-Ray diffraction (XRD),
fire assay, Inductively Coupled Plasma-Optical Emission Spectroscopy (ICP-OES), electron probe

microanalysis (EPMA) and fluid inclusion analysis.

Chapter 4 (Results and Discussion) presents the results of each methodology, particularly
the alteration and mineralogical paragenesis of the Malabeg prospect related to the mineralization
of gold and other base metals. It also presents the interpretation of the results to ultimately
determine the ore-forming conditions of the Malabeg prospect. A genetic model of the alteration

and mineralization is also presented.

Chapter 5 (Summary and Conclusions) goes back to the research problem and objectives

and how the results have answered these.

CHAPTER 2

REVIEW OF RELATED LITERATURE

2.1 EPITHERMAL MINERALIZATION

The word ‘epithermal’ was first used for shallow metallic deposits that indicate
hydrothermal! mineral precipitation and alteration at low temperature as opposed to common ore
deposits proximal to magmatic centers (Lindgren, 1922). Their economic importance lies in being
significant sources of gold, silver and base metals globally (Frimmel, 2008; Singer, 1995). In
succeeding studies, this term evolved to specify the following definition: a low temperature (100-
350 °C) shallow (50 to 1000 m) precious- or base-metal deposit with temporal and spatial-relation
to volcanic centers (White & Hedenquist, 1990; Cooke and Simmons, 2000; Richards, 2009;
Hedenquist & Arribas, 2017). The magmatic source from the volcanic center drives the circulation
of hydrothermal fluids that carry metal-bearing ligands (i. e. bisulfide and sulfide complexes).
These fluids leach ore minerals into altered host rocks or precipitate them into open spaces through
processes such as boiling (Robb, 2005). Although most epithermal deposits are associated with
magmatic environments, a few has been reported to be hosted in sedimentary units (Arehart, 1996;
Kirwin & Royle, 2018). Majority of epithermal deposits are also dated within Cenozoic (Wang et

al., 2019), and older deposits are assumed to have been eroded (Sidorov et al., 2015).

Epithermal deposits were initially classified into two major types based on sulfidation state.
This parameter refers to the valence state of the aqueous and gaseous sulfur species (Hedenquist,
1987) and is correlated to sulfur fugacity and oxidation state (Einaudi et al., 2003; Wones, 1981).

These differences produce contrasting mineralization styles.

Following the mentioned classification, high sulfidation deposits are characterized by
oxidized sulfur species such as sulfate (SO.”’) and sulfur dioxide (SO2). These deposits are situated
in subduction zone settings with calc-alkaline magmatism and proximal to volcanic vents where
saline fluids are derived from the magma (refer to Fig. 2.1). The high temperature and pressure
results to boiling of fluids, incorporating SO2 and CO? into gas while the remaining liquid is left
with a surplus of H™ (acidic). The components of high sulfidation deposits rise to the surface with
minor water-rock interaction at depth and are neutralized later by shallower host rocks (White &
Hedenquist, 1995). These also results to advanced argillic alteration with varying lithocaps

outward the hydrothermal conduit (Arribas, 1995). The high fugacity of sulfur also produces

copper-rich minerals such as enargite, luzonite and famatinite (Barton & Skinner, 1979). Gangue

minerals are usually composed of sulfate minerals with a definitive lack of carbonates.

Disseminated Au
(HS)

lL Advanced argillic
lithocap

Andesite-dacite
volcanic edifice

Paleosurface

° /
\ ogkMy / Au-Ag base-metal
\ outa ¢ (7 Veins (\S)
o#To °
Porphyry Cu + Au ° aes i a <-.. Early, shallow acidic
mineralization — = 8+ ~ condensates
Granodioritic A es $ Early, deep acidic
porphyry af magmatic gases
stock XX XX 4 XX f HS fluids, evolved in
xx xXx lithocap
me a : IS fluid
fe) 5
km

Fig. 2.1 Schematic diagram of a volcanotectonic setting (modified from Sillitoe & Hedenquist,
2003). Groundwater absorbs early magmatic volatiles within the volcanic vent. This reaction
produces acidic fluids that form the lithocap over the magmatic source. After some time,
intermediate sulfidation fluids rise and circulate outside the advanced argillic lithocap. When these
fluids flow through the lithocap, they evolve to high sulfidation fluids.

On the other end of the spectrum are low sulfidation deposits which are characterized by
reduced sulfur species such as bisulfide (HS°) and hydrogen sulfide (H2S). These are usually
situated within rift settings with bimodal volcanism (refer to Fig. 2.2). The fluids that govern low
sulfidation deposits are usually meteoric. These are also generally neutral since they have already
equilibrated with the host rocks at depth unlike fluids in high sulfidation deposits. The mineral
assemblage that forms from these conditions is composed of arsenopyrite, pyrrhotite and high-iron
sphalerite (Barton and Skinner, 1979; Einaudi et al., 2003). Common gangue minerals that form
in this type of deposit are quartz, carbonate and adularia while sericite and interstratified clays are

the typical alteration minerals (White & Hedenquist, 1995).

Disseminated
Rhyolitedome = ay

Paleosurface complex
Lake Basalt flows

Sinter terrace

Listric
faults

Granitic
magma
chamber xXx

Pe) Meteoric water

$ Magmatic volatiles

xXx xx xx t LS fluids
0 5
km

Fig. 2.2 Schematic diagram of a rift setting (modified from Sillitoe & Hedenquist, 2003).
Magmatic volatiles are neutralized at great depths, resulting in low sulfidation fluids.

A transitional sulfidation state was recognized when an epithermal deposit in northern
Nevada, with characteristics between high-sulfidation and low-sulfidation deposits, was
discovered (John et al., 1999). This deposit formed from moderate temperature and low to
moderate salinity fluids with high oxygen and sulfur fugacity. Furthermore, it has higher base
metal and silver content than its low-sulfidation counterpart in the vicinity. Later on, this has been
identified to be governed by fluids that are more evolved than their precursor deposit types (high
or low sulfidation) (Sillitoe & Hedenquist, 2003). Acknowledging the need for distinction of such
deposits, Hedenquist et al. (2000) classified them as ‘intermediate sulfidation’ deposits. These
have typical mineral assemblage composed of low Fe-sphalerite, chalcopyrite, galena, pyrite and

tetrahedrite (Einaudi et al., 2003). Common gangue minerals are sulfates, manganiferous carbonate

and quartz while alteration assemblage consists of illite, adularia, chlorite, epidote and muscovite
(Sillitoe & Hedenquist, 2003).

2.2 OPHIOLITE-HOSTED VEIN-TYPE MINERALIZATION

Much of studies on epithermal deposits revolved around volcanic-arc terranes hosted by
volcanic, volcano-sedimentary, sedimentary, pyroclastic and diatreme units, or in rift settings
(Sillitoe and Hedenquist, 2003). An extremely few has been reported to be hosted by ultramafic
units, especially within ophiolites. One example lies in Papua New Guinea wherein the first
epithermal PGE (platinum group of elements) deposit known as the Doriri lode is hosted in
carbonatized peridotite and norite (Lindley, 2016). Although its temperature of formation (100-
220 °C) from chlorite thermometry, depth of mineralization, and other hydrothermal
characteristics express its epithermal nature, its main ore minerals are PGE’s that have

concentrations greater than 1000 ppb. Another rare example is the Crnac prospect in the Central

Balkan Peninsula, which exhibits Pb-Zn-Ag epithermal veins hosted by listwanite breccias
(Sostaric et al., 2011; Sostaric et al., 2013).

\ 7 0 TH |

a NSO

es. Si f

—2 i 1 1 3 i
Fig. 2.3 Map view of the Doriri lode, a northwest-striking epithermal PGE deposit hosted by
peridotites and norite of the late Cretaceous to Eocene Awariobo Range Complex. High amounts

10

of PGE’s are concentrated within the massive chlorite-magnetite-sulfide zone shown in red.
Figures taken from Lindley (2016).

Outside of epithermal deposits, ophiolite-hosted vein-type mineralization has been more
commonly reported among orogenic gold deposits, which are formed in orogenic belts along
continental settings and are usually hosted in intrusive rocks that experienced regional
metamorphism (Groves et al., 1998; Tomkins, 2013; Goldfarb et al., 2015). Gold-bearing quartz
veins associated with ophiolites are usually hosted within listwanites, a term coined by Rose (1837)
to describe quartz-carbonate-fuchsite bearing veins found in the Ural Mountains. Early proponents
of the term followed this exact alteration mineralogy (Halls & Zhao, 1995); however, the term has
already expanded beyond its original meaning. Ash (2001) cited how geologists in British
Columbia (Nixon, 1989; Ash & Arskey, 1989) have used ‘listwanite’ as a descriptive term, rather
than a genetic term, of gold-bearing quartz veins associated with ophiolites due to the deposit’s
importance in the exploration standpoint. Aside from British Columbia, there are other areas with
economic listwanites such as the Tavsan and Kaymaz prospects, Sugecer-Van and Mihaltccik
region in Turkey (Ucurum, 2000; Akbulut et al., 2006; Yigit, 2006; Uner, 2020), Quebec
Appalachians (Auclair et al., 1993), Egypt (Helmy et al., 2004; Zoheir, 2011; Azer, 2013; Emam
& Zoheir, 2013), West Junggar region in NW China (Buckman, 2000; Robinson et al., 2005) and
Tuva and Urals in Russia (Khuzuget et al., 2015; Sazonov et al., 2001) (Table 2.1).

Meanwhile, petrological studies focused more on the alteration mineralogy rather than the
ore content. In this case, the termed ‘listwanite’ is used to denote the alteration suite of
hydrothermally altered peridotites ranging from talc-carbonates to carbonates and then finally to
silica as end members (Ploshko, 1965; Power et al., 2013; Falk & Kelemen, 2015; Menzel et al.,
2018), as opposed to carbonate-only alteration of peridotites known as ophicalcite (Kelemen et al.,
2011). Talc-carbonate is the collective term for metamorphosed ultramafic units that contain
significant amounts of talc (i. e. muscovite, pyrophyllite) and carbonates such as magnesite
(Naldrett, 1964; Power & Scott, 1995). Listwanites are also not to be confused with rodingites
(Bell et al., 1911; Sivell & Waterhouse, 1986; Schandl et al., 1990) which are characterized by a
mineral association that is rich in calcium due to the liberation of its ions from pyroxene. This is

reflected by an assemblage of Ca-Mg and Ca-Al silicates such as andradite, diopside, grossular,

11

hydrogrossular, prehnite and vesuvianite resulting from the alteration of pyroxene-rich lithologies

such as gabbros.

For listwanitization to commence, the presence of CO2-bearing fluids is required to react
with serpentine, forming talc and magnesite. These fluids can be sourced from carbonate
dissolution from subducted sediments (Falk & Kelemen, 2015; Menzel et al., 2018), adjacent
sedimentary host rocks before ophiolite emplacement (Auclair, 1993), intrusive rocks (Buckman,
2001) or from mixture of meteoric waters with magmatic waters (Robinson et al., 2005) or
metamorphic fluids (Barnes, 1973; Studemeister, 1984). Furthermore, due to the advancement of
ophiolite studies, it has been shown that the occurrence of listwanites is ubiquitous in various
settings (e. g. intrusion-related/mineralized vs slab-derived/non-mineralized) and that their
commonality is in being products of hydrothermal alteration. Therefore, current studies already
support the genetic connotation of listwanites to hydrothermal fluid reaction of serpentinized

ultramafic protoliths, and that the term be used as such.

A model proposed by Buisson and Leblanc (1987) postulates that the ultramafic rocks
(containing at least 8 ppb Au) surrounding the hydrothermal veins could have been the main source
of gold, which is contained within the accessory opaque minerals (sulfides, chromite, and
magnetite). Large-scale hydrothermal systems operating during the late stages of tectonic
emplacement leach gold from the opaque minerals and transport it in a CO2-S-As-Cl-Na-K-B-rich
solution as thio-arsenic complexes. The hydrothermal fluids are focused along tectonic contacts.
As the system evolves, the acid gold-bearing solutions precipitate silica-pyrite arsenides and gold
when entering the reducing and alkaline carbonatized rocks. Leaching of other ore elements such
as PGEs (Lindley, 2016) and mercury (Studemeister et al., 1984) from the serpentinized protoliths

has also been proposed in other intrusion-related ophiolite-hosted deposits.

A more recent study by Plyusnina (2007) found out that gold transporting and
concentration can be controlled not only by the host rocks but also by hydrothermal solutions that
are genetically related to intrusion, which is possibly the case in some listwanite deposits such as

the New England Orogen (Buckman & Ashley, 2010) or even the Doriri lode (Lindley, 2016).

Several ophiolite-hosted epithermal veins were also reported within the Philippine island
arc, which is supported by the number of ophiolites along its margins and the presence of

magmatism along subduction fronts. In Camarines Norte, the highest-grade gold-bearing quartz

12

veins exhibiting comb and crustiform textures were observed within northeast-trending tensional
joints and faults constrained along the Early Miocene Paracale granodiorite and the Late
Cretaceous Camarines Norte Ophiolite Complex (CNOC) peridotites (Miranda & Caleon, 1977;
Encarnacion, 2004). Crystallization sequence observed on the residual mantle and shallow crust
units, mineral chemistry of the gabbros, diabases and basalts and geochemical plots suggest a mid-
oceanic ridge origin for the CNOC (Tamayo et al., 1996; Tamayo, 1997). In terms of ore

mineralogy, native gold, galena, sphalerite and chalcopyrite were observed.

In Puerto Princesa, Palawan, mercury deposits were found to be hosted within the Ulugan
Bay Ultramafic Complex, which is a part of the Eocene Central Palawan Ophiolite that exhibits
BAB/MORB.-like affinity (Gibaga et al., 2020; Dycoco et al., 2021). The listwanites are related to
geothermal springs similar to the western California Coast mercury deposits and consist of
magnesite, dolomite, chalcedony, tridymite, opal and quartz that also bear cinnabar, metacinnabar,

pyrite and marcasite (Sabaria, 2021).

Lastly, lode-type gold-bearing listwanites between contacts of quartz diorite and the
ultramafic units of the Cretaceous Surigao Ophiolite were reported within the Agata Property
owned by Minimax and MRL in Agusan del Norte located in northeast Mindanao (Bailey, 2003).
The Pliocene Mabuhay monzodiorite is believed to be the source of the magmatic-hydrothermal

fluids, although further studies are needed to confirm this.

13

Table 2.1 Compilation of listwanite occurrences and their characteristics

Doriri lode, Papua New

CHARACTERISTIC = Guinea (Lindley, 2016)

Mineralization style epithermal shear-zone

Main ore PGEs, mercury
Tectonic setting island arc
Age of ultramafic belt Eocene
Type of intrusion monzonite

Gangue minerals chlorite-magnesite-calcite

hydrothermal breccias,

ngue textures
Gany ure stockwork

pyrite, pentlandite,

eso de pyrrhotite, marcasite

Supergene alteration nickel laterite

Fluid inclusion type n/a

magmatic-hydrothermal

Source of fluids

a (2)
Homogenization 100-200 °C
temperature
Salinity n/a
Mechanism leaching

Atlin gold camp, British Columbia
(Ash, 2001; Yiefei et al., 2003; Hansen et al.,
2005)

orogenic gold
Au

acrreted terranes in a continental margin

Paleozoic-Mesozoic
granite, granodiorite

Cr muscovite, ferroan magnesite, quartz,
mariposite

massive

pyrite, galena, gersdorffite, bismuthimite,
tetradymite, sphalerite, chalcopyrite, pyrrhotite,
millerite, hessite, rammelsbergite, acanthite

n/a

n/a

metamorphic fluids from dehydration at deep
crustal levels

n/a
n/a

n/a

14

New England Orogen, Australia
(Barnes et al., 1988; Buckman &
Ashley, 2010; Holcroft et al., 2010)

epithermal

Au, Cu, Hg
serpentinite belt within a fault
system
Permian (?)
granite
talc, magnesite, dolomite,
chalcedony, quartz, sericite,
fuchsite

massive

pyrite, cinnabar

copper carbonates, oxides,
silicates

n/a
carbon-dioxide-bearing

minimum 165-200 °C
low salinity

n/a

Table 2.1 Compilation of listwanite occurrences and their characteristics (cont'd)

CHARACTERISTIC

Kaymaz gold mine, NW Turkey

Sartohay ophiolite, NW China

Sayi gold deposit, NW China

(Yasuv et al., 2022) (Robinson et al., 2005) (Qiu & Zhu, 2015)
Mineralization style Intrusion-related Intrusion-related Ducts Prine dotoaaney)
shearing
Main ore Au Au Au

Tectonic setting

Age of ultramafic belt
Type of intrusion

Gangue minerals

Gangue textures

Ore assemblage

Supergene alteration

Fluid inclusion type

Source of fluids

Homogenization
temperature
Salinity

Mechanism

continental thrust
zone/metamorphic belt
Mesozoic
granitoids

quartz, calcite, chalcedony,
magnesite

cockade, colloform, stockwork,
polymictic breccia

millerite, magnetite, pentlandite,
asp, nickeline, marcasite, pyrite,
gold, silver, chalcopyrite

hematite, goethite, limonite,
chalcedony, magnesite

two-phase, liquid-rich and vapor-
rich

magmatic-hydrothermal
230-390 °C

1.4-14.2
boiling

collisional orogen

Early Devonian
monzogranite

quartz, magnesite, dolomite

boxwork, comb, cockade

pyrite, arsenopyrite, gersdorffite,
chalcopyrite, gold

calcite pseudomorph and black
chalcedony

n/a
magmatic-hydrothermal

340-410 °C

n/a
mixing (magmatic fluids and
meteoric from oxygen isotope)

15

collisional orogen
Late Silurian to Devonian
granite

quartz, mgs, mariposite,
carbonate, dolomite, muscovite

angular hydrothermal breccia
(crackle)

gold, chalcopyrite, gersdorffite,
galena, polydemite, millerite,
pentlandite, violarite

iron oxide

n/a

hydrothermal fluid through shear
zone

n/a

n/a
hydrothermal fluid through shear
zone

Table 2.1 Compilation of listwanite occurrences and their characteristics (cont’d)

CHARACTERISTIC

Mineralization style
Main ore

Tectonic setting

Age of ultramafic belt
Type of intrusion

Gangue minerals

Gangue textures

Ore assemblage

Supergene alteration

Fluid inclusion type

Source of fluids

Homogenization
temperature
Salinity

Mechanism

Wadi Allaqi, Egypt

(Azer, 2013)

Intrusion-related

Au

shield

Neoproterozoic

granodiorite

magnesite, dolomite,
ankerite, calcite, quartz,
fuchsite, talc, kaolinite

hydrothermal breccia

pyrite, chalcopyrite,
cobaltite, magnetite, gold

covellite, goethite, malachite,

magnetite

n/a

magmatic-hydrothermal

n/a
n/a

n/a

Dorn gold deposit, Antarctica

(Crispini et al., 2009)

Orogenic gold

Au

continental transtensional

Cambrian-Ordovician

granodiorite, minor tonalite, granite

ankerite, muscovite, chlorite,

tourmaline

comb and vuggy quartz, breccia

pyrite, arsenopyrite

iron oxide and iron hydroxide

n/a

n/a

n/a
n/a

n/a

16

Point Rousse Project, Newfoundland
(Escayola et al., 2009; Pitman et al., 2020)

Orogenic gold
Au

thrust belt within a continental margin

early Ordovician
granite (?)

ankerite, magnesite, dolomite, quartz

hydrothermal breccia

chalcopyrite, pyrite, mercury-gold alloy

limonite

n/a

hydrothermal fluid through shear zone

350-400 °C for the carbonates, 200 °C for
quartz and sulfides
n/a

n/a

Table 2.1 Compilation of listwanite occurrences and their characteristics (cont’d)

CHARACTERISTIC

Mineralization style
Main ore

Tectonic setting

Age of ultramafic belt
Type of intrusion

Gangue minerals

Gangue textures

Ore assemblage

Supergene alteration

Fluid inclusion type

Source of fluids

Homogenization
temperature
Salinity

Mechanism

Ahmed et al. 2009; Tourneur et al., 2021)

Bou Azzer, Morocco (En-Naciri et al., 1997;

Crnac deposit, Kosovo
(Sostaric et al., 2013)

serpentinite-hosted massive arsenide
(SHMA)

Bi, Co, Ni, Ag, U
orogenic zone

Proterozoic
Quartz diorite

quartz-carbonate, erythrite, magnetite,
rodingite

pull-apart breccias, laminated textures,
comb, massive

arsenides, arsenopyrite, gersdorffite,
bornite, chalcocite, chalcopyrite, pyrite,
pyrrhotite, sphalerite, tetrahedrite

erythrine
liquid + vapor + halite
magmatic-hydrothermal

190 °C eastern; 230 °C western (mean)
16-22 wt. % NaCl

leaching

17

Hydrothermal breccia
Pb-Zn-Ag

collision

Jurassic
Quartz latite

qz, kao, carbonate

angular to sub-rounded breccia

ccp, galena, sphalerite, py,
tetrahedrite

kaolinite

liquid-rich, halite, vapor-rich
magmatic fluid and meteoric

115-375 °C
0-35%

boiling, mixing

California Coast Ranges, USA
(Barnes et al., 1973,
Studemeister, 1984)

epithermal

Hg
metamorphosed thrust belt
proximal to geothermal sinter
Mesozoic
granite

quartz, opal, chalcedony,
calcite, ankerite, dolomite

massive

cinnabar, metacinnabar, native
mercury, stibnite, native sulfur,
pyrite, chalcopyrite, galena,

bituminous matter

n/a

meteoric and metamorphic
fluids

<250 °C
n/a

cooling, mixing

Table 2.1 Compilation of listwanite occurrences and their characteristics (cont'd)

CHARACTERISTIC Tavreh mercury deposit, NW Iran Samail ophiolite, Oman (Nasir et Advocate ophiolite complex,
(Imamalipoor et al., 2020) al., 2007; Falk & Kelemen, 2015) Newfoundland (Menzel et al., 2018)
Mineralization style contact type none none
Main ore Hg none none
Tectonic setting ophiolite belt with Neogene magmatism Wiust fault Peanne: epelty continental margin
Age of ultramafic belt Mesozoic Cretaceous early Ordovician
Type of intrusion granitoid intrusives none none
: ; 5 talc, magnesite, calcite, dolomite, _ talc, magnesite, chlorite, dolomite
Gangue minerals opal, chalcedony, quartz, cristobalite : ;
fuchsite, quartz fuchiste, quartz
Gangue textures massive massive, fracture fills zoned rhombic magnesite
Ore assemblage cinnabar chromite pyrite, NS Byron.
heazlewoodite, chromite
Supergene alteration secondary iron hydroxides hematite Mg-bearing Fe-Ni hydroxides
Fluid inclusion type n/a n/a n/a
meteoric water, CO2-saturated pore
Source of fluids geothermal water from compaction of subducted slab-derived
sediments, seawater
Homogenization ae 80-130 °C 300-420 °C for carbonation; 200 °C for
temperature silicification
Salinity n/a n/a n/a
; bonate dis i
Mechanism related to geothermal systems a te dis soluvon torn fluid flux

metasediments

18

2.3 ORE AND GANGUE INTERPRETATION

In mineral deposit studies, the characterization of ore and gangue mineral assemblage,
paragenetic sequence and alteration assemblages have been used to define the various
mineralization episodes and determine the genetic model for the deposit (White, 1990; Craig &
Vaughn, 1994; Taylor, 2009). Since quartz is a common component of hydrothermal vein,
classification of quartz veins, as well as carbonate and adularia veins, can be used to infer the mode
of precipitation such as boiling, cooling and flashing (Dong & Morrison, 1995; Dong et al., 1995)
(Fig. 2.4). Fluid-rock reaction also causes brecciation of the host rocks depending on the stage of
fluid activity and pressure; hence, classification of breccias is also standard in most hydrothermal
vein studies (Jebrak, 1997) (Fig. 2.5). In terms of ore minerals, Craig & Vaughan (1994) compiled
several examples of ore textures with their interpreted associated process, such as replacement,
exsolution and magmatic differentiation. In terms of identification of mineral constituents of host
rocks, alteration minerals and vein compositions, X-Ray diffractometry (XRD) has been used

extensively in mineral exploration (Hedenquist et al., 2000; Bunaciu et al., 2015).

19

Texture

———_ —

T
Morphology of

Grain Internal F f |
: Grain Form | irauacyetr |. crystal References
I
Texture Size individual Crystal | Aggregate
e Smirnov (1962)
Massive variable anhedral n/a homogenous Bates & Jackson
(1987)
| successive erentasony
i ; 1 Shaub (1934)
Crustiform variable variable n/a banding Lindgren (1933)
Buchanan (1981)
; , concentric | Adams (1920)
Cockade variable variable ‘
wa banding | Spurr (1926)
la
semi-spherical,
Colloform fibrous / reniform, Rogers (1917)
anhedral na Adams (1920)
mammillary
variable n/a spherical | Adams (1920)
+
lel Adams (1920)
variable prismatic n/a at d aoved
orlentate’ Boyle (1979)
variable prismatic zonal n/a Smirnov (1962)

Fig. 2.4 Quartz textures indicating primary growth (Dong et al., 1995). Classification parameters
include habit, grain size, form, internal structure and crystal morphology.

20


TECTONIC FLUID-ASSOCIATED VOLUME VOLUME
COMMINUTION BRECCIATION REDUCTION EXPANSION

CORROSIVE

WEAR
ABRASION IMPACT COLLAPSE WEAR

Fig. 2.5 Schematic chart of hydrothermal breccia classification and mechanisms for brecciation
(Jebrak, 1997)

21

2.4 MINERAL CHEMISTRY AND FLUID INCLUSION ANALYSIS

Additionally, the mineral chemistry of ore assemblages has been studied as a way of
looking into the physicochemical properties, such as sulfidation state. The Fe-Zn-S system has
proven that the iron content of sphalerite coexisting with pyrite or pyrrhotite is associated to
temperature and sulfur fugacity (Barton & Toulmin, 1966). Using this parameter with initial
temperature of formation, one can plot the sulfidation state for a given mineralization stage
(Einaudi et al., 2003) (Fig. 2.6).

0
[0 High sulfidation

2 Intermediate sulfidation
° Low sulfidation

FeS mol%

-4

log fS. ——>

200 300 400 500 600 700
Temperature (°C)
Fig. 2.6 Sulfidation state parameter (log fS2) vs temperature. The former can be obtained from iron-sulfide
mole percentage (mole % FeS) of sphalerite coexisting with pyrite or pyrrhotite. Temperature can be
derived from geothermometry methods such as microthermometry of fluid inclusions. Abbreviations for
sulfide minerals in the graph: cv-covellite, dg-digenite, bn-bornite, py-pyrite, po-pyrrhotite, asp-
arsenopyrite, lo-loellingite

22

Additionally, analysis of fluid inclusions has been prominently employed in the study of
ore-forming processes. Fluid inclusions are tiny fluids trapped during crystal growth (Sorby,
1858). Petrography is the most fundamental step in fluid inclusion studies, as this enables
rescarchers to identify the appropriate samples for a certain analysis. Studies related to epithermal
vein systems require primary fluid inclusions (fluid inclusions that are along the growth zones of
the entrapping crystal) comprising a fluid inclusion assemblage so that the temperature and salinity
derived from analysis will truly reflect the chemical and physical conditions of formation of the
mineralized phase (Goldstein & Reynolds, 1994). The composition of the fluid inclusions can also
indicate the type of fluid associated with the mineralized phase and ore-forming conditions (See

Fig. 2.7).

Wvivivy

Consistent Coexisting liquid-rich Only vapor-rich inclusions
phase ratios and vapor-rich inclusions (no liquid-rich)
“non-boiling” “Boiling” “Flashing”

Fig. 2.7 Fluid inclusion assemblages (FIA) observed in Veta Madre at Guanajato, Mexico (Moncada et al.,
2012). The Fig.s on the top indicate schematic diagrams that emphasize phase ratios of the inclusions. FIAs
with consistent liquid-vapor phase ratios indicate non-boiling conditions (left); FLAs with both liquid-rich
and vapor-rich inclusions indicate boiling conditions (middle), FIAs consisting of only vapor-rich
inclusions indicate flashing (right).

Additionally, fluid inclusions have also been used for geobarometry (Roedder & Bodnar,
1980), and, using salinity and homogenization temperatures obtained from microthermometry, can

be used to determine fluid evolution processes and paleo-water depth (Haas, 1971; Wilkinson,

2001).

23

Homogenization temperature (°C)

0 20 40 6 80
Salinity (wt% NaCl equivalent)

Fig. 2.8 Summary of homogenization temperature versus salinity of fluid inclusions among different
deposit types (Wilkinson, 2001).

Temperature (°C)
(b) i} 50 100 150 200 250 300 350
0 an Eee an ee
100
200
300
— 400
E
at 500 2.0m NaCl
i 600 —*- xC02-0.0
700 ~* xC02=0.01
800 —® xC02=0.025
900 eo xC02=0.05
1000

Fig. 2.9 Effervescence vs depth plot for brine containing 0-5 mol% CO2 and 2.0 m NaCl (Wilkinson,
2001).

24

2.5 REGIONAL GEOLOGY

The Philippine Mobile Belt is a tectonically bounded deforming zone flanked by the
subduction of the South China Sea Plate to the west and Philippine Sea Plate to the east (Rangin,
1991; Aurelio, 2000) (Fig. 2.10). The oblique convergence of the Philippine Sea Plate to the
Philippine Trench also produced the 1200-km northwest-trending sinistral strike-slip Philippine
Fault 5 Ma ago (Fitch, 1972). This complex tectonic setting resulted in several gold districts along
the length of the fault since pathways for hydrothermal fluids were provided (Yumul et al., 2008;
Yumul et al., 2016). On the other hand, subduction along the western margin of Luzon generated
volcanism in the Bataan Volcanic Arc from Miocene to Quaternary, creating three parallel
volcanic arcs with varying composition from tholeiitic to calc-alkaline to shoshonitic eastward
from the Manila Trench (De boer et al., 1979). The collision of the Scarborough Seamount Chain
with the Manila Trench resulted to slowing down of the subduction, prompting a hiatus in
magmatism (Yang et al., 1996). This also caused the uplift of the forearc basin, eastward shift of
succeeding magmatism due to the shallow subduction angle, and generation of highly fertile
Pliocene-Pleistocene andesite and dacite intrusions in Northern Luzon such as the Mankayan and
Baguio Mineral Districts (Yumul et al., 2003; Manalo et al., 2018; Jabagat et al., 2020; Soberano
ct al., 2021).

Looking at the basement of western Luzon, the east-dipping Zambales Ophiolite Complex
(Schweller et al., 1983) is divided into two blocks based on crustal section thickness, petrological
differences and geochemistry (Fig. 2.10). The Acoje Block is composed of upper mantle lherzolite
to harzburgite, with ultramafic cumulate sequence of transitional dunite, websterite, wehrlite,
clinopyroxenite and mafic cumulate sequence of gabbronorite, norite, norite-gabbro with gabbro
and anorthosite (Hawkins & Evans, 1983). Crystallization order in the cumulate layer is olivine +
spinel -> pyroxene -> plagioclase (Yumul, 1989). The geochemistry of the upper mantle suite,
ultramafic and mafic cumulates, volcanic rocks and PGEs suggest an island arc tholeiitic origin
for the Acoje Block (Hawkins & Evans, 1983; Yumul, 1989; Zhou et al., 2000; Yumul, 2001). U-
Pb dating of zircons from tonalites in the Acoje Block yielded 44.2 + 0.9 Ma (Encarnacion &
Mukasa, 1993). Chert olistoliths in the Cabaluan Formation, which are associated with ophiolite-
derived pebble- to cobble-size angular clastic rocks, contain radiolarian fauna that suggest an age

range from Late Jurassic to Early Cretaceous (Queaifio et al., 2016).

25

MINERALIZATION
16°00'N @ Volcanogenic
Massive Sulfide
East Luzon Trough N . |
: ID) Chromitite
Boy A. Copper Sulfide

Y Porphyry Cu
PHILIPPINE SEA PLATE SARS © Epithermal Au-Ag

Manila Trench

15°30'N

‘SOUTH CHINA SEA BASIN Philippine Trench

10°N FORMATIONS
15°00'N
Bataan
Volcanic Arc
Candelaria
Limestone
7
HOST ROCK . ace
Sedimentary Cabatuan
Volcanic-derived Zambales Ophiolite
Complex
Mafic intrusive ? 14°30'N Coto Block
5°N Alkaline intrusive Be Acoje Block
| Ultramafic é 4 |

120°E 125°E
Fig. 2.10 (/eft) Epithermal deposit map of the Philippines classified according to host rock (modified from
Mitchell and Leach, 1991; Yumul et al., 2003; Ruelo, 2018). Boxed in red is the Zambales Ophiolite
Complex. (right) Geologic map of the Zambales Ophiolite Complex and location of mineral deposits

(modified from Dimalanta et al., 2015; Alonso et al., unpublished; Perez et al., 2018).

Hydration of the Acoje Block basal cumulates during regional uplift of the Zambales
Ophiolite Complex resulted to serpentinization and produced an assemblage of lizardite +
chrysotile + magnesite + brucite with an upper limit of 350 °C in terms of temperature (Abrajano,
1984). The shallow condition during hydration resulted to reducing conditions due to the
involvement of olivine during rock buffering, high Fe:Mg ratio in the ultramafic minerals, and

minimal silica activity.

On the other hand, the Coto Block is composed of upper mantle harzburgite, thin transition

zone dunite, clinopyroxene-rich mafic cumulates of gabbro, troctolite and olivine gabbro with

26

anorthosite (Hawkins & Evans, 1983). Crystallization order in the cumulate layer is olivine +
spinel -> plagioclase -> pyroxene (Yumul, 1989). Aside from lack of ultramafic cumulate phase,
the Coto Block differs from the Acoje Block in terms of origin. Geochemistry of the upper mantle,
mafic cumulates and volcanic suite showed transitional MOR-IAT signatures (Hawkins & Evans,
1983; Geary et al., 1989; Yumul, 1989). Chromite deposits hosted by dunite envelopes are of
refractory type (Hock et al., 1986). U-Pb dating of zircons from plagiogranite and diorite yielded
an age of 45.1 + 0.6 Ma (Encarnacion & Mukasa, 1993).

Oligocene post-obduction gabbroic to dioritic dikes cut the peridotites of the two blocks
(Fig. 2.11) (Hawkins & Evans, 1983; Fuller et al., 1988; Rossman et al., 1989; Lagmay, 1993;
Yumul et al. 1998). Including the undergraduate thesis of Megino (2022), who worked on the
geochemistry of the peridotite-hosted diabase dikes in Malabeg, Cabangan, the dikes in Cabangan
Massif show mixed island arc-mid-oceanic ridge signatures based on REE behavior in trace

element spidergram (Fig. 2.12).

15

Nepheline
/\_ syenite

pe /syenite
rey yo ~ py
x

O 10
& { Granite NG
+ Syenpite a, TaN Gatkc
[e) or 4 A
s f J Neranodtorit/ Legend
/Gabbro og sf jorite | ;
L 4 diabase dikes (this study)

A ak B-
ge {Art Se © diabase dikes (Yumul et al., 1998b)

aa
Mech A diabase/microdiorite dikes (Lagmay, 1993)

SiO,

27

Fig. 2.11 Total alkali silica classification of post-obduction dikes in the Coto Block (Megino, 2022).

8

Sample/N-MORB

od Ara ottaaaaatzas

Legend
Q- se

Legend

Fig. 2.12 (a) Chondrite-normalized multi-element diagrams of the Coto dikes. (6) MORB-normalized
multi-element diagrams of the Coto dikes. Both Fig.s are from Megino (2022).

The distinction between Acoje and Coto Blocks are geochemical in nature. In terms of
tectonics, the Zambales Ophiolite Complex is divided into three massifs: the Masinloc Massif,
which comprises the Acoje Block and northern Coto Block (separated by a northeast-trending
Lawis Fault), the Cabangan Massif and the San Antonio Massif (Fig. 2.10). These three blocks are
separated by northwest-trending grabens (Rossman et al., 1989). The geochemical similarity of the
San Antonio Massif to the rest of Acoje Block, as well as clinopyroxenite hills on the western
portion of Cabangan Massif, suggests the southward translation of the said massif from the Acoje

Block (Yumul et al., 1997).
2.6 METALLOGENESIS OF WESTERN LUZON

Western Luzon consists of several hydrothermal systems. One example of an active
geothermal system in the area is Mount Pinatubo, which is part of the Bataan Volcanic Arc.
Geothermal studies on Mount Pinatubo reveal active hydrothermal systems represented by
solfatara pools and neutral pH waters with varying abundance of Cl, HCO; and SOs (Delfin et al.,
1996). Furthermore, drilling intercepted hornfels, microdiorite, micro-quartz monzodiorite,
diabase and gabbroic dikes, wherein the latter two are presumed to be part of the Zambales
Ophiolite Complex. Microthermometry of fluid inclusions in anhydrite revealed a bimodal
distribution of values at 290 °C and 320 °C, where the latter is closer to the current measured
temperature within the geothermal system. Aside from the overlapping of some clay zones, the

bimodal distribution implies the occurrence of more than one hydrothermal event, and the

28

existence of cooler fluids in the past. A temperature gradient of 200 °C for the shallowest portions
of Mount Pinatubo (900 masl) up to 320 °C for the deepest portions (-1100 masl) is also inferred
from the fluid inclusion readings. Majority of the stable isotope data from thermal springs plot
near the meteoric water line, although significant few samples plot near the primary magmatic
water field, indicating the presence of magmatic input (Delfin et al., 1996). High sulfur contents
of melt inclusions and groundmass glass of dacite samples suggest injections of highly oxidized
and hydrous mafic magmas that siphoned high amounts of sulfur from the mantle to the crustal

level felsic magma chambers (Luhr & Melson, 1996; Hattori & Keith, 2001).

Another well-studied porphyry-epithermal system within the Bataan Volcanic Arc is the
Dizon mine in San Marcelino, Zambales, which is underlain by fine-grained diorite porphyry
hosted by Neogene subaerial volcaniclastic units (Malihan, 1987). K-Ar age dating from a
hydrothermal sericite sample yielded an age of 2.7 Ma (Malihan, 1987) while hydrothermal biotite
from the potasically-altered diorite porphyry yielded an age of 2.5 + 0.2 Ma (Imai, 2000). Similar
to Mount Pinatubo, petrological characteristics and geobarometric and oxidation state plots of the
diorite porphyries in Dizon suggest multiple intrusions of mafic magmas, aside from the parental

magmas being oxidized and water-rich (Midea et al., 2021).

Aside from the porphyry copper deposit, the telescoping epithermal system was studied by

Imai (2005). The author has identified four stages, which is summarized as follows:

1) Quartz veinlets with chalcopyrite, bornite, magnetite and native gold. They exhibit
stockwork texture and are associated to chlorite and biotite alteration. Gas-rich and
polyphase (including halite, opaque minerals, vapor and hematite) inclusions yielded a
minimum temperature at 500 °C and maximum pressure at 460 bars.

2) Quartz veinlets with chalcopyrite, pyrite and gold having chalcopyrite and pyrite
stringers. These also exhibit stockwork and drusy textures and are associated to sericite
alteration. Minimum temperature is around 245 °C while minimum pressure is around
25 bars.

3) Quartz veinlets with molybdenite. These usually appear as stringers in sericite
alteration. Gas-rich and minor liquid-rich inclusions yielded homogenization

temperatures between 350-490 °C.

29

4) Quartz veins with sphalerite and galena at deeper portions and enargite and stibnite at
shallower portions. These were observed to exhibit drusy texture with crustiform
banding and botryoidal habit in some portions. Liquid-rich two-phase inclusions
yielded homogenization temperature between 190-300 °C, pressure around 15 bars

salinity values between 1.0-3.4 wt.% NaCl.

The closeness of sulfur isotope values (+0 to +5%o) across the paragenetic stages suggests
a single hydrothermal system for the mineralization and a homogenous source, while the
decreasing pressure is thought to be associated to the collapse of the Pua diatreme while the
magmatic-hydrothermal system was still active. Afterward the collapse, the unroofing of the debris

would have resulted in the decrease of pressure and temperature.

South of Dizon lies the late Pleistocene to Pliocene Mount Natib, which is an andesitic
stratovolcano within the Bataan Peninsula (Salvania, 1995). Compositionally similar to Mount
Pinatubo, active thermal springs are of the SO4-HCO3-Cl and Cl -HCO3 types which signify
contributions from condensates and meteoric waters (Ruaya & Panem, 1990). Quartz equilibrium
and Na-K-Ca suggest subsurface temperatures between 160 to 232 °C while plots in Na-K-Mg
diagram suggests subsurface dilution with primary geothermal waters. Recurrence of parasitic
cones suggests an active heat source to generate the convection of hydrothermal system in Mount

Natib.

South of Mount Natib is the Pantingan Gold System, aged at 0.88 + 0.13 to 1.13 + 0.17 Ma
and located at the southernmost tip of the Bataan Volcanic Arc (Fig. 2.10) (Payot et al., 2005).
and exhibits silica-sinter low sulfidation epithermal deposit hosting gold, silver and minor copper
(Payot et al., 2005). Aside from Dizon and Pantingan, other porphyry-epithermal systems along
the Bataan Volcanic Arc are only reported through government or company reports such as

Pisumpan (Singer et al., 2008) and Burgos in Tarlac (Mines and Geosciences Bureau, 2004).

Ore-grade concentrations of platinum group of elements (PGE’s) were found in
metallurgical chromites from transitional dunites up to cumulate peridotites (Hock et al., 1986;
Orberger et al., 1988; Bacuta et al., 1990). Ni sulfides were also found in the basal cumulates of
the Acoje Block, including pentlandite, troilite, pyrrhotite, mackinawite, chalcopyrite, cubanite,
digenite, bornite, idaite, heazlewoodite, godlevskite, millerite, valleriite, native copper, native iron,

djerfisherite, cobalt pentlandite, tochilinite, pyrite, laurite, moncheite, copper-palladium alloy and

30

graphite (Abrajano, 1984). The interstitial and amoeboid surrounding of these sulfides (aside from
being inclusions in silicates and chromites), as well as the dominance of troilite and pyrrhotite,

signify their nature as magmatic sulfides.

The Mines and Geosciences Bureau, formerly known as Bureau of Mines, had investigated
Cabangan and nearby municipalities since 1964. Most reports pointed out talc (as hydrothermal
product of serpentine), chrysotile and chromite mineralization in Cabangan (Belandres, 1964;
Palaganas, 1966; Gorriceta and Llave, 1970; Magpantay et al., 1979), but none mentioned
epithermal mineralization. With proximity to Cabangan, possible related deposits are copper
mineralization in Botolan (Fig. 2.10) that lies 15 kilometers north of Cabangan. This was reported

by Magpantay et al. (1979) on the following sites:

a. Southern slope of Mount Botolan under Mindanao Mother Lode Copper Mines Inc. The
NE-striking NW-dipping veins were deposited via filling and replacement along shear zones with
serpentinized peridotite and gabbro hosts. Chlorite and serpentine are the dominant alteration
minerals. Sulfides observed in the quartz veins were pyrite, pyrrhotite and chalcopyrite. Reported

average copper content is 4%.

b. Bukao, Binuklutan under Binuklutan Copper Prospect project (immediately west of Mt.
Botolan; see Fig. 2.10). Veins were found along NE-trending shears and faults and in contact
between gabbroic host rocks intruded by andesite dikes. Sulfides observed in quartz veins were

chalcopyrite, pyrrhotite and rare sphalerite. Reported copper average is around 2%.

c. Western slope of Mount Pera under Malumboy Copper Prospect in Biangul, Malumboy.
Gabbro is the dominant lithology in the area which is cut by fine-grained dark gray to black ‘basic
igneous dikes.’ The source of copper are quartz veins transecting gabbro, trending N 30° W with
40° SW dip. Magnetite, pyrite, chalcopyrite and minor pyrrhotite were the observed sulfides.

Epidote and chlorite were the main alteration minerals.

Lastly, the Coto Block has also been explored and mined for chromite and nickel since the
last century (MGB, 2004). In 2014, the Cordillera Exploration Corp. Inc. (CEXCI) investigated
and explored the property of NEWMINCO Pacific Mining Corp. Inc. denominated as EP-001-

2015-III after exploration permit was granted. A quartz vein float along Malabeg River with 5.2

31

g/t Au and malachite staining from Takipan with 2.2 g/t Au encouraged further exploration on the

tenement (Alonso et al., unpublished).

The NEWMINCO property EP-001-2015-III is dominated by moderately jointed dark-
colored harzburgites exposed in Takipan Ridge, Malabeg River, Mabibituin, Loong, Angeles and
Tanguay River (Fig. 2.13). In terms of topography, the highest elevations reach 900 masl and are
interconnected along east to northeast trends while local tributaries drain southward towards the
Maloma River, except for Tanguay River that runs towards southwest. Gabbros were observed in
the northwest (Quimalogong area) and upper portions of Bacsil (Fig. 2.13A). Diabase dike
complexes were observed in the southeastern portion of the tenement covering Bacsil to Antongen-
Hiloen (Fig. 2.13B). Gabbro-hosted, partly oxidized hydrothermal breccia with disseminated
malachite and pyrite + bornite + chalcopyrite was found in Bacsil. Two trends of mineralized
quartz-carbonate veins were found along contacts of harzburgites and diabases. NW-striking veins
were found in Malabeg, Takipan, Mabibituin NW, Angeles, Lower Loong and Bulikawa (Fig.
2.13C, D). Most of them dip towards northeast except for Bulikawa, which dips southwest. NE-
striking veins were found in Takipan, Mabibituin, and Upper Loong (Fig. 2.13E, F). Sulfide
association includes chalcopyrite, pyrite, sphalerite, galena, covellite and bornite. Alteration

minerals consist of light green malachite, emerald-green chrome mica and orange-brown hematite.

32

Fig. 2.13 Outcrop and sample photos of prospects within the NEWMINCO property EP-001-2015-
III. A.) Layered gabbro in Tanguay River. B.) Diabase dikes (with gabbro phases) intruding harzburgite in
Tanguay River. C.) NW-trending, clast-supported crackle breccia with angular cobble-sized monomictic
diabase clasts and infill quartz in Mabibituin-NW. Light green malachite staining and up to 2%
disseminated chalcopyrite were observed. Assay results yielded <0.005 ppm Au and 0.551% Cu. D.)
Quartz vein with up to 3% disseminated pyrite-chalcopyrite-bornite specks and emerald-green chrome mica
from a NW-trending vein in Angeles. Assay results yielded 0.02 ppm Au and 0.3% Cu. E.) NE-trending
quartz veins with sub-angular to sub-rounded matrix-supported mosaic breccia consisting of cobble-size
monomictic diabase clasts. Light green malachite stains were also observed. Assay results yielded 0.006
ppm Au and 0.121% Cu. F.) Quartz sample with up to 3% chalcopyrite-pyrite-bornite from a NE-trending
extension vein in Lower Loong. Assay results yielded 0.012 ppm Au and 0.135% Cu. Photos provided by
R. Alonso.

33

CHAPTER 3

METHODOLOGY

3.1 FIELDWORK AND SAMPLING

Field survey was conducted in the study area to investigate the occurrence of mineralization
on surface exposures. Description of veins, structures and host rocks were recorded. Available drill
cores were observed. The characteristics of mineralized veins were recorded with specific attention
to host rock, alteration and ore and gangue mineralogy and textures. Representative samples of the

host rock and veins were collected for succeeding analyses.
3.2 PETROGRAPHY AND ORE MICROSCOPY

Doubly polished thin sections of 30-mm thickness were prepared at the National Institute
of Geological Sciences, University of the Philippines. Petrographic observation and classification
of host rocks were conducted using Olympus BX53-P polarizing microscope housed at the
institute. Thin sections for gangue minerals were also prepared to determine mineralogy, textures
and intermineral relationships. For the petrography of peridotites, the textural definition of Mercier

& Nicolas (1974) was followed.

Polished slabs of mineralized samples were produced for the mineragraphic analyses of

ore-related minerals.
3.3 MINERAL CHEMISTRY ANALYSIS

Ore minerals were subjected to mineral chemistry analysis to determine atomic percentage
and mineral composition. Qualitative analysis was done using SEM JSM-6610V Energy
Dispersive X-Ray Spectroscopy at the Department of Earth Resources Engineering, Kyushu
University. Operating conditions were set to load voltage of 15 kilovolts and load current of 2
amperes. For quantitative analysis, the JEOL JXA-8230 Electron Probe Microanalyzer (EPMA)
at the UP-NIGS was used. Operation conditions were set to 15 kV acceleration with probe current
of 10 nA and probe diameter of 3-5 jm. Output was calculated using the ZAF correction matrix

from the JEOL software.

35

Fig. 3.1 Operating the SEM JSM-6610V Energy Dispersive X-Ray Spectroscopy (SEM-EDX) housed at
the Department of Earth Resources Engineering, Kyushu University

Fig. 3.2 Operating the JEOL JXA-8230 Electron Probe Microanalyzer (EPMA) housed at UP-NIGS.

36

3.4 X-RAY DIFFRACTOMETRY

Alteration minerals were powdered to <10 jm using agate mortar and pestle. These were
subjected to X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis using Olympus Terra XRD analyzer owned by
Cordillera Exploration Company Inc. (CEXCI). Results were interpreted using SwiftMin

automated quantitative XRD software and XPowder software.
3.5 FLUID INCLUSION ANALYSIS

Doubly polished silica wafers with thickness of 150-200 ym were prepared at Kyushu
University, Japan. Petrography of observable fluid inclusions were employed using the Olympus
BXS53 polarizing microscope. Homogenization temperature and final ice melting temperature were
measured using the LINKAM 10002L heating and cooling stage mounted in a Nikon Eclipse
LV100N POL microscope at the Department of Earth Resources Engineering, Kyushu University,

Japan.

Salinity values were calculated from Bodnar’s equation (1993) where 6 is the final-ice

melting temperature:
Salinity (wt. % NaCl equiv.) = 0.00 + 1.786 — 0.044267 + 0.0005576°

3.6 FIRE ASSAY AND ICP-OES

Mineralized samples were analyzed by Intertek Testing Services Philippines. Fire assay
with atomic absorption spectrophotometry (AAS) finish was employed to determine gold content
with lower detection limit of 0.005 ppm while multi-element determination by ICP-OES following
aqua regia digestion (HCI/HNO3) with test tube clement was employed to determine concentration

of 37 elements. The detection limit (in ppm unless stated otherwise) of the analyzed elements are

37

as follows: Cu (1/10000), Pb (3/5000), Zn (1/5000), Ag (0.5/100), Mo (1/5000), As (5/10000), Co

(1/5000), Cr (2/1000), Ni (1/20000), Sc (1/500).

38

CHAPTER 4

Results and Discussion

4.1 MINERALIZATION IN THE MALABEG PROSPECT
4.1.1 Host Rocks

The Malabeg prospect lies along the 200-400-mas! northeastern flank of a NW-trending
ridge between two NE-trending tributaries (Fig. 4.1). It is also adjacent to the NE-trending
extensional Mabibituin Fault mapped by previous workers (Alonso et al., unpublished). Massive
and jointed serpentinized harzburgites (Fig. 4.2A) are the dominant lithologic units. They are
highly fractured and, in weathered outcrops, covered by pale to moderately yellowish iron oxide
rims. In some portions, thin (1-10 meters) reddish-brown lateritic profiles overlie them.
Microscopic inspection of the harzburgite reveals anastomosing meshwork serpentine around
orthopyroxene and olivine grains with curvilinear grain boundaries (Fig. 4.2B). In some instances,
the latter seemingly appear as closely oriented aggregates of a preexisting larger grain. Dark brown
spinel appears with vermicular habit (Fig. 4.2C) or as exsolution lamellae along orthopyroxene
cleavage planes. Aside from these, the absence of elongation in unaltered grains suggests general

protogranular texture, although some orthopyroxenes exhibit porphyroclastic texture.

Grayish diabase dikes usually cut through harzburgites along NW-trending contacts (Fig.
4.2D, 4.4A). These are highly jointed, and sometimes with trends perpendicular to the contact
plane. Microscopic inspection reveals fine-grained euhedral to subhedral orthopyroxene grains
with perpendicular two-directional cleavage. Fine-grained subhedral clinopyroxene grains were
observed, with occasional glomeroporphyritic clustering (Fig. 4.2E-F). Some grains also exhibit
simple twinning (Fig. 4.2D). Fine-grained plagioclase feldspars are the most dominant mineral.
Their crystal growth appears to be obstructed by pyroxene grains, deforming the plagioclase laths.
Some laths are partly to fully chloritized and appear pale green under plane-polarized light (Fig.

4.2E, G). Medium-grained phenocrysts of clinopyroxene and plagioclase feldspar were also

40

120° 10° 120° 15'

15° 10

Legend
Peridotites
Gabbros

Tenement
boundary

Fault

Stream |
Metalliferous Prospects
Cu +Au+Ag Oo
Cu+Pb+Ag

S a
] z
Bag Mabibituin} ©) sasies Aut+basemetals @ |
y. |
[o}

wh B /

~ | Au

5°05’

Fig. 4.1 Geologic map of the NEWMINCO property EP-001-2015-III. It is underlain by peridotites and gabbros of the Cabangan Massif. Most
prospects are targeted for Cu, Au and Ag Base map for both Fig.s are from Shuttle Radar Topography Mission (SRTM) 15 digital elevation model.

41


Fig. 4.2 A.) Harzburgite exposure cut by a normal fault (N 80 E dipping 40° SE) in Maloma River
(15° 6' 48.5244" N 120° 11' 19.9752" E). The weathered harzburgite exhibits yellowish-brown
color due to weathering of iron oxides. Raised edges of striations indicate downward movement
for the opposite block. B.) Photomicrograph of serpentinized harzburgite from MLDH 002 41.8 m
under cross-polarized light. Meshwork serpentine surrounds orthopyroxene and olivine
aggregates. C.) Section from MLDH 002 41.8 m showing vermicular spinel exsolution with
orthopyroxene. D.) NW-trending diabase dike cutting through grayish harzburgite, with most
joints perpendicular to the plane of contact in Malabeg River (15° 7' 20.0784" N 120° 11' 18.946").
Secondary quartz stringers are found along the contact. E.) Photomicrograph of BAC_01 under
plane-polarized light showing subhedral medium-grained clinopyroxene grains and fine-grained
pale green chlorite grains surrounding a reaction rim composed of sericite surrounded by yellowish
green hornblende. Among the surrounding groundmass are fine-grained plagioclase feldspar and
clinopyroxene grains. F.) Cross-polarized photomicrograph of previous section. G.)
Photomicrograph of BAC_01 showing medium-grained euhedral orthopyroxene grains
surrounded by pale green chlorite and fine-grained plagioclase laths. H.) Cross-polarized
photomicrograph of previous section. Abbreviations: chl-chlorite, cpx-clinopyroxene, db-
diabase, hbl-hornblende, hz-harzburgite, pl-plagioclase, ol-olivine, opx-orthopyroxene, ser-
sericite.

observed, with the latter generally being deformed (Fig. 4.2E-H). Sericitization is observed
ranging from small specks in plagioclase phenocrysts to anhedral grains with hornblende rims
(Fig. 4.2E-F). Subhedral to anhedral amphibole are yellowish brown under plane-polarized light
and appear as alteration of clinopyroxenes (Fig. 4.2E-F). The crystallization sequence observed is

orthopyroxene > clinopyroxene > plagioclase.
4.1.2 Alteration and Mineralization

Since the observed alteration in the Malabeg prospect is unique compared to the alteration
in typical epithermal gold mineralization in the Philippines, the alteration stages were carefully
characterized through the observed consistent zonation throughout the drill cores and outcrops. As
discussed in Chapter 2, the typical listwanite alteration suite was also observed in the Malabeg

prospect. First, the serpentinized harzburgites were observed to be altered to talc-carbonates, which

43

A tale-carbonate ——* carbonate ————————+ __ quartz

E
2 S
3 o
— Assay values for the quartz vein (ppm)
Au Cu a) Zn As Co
0.075 107 169 110 199 30 434 684 2
B talc-carbonate ——+ carbonate «———_ talc-carbonate
. awh a L
E
©
a
o
Assay values for MLDH 008 39.8-40.8 m (ppm)
Pb cr
0.007 8 n/d 26 34 60 §29 1223 If
Cc. talc-carbonate quartz diabase
A A A

Assay values for the quartz vein (ppm)

Fig. 4.3 A.) Drill core photo of MLDH 008 30.8-31.2 m showing the listwanite alteration suite
from talc-carbonates to carbonate and then finally to quartz vein with brecciated fragments.
Composition of talc-carbonates was verified through XRD analysis. Cream-colored carbonate
veins are overprinted by reddish brown hematite. B.) Drill core photo of MLDH 008 39.8-40.8
showing an incomplete sequence of listwanite from talc-carbonate to carbonate. C.) Drill core
photo of MLDH 008 53-53.7 m showing mineralized quartz veins between talc-carbonates and
quartz. Gray specks of galena and yellowish chalcopyrite are observed on hand sample. The
lowermost portion of the quartz vein contain silicified diabase.

44

generally has pale greenish gray groundmass that are revealed to be fine-grained talc and
pyrophyllite cut by white magnesite veinlets (Fig. 4.3). Black grains are also shown to be talcitized
under the microscope and exhibit relict foliation (Fig. 4.5A). The identification of these minerals
was further confirmed through XRD (Fig. 4.6). The sulfides observed were euhedral gersdorffite
and anhedral pentlandite-pyrrhotite exsolution that occurs in island-like disseminations (Fig. 4.7A-
B). Similar to the nickel sulfides found by Abrajano (1984) in the basal cumulate sequence of the
Acoje Block, the textures and occurrence as inclusions within the silicates signify the magmatic

origin of these sulfides.

Meanwhile, cream-colored ferromagnesian carbonates consisting of dolomite crosscut the
talc-carbonates in most portions (Fig. 4.3A). The dolomite veins are usually accompanied by
reddish-brown hematite staining. Under the microscope, the dolomite grains exhibit feathery habit,
with the hematite stains bordering their cleavage, fractures and rims (Fig. 4.5B). Fragments of
serpentine with ribbon texture were also observed, which were derived from the adjacent talc-
carbonate. In terms of sulfide mineralogy, rare arsenopyrite has been observed in hand samples

and detected through XRD (Fig. 4.6).

A transition between the carbonate phases and silica phases was also observed in some
veins, where white euhedral calcite and light gray quartz grains exhibit rhombic boundaries and
signify the partial replacement of the former by the latter (Fig. 4.5C). Euhedral arsenopyrite grains,

which appear as dark gray specks in hand samples, were observe in both gangue minerals.

Lastly, massive quartz veins with minor adularia crosscut the carbonates. Their thickness
can vary from millimeter-wide stringers to meter-wide veins. Along host-vein borders, varying
degrees of brecciation were observed, ranging from intensely silicified breccias that appear as

grayish mottles (Fig. 4.4C) to unaltered angular mosaic breccias following preexisting planes of

45

discontinuity (Fig. 4.4D). Vuggy, comb and dogtooth textures were observed especially along the
cores of the veins (Fig. 4.4E-F). Minor adularia occurs as pale-orange grains that were confirmed

by petrographic observation (Fig. 4.4H).

The dominant sulfides in the quartz-adularia veins are anhedral chalcopyrite and galena
(Figure 4.7C-F). Both minerals coexist with sphalerite that exhibits chalcopyrite disease (Figure
4.7F). Anhedral electrum grains occur as inclusions in chalcopyrite and galena, or as isolated

grains (Figure 4.7E).

Supergene alteration is represented by pyrolusite, limonite and hematite. These form the
thin layer of gossanous limonite cap, which is also enriched in nickel due to leaching from the
ultramafic regolith. Among the sulfides, secondary covellite was subsequently produced from the

alteration of chalcopyrite (Fig. 4.7D).

In summary, there were five stages of alteration and mineralization observed within the
Malabeg prospect. Stage | is represented by talc-carbonates, Stage 2 is represented by carbonates
in the form of the dolomite veins, Stage 3 represents the transition between the carbonate phases
and silica phases, Stage 4 is represented by the quartz-adularia veins and lastly, supergene
alteration is represented by the iron and manganese oxides. This paragenetic sequence is shown

in Fig. 4.8, which includes the gangue minerals and sulfide for each stage.

46

Fig. 4.4 Vein occurrence and textures of quartz-adularia veins. A.) Quartz vein (10-centimeter width) between pale yellowish-brown
harzburgite and bluish-gray diabase. Vein attitude: N 79 W, 33° NE dip. B.) Quartz vein (58-centimeter width) between gray diabase
and bluish gray harzburgite. Vein attitude: N 16 W, 58° SW dip. C.) MLB-DMS-07 sample consisting of massive quartz and minor
pale-orange adularia. Comb texture is emphasized in red inset photo. Bluish black patches of pyrolusite were observed, as well as reddish
brown iron oxides. Brecciated wall rock fragments appear as grayish mottles with indiscernible boundaries partially consumed by intense
silicification. Assay results yielded 1.162 g/t Au, 0.358% Cu and 0.748% Zn. D.) Drill core sample from MLDH 001 42.2 m showing
unaltered matrix-supported angular mosaic breccia composed of gray diabase fragments and cemented by quartz. E.) Zoomed inset
photo of quartz vein (see Fig. 4.5B) emphasizing elongated comb (dogtooth) texture with minor greenish fuchsite. Black sphalerite and
brass yellow sphalerite disseminations were observed at close inspection. F.) Zoomed inset photo of MLB-DMS-07 (see Fig. 4.5C)
emphasizing comb texture inside a cavity. G.) Photomicrograph of MLB-DMS-07 showing dusty rhombic adularia grains. H.)
Photomicrograph of a quartz vein sample from MLDH 008 53.5 m exhibiting macrocrystalline to microcrystalline quartz grains. Opaque
minerals are sulfides (see Fig. 4.8C and E).

47

SEL AN

Fig. 4.5 Hand specimen and photomicrographs of Stages 1-3. Alteration minerals were confirmed
through XRD analysis. A.) Stage | talc-carbonate sample from MLDH 008 47-47.3 m. Talc grains
exhibit relict foliation and are cut by magnesite. Second photo shows the boundary between fine-
grained magnesite from the talc-carbonate and coarse-grained magnesite from the adjacent veinlet.
B.) Stage 2 carbonate sample from MLDH 008 30.8-31.2 m. Fragments of serpentine with ribbon
texture were derived from the wall rock. Orange-brown hematite overprints dolomite grains along
cleavage planes and grain boundaries. C.) Stage 3 quartz-carbonate sample from MLDH 002 34.3
m. Rhombic boundaries were observed between calcite and quartz.

48

(MLDH 008 53.0-53. a
53.0-53.5m jee

°
Ss)

tle
pri/tic

a
-
°

* pri
pi
e. ~« dol
p
NIC asp
i. m pri/tic

Fig. 4.6 XRD diffractograms for the representative samples for talc-carbonate (MLDH 008 53.0-
53.3 m) and carbonate (MLDH 008 30.8-31.2 m). The presence of lizardite, talc and pyrophyllite
in the lower diagram represents the fragments from the adjacent talc-carbonate. Abbreviations:
asp-arsenopyrite, chr-chromite, dol-dolomite, !z-lizardite, mgs-magnesite, prl-pyrophyllite, tlc-
talc.

49

Fig. 4.7 Photomicrographs of sulfides under reflected light. Sulfide compositions were confirmed
through SEM-EDX. A.) Talc-carbonate sample from MLDH 008 53.3 m showing disseminated
islands of coexisting pyrrhotite and pentlandite. B.) Peridotite breccia from MLB-DMS-07 with
deformed pyrrhotite laths and subhedral gersdorffite with pentlandite inclusion. Chromian spinel
was also observed. C.) Quartz sample from MLDH 008 53.5 m showing dominant anhedral
chalcopyrite coexisting with subhedral pyrrhotite lath, anhedral sphalcrite and anhedral to
subhedral galena. D.) Quartz sample from MLB-DMS-06 showing secondary covellite around
chalcopyrite. E.) Quartz sample from MLDH 008 53.5 m showing dominant anhedral galena with
inclusions of anhedral chalcopyrite and electrum. F.) Quartz sample from MLDH 001 40.5 m
showing chalcopyrite disease with sphalerite. Specks of galena were also observed.

50

——

| ALTERATION

STAGE 1 STAGE 2 STAGE 3 STAGE 4
a SUPERGENE

Talc-carbonate Carbonate Quartz-carbonate

\Lizardite

nas
|Tale

Pyrophyllite

|Chlorite
Sericite

je

Magnesite

[Dolomite
[Calcite
|Quartz

|Adularia :

|Hematite

|Pyrolusite _

| SULFIDE

|
|
|

al

lArsenopyrite eastern

a
Chalcopyrite ———————
ns

\Galena

Pyrrhotite
Sphalerite
[Electrum _|

[Chalcocite

Fig. 4.8 Alteration and ore paragenesis of the Malabeg prospect. Line thickness signify relative
abundance. Gold in the form of electrum is emphasized in red.

4.1.3 Mineral Chemistry

Elemental compositions of six electrum grains from Stage 4 quartz-adularia veins are

shown in Table 4.1. A representative compositional map resulting from the EPMA analyses reveal

the electrum’s abundance in Au and Ag (Fig. 4.9A). Mean composition obtained from the analyzed

grains (Fig. 4.9C) is 73.6% Au and 21.51% Ag.

$1

Nine sphalerite grains coexisting with either pyrite or pyrrhotite were also analyzed to
determine the Fe, Zn, and S compositions (Table 4.2 and Fig. 4.9D). Iron-sulfide (FeS) mole

percentage ranges from 13.8 to 15.89, with an average value of 14.91.

Table 4.1 Composition of electrum grains analyzed through EPMA

Au-bearing Elemental Composition (Wt. %)
minera! t
AS Cu Fe Zn Pb Ni Ag

PS06-02-Au 1 0.01 bdl 0.01 bdl
PS06-02-Au2 | bdl 0.04 0.03 0.16
PS06-02-Au3 | 0.02 amo bdl
PS06-02-Au4 | 0.00 | 0.01 0.01 0.12

PS06-02-AuS | 0.05 0.03 bdl bdl
PS06-02-Au6 | 0.01 bdl 0.03 bdl

Table 4.2 Composition of sphalerite grains coexisting with pyrite and pyrrhotite analyzed
through EPMA

Wt. %

FeS mol%
| Fe | zn | Ss

10.38 | 57.23 | 31.63 15.23
PS07-sp2 9.35 | 55.59 | 30.96 13.80
PSO7-sp3
PS07-sp4
PS07-sp5
PS07-sp6
PS07-sp7 55.58 | 32.79
PS07-sp8
PS07-sp9

10.08 | 56.31 31.79 14.91

52

63 #15 F138 8 126
an 7 63 63
Pg Bs Oi 0

4 a 31

atin
i

6
0
5 4

a

0
Project : compo maps_0002
Mar 12.17.03 2021

Acc V 200kV
Prob C 5.01 76-0084

Fig. 4.9 Images from EPMA. A.) Photomicrograph of mineralized quartz from MLDH 008 53.5
m showing electrum grains in galena and chalcopyrite. Red box indicates a targeted area for EPMA
(see Fig. 4.10B). B.) Compositional map showing electrum grains coexisting with galena and
chalcopyrite. Warm colors signify abundance of clement. C.) Scanning clectron microscope
(SEM) image of electrum grains existing cither as isolated grains or inclusions within chalcopyrite.
Red circles indicate points that were targeted for EPMA. D.) SEM image of sphalerite coexisting
with pyrite. The sphalerite grain was analyzed using EPMA.

4.1.4 Fluid inclusion petrography and microthermometry

Three sets of fluid inclusions from Stage 4 quartz-adularia veins were analyzed. These

dominantly consist of liquid and vapor (10 to 30% volume) with almost consistent phase ratios

53

(Fig. 4.10A). Most inclusions have small sizes between 2-10 uum while the larger ones that reach

to 25 um are less common.

Two modes were recognized for the homogenization temperature: 170-180 and 190-200
°C (Fig. 4.10B) while salinity ranges from 1.40 to 10.23 wt% NaCl. Salinity values were plotted
versus homogenization temperature values (Fig. 4.10C). The low R?-squared value, as well as the
scattered nature of the plots, signify that there may not be a single dominant mechanism in the
deposition of the Stage 4 veins. On the other hand, the massive and comb texture suggest cooling
of hydrothermal fluids, especially that the veins occur on the shallower part of an epithermal-

porphyry system.
4.2 DISCUSSION
4.2.1 Mineralization style

Gold mineralization in the Malabeg prospect is associated with veins consisting of
carbonate, quartz and adularia. The occurrence of veins between harzburgite and diabase contacts
can be explained by rheology contrasts between the two lithologies (Vearncombe & Holyland,
1995). The massive and brecciated textures of veins indicate hydrothermal activity, with the latter
indicating hydraulic fracturing (Jebrak, 1997; Figueroa & Gabo-Ratio, 2022) with varying degrees
of silicification. On the other hand, comb and dogtooth textures indicate slow crystallization of
crystals in open spaces and fractures promoted by brittle deformation, especially in the shallow

crustal portions (Dong et al., 1995).

The fluid inclusions from the quartz-adularia veins also reveal the nature of the
hydrothermal fluids responsible for gold mineralization in Malabeg. Aside from the nature of the

fluid inclusions as two-phased and fluid-rich, the homogenization temperatures between 170-200

54

°C, and salinity between 1.40-10.24 wt. % NaCl indicate epithermal conditions of formation.
Based on the fluid inclusion data, a depth of 67-144 meters below the paleo-water table was
calculated using Haas’s (1971) equation (Fig. 4.11) which puts the Malabeg prospect within the

shallow/epithermal zone (Lindgren, 1933; Cooke, 2000; Hedenquist & Arribas, 2017).

Furthermore, as stated in Chapter 2, it is discovered that cooler fluids might have circulated
within Mount Pinatubo. The lower homogenization temperatures found within the Malabeg
prospect suggest a farther distance and shallower depth relative to the source of magmatism—
temperatures of at least 200 °C were inferred for the shallowest portions of Mount Pinatubo (Delfin
et al., 1996). Additionally, similar liquid-rich fluid inclusions in quartz veinlets with similar sulfide
mineralogy (galena and sphalerite) in Dizon mine yielded homogenization temperatures ranging
from 190 °C to 300 °C and salinity ranges from 1.0 to 3.4 wt% NaCl, which are within the values

observed for the Stage 4 veins.

Ore mineralogy also provides constraints on the mineralization style in the area. The
presence of arsenopyrite in Stages 2-3 indicate low sulfidation state during listwanitization of
peridotite host rocks (Einadi et al., 2003; Sillitoe & Hedenquist, 2003; John et al., 2018). As stated
in Chapter 2, hydration of ultramafic minerals results to reducing conditions (Abrajano, 1984) and
thus lead to low sulfidation states. The listwanitization process might have yielded the same effect

in the system.

55

ry

Frequency

n=60

@ MLB103
» MLB104
@ MLB202

= il thie

180 190 200 210 220 230 240 250

Homogenization Temperature (°C)

260

240

8
8

8

g

Homogenization Temperature (°C)
rs 8

8

R?=0.1349

8
Salinity (wt% NaCl eq)

n=29
MLB103

© MLB104
MLB202

10 12

Fig. 4.10 A) Fluid inclusion photomicrograph from MLB103. B.) Histogram of homogenization temperature derived from fluid inclusion
microthermometry. Bimodal distribution with closeness of peak values suggests multiple pulses from the same IS fluid in different
instances. C.) Graph showing homogenization temperature versus salinity. Mechanism diagram is from Wilkinson (2001).

56

Temperature (°C)

150 200 250 300

100 | MLB202

4 MLB103

Depth from paleowater table (m)

Fig. 4.11 Temperature-depth plot using Haas’s (1971) equation. The depth below paleowater table
lies between 67 to 144 meters which is within the epithermal zone (Lindgren, 1933; Cooke, 2000;
Hedenquist & Arribas, 2017).

However, in the Stage 4 quartz-adularia veins, the sulfides identified are chalcopyrite,
galena, sphalerite, pyrite, and pyrrhotite, which imply intermediate sulfidation state. According to
the diagram by Einaudi and others (2003), chalcopyrite serves as the upper limit of the intermediate
sulfidation state while pyrite and pyrrhotite serve as the lower limit. In the same diagram, the
sphalerite iron-sulfide mole percent was plotted together with the homogenization temperature
obtained from fluid inclusion microthermometry and the resulting values lay within the
intermediate sulfidation region (Fig. 4.12). The difference in sulfidation state between
listwanitization and precipitation of Stage 4 veins is attributed to initial fluid-rock interaction of
the hydrothermal fluid with the serpentinized peridotites, which have high buffering capacity
dictated by the dominance of ferromagnesian minerals. Mineral carbonation systems involving
olivine, serpentine and talc go as high as 410 °C and decreases up to around 370 °C as the amount
of CQ: in the system increases (Kelemen et al., 2011). At these temperatures, fluid-reaction

processes such as hydration lead to reducing conditions, and therefore low sulfidation state, due to

57

the rock buffering of olivine (Abrajano, 1984). Subsequent intermediate sulfidation fluids were

weakly buffered since the harzburgites have already been altered to listwanites.

Victoria (Sajona et al., 2002)
Acupan (Cooke et al., 1996)
Suyoc (Soberano et al., 2020)

This study

FeS mol%

log fS, ——

200 300 400 500 600 700
Temperature (°C)

Fig. 4.12 Temperature versus sulfur fugacity graph based on Einaudi et al. (2003). Based on
sphalerite iron-sulfide mole percent and homogenization temperature derived from fluid inclusion
microthermometry, the Stage 4 quartz-adularia veins exhibit intermediate sulfidation state. The
sulfidation state is complemented by the proximity of the plot to the pyrite-pyrrhotite boundary,
which are part of the ore assemblage of the mentioned vein, and by the presence of other indicator
sulfides such as chalcopyrite.

58

Due to the nature of volcanic arc terranes, epithermal veins are usually hosted by the
resulting volcano-sedimentary strata, if not younger intrusive units (Sillitoe, 1973; Cooke &
Simmons, 2000; Corbett, 2002; Sillitoe & Hedenquist, 2003; Sillitoe, 2010; Hedenquist & Arribas,
2017). For example, intermediate sulfidation epithermal deposits in Luzon such as Victoria,
Acupan, and Suyoc are hosted in volcanic, plutonic and sedimentary host rocks, respectively. In
case of the Malabeg prospect is not typical, since the epithermal veins are hosted by the basement
ultramafic units, producing a listwanite alteration suite due to reaction with evolved fluids. It is
also important to take note that the listwanites in the Malabeg prospect is unique in terms of
mappable extent and degree of alteration compared to existing listwanites, such as the gold-bearing
listwanites in grecnstone belts associated with metamorphic fluids (Buckman & Ash, 2010) and
listwanites produced from the devolatilization of sediments along the leading edge of the mantle
wedge such as the Oman Listwanites (Falk & Kelemen, 2015) and the listwanites of the Advocate
ophiolite complex in Newfoundland, Canada (Menzel et al., 2018). The listwanites in the Malabeg
prospect appear more prominently in the drill cores than in surface exposures possibly because the
source of the fluids is deeper. Still, the Malabeg prospect shares many similarities with other
ophiolite-hosted intrusion-related epithermal veins in terms of spatial proximity to intrusions,

gangue textures and mineralogy and sulfide mineralogy (Table 4.3).

The ore mineralogy and elemental compositions, coupled with temperature data, textural
characteristics and fluid inclusion properties imply an intermediate sulfidation epithermal (ISE)
mineralization style is strongly implied for the Malabeg prospect. A summary of the mineralization

characteristics of the Malabeg prospect is shown in Table 4.4.

$9

Table 4.3 Mineralization characteristics observed in the Malabeg prospect versus other ophiolite-
hosted epithermal veins. Data was derived from Robinson et al. (2005), Qiu & Zhu (2015) and

Yazuv et al. (2022).

Kaymaz Gold Mine

Tectonic setting

Sartohay Ophiolite

Sayi Gold Deposit

Malabeg Prospect

Continental thrust zone |

Collision

Collision

Subduction

Distinct Gangue

T
magnesite, chalcedony,
quartz

talc, chlorite, magnesite,
dolomite, fuchsite, quartz

chlorite, mariposite,
magnesite

talc, magnesite, dolomite,
fuchsite, quartz, chlorite,
sericite

Alteration

listwanite

|

listwanite

listwanite

propylitic, listwanite

Gangue textures

Sulfide mineralogy

T

Cockade, colloform, |

stockwork, polymictic
breccia

Boxwork, comb, cockade

Angular hydrothermal
breccia (crackle)

T
|
Millerite, magnetite,

pentlandite, arsenopyrite,
nickeline, marcasite,

Pyrite, arsenopyrite,

| gersdorffite, chalcopyrite,

Gold, chalcopyrite,
gersdorffite, galena,
polydemite, millerite,

Massive-comb, crackle to
mosaic monomictic breccia

Chalcopyrite, sphalerite,
pyrrhotite, galena, electrum

60

| |
Pyrite, gold, silver, | gold | pentlandite, violarite

chalcopyrite |
| |
|
|
| j

Soluea of fdas Magmatic-hydrothermal | Magmatic and meteoric Hydrothermal fluid Magmatic-hydrothermal
fluids | through shear zone fluids (?)
T t
Type of intrusion (if present) Granitoids | Monzogranite Monzogranite Diorite-quartz diorite(?)

|


Table 4.4 Mineralization characteristics observed in the Malabeg prospect versus other
intermediate sulfidation epithermal (ISE) mineralization. Data was derived from Arribas (1995),
Einaudi et al. (2003), Sillitoe & Hedenquist (2003) and Bodnar et al. (2014).

CRITERIA INTERMEDIATE MALABEG PROSPECT

Chalcopyrite + galena +
sphalerite + pyrite +
electrum

Tectonic setting Subduction Subduction/rift Rift

Pyrite + enargite +
luzonite

Chalcopyrite +
pyrite + tennantite

Arsenopyrite +

Sulfide assemblage ‘
pyrrhotite

Homogenization
Temperature

90-480 °C 140-310 °C <220 °C

4-46 wt.% NaCl 3-20% wt.% NaCl <1 wt.% NaCl

<1

Mode: 180-200 °C

2-11 wt.% NaCl
13.8-15.89

Carbonate, quartz,
adularia

Salinity

Sphalerite FeS

21 to 40
mole percent

Sulfate,
manganese,
carbonate, silicate

Distinct gangue Sulfate Carbonate, fluorite

Pyroclastic and

sedimentaryunits Diatremes, Pyroclastic,
Typical host rock y ‘| pyroclastic and | volcanosedimentary Peridotites, diabase
porphyry, volcanic f . ;
sedimentary units units

units

4.2.2 Hydrothermal fluid evolution in the Malabeg Prospect

Ore and gangue composition and textures serve as evidence for hydrothermal activity
throughout the Malabeg prospect. The sequence from Stages | to 3 represents listwanitization of
the serpentinized ultramafic host rocks probably brought about by mixing of meteoric waters and
the initial magmatic-hydrothermal fluids related to the Bataan Volcanic In an alkaline and high-
temperature environment, the reaction of serpentine with carbon dioxide from fluids produces talc,
magnesite and water. This explains the presence of talc in the early phase of listwanitization which

usually exists at temperatures higher than 300 °C (Evans & Guggenheim, 1988).

61

serpentine carbon dioxide talc magnesite water
2M g3Si205(0H), + 3COz > Mg,Siz0,.(0H),+ 3MgCO; + 4H,0

Consequently, the reaction of olivine with carbon dioxide also produces magnesite. This
explains the abundance of magnesite during temperature decrease while promoting the

consumption of serpentine (Buckman & Ashley, 2010).
olivine carbon dioxide magnesite silica
Mg2Si0, + 2CO, > 2MgCO, + SiO,

The presence of CO? also controls the pH of the system when it reacts with water and yields

H+ ions and bicarbonate.
carbon dioxide water carbonic acid
CO, + H,0 > Ht + HCO;

Naturally, excess in H+ ions influence the acidity of a system. However, the reaction with

serpentine breaks the latter down into Mg?’ ions, silicic acid and water.
MgFe-carbonate _ silicic acid carbon dioxide water
MgFe(CO3). + 4H* + SiO{- > SiO, + 2CO, + 4H,0 + Mg?* + Fe?*

Together with ferrous ions and bicarbonate, Mg?” ions are used to form ferromagnesian

carbonates.
nM g2* +mFe?* + 4HCO; > [n/(n+ m)]Mg[m/(n + m)]Fe(C03)2 + 2H,0 + 2C0,

The excess CO? in this reaction also provides a feedback mechanism for the reaction

(Buckman & Ashley, 2010). The progression from magnesium-rich carbonates (magnesite in Stage

62

| talc-carbonates) to calcium-magnesium-bearing carbonates (dolomite in Stage 2 carbonate veins)
and then finally towards magnesium-free carbonates (calcite in Stage 3 quartz-carbonate veins)
also support the aforementioned chemical reactions regarding listwanitization in the Malabeg
prospect. Additionally, during the formation of Stage | talc-carbonates, zinc ions were most likely

derived from the ultramafic host rocks, producing minor smithsonite.

The turning point for Phase I listwanitization starts when serpentine is fully consumed.
There will no longer be a supply of Mg?” ions, halting the formation of magnesite. Additionally,
the excess H+ ions will make the system acidic, which inhibits the precipitation of carbonates
(Buckman & Ashley, 2010). By this point, Phase II listwanitization would commence. Alongside
the decrease in pH, decrease in temperature will also favor the precipitation of silica. This is also
safe to assume since most hydrothermal and metamorphic systems follow a progression from
higher to lower temperatures (Buckman, 2010). Thus, the precipitation of silica-rich veins is often
seen as the end phase in most listwanite deposits. The rhombic boundaries in Stage 3 quartz-

carbonate veins signify the partial replacement of calcite by quartz.

After Stages 1-3 listwanitization, processes such as fault reactivation and reaction-induced
self-cracking (Power et al., 2013) could have propagated open spaces such as fractures, which
served as loci for the precipitation of Stage 4 quartz-adularia veins from the subsequent evolved
fluids. Slow cooling of fluids is evidenced by the precipitation of sub-rhombic adularia and comb
quartz (Dong & Morrison, 1995) in open spaces. Bimodal distribution of the homogenization

temperature from the fluid inclusions, albeit having close values and similar petrography, suggests

63

[)) Hydrothermal fluids

WC Listwanites

RR Brittle deformation
~~~ (e.g. reactivated faults)

HB orebody

Fig. 4.13 Listwanitization and epithermal mineralization model for the Malabeg prospect. Intermediate sulfidation (IS) fluids from a
magmatic source react with the serpentinized peridotites (A), producing the Stages 1-3 listwanites (B). Due to its shallow depth, the
listwanite zone in the Malabeg prospect becomes susceptible to brittle deformation processes such as faulting and fracturing, aside from
its tendency to self-cracking (C). Subsequent IS fluids infiltrate the altered zone (D) and precipitate the mineralized Stage 4 quartz-
adularia veins (E).

64

different pulses of fluids from the same source. Fig. 4.13 shows a generalized model for the

listwanitization and epithermal mineralization in the area.

Supergene alteration, resulting from a shift towards an oxidizing environment, is also
documented consistently throughout the prospect. Iron oxides were observed as reddish-brown
overprints over the lighter colored carbonate and quartz veins. Bluish black patches of manganese
oxides, which were identified as pyrolusite via XRD, were also observed in contacts between host
rocks and quartz veins. These two types of oxides were also observed forming the thin layer of
gossanous limonite cap, which were also enriched in nickel due to leaching from the ultramafic

regolith.
4.2.3 Metal endowment

Fluid-rock interaction with the serpentinized peridotites could have contributed to ore
deposition. In orogenic listwanites, it has been postulated that gold content in serpentinized
ultramafic bodies, with at least 8 ppb Au, can also be leached into veins (Buisson and Leblanc,
1985); the serpentinized harzburgite samples have an average Au content of 15.5 ppb (Table 4.5).
However, this requires large-scale hydrothermal activity across voluminous ultramafic units,
precipitating ore into structures such as tectonic contacts and faults. Succeeding studies have
validated the effect of listwanitization to gold transport (Plyusnina et al., 2007; Emam and Zoheir,
2013). Going back to the Malabeg prospect, an increasing trend in average Au content is observed
from the host rocks across the various stages. This is also observed for Pb content. Aside from
these, there are other similarities in ore trend observed in the Malabeg prospect and by Buckman

& Ashley (2010):

65

A. There is an increase in Ni, Co, Cu and As concentrations from host rocks to Phase I
listwanites. In the Malabeg Prospect, As peaks at Stage 3 quartz-carbonates while Ni
and Co peak at Stage 2 carbonates. In addition to this, Power & Scott (1995) mentions
that carbonatization in ultrabasic rocks is related to As enrichment.

B. Co and Ni content decrease in Phase II listwanites compared to host rocks (Tuysuz &
Erler, 1993), which is similar to the trends observed in the Malabeg prospect. Further

studies may be elucidate the specific sources of these ore minerals.

Table 4.5 Average ore content per lithology based on assayed samples from MLDH-001, MLDH-
002, MLDH-003, MLDH-008 and field samples. Sample count for each lithology is as follows:
harzburgite=10; diabase=4; talc-carbonates=6; carbonates=4; quartz-carbonates=3; quartz-
adularia=7.

AVERAGE ORE CONTENT PER LITHOLOGY

HOST STAGE1 STAGE 2 STAGE 3 STAGE 4
Harzburgite pjabase (GES) Talc-carbonates Carbonates §Quartz-carbonates Quartz-adularia
(n=6) (n=4) (n=3)

[Cu (ppm) eae 5 27 51 289 699
Pb (ppm) 3.00 15 29 19 613 1421
Zn (ppm) 25 53 35 42 82 | 141
Ag (ppm) <0.5 <0.5 0.1 <0.5 A 4.3

[Mo (ppm) <1 0.3 <1 0.3 <1 0.3
As (ppm) 72 4 60.7 120 443 419

| Co (ppm’ 65 36 57 68 a 42 44
Cr (ppm) 566 282 539 517 257 331
Ni (ppm) 1363 471.8 1157 1516 532 898
Sc (ppm) 6 16 5 6 18 5

Cr content is almost the same from host rocks to Stage 2 carbonates and then decreases in
the succeeding stages, which is almost the same trend observed for Ni and Co. Mo content is very
low, although most porphyry deposits in island arcs are enriched with Cu-Au rather than Cu-Mo
(Mitchell & Bell, 1973; Kesler et al., 1977; Solomon, 1990; Yumul et al., 2003). Lastly, except
for Sc, the gencrally low ore content in the diabases suggests their minimal contribution as metal

source.

66

With these observations, the following processes can be postulated for the metal source

and transport in the Malabeg prospect:

A. The high Au, Cu, Zn and Pb content are both a factor of IS mineralization and leaching
from the serpentinized peridotites to a certain extent. Their precipitation is highly
favored in silica (Stages 3 and 4).

B. As is leached out from the serpentinized peridotites and precipitated during the waning
stages of listwanitization (Stage 3). Interestingly, the same trend is observed for Cu.

C. Co, Cr and Ni behave almost similarly. They are transported and precipitated during
the earlier stages of listwanitization (Stages | and 2). From the previous observation, it
is suggested that As, Co, Cr and Ni are dissolved during the talcitization and
carbonatization of the serpentinized ultramafic units and are most likely precipitated in
carbonate-rich phases.

D. The contribution of the diabase in ore deposition is minimal.
4.2.4 Tectonic setting

The ISE mineralization characteristics of the Malabeg prospect is further supported by its
spatial proximity with intrusions related to porphyry copper deposits in a magmatic arc (Sillitoe &
Hedenquist, 2003; Yumul et al., 2003). This is reflected by the ridge subduction in the Manila
Trench (Hayes & Lewis, 1984; Yang et al, 1996) and has been associated with other porphyry-
epithermal mineral systems in Luzon, such as the Balatoc diatreme (Cooke & McPhail, 2001;
Figueroa et al., 2022) and the Baguio-Mankayan Mineral District (Yumul et al., 2008; Chang et
al., 2011, Manalo et al., 2018; Jabagat et al., 2020; Soberano et al., 2020). Metals and sulfur are
usually sourced from magmas via hydrothermal fluids which can be precipitated through various

fluid evolution processes such as boiling and cooling (Fontbote et al., 2017).

67

The proximity of north-south trending porphyry copper deposits and active volcanos
comprising the Bataan Volcanic Arc further strengthen the possibility of the Malabeg Prospect as
a part of a larger porphyry-epithermal system. Aside from the slew of copper sulfide deposits near
the Cabangan Massif, the Dizon deposit readily exemplifies a linkage between porphyry copper
mineralization and telescoping epithermal system in the area (Imai, 2002; Imai, 2005), with metal
content averaging 0.355% Cu, 0.746 gpt Au and 2.0 gpt Ag. The diorite and andesite porphyries,
which served as hosts, originated from oxidized and water-rich (>5 wt%) fertile parental magmas
(Midea et al., 2021). Similarly, Mount Pinatubo, which lies to the east of Malabeg prospect, is
associated with intermediate to silicic highly oxidized magmas with high sulfur content (Hattori,
1993; Hattori & Keith, 2001). Geophysical survey, followed by detailed drilling, is necessary to

confirm the existence of a causative pluton eastward of the Malabeg prospect.

68

CHAPTER 5

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

The results of the study gave insights to the processes that resulted in the intermediate

sulfidation epithermal (ISE) mineralization in the Malabeg prospect.

1)

2)

3)

4)

The listwanite alteration, vein occurrence, and textures indicate that the peridotites of the
Malabeg Prospect were influenced by hydrothermal fluid activity. Furthermore, fluid
inclusion composition, homogenization temperature, salinity, and paleo-water depth
calculations serve as evidence for the precipitation of gold-bearing quartz-adularia veins
along the shallow epithermal zone.

Ore assemblage and mineral chemistry reflect changing sulfidation states from Stages 1-4.
The presence of arsenopyrite during the listwanitization stages represent low sulfidation
state due to the strong buffering capacity of the serpentinized harzburgites during fluid-
rock reaction with the evolved magmatic fluids. Succeeding fluid pulses that interact with
the listwanites were weakly buffered due to the alteration of the existing ferromagnesian
minerals comprising the ultramafic protolith, thus precipitating Stage 4 quartz-adularia
veins. Ore assemblage and mineral chemistry of sphalerite coexisting with pyrite/pyrrhotite
serve as evidence for the intermediate sulfidation state for this gold-bearing phase.

The ultramafic character of the host rocks yielded a listwanite alteration sequence that is
unique to the Malabeg prospect. In spite of this, the Malabeg prospect still exhibits
similarities with other areas associated with ISE mineralization, especially when other
characteristics such as gangue mineralogy and regional setting are considered.

Together with the results of this study, the tectonic configuration of Western Luzon implies
that the epithermal veins in the Malabeg prospect are a part of a larger porphyry-epithermal

system associated with the Bataan Volcanic Arc east of the Zambales Ophiolite Complex.

70

REFERENCES

Abrajano, T. A. (1984). The Petrology and Low-Temperature Geochemistry of the Sulfide-
Bearing Mafic-Ultramafic Units of the Acoje Massif, Zambales Ophiolite, Philippines:
Characterization of Mineral And Fluid Equilibria. (doctoral dissertation, Washington
University).

Ahmed, H. A., Arai, S., & Ikenne, M. (2009). Mineralogy and Paragenesis of the Co-Ni
Arsenide Ores of Bou Azzer, Anti-Atlas, Morocco. Economic Geology, 249-266.

Alonso, R. A., Panol, A. P., & Perez, A. D. (2015). Mineral Property Assessment of
NEWMINCO Pacific Mining Corp. Mineral Claims.

Angeles, C. A. (1988). Geology and alteration-mineralization characteristics of the Nalesbitan
gold deposit, Camarines Norte, Philippines. Philippine Mining and Engineering Journal.

Ash, C. H. (2001). Relationship Between Ophiolites And Gold-Quartz Veins in the North
American Cordillera. Ministry of Energy and Mines, British Columbia.

Ash, C. H., & Arksey, R. L. (1990). The Listwanite-Lode Gold Association in British Columbia.
British Columbia Geological Survey 1989, 359-364.

Aurelio, M. A. (2000). Tectonics of the Philippines Revisited. Journal of the Geological Society
of the Philippines, Vol. 55, 119-183.

Aurelio, M. A., Angeles, C. A., Hernando, J., Elviiia, J. C., Lasconia, J. J., Lobino, F., & TVIRD
Balabag Exploration Team. (2009). Tilting of the Balabag Epithermal Gold Vein System,
Zamboanga Del Sur: Arguments for a Regional Tectonic Event. Geological Society of the
Philippines.

Azer, M. K. (2013). Evolution and economic siginificance of listwaenites associated with
Neoproterozoic ophiolites in South Eastern Desert, Egypt. Geologica Acta, 113-128.

Bacuta, G. J. (1989). The Zambales Ophiolite Complex, Philippines: Chromite and Platinum-
Group Element Mineralization. (doctoral dissertation, Cornell University).

Barnes, I., O' Neil, J. R., Rapp, J. B., & White, D. E. (1973). Silica-Carbonate Alteration of
Serpentine: Wall Rock Alteration in Mercury Deposits of the California Coast Ranges.
Economic Geology, 68, 388-398.

Barnes, R. G., Brown, R. E., Brownlow, J. W., Gilligan, L. B., Krynen, J., & Willis, I. L. (1988).
A Review of the mineral deposits of the New England Orogen in New South Wales. In J.
D. Kleeman, New England Orogen - Tectonics and Metallogenesis (pp. 216-217).
Department of Geology and Geophysics.

Barton, P. B., & Toulmin, P. I. (1966). Phase Relations Involving Sphalerite In The Fe-Zn-S
System. Economic Geology, 815-819.

71

Belandres, C. (1964). Talc and Chrysotile Asbestos in Cabangan, Zambales. Manila: Bureau of
Mines.

Bjerga, A., Konopasek, J., & Pedersen, R. B. (2015). Talc-carbonate alteration of ultramafic
rocks within the Leka Ophiolite Complex, Central Norway. Lithos, 21-36.

Bodnar, R. J. (1993). Revised equation and table for determining the freezing point depression of
H20-NaCl solutions. Geochimica et Cosmochimica, 57, 683-684.

Buckman, S. (2000). Tectonics and Mineralization of West Junggar, NW China . (Doctoral
dissertation, University of Hong Kong).

Buckman, S., & Ashley, P. M. (2010). Silica-carbonate (listwanites) related gold mineralisation
associated with epithermal alteration of serpentinite bodies. NEO 20/0.

Bunaciu, A. A., Udristioiu, E. G., & Aboul-Enein, H. Y. (2015). X-Ray Diffraction:
Instrumentation and Applications. Critical Reviews in Analytical Chemistry, 289-299.

Claveria, R. J. (2008). Mineral Paragenesis of the Lepanto Copper and Gold and the Victoria
Gold Deposits, Mankayan Mineral District, Philippines. Resource Geology, 97-106.

Comsti, M. E., Villones, R. I., De Jesus, C. V., Natividad, A. R., Rollan, L. A., & Duroy, A. C.
(1990). Mineralization at the Kelly Gold Mine, Baguio District, Philippines: fluid-
inclusion and wall-rock alteration studies. Journal of Geochemical Exploration, 341-362.

Cooke, D. R. (2000). Characteristics and Genesis of Epithermal Gold Deposits. SEG Reviews,
pp. 221-244.

Cooke, D. R., & McPhail, D. C. (2001). Epithermal Au-Ag-Te Mineralization, Acupan, Baguio
District, Philippines: Numerical Simulations of Mineral Deposition. Economic Geology,
109-131.

Cooke, D. R., & McPhail., D. C. (2001). Epithermal Au-Ag-Te Mineralization, Acupan, Baguio
Districts, Philippines: Numerical Simulations of Mineral Deposition. Economic Geology,
109-131.

Cooke, D., McPhail, D., & Bloom, M. (1996). Epithermal gold mineralization, Acupan, Baguio
District, Philippines: geology, mineralization, alteration and the thermochemical
environment of ore deposition. Economic Geology, 243-272.

Cooper, I. S. (2002). Independent Technical Report Prepared For: Sur American Gold
Corporation. Brookfield, Queensland: Cooper Geological Services, Pty. Ltd.

Corbett, G. (2002). Epithermal Gold for Explorationists. AJG Journal, 1-26.

De Boer, J., Odom, L. A., Ragland, P. C., Snider, F. G., & Tilford, N. R. (1980). The Bataan
Orogene: Eastward subduction, tetconic rotations, and volcanism in the western Pacific
(Philippines). Tectonophysics, 67, 251-282.

72

Delfin, F. G., Villarosa, H. G., Layugan, D. B., Clemente, V. C., Candelaria, M. C., & Ruaya, J.
R. (1996). Geothermal Exploration of the pre-1991 Mount Pinatubo Hydrothermal
System. In C. Newhall, & R. Punongbayan, Fire & Mud: Eruptions and lahars of Mount
Pinatubo, Philippines. University of Washington Press.

Dong, G., & Morrison, G. W. (1995). Adularia in epithermal veins, Queensland: morphology,
structural state and origin. Mineralium Deposita, 11-19.

Dycoco, J. M., Payot, B. D., Valera, G. T., Labis, F. A., Pasco, J. A., Perez, A. D., & Tani, K.
(2021). Juxtaposition of Cenozoic and Mesozoic ophiolites in Palawan island,
Philippines: New insights on the evolution of the Proto-South China Sea. Tectonophysics.

Emam, A., & Zoheir, B. (2012). Au and Cr mobilization through metasomatism: Microchemical
evidence from ore-bearing listvenite, South Eastern Desert of Egypt. Journal of
Geochemical Exploration, 34-45.

Encarnacion, J., & Mukasa, S. B. (1993). Zircon U-Pb Geochronology of the Zambales and
Angat Ophiolites, Luzon, Philippines: Evidence for an Eocene Arc-Back Arc Pair.
Journal of Geophysical Research, 19,991-20,004.

Fernandez, H. E., & Damasco, F. V. (1979). Gold Deposition in the Baguio Gold District and Its
Relationship to Regional Geology. Economic Geology, 1852-1868.

Fernandez, H. E., Damasco, F. V., & Sangalang. (1979). Gold Ore Shoot Development in the
Antamok Mines, Philippines. Economic Geology, 606-627.

Figueroa, A. J., & Gabo-Ratio, J. A. (2021). Breccia characteristics and classification of the GW
orebodies, Balatoc Diatreme, Philippines: Insights to breccia facies and distribution
across diatremes. Resource Geology, 1-9.

Figueroa, A. J., Gabo-Ratio, J. A., Manalo, P. C., Takahashi, R., Sato, H., & Ramos, A. B.
(2022). Breccia and vein mineralization of the Balatoc Diatreme, Acupan gold deposit,
Baguio Mineral District: An example of a diatreme-hosted epithermal deposit in the
Philippines. Ore Geology Reviews.

Fischer, W., Amosse, J., & Leblanc, M. (1987). PGE distribution in some ultramafic rocks and
minerals from the Bou-Azzer ophiolite complex (Morocco). Geo-Platinum, 199-210.

Fitch, T. J. (1972). Plate Convergence, Transcurrent Faults and Internal Deformation Adjacent to
Southeast Asia and the Western Pacific. Journal of Geophysical Research, 4432-4460.

Frias, S. M., Imai, A., Takahashi, R., Balangue-Tarriela, M. I., Arcilla, C., & Blamey, N. (2019).
Geology, Alteration, and Mineralization of the Kay Tanda Epithermal Gold Deposit,
Lobo, Batangas, Philippines. Resource Geology , 351-384.

Geary, E. E., Kay, R. W., Reynolds, J. C., & Kay, S. M. (1989). Geochemistry of mafic rocks
from the Coto Block, Zambales Ophiolite, Philippines: trace element evidence for two
stages of crustal growth. Tectonophysics, 43-63.

73

Gibaga, C. R., Arcilla, C. A., & Hoang, N. (2020). Volcanic rocks from the Central and Southern
Palawan Ophiolites, Philippines: Tectonic and mantle heterogeneity constraints. Journal
of Asian Earth Sciences.

Goldstein, R. H., & Reynolds, T. J. (1994). Systematics of Fluid Inclusions in Diagenetic
Minerals. Tulsa, Oklahoma: Society for Sedimentary Geology.

Gorriceta, A. J., & Llave, C. A. (1970). Memorandum Report On Geological Verification of Talc
Deposit In Sition Nibalanga, Barrio Santa Rita, Cabangan, Zambales. Manila: Bureau of
Mines.

Haas, J. L. (1971). The Effect of Salinity on the Maximum Thermal Gradient of a Hydrothermal
System at Hydrostatic Pressure. Economic Geology, 940-946.

Hammarstrom, J. M., Bookstrom, A. A., DeMarr, M. W., Dicken, C. L., Ludington, S.,
Robinson, G. R., & Zientek, M. L. (2014). Porphyry Copper Assessment of East and
Southeast Asia--Philippines, Taiwan (Republic of China), Republic of Korea (South
Korea), and Japan. Reston, Virginia: United States Geological Survey.

Hansen, L. D., Dipple, G. M., Gordon, T. M., & Kellett, D. A. (2005). Carbonated Serpentinite
(Listwanite) At Atlin, British Columbia: A Geological Analogue to Carbon Dioxide
Sequestration. The Canadian Mineralogist, 225-239.

Hattori, K. (1993). High-sulfur magma, a product of fluid discharge from underlying mafic
magma: Evidence from Mount Pinatubo, Philippines. Geology, 1083-1086.

Hattori, K. H., & Keith, J. D. (2001). Contribution of mafic melt to porphyry copper
mineralization: evidence from Mount Pinatubo, Philippines and Bingham Canyon, Utah,
USA. Mineralium Deposita, 36: 799-806.

Hawkins, J. W., & Evans, C. A. (1983). Geology of the Zambales Range, Luzon, Philippine
Islands: Ophiolite Derived from an Island Arc-Back Arc Basin Pair. "The Tectonic and
Geologic Evolution of Southeast Asian Seas and Islands, Part 2", 95-123.

Hedenquist, J. W., Arribas, A. R., & Gonzalez-Urien, E. (2000). Exploration for Epithermal
Gold Deposits. Society of Economic Geology Reviews, 245-277.

Helmy, H. M., Elshafei, S., & Elwan, W. (2018). Mineralogy and geochemistry of
metasomatized mantle peridotites from the Eastern Desert of Egypt: The role of granite-
related hydrothermal fluids in gold mineralizations. Journal of African Earth Sciences,
136-150.

Helmy, H. M., Kaindly, R., & Fritz, H. (2004). The Sukari Gold Mine, Eastern Desert--Egypt:
structural setting, mineralogy and fluid inclusion study. Mineralium Deposita, 495-511.

Hermo, M. I., Balangue-Tarriela, M. I., Takahashi, R., Gabo-Ratio, J. A., & Frias, S. M. (2022).
Mineralization styles and ore-forming conditions of the quartz-fragment-rich breccia
(QBX) at the Didipio alkalic porphyry Cu-Au deposit, Nueva Vizcaya, Philippines. Ore
Geology Reviews.

74

Holcroft, E., Buckman, S., & Neuss, I. (2010). A petrological, mineralogical and geochemical
analysis of listwaenite alteration at Spring Creek Bingara in the Great Serpentinite Belt,
New England, NSW. New England Orogen 2010 (pp. 177-183). University of New
England.

Imai, A. (2002). Metallogenesis of Porphyry Cu Deposits of the Western Luzon Arc, Philippines:
K-AR ages, SO3 Contents of Microphenocrystic Apatite and Significance of Intrusive
Rocks. Resource Geology, 147-161.

Imai, A. (2005). Evolution of Hydrothermal System at the Dizon Porphyry Cu-Au Deposit,
Zambales, Philippines. Resource Geology, 73-90.

Imai, A., Listanco, E. L., & Fujii, T. (1996). Highly Oxidized and Sulfur-Rich Dacitic Magma of
Mount Pinatubo: Implications for Metallogenesis of Porphyry Copper Mineralization in
the Western Luzon Arc. In C. Newhall, & R. Punongbayan, Fire & Mud: Eruptions and
lahars of Mount Pinatubo, Philippines. University of Washington Press.

Imamalipoor, A., Barak, S., & Khalifani, F. M. (2020). Quantifying mass changes during
hydrothermal alteration in listwaenite-type mercury mineralization, Tavreh area,
northwestern Iran. Geochemistry: Exploration, Environment, Analysis, 425-439.

James, L. P., & Fuchs, W. A. (1990). Exploration of the Exciban gold-copper-tellurium vein
system, Camarines Norte, Philippines. Journal of Geochemical Exploration, 363-385.

Jebrak, M. (1997). Hydrothermal breccias in vein-type ore deposits: A review of mechanisms,
morphology and size distribution. Ore Geology Reviews, 111-134.

Jia, Y., Kerrich, R., & Goldfarb, R. (2003). Metamorphic Origin of Ore-Forming Fluids for
Orogenic Gold-bearing Quartz Vein Systems in the North American Cordillera:
Constraints from a Reconnaissance Study of 515N, 5D, and 8180. Economic Geology,
109-123.

Jimenez, F. A., Ruelo, H. B., Angeles, C. A., Galet, G. P., Boticario, M. D., & Declaro, S. F.
(2009). Geology and Mineralization of the Bananghilig Gold Deposit, Tambis Mineral
District, Barobo, Surigao del Sur, Philippines. Geological Society of the Philippines.

John, D. A., Vikre, P. G., du Bray, E. A., Blakely, R. J., Fey, D. L., Rockwell, B. W.,...
Graybeal, F. T. (2018). Descriptive Models for Epithermal Gold-Silver Deposits. Reston:
U. S. Geological Survey.

Kesler, S. E., Sutter, J. F., Issigonis, M. J., Jones, L. M., & Walker, R. L. (1977). Evolution of
porphyry copper mineralization in an oceanic island arc: Panama. Economic Geology,
1142-1153.

Kinkel, A. R., & Samaniego, S. (1956). Geology of the Botolan Copper Mine, Botolan,
Zambales. Manila: Philippine Bureau of Mines.

Kirwin, D. J., & Royle, D. Z. (2018). Sediment-Hosted Gold Deposits in Southeast Asia.
Resource Geology, 1-23.

75

Knittel, U. (1989). Composition and Association of Arsenian Goldfieldite from the Marian Gold
Deposit, Northern Luzon, Philippines. Mineralogy and Petrology, 145-154.

Kolb, J., & Hagemann, S. (2009). Structural control of low-sulfidation epithermal gold
mineralization in the Rosario-Bunawan district, East Mindanao Ridge, Philippines.
Mineralium Deposita, 795-815.

Lagmay, A. M. (n.d.). Geochemistry of the hypabyssal dike intrusions and mafic cumulates in
the San Antonio Massif: Constraints in Rock Series Classification and Tectonic Setting.
Philippines: (master's thesis, University of the Philippines).

Lahti, H. R. (2012). Technical Report on T'Boli Gold and Silver Project, South Cotabato,
Mindanao, Philippines. Cadan Resources Corporation.

Leblanc, M., & Billaud, P. (1982). Cobalt arsenide orebodies related to an upper Proterozoic
ophiolite: Bou Azzer (Morocco). Economic Geology, 162-175.

Lee, S. L., & Hattori, K. (2018). Cold magmas and explosive eruptions: The story of zircon from
Mount Pinatubo, Philippines. American Geophysical Union, Fall Meeting 2018.

Lindgren, W. (1933). Mineral Deposits, 4th Ed. New York: McGraw-Hill.

Luhr, J. F., & Melson, W. G. (1996). Mineral and Glass Compositions in June 15, 1991,
Pumices: Evidence for Dynamic Disequilibrium in the Dacite of Mount Pinatubo. In C.
N. Punongbayan, Fire and Mud: Eruptions and Lahar of Mount Pinatubo, Philippines.
University of Washington Press.

Maglambayan, V. B., Ishiyama, D., Mizuta, T., Imai, A., & Ishikawa, Y. (1998). Geology,
Mineralogy, and Formation Environment of the Disseminated Gold-Silver Telluride
Bulawan Deposit, Negros Occidental, Philippines. Resource Geology, 87-104.

Magpantay, A. L., Palaganas, U. M., de Luna, E. A., Perez, J. L., & del Rosario, E. C. (1979).
Report of Investigation No. 95-A, Geology and Mineral Resources of Zambales Province.
Manila: Bureau of Mines.

Malihan, T. D. (1987). The gold-rich Dizon porphyry copper mine in the western Central Luzon
island. Pacific Rim Congress '87, (pp. 303-307).

Manalo, P. C., Imai, A., Subang, L. L., delos Santos, M., Yanagi, K., Takahashi, R., & Blamey,
N. J. (2018). Mineralization of the Northwest Quart-Pyrite-Gold Veins: Implications for
Multiple Mineralization Events at Lepanto, Mankayan Mineral District, Northern Luzon,
Philippines. Economic Geology, 1609-1626.

Manalo, P., Imai, A., Subang, L. S., delos Santos, M. C., Yanagi, K., Takahashi, R., & Blamey,
N. J. (2018). Mineralization of the Northwest Quartz-Pyrite-Gold Veins: Implications For
Multiple Mineralization Events at Lepanto, Mankayan Mineral District, Northern Luzon,
Philippines. Economic Geology, 1609-1626.

76

Menzel, M. D., Urai, J. L., de Obeso, J. C., Kotowski, A., Manning, C., Kelemen, P. B.,...
Team, O. D. (2020). Brittle Deformation of Carbonated Peridotite—Insights From
Listvenites of the Samail Ophiolite (Oman Drilling Project Hole BT1B). Journal of
Geophysical Research: Solid Earth, 1-19.

Mercier, J. C., & Nicolas, A. (1974). Textures and Fabrics of Upper-Mantle Peridotites as
Illustrated by Xenoliths from Basalts. Laboratoire de Geologie Structurale.

MGB. (2004). Mineral Resources Information Series No. 2: Nickel. Quezon Clty: Mines and
Geosciences Bureau.

MGB. (2004). Mineral Resources Map of Tarlac - MGB Region 3. Retrieved from Mineral
Resources Map of Tarlac Province:
https://region3.mgb.gov.ph/mgb_rolll_files/pdf/Mineral_Resources_Map/Mineral_Resou
rces_Map_of_Tarlac.pdf

Middleton, C. (2001). The Manat Epithermal Gold-Silver-Lead-Zinc Project in SE Mindanao.
Geological Society of the Philippines.

Midea, W. P., Hattori, K., & Valera, G. T. (2021). Igneous rocks related to porphyry Cu-Au
mineralization at the Dizon mine, Philippines. Resource Geology, 1-17.

Miranda, F. E., & Caleon, P. C. (1977). Geology and Mineral Resources of Camarines Norte and
Parts of Quezon Province. Manila City: Bureau of Mines.

Mitchell, A. H., & Bell, J. D. (1973). Island-Arc Evolution and Related Mineral Deposits. The
Journal of Geology, 381-405.

Naldrett, A. J. (1966). Talc-carbonate Alteration of some Serpentinized Ultramafic Rocks south
of Timmins, Ontario. Journal of Petrology , 489-99.

Nixon, G. T. (1989). Geology and Precious Metal Potential of Mafic-Ultramafic Rocks in British
Columbia: Current Progress. British Columbia Geological Survey, 353-358.

Olsen, S. (2018). NI 43-101 Technical Report: T'Boli Gold-Silver Project, South Cotabato,
Mindanao, Philippines. Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada: Rizal Resources
Corporation.

Orberger, B., Friedrich, G., & Woermann, E. (1988). Platinum-Group Element Mineralization in
the Ultramafic Sequence of the Acoje Ophiolite Block, Zambales, Philippines. Geo-
Platinum 87 (pp. 361-380). Elsevier Science Publishers Ltd.

Palaganas, U. M. (1966). Geologic and Mineral Verification of Chromite Prospects Being
Applied For An Exploration Permit By Golden River Mining Corporation In Barrio San
Juan, Cabangan, Zambales. Manila: Bureau of Mines.

Payot, B. D., Maglambayan, V. B., Dimalanta, C. B., Yumul, G. P., Tamayo, R. A., Matsuda, T.,
... Bellon, H. (2005). Geology and Hydrothermal Alteration of the Low Sulfidation

77

Pantingan Gold System, Mount Mariveles, Bataan (Luzon), Philippines. Resource
Geology, 155-162.

Perez, A., Umino, S., Yumul, G. P., & Ishizuka, O. (2018). Boninite and boninite-series
volcanics in northern Zambales ophiolite: doubly vergent subduction initiation along
Philippine Sea plate margins. Solid Earth, 9. 713-718.

Ploshko, V. V. (1965). Listvenitization and carbonatization at terminal stages of Urushten
igneous complex, North Caucasus. /nternational Geology Review, 7:3, 446-463.

Power, I. M., Wilson, S. A., & Dipple, G. A. (2013, April). Serpentinite Carbonation For CO2
Sequestration. Elements, pp. 115-121.

Powcr, M. R., & Scott, P. W. (1995). Talc-Carbonate Alteration of Some Basic and Ultrabasic
Intrusions in Cornwall. Proceedings of the Ussher Society, 392-397.

Queano, K. Q., Dimalanta, C. B., Yumul, G. P., Marquez, E. J., Faustino-Eslava, D. V., Suzuki,
S., & Ishida, K. (2016). Stratigraphic units overlying the Zambales Ophiolite Complex
(ZOC) in Luzon, Philippines: Tectonostratigraphic significance and regional
implications. Journal of Asian Earth Sciences.

Rae, A. J., Cooke, D. R., & Brown, K. L. (2011). The Trace Metal Chemistry of Deep
Geothermal Water, Palinpinon Geothermal Field, Negros Island, Philippines:
Implications for Precious Metal Deposition in Epithermal Gold Deposits. Economic
Geology, 1425-1446.

Rangin, C. (1991). The Philippine Mobile Belt: a complex plate boundary. Journal of Southeast
Asian Earth Sciences, 209-220.

Richards, J. P. (2011). High Sr/Y arc magmas and porphyry Cu + Mo + Au deposits: just add
water. Economic Geology, 1075-1081.

Roedder, E., & Bodnar, R. J. (1980). Geologic Pressure Determinations From Fluid Inclusion
Studies. Annual Reviews: Earth Planetary Science, 8, 263-301.

Rohrlach, B. D. (2002). Tectonic Evolution, Petrochemistry, Geochronology and Paleohydrology
of the Tampakan Porphyry and High Sulfidation Epithermal Cu-Au Deposit, Mindanao,
Philippines. Canberra, Australia: (Doctoral dissertation, Australian National University).

Rose, G. (1837). Mineralogisch-geognostische reise nach dem Ural, dem Altai und dem
Kaspischen Meere. Berlin: Verlag der Sanderschen Buchhandlung.

Ruaya, J. R., & Panem, C. C. (1991). Mt. Natib, Philippines: a geochemical model of a caldera-
hosted geothermal system. Journal of Volcanology and Geothermal Research, 255-265.

Ruolo, H. B. (2018). Copper & Gold Discoveries and Mines in the Philippines:
Historical/Geological Perspective. Quezon City: (Microsoft Powerpoint Presentation).

Sabaria, L. G. (2021, May). Tagburos Mercury Deposit: Deposit Characterization and
Categorization. (bachelor's thesis, Mapua Institute of Technology).

78

Salapare, R. C., Dimalanta, C. B., Ramos, N. T., Manalo, P. C., Faustino-Eslava, D. V., Queano,
K. L., & Yumul, G. P. (2015). Upper crustal structure beneath the Zambales Ophiolite
Complex, Luzon, Philippines inferred from integrated gravity, magnetic and geologic
data. Geophysics Journal International, 201, 1522-1533.

Salvania, N. V. (1995). Development of a geothermal database and resource assessment of Mt.
Natib Geothermal Prospect, Philippines. The United Nations University.

Sazonov, V.N., Van Herk, A. H., & de Boorder, H. (2001). Spatial and Temporal Distribution of
Gold Deposits in the Urals. Economic Geology, 685-703.

Schweller, W. J., Karig, D. E., & Bachman, S. B. (1983). Original Setting and Emplacement
History of the Zambales Ophiolite, Luzon, Philippines, From Stratigraphic Evidence.
Geophysical Monograph Series, 124-138.

Sillitoe, R. H. (1973). The Tops and Bottoms of Porphyry Copper Deposits. Economic Geology,
799-815.

Sillitoe, R. H., & Hedenquist, J. W. (2005). Linkages between volcanotectonic settings, ore-fluid
compositions, and epithermal precious-metal deposits. In S. F. Simmons, & G. Ian,
Volcanic, Geothermal, and Ore-Forming Fluids: Rulers and Witnesses of Processes
within the Earth.

Sillitoe, R. H., Angeles, C. A., Comia, G. M., Antioquia, E. C., & Abeya, R. B. (1990). An acid-
sulphate-type lode gold deposit at Nalesbitan, Luzon, Philippines. Journal of
Geochemical Exploration, 387-411.

Singer, D. A., Berger, V. I., & Moring, B. C. (2008). Porphyry Copper Deposits of the world:
Database and grade and tonnage models. U. S. Geological Survey Open-File Report.

Soberano, O. B., Gabo-Ratio, J. S., Queano, K. L., Dimalanta, C. B., Yumul, G. P., Andal, E. S.,
... Boyce, A. J. (2020). Mineral chemistry, fluid inclusion and stable isotope studies of
the Suyoc epithermal veins: Insights to Au-Cu mineralization in southern Mankayan
Mineral District, Philippines. Ore Geology Reviews, 1-16.

Sorby, H. C. (1858). On the microscopic structure of crystals, indicating the origin of minerals
and rocks. Geological Society of London, 1, 453-500.

Sostaric, S. B., Palinkas, L. A., Neubauer, F., Hurai, V., Cvetkovic, V., Roller-Lutz, Z.,...
Genser, J. (2013). Silver-base metal epithermal vein and listwanite hosted deposit Crnac,
Rogozna Mts., Kosovo, Part II: A link between magmatic rocks and epithermal
mineralization. Ore Geology Reviews, 98-117.

Sostaric, S. B., Palinkas, L. A., Topa, D., Spangenberg, J., & Prochaska, W. (2011). Silver-base
metal epithermal vein and listwaenite types of deposit Crnac, Rogozna Mts., Kosovo.
Part I: Ore mineral geochemistry and sulfur isotop study. Ore Geology Reviews, 65-80.

Subang, L. L., Buenavista, A. G., Gonzales, J. M., Moreno, G. P., Baratang, V. T., Sebua, M. C.,
& Santos, N. A. (2004). Geology and Mineralization of the Porphyry-High-Sulfidation

79

Epithermal Cu-Au Deposit at Tampakan, Southern Mindanao, Philippines. Geological
Society of the Philippines.

Tamayo, R. A. (1997). Petrological and Geochemical Characterization of the Camarines Norte
Ophiolite Complex. (master's thesis at the University of the Philippines).

Tamayo, R. A., Yumul, G. P., & Jumawan, F. (1996). Geology and geochemistry of the mafic
rock series of the Camarines Norte Ophiolite Complex. Journal of the Geological Society
of the Philippines, 131-152.

Taylor, R. (2009). Ore Textures: Recognition and Interpretation. Queensland: Springer.

Vearncombe, J. R., & Holyland, P. W. (1995). Rheology, stress-mapping, and hydrothermal
mineralization--the example of structurally-controlled gold-antimony deposits in South
Africa. South African Journal of Geology, 415-429.

Villaplaza, B. R., Buena, A. E., Pacle, N. A., Payot, B. D., Gabo-Ratio, J. A., Ramos, N.T.,...
Yumul, G. P. (2017). Alteration and lithogeochemistry in the Masara gold district,
Eastern Mindanao, Philippines, as tools for exploration targeting. Ore Geology Reviews ,
530-540.

Wilkinson, J. J. (2001). Fluid inclusions in hydrothermal ore deposits. Lithos, 229-272.

Wolfe, R. C. (2001). Geology of the Didipio Region and Paragenesis of the Dinkidi Cu-Au
Porphyry Deposit. (Doctoral dissertation, University of Tasmania).

Yang, T. F., Lee, T., Chen, C.-H., Cheng, S.-N., Knittel, U., Punongbayan, R. S., & Rasdas, A.
R. (1996). A double island arc between Taiwan and Luzon: consequence of ridge
subduction. Tectonophysics, 258; 85-101.

Yumul, G. P. (1989). Petrological characterization of the residual-cumulate sequences of the
Zambales Ophiolite Complex, Luzon, Philippines. Ofioliti, 14, 253-291.

Yumul, G. P., Brown, W. W., Dimalanta, C. B., Ausa, C. A., Faustino-Eslava, D. V., Payot, B.
D.,... Pacle, N. D. (2017). Adakitic rocks in the Masara gold-silver mine, Compostela
Valley, Mindanao, Philippines: Different places, varying mechanisms? Journal of Asian
Earth Sciences, 45-55.

Yumul, G. P., Brown, W. W., Dimalanta, C. B., Ausa, C. A., Faustino-Eslava, D. V., Payot, B.
P.,... Pacle, N. A. (2016). Adakitic rocks in the Masara gold-silver mine, Compostella
Valley, Mindanao, Philippines: Different places, varying mechanisms? Journal of Asian
Earth Sciences.

Yumul, G. P., Datuin, R. T., & Manipon, J. C. (1990). Geology and geochemistry of the
Cabangan-San Antonio massifs, Zambales ophiolite complex, Philippines: Tectonically
juxtaposed marginal basin-island arc terranes. Journal of Geological Society of the
Philippines, 69-100.

80

Yumul, G. P., Dimalanta, C. B., Faustino, D. V., & De Jesus, J. V. (1998). Translation and
docking of an arc terrane: geological and geochemical evidence from the southern
Zambales Ophiolite Complex, Philippines. Tectonophysics, 293, 255-272.

Yumul, G. P., Dimalanta, C. B., Faustino, D. V., & de Jesus, J. V. (1998). Upper mantle-lower
crust dikes of the Zambales Ophiolite Complex: distinct short-lived, subduction-related
magmatism. Journal of volcanology and geothermal research, 287-309.

Yumul, G. P., Dimalanta, C. B., Maglambayan, V. B., & Tamayo, R. A. (2003). Mineralization
Controls in Island Arc Settings: Insights from Philippine Metallic Deposits. Gondwana
Research, 767-776.

Yumul, G. P., Dimalanta, C. B., Tam, T. A., & Ramos, E. G. (2008). Baguio Mineral District:
An oceanic arc witness to the geological evolution of northern Luzon, Philippines. /s/ang
Arc, 432-442.

Yumul, G., Dimalanta, C., Salapare, R., Queano, K., Faustino-Eslava, D., Marquez, E.,.. .
Suzuki, S. (2019). Slab rollback and microcontinent subduction in the evolution of the
Zambales Ophiolite Complex (Philippines): A review. Geoscience Frontiers.

Zafra, J. C. (2021). NI 43-101 Exploration Results And Mineral Resource Update Report On The
Balabag Gold-Silver Project. Zamboanga del Sur, Mindanao, Philippines: TVI Resource
Development Inc.

Zoheir, B. (2011). Transpressional zones in ophiolitic melange terranes: Potential exploration
targets for gold in the South Eastern Desert, Egypt. Journal of Geochemical Exploration,
23-38.

Zoheir, B., & Lehmann, B. (2011). Listvenite-lode association at the Barramiya gold mine,
Eastern Desert, Egypt. Ore Geology Reviews, 101-115.
