TECHNOLOGY FORESIGHT ON THE DEPLOYMENT OF READY TO EAT (RTE) SHELF-STABLE DISASTER FOODS THROUGH SCENARIO BUILDING

CYNTHIA M. BIHIS

University of the Philippines Diliman

Master of Technology Management

December 2019

Abstract

Earthquakes, typhoons, floods and other natural hazards brought major
sufferings to local populations and inflict serious conditions for many
people especially in the Asia-Pacific region. These calamities occur
frequently in the Philippines taking big toll of lives and properties. With its
landscape consisting of mountainous terrains and coastal areas,
distribution of relief foods during calamities is one of the challenges.
Down with electricity and clean water, survivors need food that will ease
their hunger in the first 48 hours of disaster. The study was aimed to measure the effectiveness of the developed
technology in applying foresight strategies in times of disaster. The
objective of the study was to determine the long-term future of the
developed technology in the deployment of Ready to eat shelf stable
disaster foods to address hunger alleviation and challenges of relief
distribution. A Scenario Building Approach was used as theoretical framework for the
study. The methodology used primary data from interviews, surveys and
team discussions while online materials, journals and other studies related
to deployment of disaster foods were used as secondary data. The
approach started with focal issue identification and environmental
scanning on the different macro factors through PESTLE and SWOT
analyses. Key predictable and critical uncertainties were identified,
characterized, clustered and ranked to establish the key driving forces. Three different scenarios were developed and assessed to determine
soundness and significance and were named as follows: Scenario 1 — The
Big 3 (TeMaSo) Leverage showed high impact low uncertainty; Scenario 2
— The Admin Influence showed medium impact and high uncertainty and
Scenario 3 -— The Indefinite Impact showed low impact medium
uncertainty. Strategies were then developed based on the capacity of
each determinant to achieve economic growth and development.

1. Introduction

The Philippines, due to its geographic location, is very prone to natural
disasters such as earthquakes, typhoons, volcanic eruptions and flood.
Preparedness in times of emergency and disaster is very essential for the
resilience of every Filipino ( (World Bank, 2005). Our country, being
situated along the Ring of Fire has suffered from an inexhaustible number
of deadly typhoons, earthquakes, volcanic eruptions and other natural
disasters (Masum & Akbar, 2019) Because of its archipelagic nature,
Philippines is a culturally diverse country. With its geographical landscape
consisting of mountainous terrains, compact forests, plains and coastal
areas, distribution of relief foods during calamities is one of the
challenges. Down with electricity and clean water, survivors need food
that will ease their hunger in the first 48 hours of disaster.

According to the World Risk Report 2018, in terms of disaster risk, our
country ranks third among all the countries with highest risks as shown by
its index value of 25.14% (World Economic Forum, 2018). Disasters, be it
natural or human-caused brought major sufferings to local populations in
countries especially in the Asia-Pacific region. Calamities such as
earthquakes, floods, and landslides in the Philippines occur frequently
(Figure 1.1) taking big toll of lives and properties. Just recently,
Mindanao, Manila and Batanes suffered a strong earthquake, and super
typhoons “Ondoy” and “Yolanda” greatly hit Manila, Eastern Samar and
Southern Leyte. One of the major problems encountered as reported was
the difficulty of distributing relief foods and other basic necessities. Any
delay in disaster relief could increase the magnitude of distress for the
victims.

In a study of Global Peace Index, the Philippines is the most vulnerable
country to hazards as shown by 47% of population exposure to different
catastrophes (Global Peace Index, 2019). It ranked 134'* out of 163
countries and least peaceful in South East Asia region. The study also
showed that climate change can indirectly increase the occurrence of
violent conflict through resource availability, livelihood security and
migration. In 2017, 61.5% of displacements were due to climate-related
disaster (Global Peace Index, 2017).

10

Figure 1.1 Average Annual Number of Significant Natural Disasters in the
Philippines from 1970-2016

160

80
; i i

1970-1979 1980-1989 1990-1999 2000-2009 2010-2016

BFlood #Storm = Others

Source: CRED EM-DAT

During calamities, some of the common relief foods distributed are
noodles and rice that needs cooking. Foods in retort pouch in the form of
Meal Ready to Eat (MRE) could serve the ideal food during crises. MRE
or food aid must be simple, non-perishable or shelf stable, non-bulky,
formulation is based on the three food groups (rice or cereal as staple, fat
as source of energy, and meat or fish as protein source), and should be
safe. MRE pouches should also be sturdy, must pass package tests and
standards and should have package design that is stricter than that of a
commercial food.

1.1 Objectives

The general objective of the study is to determine the long-term future of
the developed technology in the deployment of Ready to Eat shelf stable
disaster foods in the calamity areas through scenario building.

Specifically, it aims to:
e determine the current situation of disaster mitigation and
preparedness in the country

¢ discuss focal issues and conduct environmental scanning to identify
the challenges faced in the deployment of disaster foods in the
Philippines

11

identify and characterize key predictable variables that may have
an impact in the deployment of disaster foods

identify critical uncertainties affecting the deployment of ready to
eat (RTE) disaster foods

develop plausible scenarios in the deployment of ITDI developed
RTE shelf stable disaster foods in 2030

assess the implications of scenarios to the long-tem future ITDI-

developed RTE disaster foods for strategic deployment, planning,
technology transfer and commercialization

12

2. The Problem
2.1 Statement of the Problem

Philippines, being situated along the Ring of Fire has suffered from an
inexhaustible number of deadly typhoons, earthquakes, volcanic eruptions
and other natural disasters. Being situated in an archipelago, Philippines
is a culturally diverse country. With its geographical landscape consisting
of mountainous terrains, thick forests, plains and coastal areas,
distribution of relief foods during calamities is one of the challenges
(Licuanan, Cabreira, & Alifio, 2019). Down with electricity and clean
water, survivors need food that will ease their hunger in their stay in
evacuation areas. This study aims to address the availability, accessibility
and difficulty of distributing relief foods in the calamity areas.

2.2 Specific Research Questions

The following research questions will be used as a guide in the creation of
scenarios for the analysis of problem:

e What is the future of the Industrial Technology Development
Institute (ITDI) developed RTE shelf stable disaster foods being
deployed in calamity areas?

e What are the critical factors affecting its deployment in 2030?

2.3 Significance of the Study

The study will measure the effectiveness of the developed technology in
applying foresight strategies in times of disaster. The researcher will
evaluate the quality of the strategies implemented during food distribution
in disaster areas. The project will identify the strength and weaknesses of
the developed disaster food technology based on the uncertainties
encountered.

ITDI, being one of the Research and Development Institute (RDI) of the
Department of Science and Technology (DOST) undertaking
multidisciplinary industrial research and development, technical services
and technology transfer/commercialization. It has emerged as a credible
and reliable industry and government partner in accelerating growth and
development in the country. This project will be essential for ITDI to
determine the impact of technology and long-term future plans as an RDI.

13

3. Review of Related Literature

3.1 Flexible Packaging Industry

Changes in lifestyle resulting from rapid urbanization and income growth
have improved the demand for food consumption and packaging styles.
The evolution in the development of flexible packaging and high barrier
technology brought the development of technology in the market. Food
suppliers are now becoming more innovative to cater the demand of the
consumers.

In 2017, the worldwide market for flexible packaging climbed at US$
222.30 billion and expected to reach US$ 317.57 billion in 2026, with an
expanding growth rate of 4.1% compounded annually from 2018 to 2026.
During the forecast period, the largest region was the Asia Pacific and was
also expected to be the fastest growing region (Creden Research, 2018)
The demand for flexible packaging is experiencing a fix growth which is
mainly attributed to the growing food & beverage, personal care, and
pharmaceutical industries among others. With China, Japan and India
dominating the market, Asia Pacific is expected to display an intense
growth for flexible packaging in the coming year. In the last two decades,
technological innovations, sustainability concerns and economic growth
are some of the reasons for the remarkable growth of flexible plastics in
the US market (Mc Tigue, 2018)

In the forecast period 2019-2024, the Philippine market for plastics is
expected to grow a growth rate of around 5%. Some of the factors driving
the market are the growing demand from various industries and the
increasing government support for foreign investment (Mordor
Intelligence, 2019) The packaging application overpowered the market in
2018 and is anticipated to grow during the predicted period. Development
of innovative application products is likely to produce a good opportunity in
the future.

Flexible packaging is a packaging material that is made from flexible or
easy yielding materials in which the shape can be changed once filled. A
wide variety of materials are used to manufacture flexible packaging such
as plastic, glass, metal and paper among others (Siracusa, 2016).

14

The developing nations such as China, India and Japan among others are
contributing more to the growth of the packaged food industry as
compared to the developed nations, due to which the manufacturers are
focusing greatly on expanding in these markets for growth opportunities.
Consumer demand for convenience, backed by rising discretionary
income levels of the working populace has paved the way for the growth
of the packaged food industry in regions such as Asia Pacific.

3.2 Retort Pouch Technology

Industrial property has been identified as one of the tools for promoting
economic growth by the advance and developing countries. Several
countries like Japan are setting policies to stimulate the use of IP
protection in R&D _ institution, universities, large private firms, and
especially to SME’s that lacks the capability to implement IP management
as part of their strategy. In food packaging, the retort pouch technology
has been considered as the most advance since the metal can has the
capability to become the suitable choice over glass jar. According to the
definition, retort pouch is a flexible laminated food package that can
withstand thermal processing (Canadian Food Inspection Agency, 2002).
Retort food is a retort sterilized non-canned and non-bottled prepared food
that is hermetically sealed for long-term unrefrigerated storage (Nishino,
2001). It has the advantage of providing longer shelf life combined with
high retention of nutrients.

Through the years, modernization in retort pouch technology worldwide
can be seen through R&D on improvement of packaging material
construction and performance, equipment efficiency and enhanced
packaging technique. Retort pouch technology offers not only shorter
process time, but also the advantages of reduced energy consumption
and increased nutrient retention of the products.

In 1950s, the retort food technology was developed in the United States
for the shelf stable ready to eat meals MRE) intended for the military
personnel and space shuttles replacing heavy metal cans with light
weight, easy open, easy carry and has longer shelf life foods (Jun, Cox, &
Huang, 2006) Although, it was Japan primarily that has successfully
commercialized retort technology (Lampi, 1980) Currently, Japan is the
biggest producer, distributor and user of retort foods followed by South
Korea. During the twentieth century, thermal sterilization of canned foods
has been one of the most widely used methods for food preservation and

15

has significantly contributed to the nutritional well-being of much of the
world’s population (Texeira & Tucker, 1997).

Recently, the use of non-foil barrier material with coating of silicon oxide
and aluminum oxide becomes the highlight of development in flexible
packaging. These non-foil barrier materials are clear materials with high
barrier property comparable with foil laminates. These offer the property
similar to glass wherein food inside container can be seen and very
suitable for fruits with attractive colors. But whatever the structure of
retortable pouch, foil or non-foil, barrier property of material will play an
important role in protecting sensory and nutritional quality of foods.

Developed countries have been using retort foods as relief/mitigation
foods. Retort foods are ready to eat and can be stacked for at least one
year. Compared with other packaging materials such as metal cans and
glass jars/bottles, retortable pouches are light in weight thus easy to
handle and distribute when it is drop from helicopters.

3.2 PTD-ITDI's Initiative

In the early 2000, the Packaging Technology Division (PTD) of Industrial
Technology Development Institute (ITDI) of the Department of Science
and Technology (DOS) has initiated project studies on developing retort
foods in the Philippines. These were undertaken with the objective of
developing shelf stable food products in retort pouch thereby increasing
the market potential of traditional and ethnic food products. ITDI-DOST
has successfully re-introduced retort foods to local producers of canned
food products in 2000. In 2002, retort foods such as sardines, dinuguan,
shrimp paste, bopis and pork lechon paksiw among others were launched
in the domestic market by ITDI’s SMEs collaborators. In 2012, PTD
started the project “Application of retort packaging technology in the
development of retort foods as disaster mitigation/relief foods”. Products
considered in the study are: (1) arroz caldo, (2) corn soup, (3) chicken
tocino rice meal, and (4) beef tapa rice meal. The project objective is to
develop shelf stable ready to eat retort foods as disaster mitigation/relief
foods. The first retort food developed was chicken arroz caldo which is
classified as disaster food ready to eat without drinkables. The effect of
different rice varieties and ratio of solid to liquid on the acceptability of
RTE chicken arroz caldo were studied. The process schedule and
appropriate packaging structure were established to ensure product
safety. The RTE chicken arroz caldo is shelf stable for at least one (1)
year and is now ready for commercialization.

16

3.3 Technology Foresight

The APEC Center for Technology Foresight defines technology foresight
as “Foresight involves systematic attempt to look into the longer-term
future of science, technology, the economy, the environment and society
with a view to associating the emerging generic technologies and
foundation areas of strategic research likely to yield the notable economic,
environmental and social benefits.”

According to UNIDO, this method is the most upstream element of the
technology development process that provides inputs for the formulation
of technology policies and strategies in guiding the development of
technological infrastructure in a country (UNIDO, 2019)

3.4 Scenario Building

As defined, scenario building is the process of constructing alternate
futures of a business’ external environment (Simpson, 1977). It is one of
the tools in Technology Foresight that is very useful in longer time
horizons which is around 5-50 years’ time. There are many definitions of
scenario. According to Schwartz, a scenario is a tool for ordering one’s
perceptions about an alternative future environment in which one’s
decision might be played out (Schwartz, 1991). Scenario Planning is
identifying a specific set of uncertainties and making assumptions on what
might happen in the future of your business venture.

Based on TM 281 lectures of Prof. Imbang, below are the 10 stages of
scenario building (Imbang, 2018).

Stage 1. Focal issue identification — This first stage defines the issues in
the project as well as the time frame for the study

Stage 2. Environmental analysis — This stage identifies the external
factors in the macro environment which can affect the focal
issue. PESTLE, SWOT analysis and other related tools can be
used to support the analysis of the solutions for the focal issue

Stage 3. Identify and characterize key predictable variables — This third
stage identifies the different critical variables that may have an
impact on the focal issue and all the factors that can be predicted
and controlled.

17

Stage 4. Identify critical uncertainties - This stage defines the critical
uncertainties or uncertain driving forces that may have direct or
indirect impact on the focal issue

Stage 5. Clustering of variables - At this stage, the variables and
uncertainties identified in stages 3 and 4 are categorized in this
stage under more manageable sets or clusters representing the
driving forces

Stage 6. Ranking of variables to establish key driving forces — This stage
is done to identify the weight of each driving force/variable as
these factors affect the focal issue. The rankings are based

Stage 7. Selection of scenario logic — This stage is done by exploring how
the different clusters may interact and impact the other clusters.

Stage 8. Development of scenarios — This stage is done to bring about
and present as many divergent yet plausible scenarios as
possible to prepare for potential risks and gaps.

Stage 9. Assessment of scenario — The purpose of this stage is to
evaluate the coherence of the different driving forces, the
clusters in each of the scenario to test its validity. Each scenario
is assessed using SWOT analysis in order to identify the points
which the firm needs to give attention to.

Stage 10. Assessment of implications of scenario to strategic planning —
This stage is built on the strategies or critical considerations that
may be useful for firm when planning its strategies in the future.

3.5 Technology Deployment

Technology deployment refers to the activities that help businesses in
executing available technologies in their current business operations and
promoting acceptance and implementation of technologies in commercial
utilization. According to Encyclopedia of Multimedia Technology and
Network, technology deployment is the establishment of innovations in
action that involves the generation of knowledge, install technology and
processes to develop systems that will solve problems and available for
use (Pagani, 2009)

The term deployment has long been used in military strategy which means
spreading out or arrange strategically. In the IT industry, this is an

18

alternate to the word implementation which means installing, setting up,
testing and running. It is the realization of an application or implementation
of a plan, idea, model, design, specification, algorithm or policy. In project
management, technology deployment is critical in the success of a project
(Baskarada, McKay, & McKenna, 2013)

19

4. Conceptual Framework

Formulating the theoretical framework helps the researcher in analyzing
and organizing ideas. It is a way of understanding the different variables
in the study on how it will connect to each other. In this project, scenario
building is most useful for long-term projects, 5-50 years as discussed in
the review of literature. It is the method chosen for this project and
supported by other technology management concepts.

Through the 10-stages in scenario building as lectured by Prof. Imbang,
this project is aimed to create scenarios that will determine the different
challenges faced in the deployment of RTE shelf stable disaster foods
(Imbang, 2018). The scenarios developed under this assumption would
help ITDI-DOST in doing future R&D activities that can create more
strategies in anticipating impacts from different scenarios.

20

Figure 4.1 Framework Diagram of RTE Shelf stable disaster food

DATA GATHERING
(research, team discussion& interviews)

Q

Focal issue setting of RTE Disaster Food

Environmental scanning

Establishing key driving forces & critical uncertainties

Scenario logic selection

Presentation of scenarios |

Assessment

q

| Strategies |

21

4.1 Definition of Terms

Ring of fire — major area in the basin of the Pacific Ocean where
many earthquakes and volcanic eruptions occur

Topography — the arrangement of the natural and artificial physical
features of an area

Index value — a measure that describes the nominal value relative
to its value in base year

Shelf stable food - type of food that can be stored at room
temperature in a sealed container

Retort pouch — type of food packaging made from laminate flexible
plastic and metal foils and use as an alternative to traditional
industrial canning methods

Thermal processing -— combination of temperature and time
required to eliminate a desired number of microorganisms from a
food product

No drinkables — food that can be eaten without the need to drink
water

Retort food — food processed in sterilized condition making it safe
for human consumption

Scenario — a view of possible future environment based on set of
assumptions which may affect business or organizational
performance

Scenario planning — a structured way of thinking about the future

Uncertainties — lack of sureness about something which is beyond
the control of the person or organization

First stage food — the stage immediately after a disaster where
there is no electricity, water and food

Resilience — the ability to recover quickly from difficulties

Drought — characterized by water shortage for an extended period
of time caused by deficiency of rainfall

Climate change — change in global or regional climate patterns
attributed largely to increased levels of atmospheric carbon dioxide
produced by the use of fossil fuels

22

4.2 Limitations of the Study

The study will be limited to the scenario building approach following the 10
stages in scenario planning. This will only create recommendations on the
strategies for the future of RTE disaster foods resulting from the
assessment of the scenario implications. These scenarios are highly
influenced by the different factors including the predictable variables and
uncertainties in relation to different factors such as historical background,
environment, market and the technology itself. This study will not evaluate
other different kinds of foods distributed during calamities, but shall cover
only the first stage type of food (No drinkables). However, the technology
can be applied to different ready to eat disaster foods.

23

5. Methodology

The study will start by gathering data through primary and secondary
sources. Interviews, surveys and team discussions were used as primary
data. Project leader and staff involved in the project on disaster foods
were interviewed to determine the current status and the challenges they
encountered in the deployment of RTE shelf stable disaster foods. Online
materials, journals and other studies related to deployment of disaster
foods were used as secondary data.

A Scenario Building Approach was used to determine the long term-future
for this RTE shelf stable disaster foods. This approach is used to make
flexible long-term plans. Development of scenarios is needed to consider
the impact of a technology and to plan for the future. The initial stage is
needed to identify the focal issues. After identifying focal issues for the
project, environmental scanning was conducted. A PESTLE analysis was
presented to monitor the macro environmental factors that have impacts in
the project. SWOT analysis was also done to determine the internal and
external factors of the developed technology. Below are the different
stages used in the Scenario Building exercise.

Stage 1. Focal issue identification

Stage 2. Environmental analysis
PESTLE Analysis
SWOT Analysis

Stage 3. Identify and characterize key predictable variables
Stage 4. Identify critical uncertainties

Stage 5. Clustering variables

Stage 6. Ranking of variables to establish key driving forces
Stage 7. Selection of scenario logic

Stage 8. Development of scenarios

Stage 9. Assessment of scenario

Stage 10. Assessment of implications of scenario to strategic planning

24

6. Results and Analyses
6.1 Stage 1 — Identification of Focal Issue

The focal issue of this scenario building activity was to minimize hunger
alleviation and determine the challenges of relief distribution in calamity
areas when there is no electricity and clean water. The time horizon that
will be used is 11 years (2019-2030).

The Packaging Technology Division of ITDI-DOST developed the “Pack of
Hope”, RTE Chicken Arroz Caldo as first stage disaster/relief food. This
product was created as a disaster mitigation/relief food to address the
immediate hunger of disaster survivors and providers of services (medical,
military personnel and volunteer groups) in calamity-stricken areas within
48 hours after the disaster happened a first stage disaster. RTE chicken
arroz caldo is categorized as food which means ready to eat without
preparation and without drinkables. The packaging both primary and
transport was designed to withstand distribution by aerial drop (at least 30
feet high), sea surface, land and water submersion. The developed relief
foods can be consumed by everyone regardless of age, culture and
teligion. The product shelf life is at least one year and this was validated
by the field testing conducted using the distribution protocols of the
Department of Social Welfare and Development (DSWD).

6.2 Stage 2 — Environmental Scanning

To support the development of scenario in the deployment of RTE shelf
stable disaster foods, the study and interpretation of the macro factors
relating to this topic are necessary. Philippines being one of the most
hazard prone countries in the world suffering from different types of
natural hazards such as typhoons, earthquakes, volcanic eruptions and
other natural disasters are facing different challenges and issues such as
political, economical, social, technical, legal and environmental.

6.2.1 Political

In times of calamities, the question that was raised for government and
other organizations is “How do local government units (LGUs) improve
public welfare during disasters?”. In a study presented by Dr. Maja-Leah
V. Ravago and her team about “Coping with Disasters due to Natural
Hazards: Evidence from the Philippines’, they reported that a one
percentage point increase in the dynasty share of a province decreases

25

the probability of recovery from disaster by 74% (Jocson, 2018)
According to Local Government Code of 1991, the LGUs should be at the
frontline of emergency measure in the aftermath of calamities to ensure
the general welfare of its constituents and be proactive in performing
disaster-related activities.

The national government highlighted the importance of disaster
preparedness to ensure survival of Filipinos during calamities. Some of
the plans and programs of the national government related to natural
disasters are discussed below. Programs on climate change and disaster
tisk reduction management are critical strategies in the Philippine
Development Plan (PDP) 2017-2022. Chapter 11 of the PDP states that
the conduct of information, education and community campaigns as well
as the mainstreaming of disaster risk reduction in local development is an
important strategy to achieve community level resiliency. Building the
socioeconomic resilience of individuals and families especially the
marginalized sectors through reduction of their exposure to risks and
increasing their adaptive capacities is the focus of this chapter for the
attainment of “pagbabago” pillar of the PDP 2017-2022.

The National Disaster Preparedness Plan (NDPP) 2015-2028 was created
with the objectives that evolve from the National Disaster Risk Reduction
and Management Plan as amended in the Republic Act (RA) 10121
wherein the primary goal is to avert the loss of lives and assets of Filipinos
due to disaster threats and emergencies. On the other hand, the National
Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Plan (NDRRMP) under the
Office of the Civil Defense (OCD) fulfills the requirement of RA 10121 of
2010. It is a plan that serves as the national guide on how sustainable
development can be achieved through inclusive growth while building the
adaptive capacities of communities. The NDRRMP establishes the
expected outcomes, key activities, outputs, indicators, lead agencies, key
partners and timelines covering the four thematic areas such as disaster
prevention and mitigation; disaster preparedness; disaster response and
disaster rehabilitation and recovery (NDRRMC, 2015).

6.2.2 Economic
Natural calamities result in substantial economic damages every year.
According to PSA, the total cost of damage arising from by “major natural

extreme events and disasters” was estimated at P374.199 billion from
2005 to 2015. The agency gave a separate estimate for economic losses

26

due to natural and human-induced disasters of P139.748 billion, with
natural disasters accounting for P132.910 billion of the total (PSA, 2016).

In the first half of 2019, the Philippine economy remains strong and is
projected to grow at 5.8% before it recovers to 6.1% and 6.2% in 2020
and 2021 respectively (World Bank, 2019). Although the growth rate is
increasing, Asian Development Bank (ADB) reduced the growth projection
for Philippines as shown by its gross domestic product (GDP) rate of 5.5%
versus the target of 6-7% growth. They said that GDP would grow at
6.1% in 2019 and 6.2% in 2020 lower than the previous forecast of 6.2%
and 6.4% respectively (Asian Development Bank, 2019). According to
ADB country manager Kelly Bird, the slower growth rate may be due to
internal phase of the Philippines entering in business cycle when growth is
expected to be temporarily spontaneous.

As shown in the figure below, the total economic loss from 2006 to 2015
due to natural disasters was almost Php 133 billion. The largest economic
loss recorded was in 2009 at a level of Php 45 billion. In that same year,
there were 14 meteorological disasters which are considered as major
disaster events including the tropical storm Ondoy and typhoon Pepeng.
In 2014, the least economic loss was recorded at Php 262.3 million
(CPES, 2016).

Figure 6.1 Number of Natural Extreme Events and Disasters and
Economic Loss from 2006 to 2015

50,000.0 400
350
40,000.0 Ean
on
S 30,000.0 250
4 200
= 20,0000 150
c=}
§ 10,000.0 100
8 | 50
0.0 0

2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015

Year
|= Number of Events =~ Economic Loss
Source: National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Council

27

Philippines ranked second as the most significant natural disasters by
number of victims in 2018. Around 3.8 million people were victims of
Typhoon Mangkut (Duffin, 2018)

6.2.3 Socio-cultural

Natural disasters can cause catastrophic events to Filipino people ( (Jha,
Martinez, Quising, Ardaniel, & Wang, 2018). During calamities, one of the
most immediate effects is the population displacement. When countries
are devastated by earthquakes, typhoons and other powerful forces of
nature, many people need to abandon their homes and quest for shelter in
other areas. In 2018, around 3.8 million Filipino people are displaced from
their homes due to natural disasters and violence (IDMC, 2018) A large
number of evacuees can derange the accessibility of health care as well
as food supplies and clean water. Another social issue of natural
disasters is the risks of health. People staying in evacuation areas where
there is no supply of clean water and food can accelerate death tolls even
after the immediate has passed (Figure 6.2.3.1).

Figure 6.2 Number of Incidents and Deaths due to Natural Extreme
Events and Disasters from 2006 to 2015

1600 400

1400 350

1200 \ AN 300

1000 \ 7 im 250
801 \ 200
600 nN \ 150
400 ww \ 100
200 50

° 0

2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015

Number of Deaths
8
sjueng Jo sequiNN

Year

mms Number of Events = Number of Deaths

Source: National Disaster Risk Reduction ans Management Council

After natural disasters, food usually becomes scarce. People devastated
by typhoons or severe drought can go hungry as a result of destroyed
crops and loss of agricultural supplies. Hunger and availability of food are

28

some of the critical issues experienced by calamity survivors. The
frequent disasters hinder the Philippine Government's efforts to reduce the
incidence of poverty and reduce the number of people and assets
vulnerable to these hazards. There are manifestations of close association
between poverty and vulnerability to natural disasters and of their
combined re-enforcing effects. As a result, the poorer communities tend to
be the most vulnerable.

6.2.4 Technological

In aligning to national goals and plans, the Department of Science and
Technology (DOST) through its Strategic Plan 2017-2022 aspires to use
science to enhance innovation and creative capacity of the Filipinos
toward the achievement of inclusive and sustainable development. The
Science for the people 11-point agenda which include providing science
technology and innovation (STI) based solutions for disaster risks and
climate change adaptation (DOST, 2017) The importance of monitoring
and forecasting hazard and risk assessment, risk communication and
appropriate response during and after disasters is the key action points for
Philippine policy with respect to disaster risk reduction and management.
During calamities, one of the immediate tasks in responding to disasters is
by providing food to victims who are not only physically, emotionally and
economically damaged. Being in these sensitive situations, there is a
need to consider all factors that would hasten the reconstructing process.

In developing disaster foods, there are many considerations that need to
be regarded like the utilities that become unavailable (water and electricity
service) up to what extent or duration, and the population in the area. On
the other hand, in providing relief foods, there are three stages to go
through. This means that at every stage, there are appropriate relief goods
that should be given not just for the purpose of feeding but meeting the
objectives of helping the victims cope faster and feel better.

The first stage is immediately after disaster where power, gas and water
are cut off. Survivors need food that can be eaten without water and
drinkables, and without cooking.

The second stage is upon the restoration of power and other utilities.

Calamity survivors can make use of instant quick foods requiring hot water
or cooking.

29

The third stage is when all the utilities are back on line allowing survivors
to use equipment and prepare foods sent as relief from outside the
disaster zone. It is at this stage that nutritious foods or supplements are
provided to survivors.

The DOST researchers from the Industrial Technology Development
Institute (DOST-ITDI) carefully considered all these factors and have
come up with various disaster or emergency foods based on the following
standard categories:

Category A — includes foods that do not need preparation and taken
without drinkables like arroz caldo. This corresponds to the first stage of
disaster or at least satisfying hunger for two days after a disaster

Category B — are also foods that require no preparation but are taken with
a drinkable like biscuits and crackers

Category C — are foods taken by adding or putting in hot water like instant
noodles and pre-gelatinized rice

Category D — are foods that must be cooked like rice

The country's affinity to natural disasters and calamities is a challenge to
everyone as these happen every year. It is very essential to develop
disaster or emergency foods. This became the very reason why the
DOST researchers/nutritionists took on the challenge.

6.2.5 Legal

The Presidential Decree (PD) 1566 signed by President Ferdinand Marcos
on June 11 1978 is about strengthening the Philippine disaster control,
capability and establishing the national program on community disaster
preparedness. This decree created the National Disaster Coordinating
Council (NDCC) composed of different departments, bureaus, agencies,
instrumentalities and corporations of the government and private sector.
This PD 1566 focused on disaster control which comes into play after the
happening of disaster.

RA 10121 known as the Philippine Disaster Risk Reduction and
Management Act of 2010 is an act mandated to strengthen disaster
management in the Philippines, a country prone to natural hazards. This
act focuses on disaster risk reduction and management where it provides
mechanisms prior to the happening of a disaster (Ani, Daquio, & Aquino,

30

2015). Signed by Pres. Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo on May 27, 2010, this
Act is a consolidation of Senate Bill No. 3086 and House Bill No. 6985
passed by the Senate and House of Representatives. This RA 10121 is
about developing a framework and roll out resources that that will enable
our national government, local government units and other stakeholders to
build communities that can survive disasters. This act abolished the
Presidential Decree 1566 that created the National Disaster Coordinating
Council (NDCC) which is the highest policy-making, coordinating and
supervising body for disaster management in the Philippines.

The Philippine Climate Change Act 2007 seeks to create a National
Framework Program on Climate Change Mitigation, Adaptation and
Communication and establish mechanisms to reduce greenhouse gas
emissions from energy, power, transport and manufacturing sectors to
usher in a low-carbon revolution in the Philippines and institutionalize the
country's commitments to international efforts to address the problem on
climate change.

6.2.6 Environmental

Being prone to natural disasters particularly typhoons, earthquakes,
floods, volcanic eruptions and others, the Philippines suffered a lot of
human-caused environmental degradation exasperated by high population
growth rate. Some of these environmental issues include climate change,
deforestation, air and water pollution, land use change, disposal of solid
wastes, illegal mining and logging (Sovacool, 2014)

Our country is suffering from degradation of the natural environment. The
agricultural sector takes in about 22% of the total damage and losses
caused by natural hazards in developing countries (FAO, 2015).
Disasters and calamities imperil the agricultural production and
development and has cascading negative effects across national
economies.

In many of the country’s most vulnerable to natural hazard-induced
disasters, agriculture is the main source of livelihoods and food security,
and a key driver of economic growth. Of all the natural hazards, floods,
droughts and storms affect the agriculture sector the most, showing the
severe impact of climate-related disasters on the sector. These disasters
thus weaken efforts to abolish hunger and food insecurity, and build
sustainable flourishing futures.

31

6.2.7 SWOT Analysis

Characterizing the strengths, weaknesses and problems of a particular
technology for commercialization is necessary in helping organizations in
meeting their goals, improve operations and keep the business relevant to
the industry. SWOT means strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and
threats. It establishes the direction and action steps required to grow a
business. A SWOT analysis is important to strategic planning in
identifying the key internal and external influences that are responsible for
the company's current position, to be able to discover its advantages over
the competitors; come up with effective solutions in understanding the
weaknesses; helps the business improve and grow and identify possible
factors that could hamper the growth and success of the business.

In the case of ITDI developed technology on RTE shelf stable disaster
foods, what would be the strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and
threats it will face associated with the future deployment of that
technology? During the team’s discussion, the following internal and
external factors were identified.

Table 6.1 SWOT Analysis for RTE disaster foods

Strengths

e Longer shelf life (stable)

e No cooking/heating
needed

« Ease of consumption (no
utensils required)

e Ready to eat food

e Lighter than metal cans
(packaging)

Weaknesses

«More expensive compared
to ordinary congee

Lack of
coordination/cooperation in
relief distribution

«Not complete source of RDI
requirement

Opportunities

e Increasing demand for
shelf  stable/retortable
foods

e IP protection

Threats

eRise of existing similar
products
«Use of other
disaster food

type of

32

6.3 Stage 3 - Identify and characterize key predictable variables

After the environmental scanning where we have discussed the different
drivers that will influence the deployment of RTE shelf stable disaster
foods, the next stage will be the identification and characterization of the
predictable variables established in the team discussion. The group was
able to identify 17 predictable variables which are shown below:

6.3.1 Cost of technology

In any research activity, expenditures related to acquisition, development
and implementation really matter a lot. One of the biggest portions of
project allocation goes to research and development. And for this project,
this can be one of the key drivers for the possible takers to adopt and
commercialize the technology. The team identified the list of equipment
needed in the production of disaster foods.

6.3.2 Adoptors/takers of technology

In today’s modern world, technology plays a major role on how the
business is conducted. Technology transfer and commercialization is
important to examine the factors that will affect adoption of an innovation.
Technology investors play a big role in making a business the leader in
their industry. They are the movers in the industry who have the
fesources and capability to explore the technology and take the market
risk.

In the case of RTE shelf stable disaster foods, the technology has already
two (2) technology adoptors namely Kai Anya Foods located at Premier
Port St. corner Bulungan Avenue Navotas Fishport Complex, NBBS,
Navotas, Metro Manila, who is already commercializing the technology
and Magic melt with plant address at Bankal, Lapu Lapu City, Cebu has
just signed a Memorandum of Agreement (MOA) this July 2019. But still,
the technology needs more adoptors to commercialize the RTE shelf
stable disaster foods.

6.3.3 Availability of supplies and materials

The importance of raw materials availability is very critical in any
manufacturing activity. Hence, if the raw materials you need become
difficult to acquire, market forces might shift demand to other goods and
supply chains. Managing raw materials inventory can make or break the
effort you put in the supply chain. Keeping an eye on raw materials
inventory can provide a significant competitive advantage as well as cost

33

advantage for most companies. Although Philippines is an agricultural
country, we cannot argue that sometimes the supply and demand is
affected by the movement of global market. As for the raw materials for
RTE disaster foods, availability is not a major problem. However, to make
this product always available for the consumers, the producers, traders
and farmers must collaborate well for a balance supply of raw materials.

6.3.4 Consumer acceptability

One of the challenges in developing a new food product is forecasting how
it will be accepted by the consumers. There are many factors affecting the
acceptability of a particular product. Acceptability of product or service in
a market requires series of tests, surveys and consumer prototyping.
Some of these include price, convenience, appearance, availability and
marketing. But one main factor that needs important evaluation is the
sensory experience that consumers have with the food. Sensory
evaluation is a method of testing food products in terms of our senses of
sight, smell, taste, touch and hearing. While taste of the product seems to
be a significant factor, it is not the sole consideration. Foods that taste
great may have weak appeal to consumers if the appearance is not
pleasing. Therefore, visual interest is also important in consumer
acceptability.

6.3.5 Shelf life

The question frequently asked if you have a product is “What is the shelf
life of that food? Shelf life can be defined as the time period within which
the food is safe to consume and/or has an acceptable quality to
consumers (Fu & Labuza, 2000). It is the length of time the product may
be stored without becoming unsuitable for consumption. The longest shelf
life of food stored depends on the interaction of your product with the
different criteria such as temperature, moisture, oxygen, light and
contamination with microorganisms.

In times of natural disaster, most people are into panic mode. We can
never tell when a typhoon, an earthquake, flood or any hazard may strike
and leave you stranded with nothing to survive on. Establishing your food
storage in times of emergencies is necessary in every household and can
give you peace of mind. This stockpile of food storage is different from the
typical groceries that you are buying in supermarkets. A disaster food is a
food supply that can be stored for long period of time. This is where the
importance of long shelf life comes in. In the case of RTE shelf stable

34

disaster food (chicken arroz caldo), it is a ready to eat shelf stable food
that has a shelf life of one year.

6.3.6 Relief distribution

One of the most important responsibilities of governments and relief
agencies after each natural disaster is to provide the victims with
emergency food items. This is an inevitable measure to save the lives of
injured and the ones who are rescued. This is due to inadequacy and
unreliability of household and local food supplies. Selection of the type of
food is a concern of managers of the response management programs.

6.3.7 Ease of consumption

This property measures the easiness of how the finished product is used
or consumed by the intended users. In designing a product, it is a choice
between trying to deliver ease of use and trying to deliver functionality or
sometimes, designers wan to cover both properties. In times of disasters,
one of the concerns of the response management teams is the choice of
the type of food.

In a study after the Great East Japan Earthquake, Nakazawa and Beppu
highlighted the insufficiency of food supplies and the need to store
required amounts of appropriate food items according to differences in
their ease of consumption. They mentioned the idea of shifting the
conventional concept of emergency food to one of the “disaster
preparation food” that is based on appropriate ways for providing
stockpiles (Nakazawa & Beppu, 2012).

In another study, Wien and Sabate reported that handling properties, ease
of preparation, cultural acceptance and individual tolerance are the
important criteria for food selection in planning for disaster response. For
the most suitable diet in emergencies, they regarded plant-based
approach and suggested dried products such as grains, cereals, fruits and
nuts (Wien & Sabate, 2015)

6.3.8 Food availability
The economy of the Philippines is heavily dependent on agriculture.

According to FAO, most of what constitutes food security in the country
depends on the agricultural sector (FAO, 2019). Therefore, the

35

challenges faced by Filipino farmers and fishermen often have an adverse
effect on food security in the country.

The prevalence of natural calamities is one of the factors that contribute to
food insecurity in the Philippines. The location of the country being in the
middle of the Pacific makes it susceptible to typhoons and droughts.
Some with devastating effects experienced caused by the El Nino
phenomenon destroyed about 349,630 metric tons of crops which is worth
$95 million (FAO, 2015). On the other hand, the string of typhoons that
tavaged the country at the end of the year notably slowed down the
national agricultural growth rate.

In a study on regional disaster risk management strategies in an African
community, Natural disasters and food insecurity are directly
interconnected. Natural hazards and climate change such as floods,
typhoons, earthquakes, droughts and other risks can weaken food security
and severely impact agricultural activities. Consequently, this has an
impact on market access, trade, food supply, reduced income, increased
food prices, decreased farm income and employment in a country.

6.3.9 Variability in food choices

Selection of food that we eat is a social phenomenon and our eating
behavior is significantly influenced by observing the kind of food and how
other people eat as well as their reactions to the foodstuff. Food choice
means how the people decide on what they buy and eat. It is a complex
set of factors that may vary from person to person depending on culture,
heritage and up-bringing. Food choice can also be influenced by other
characteristics that correspond to personal preferences (e.g. organic
labels or nutrition information for health claims). But when you are in
disaster areas, selection of food to eat is not always available. Thus,
eating the same food again for how many times can add distress to
calamity survivors. Thus, a need to have variability in food choices is
essential to people stucked in calamity areas. With the use of RTE
chicken arroz caldo, this can be a good alternative from their usual
noodles and canned sardines.

6.3.10 Religion/tradition

Beliefs and religion are delicate topics that are not usually discussed
during emergency situations. They are intangible topics and sometimes
difficult to understand and recognize but form part of culture and influence

36

all aspects of disaster cycle on how the communities look at the risks and
how they respond to it. Being active in bringing people together, religion
acts as resource for most people to give support and provide ways to cope
with disasters. In times of calamities, differences in religion/tradition do
not really matter in terms of survival. For the developed RTE chicken
arroz caldo, any survivor with different religion can eat the product. During
calamities, it is better that we have variability in food choices or options on
what to eat based on our culture and religion but what's more important is
how people survive in times of disasters.

6.3.11 FDA permits

Enterprises and foreign investors that are planning to do business in the
food, pharmaceutical industries in the Philippines are required to register
their products with the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) to ensure that
the products circulating in the country have undergone a wide range of
tests to check if they are of best quality and safe for consumers.
Registration of products plays a vital role in making the product to the
market. Under RA 9711, establishments which are marketing or selling
unregistered commodities that are used for human consumption will face
necessary sanctions. Before the products can be imported, exported,
distributed, marketed or manufactured, a company (local or foreign) must
first secure a License to Operate (LTO) from the FDA as importer,
distributor or wholesaler of their products or the manufacturer of their
products (FDA, 2019)

In the case of RTE chicken arroz caldo as disaster/relief food, the possible
adoptor/taker should register the product before marketing or selling. The
registration takes 6 months to | year depending on the submitted
requirements for the registration.

6.3.12 Government procurement system

The Philippine government established its own electronic procurement
thru Philippine Government Electronic Procurement System (PhilGEPS to
modernize the procurement process and achieve greater transparency of
purchasing common use supplies, materials and equipment (Bombay,
2011) To harmonize all government agencies procurement system, they
will follow the PhilGEPS especially to DSWD who are distributing relief
foods to disaster survivors. In acquiring these relief materials, one of the
advantages of this electronic procurement system is the long process of
acquisition/bidding which affects the survivors who are receiving these
relief goods in calamity areas.

37

6.3.13 Warehouse issues

In preparation for food security during disasters, one of the options of the
national government is to stockpile emergency food reserves. During
calamities, having these emergency foods is important. One of the issues
during stockpiling is the problem on warehouse. Majority of warehouses
in different LGUs and other government agencies are not designed for
stockpiling of emergency foods.

6.3.14 Culture

In disaster areas, the food you eat can affect your health and risk for
certain diseases. Different people can have varying food culture.
Changing the way we eat and our environment can help us eat nutritious
foods. Eating a healthy diet is difficult to do due to complexity of human
beings. In fact, eating is such a good experience that we often prefer to
eat foods that taste really good, but that don’t make us feel better
afterward. We love these foods so much that we are eating more than our
bodies actually need, which in turn makes us fat, lonely and depressed. A
lot of people do not even know how great it feels to eat a healthy meal,
because they have been making bad food choices for so long.

Beyond damage to properties and loss of life, disasters can also cause
long-term damage to disaster survivors and communities. In the study of
2010 Pakistani monsoon, disasters can change victim's attitudes in ways
that will potentially haunt individuals, communities and local economies for
decades to come.

6.3.15 Political interest

Traditionally, politics in the Philippines has been dominated by clans and
political bosses and patronage which is characterized by law makers that
make decisions based on fiscal incentives rather than faiths and people
who make choices based on popularity rather than significant policies.
Under the traditional utang na loob system of patronage, or obligation
earned through favors, voters expect money or jobs in return for their
political support (Hranjski, 2013). In many cases, the politician's
performance was based on dole-outs but not on programs or policies
established. Sad to say, the Philippine concepts of debt repayment and
kinship responsibilities play a major role in how political networks are set
up and run.

38

In Philippine politics, personalities are more important than parties
According to Hrvoje Hranjski of Associated Press “Philippine elections
have long been dominated by politicians belonging to the same bloodlines.
At least 250 political families have monopolized power across the country,
although such dynasties are prohibited under the 1987 constitution
(Hranjski, 2013). Until now, political interest still prevails in our
government system.

6.3.16 Marketability

The definition of product marketability varies depending on the company.
Essentially, marketability is a measure of whether a product will appeal to
buyers and sell at a certain price range to generate a profit. Marketing
communications include public relations, advertising, trade shows and
collateral production, as well as other functions such as product quality
assurance and documentation. Prior to attempting to market products, the
product developers should complete a marketability evaluation. This helps
marketing managers and other executives determine whether the
product(s) is marketable in the current and future market.

Incorporating marketability evaluations helps determine the value of a new
product. The questions "Who will buy this product?" and “How much does
the product cost?" will help you determine if it is worthwhile to invest
resources into that kind product. There are many factors considered in
marketing your new product and these include: fulfilling customers’ needs,
right pricing, has established market opportunity and pass quality and
legal standards of safety. Marketing plays a critical role in the success of
any particular product.

6.3.17 Adoptors production commitment

Knowing all the requirements needed in producing and marketing the
developed disaster food, another aspect that is important in relief
distribution is the commitment of the adoptors to produce the disaster
foods.

6.3.18 IP regulations

Under RA 8293 (Intellectual Property Code of the Philippines), this law
covers the rules and regulations in granting and enforcing patents in the
Philippines. These patents may be granted to technological solutions
such as interventions, machines, devices, processes or an improvement
of any mentioned solutions. The technological solution should be novel,

39

innovative and useful for the industry filed at Bureau of Patents (BOP) at
the International Patent Office Philippines (IPOPhil, 2019). In the case of
RTE chicken arroz caldo, the application (utility model) was already
submitted to IPOPhil for review and examination.

6.4 Stage 4 - Identify critical uncertainties

The fourth stage in the scenario building activity is about the identification
of critical uncertainties. Determining the critical uncertainties helps you
connect the different realities that might happen in the future. The
importance of identifying these uncertainties helps you formulate
strategies that will deal with range of plausible but unpredictable futures.

6.4.1 Government support and prioritization

The government plays a significant role in industrial and economic
development in a country for the benefit of the common people. Policy
makers, practitioners, academics and business leaders agree that in an
economy, government plays three basic roles: providing suitable macro
economic conditions, improving microeconomic capacity and establishing
a supportive and progressive regulatory environment.

When a disaster hits the country, it is not always that the national
government that should act first. The NDRRMC is functioned to come up
with a framework for disaster risk reduction management (DRRM) as well
as supervise preparations and responses to natural calamities as well as
human-made disasters. Based on RA 10121, the local government units
(LGUs) are expected to be at the frontline of emergency measures to
ensure safety of all the constituents. In the aftermath of disasters, they
are the first responders in the occurrence of natural and man-made
calamities.

When disaster strikes, one of the most important priorities is to establish
again communications with everyone to address the needs of the most
vulnerable at the soonest time possible. The ultimate priority is to
anticipate needs. That is why the government makes it a point to
preposition goods, equipment and even personnel because ideally, relief
and rescue should not have to travel great distances

6.4.2 Cooperation among disaster support agencies (NDRRMC, LGU &
DSWD)

40

The capability to accomplish definite tasks under certain conditions with
desired results is built upon the appropriate combination of people, skills,
processes and assets. Whenever there are several agencies who are
expected to deliver a desired goal for the disaster victims, it is necessary
that these agencies should collaborate, coordinate, cooperate and discuss
with each other all the time to reach a common objective. Coordination is
influenced by different factors which include governance structure,
availability of resources, partnership of different stakeholders and the
information management system. Based on experience, majority of
disaster support agencies in the regions and provinces are understaff and
lacks coordination.

6.4.3 Climate change/natural phenomenon

According to NASA, climate change is a broad range of global phenomena
created predominantly by burning fossil fuels, that adds heat-trapping
gases in the earth’s atmosphere. This is also about the long-term change
of climate patterns in a place wherein the weather patterns become less
predictable. Some of the effects of climate change include unpredictable
weather patterns, food scarcity and people displacement. This
phenomenon has contributed on the happenings on natural disasters in
our country. In the Philippines, climate change preparedness and
resilience efforts are on-going currently. Majority of these efforts are
usually organized by international aid organizations (Franta, Quiaoit, Lo, &
Narisma, 2016)

6.4.4 Rise of new entrant/possible competitors

Competition is essential in any venture undertaking as it identifies specific
and extraordinary attributes that are more appealing to the customers or
should | say determining your competitive advantage. Identifying these
attributes will able you to market your business effectively. Hence,
competition results to better goods and services at lower prices.

Currently, there is no competitor for the developed RTE chicken arroz
caldo as disaster food which belongs to first stage category (no
drinkables). In the supermarket, there is also no RTE disaster food that is
available for consumption other than canned foods and noodles (dried,
fresh) which needs cooking or adding of hot water.

6.5 Stage 5 - Clustering of variables

41

The list of identified predictable variables and critical uncertainties were
clustered to reduce the variables into manageable set. The team agreed
to cluster the different variables as follows:

Table 6.2 Clustering of Variables for RTE disaster foods

Cluster 1: Cost of technology
Technical Aspects Shelf life
IP regulations

Adoptors/takers of technology

luster 2: Availability of supplies and materials
jarketing Issues Marketability

Adoptors production commitment
Consumer acceptability

Ease of consumption

Cluster 3: Variability in food choices

Social Concerns Food availability

Eating habits

Religion/tradition

Zo

Cluster 4: Government procurement system
Government Policies FDA permits

Cluster 5: Relief distribution

Logistical Concerns political interest

Warehouse issues

6.6 Stage 6 - Ranking of variables to establish key driving forces

The clustered variables from Stage 5 were then ranked based on their
degree of impact and uncertainty to establish the key driving forces (Table
6.3). In scenario planning, the focus of ranking variables was on the “high
impact/low uncertainty and on the high impact/high uncertainty quadrants
in the graph. This ranking is very helpful in making inferences and
analysis of future. This focus emphasized the relationship among the
most important driving forces and the uncertainties. Ranking of variables
was based on the individual’s assessments in consideration with the

42

concept of foresight — the future of deployed RTE disaster foods.
annexes for the result of ranking the variables)

Table 6.3 Overall Ranking of Variables and Uncertainties

(See

Overall Ranking

Variables
Impact* Uncertainty**
Technical aspects 9 2.58
Marketing issues 8 4.42
Social concerns 7 3.92
Government policies 6 6.75
Government support and
| prioritization Z eH
Logistical concerns 4 7.25
Cooperation among disaster
support team Y te
Climate change/natural 2 5.25
| phenomenon :
Rise of new entrant / competitor 1 3.67

*9 being high impact, 1 being low impact
** 10 being the most uncertain, 1 being the less uncertainty

The figure below shows the result of ranking of variables based on the
summary of individual evaluation of each team member according to the
degree of impact and degree of uncertainties related to the effect of
different variables (possible discontinuity) on the future of RTE disaster

foods deployment.

43

Figure 6.3 Graphical representation of ranking of variable

8

a

Uncertainty
x
>

Impact

6.7 Stage 7 - Selection of scenario logic

= Technical aspects

==Marketing issues

=@=Social concerns

=@=Government
policies

=@=Logistical
concerns

=O=Government
support &
prioritization
@@=Cooperation
among disaster
support team
]==Climate
change/natural
phenomenon
ere Rise of new
entrant / possible
competitor

After ranking, the seventh stage is the selection of scenario logic which is
based on the overall ranking of the clustered variables and uncertainties
established in the previous stage. The different scenario logics developed

are shown in Table 6.4

44

Table 6.4 Scenario Logic for RTE disaster foods

Technical aspects
Scenario 1: Marketing issues
High Impact Low Uncertainty Social concerns

Government policies
Government support and

Scenario 2: prioritization
Medium Impact High Logistical concerns
Uncertainty Cooperation among disaster

team/stakeholders

Scenario 3: Climate change/natural
Low Impact Medium phenomenon
Uncertainty Rise of new entrant/competitor

As discussed in TM 281 lectures of Prof. lmbang, he emphasized that this
part is a highly creative stage that will assist in determining the number
and characteristics of the developed scenario. This can be done by
considering the high/low position on each axis to identify the key areas
along which scenarios could differ.

Using the graphical representation below, the team evaluated the
relationship of different variables on their importance/impact and the
degree of uncertainties to form the plausible and logical scenarios. The
team members agreed to group the variables closely related to each other
based on plot representation in the graph. This is believed to be the
driving forces that will influence the future deployment of RTE shelf stable
disaster foods.

The three scenarios were composed of 2 to 4 variables characterized as
follows: Scenario 1: high impact low uncertainty; Scenario 2: medium
impact high uncertainty and Scenario 3: low impact medium uncertainty.

45

Figure 6.4 Graphical representation of scenario logic

= =Technical aspects
7
="=Marketing issues
=@=Social concerns

=00= Government policies

=@= Logistical concerns

Uncertainty
ae

=O=Government support &
prioritization

@@=Cooperation among
disaster support team

=@=Climate change/natural
phenomenon

ie) «=e Rise of new entrant /

ie} 2 4 6 8 10 possible competitor

Impact

6.8 Stage 8 - Development of scenarios

In this stage, the group named the previous scenarios identified in stage 7
as follows: Scenario 1 — The Big 3 (TeMaSo) Leverage; Scenario 2 — The
Admin Influence and Scenario 3 — The Indefinite Impact. These scenarios
are considered as the influencing plausible scenario that may possibly
occur in the deployment of RTE shelf stable disaster foods by the year
2030 as this will be the determinants and drivers of the deployment and
commercialization of this ITD! developed technology.

Below is the diagram on the three (3) different possible scenarios
identified by the team. These are the Big 3 Leverage, the Admin Influence
and the Indefinite Impact.

46

Figure 6.5 Possible scenarios identified by the team

The Admin Influence

The Indefinite Impact Q)

The Big 3 Leverage

Increasing Uncertainty

Increasing Impact ——————>

Scenario 1: The Big 3 (TeMaSo) Leverage (high impact low uncertainty

This scenario defines the 3 leading variables (TeMaSo: technical aspects,
marketing issues and social concerns) in the study that will influence the
future deployment of the RTE shelf stable disaster foods with high impact
and degree of importance. These variables are the drivers of change that
will significantly pull the future deployment of this technology. We can
consider this also as the driving forces that will push the deployment of
RTE disaster foods.

Due to our geographic location, the Philippines is suffering around 140
natural hazards annually (CRED EM-DAT, 2018). With that data, it is
necessary to have developed technologies on disaster that can last up to
one year. In line with DOST’s agenda on disaster mitigation, the PTD-
ITDI developed the RTE chicken arroz caldo as first stage disaster food.
In terms of technical aspect, the RTE disaster food has a big chance. The
availability of the technology will address hunger alleviation in calamity

47

areas. For the marketing issues, possible adoptors and availability of
materials are not a major problem since the technology has already 2
adoptors that can supply the product. And if the market particularly the
calamity victims influence the consumption behavior for RTE disaster
foods, there will be a big leap

In terms of social concerns, the technology has positive vibes on social
issues such as product acceptability, ease of consumption, eating habits
and variability in food choices. The RTE chicken arroz caldo is formulated
like the normal arroz caldo that we are eating in our home with bits of
chicken. If the society particularly the calamity victims would support the
consumption of RTE disaster foods, this can be a big success for this
technology.

Scenario 2: The Admin Influence (medium impact high uncertainty)

There is a big possibility that this kind of scenario will occur. This
Scenario is named as The Admin Influence and is characterized by
medium impact high uncertainty. The following are the key drivers that will
influence the occurrence of this scenario. These include government
policies, support and prioritization; logistical concerns and the cooperation
among the disaster support team.

The highlight of this scenario is the influence of the government to support
and implement policies related to disaster mitigation and preparedness as
well as establish cooperation among other agencies/stakeholders in the
successful deployment of RTE disaster foods. In particular, the
government should take the initiative in extending help and the needed
assistance before, during and after disaster.

Scenario 3: The Indefinite Impact (medium impact low uncertainty)

This scenario is named indefinite as this is characterized by low
uncertainty and medium impact. The key drivers in this scenario are
climate change/natural phenomenon and the rise of new
entrant/competitor.

We can say that this scenario is likely to occur with uncertain assurance to
come up with the vision of deployment for RTE disaster foods. In
particular, the rise of the new entrant or possible competitor. This
scenario was considered as indefinite because as of the moment, there is

48

no possible competitor of first stage RTE disaster food. In terms of
climate change, it is also uncertain as we cannot tell when that will
happen. As defined, climate change is a long-term shift in climate
patterns globally or regionally as manifested by unpredictable weather
patterns, temperature and rainfall.

6.9 Stage 9 - Assessment of scenario coherence

The developed scenario on RTE disaster food deployment presents a
logical outcome for future deployment in the present situation and in the
future. It is useful to assess the scenario coherence for the technology
foresight of RTE shelf stable disaster foods to critically examine the
scenario logic, identify the key events or turning point and examine
against the set of variables to ensure coverage and consistency. With
this, possible determinants will be identified that is crucial in the activity of
strategic technology deployment. Again, below are the following
scenarios that are evaluated for internal and external factors that might
affect the deployment of RTE chicken arroz caldo in the future.

Scenario 1: The Big 3 (TeMaSo) Leverage (high impact low uncertainty)

This scenario showed coherence among the three variables such as
technological aspects, marketing issues and social concerns. These
variables are the critical scenario drivers that need monitoring and re-
assessment for the deployment of RTE disaster foods.

The variable from technological aspects was highlighted by the
development of ITDI-DOST’s technology on RTE chicken arroz caldo as
first stage disaster/relief food. In a report from the Philippine News
Agency, the Department of Science of Technology (DOST) gives 30,000
packs of ready-to-eat food to recently hit earthquake victims in Mindanao.
The disaster packs distributed by police officers and firefighters contain
the DOST-developed products, such as rice porridge, smoked fish rice
meal, and BigMo (bigas/rice - mongo) curls that could ease the hunger of
the disaster victims (Arayata, 2019).

In terms of product distribution, marketing plays a key role. Some studies
reveal that market needs rather than technological opportunities provide
the main pull and motivation for the adoption of technology such as the
RTE disaster foods. This indicates that ITD! should give importance to
different market factors and the needs of expected users/adoptors of

49

technology in order to facilitate technology adoption, transfer and
commercialization.

Although as of the moment, the developed technology has two adoptors,
the technology transferor (ITDI) should focus on marketing their
technology to cater the needs of users. For the advantages, the
technology on RTE disaster foods has long shelf life of 1 year, easy to
consume and can be eaten without drinkables. The product is very useful
during calamities, can be eaten by anyone and provides alternative option
for disaster foods.

Table 6.5 SWOT Analysis of Scenario 1 - The Big 3 Leverage

Strengths Weaknesses
« Technology promotion ¢ Collaboration of different
« Can be eaten by anyone government agencies
without cooking needed ¢ Not finish patent
application
Opportunities Threats
e Usefulness in times of e Rise of existing similar
calamities products
e Risk of natural
phenomenon

Scenario 2: The Admin Influence (medium impact high uncertainty)

The second scenario showed coherence among the four variables which
include government policies, support and prioritization, logistical concerns
and the cooperation among the disaster team. This scenario is with
emphasis on the important role of the government to support and prioritize
the deployment of RTE disaster foods. In this scenario, this considers the
government being the major determinant of deployment that will facilitate
the technology adoption and deployment of RTE disaster foods in the
country. Favorable environment wherein the government strategically
imposes strict policies and guidelines in the deployment of the technology
will pave the way for the big Admin influence on the deployment of RTE
disaster foods.

50

Recently, the ASEAN Coordinating Centre for Humanitarian Assistance on
disaster management (AHA Centre) and Deutsche Post DHL (DPDHL)
Group sign a Memorandum of Intent (MOI) to collaborate on emergency
preparedness and disaster response. The collaboration was about the
establishment of Disaster Emergency Logistics Systems for Asean
(DELSA) Phase || warehouse in Camp Aguinaldo, Quezon City that
develop a regional relief item stockpile and support capacity enhancement
in emergency logistic operations. This logistic system focuses on three
elements such as regional emergency stockpiles, institutional capacity
building and awareness and communication. With the activation of
DELSA, the organization's emergency preparedness and response
capabilities will notably amplify. Calamities and natural hazards can
greatly affect a country. Aside from social conflict triggered by social
grievances and resource scarcities, natural disasters often result in
fatalities, injuries, diseases and other negative physical and mental health
impacts.

For the advantages of this scenario, there will be faster and efficient relief
distribution of disaster foods as well proper coordination and cooperation
among the disaster support teams will established. The major problem
that we can see in this scenario is the proliferation of political interest
especially to local government units. But overall, this scenario will have a
big leap if the deployment of technology on RTE disaster foods will be fully
supported and prioritized by the government.

51

Table 6.6 SWOT Analysis of Scenario 2 —- The Admin Influence

Strengths Weaknesses
e Technology adoption e Political interest
e Easy distribution of relief e Lack of
foods coordination/cooperation

in relief distribution
« Warehouse issues

Opportunities Threats
e Increasing demand for e Rise of existing similar
shelf stable/retortable products
food e Use of other type of

disaster food

Stage 3: The Indefinite Impact (medium impact low uncertainty)

The third scenario showed coherence between climate change/natural
phenomenon and the rise of new entrant/possible competitor as these are
the critical scenario drivers. Although this scenario is highly uncertain and
undefined, there is still the possibility that this will occur. The highlight of
this scenario is the indefinite occurrence of natural phenomenon/climate
change. For the advantages of this scenario, people will be more
prepared to natural calamities and there will be increased competition
among the possible competitors. Some of the major problems in this
scenario will be on the socio-cultural and environmental issues such as
loss of lives and properties, health risks, food scarcity, damages to
environment and business establishments.

52


Table 6.7 SWOT Analysis of Scenario 3 — The Indefinite Impact

Strengths Weaknesses
« Preparedness in the e Loss of lives & properties
occurrence of natural « Damages to environment
calamities and business
« Increase competition establishments
among new entrants e Low economy
Opportunities Threats
e Increasing demand for e Use of other type of
shelf stable/retortable disaster food
foods
« Establishment of
competitive advantage

6.10 Stage 10 - Assessment of implications of scenario to strategic
planning

This last stage assessed the implications of the different scenarios to
strategic planning. Looking back on the focal issue of what is the possible
future of the deployment of RTE disaster foods and the critical factors
influencing/affecting the deployment of RTE disaster foods to address the
problems on hunger alleviation and challenges encountered during
disasters. RTE shelf stable disaster food which all resulted to the future
deployment.

The three scenarios highlighted the drivers and challenges that the
country has to face relevant to the deployment of RTE disaster foods
which will be expected to yield economic growth and development. To
easily understand the assessment and implications of the scenarios,
below is the summary of the possible future scenario of RTE disaster
foods which all resulted to future deployment and commercialization. With
this, it is understood that these scenarios have different key driving forces
related to its objectives.

53

Table 6.8 Scenario Matrix of RTE Disaster Food Deployment

Scenario 1 Scenario 2 Scenario 3
Scenario Title The Big 3 The Admin The Indefinite
(TeMaSo) Influence Impact
Leverage
«Government
¢ Technical policies « Climate
aspects eGovernment change/natural
Key driving ¢ Marketing support and phenomenon
forces/variables issues prioritization | e Rise of new
¢ Social ¢ Logistical entrant /
concerns concerns competitor
¢ Cooperation
among
disaster
team
Degree of High impact | Medium Low impact
impact and low impact high medium
uncertainty uncertainty uncertainty uncertainty
Determinants of | Institute Government | Private Sector
deployment
Natural
Turning of TeMaSo Influence of | occurrence/clim
events consideration | government__| ate change
Results Economic growth and development

These different driving factors/variables have different degree of
importance and uncertainty. Nevertheless, these different driving forces
with different degree of impact/importance and uncertainty are greatly
affected by the determinants of utilization.

In this assessment, the emphasis is how these determinants of utilization
such as the institute (ITDI), the Philippine government and the private
sector will strategically respond to the challenges and issues it will face in
the deployment and commercialization of RTE disaster foods to achieve
economic growth.

54

7. Strategies for the deployment of RTE disaster foods

In the previous stage, the different determinants of deployment of RTE
disaster foods that are critical for the deployment and commercialization of
the technology were identified. In order to bring in the objective of this
scenario building study, the emphasis will be on defining the different
strategies that will help in achieving the future objectives for a more stable
and growing economy.

Below are some of the strategies for the three (3) determinants of RTE
disaster foods for deployment.

7.1 Strategies for the Institution (ITDI)
7.1.1 Determining the technical and commercial feasibility of the project

In early stage technology development, understanding the transition from
invention to innovation is critical in the creation of business strategies.
Determining the technical and commercial feasibility of a project is
essential in evaluating the project's potential success or the viability of
commercializing the idea. A feasibility study evaluates the usability of a
proposal, business venture or idea. The principal objective of this is to
determine if the project will continue or not. In business, determining the
continuity of your venture is very important so as not to waste money,
effort and time.

7.1.2 Private-government partnership for technology transfer

In our modern world of innovation, one of the key highlights is the effective
technology transfer and the cooperation between public and government
entities to share ideas and to implement successfully the innovation
solutions developed in an organization. In any undertaking, private-
government partnership is important in the direction of crafting policies
and business research activities for a successful transfer of technology
(Vutsova & Ignatova, 2014).

At ITDI, partnering with the private sector industries and business
enterprises is a good way to showcase developed technologies and seize
the opportunity to capitalize it for adoption and commercialization/transfer.

7.1.3 Technology offering for marketing and commercialization

55

To boost the transfer or uptake of technologies developed from R&D to
the production sector, ITDI launches the Technology Offerings, an
innovative pre-commercialization strategy aimed to heighten the
technology transfer program of the institute. During this offering, small
and medium enterprises are invited to discuss the technologies
developed. In the discussions, pitching and business opportunities are
presented.

7.2 Strategies for the government
7.2.1 Strict implementation of policies/guidelines in DRR management

In the process of deployment, government intervention is very important.
Intervention is done to promote general economic fairness for social
welfare of its people. Crafting policy framework is very important in the
deployment disaster foods. In terms of mechanisms for disaster risk
reduction management, the Philippines has a strong set of policies for
disaster risk reduction through its Philippine Disaster Risk Reduction
Management Act of 2010 (DRRM Law) which establishes the local
government units in the regional, provincial, municipal and barangay
levels that shows the responsibilities of NDRRMC. Usually, these local
government units are understaffed or lacks professionalism and that's
where the gap exist since the NDRRMC cannot supervise all the local
government units. The effectiveness of local government units came from
local political leaders’ support of disaster management, funding and
training support from the national government. However, natural
phenomenon such as climate change can also change the situation due to
unpredictable weather events.

Further, several works have been done in the Philippines related to
resilience and disaster risk reduction. Some of these include hazards,
vulnerability and risk assessment; early warning systems and evacuations;
tisk transfer mechanisms; capacity building for disaster preparedness and
response & relief operations ( (Alcayna, Bollettino, Dy, & Vinck, 2016). To
bridge the gap, Alcayna et al. (2016) identified several activities in
community-based resiliency and disaster risk reduction. They
emphasized that climate change or extreme weather events cannot just
tely on past experiences to prepare for future disasters and secondly,
there is lacking research that would help policy information and disaster
management decisions.

56

In another study on disaster risk reduction implementation and
management policies in Lao area, the authors reported that the
implementers had difficulty in the policy implementation because of
unclear provisions in the national legislation, unclear mandates, poor
monitoring system, insufficient human resources and lack of private-public
partnership (Kanyasan, Nonaka, Chatouphonexay, & Hernandez, 2018).

7.2.2 Massive national campaign on the promotion of disaster foods

To mitigate the loss of life, personal injuries and damages for natural
disasters, public awareness and education in the community is very
essential in every nation. People must be aware of what natural hazards
will arrive in their community (National Research Council, 1991).
Additionally, they should be aware of what to do during disasters and what
actions to take in its aftermath. In food preparation, it is also important
that people are aware of what kind/type of food that they should
buy/prepare in order to survive the calamities.

7.2.3 Funding/supporting technology start-ups on disaster foods

As a new technology start-up, new ventures face difficult challenges of
finding all the resources they need as well as people who can fund the
business venture. On the other and, venture providers know the risks of a
new start-up and usually are very reluctant to provide the necessary
resources or invest on the idea. Initial capital is normally required to finish
the product development and it generally comes as government grants. In
the Philippines, majority of government agencies such as the DOST, DA,
and DTI have programs that are helping the small medium enterprises to
take off and fund their businesses. With this strategy, government must
strengthen and continue their support to the entrepreneurs on disaster
foods by providing grants that will serve as their initial capital for product
development, prototyping and market testing.

At DOST, some of the programs for SMEs include SET-UP, BIST,
CRADLE, NICER and RDLead. The Small Enterprise Technology
Upgrading Program (SET-UP) is a nationwide strategy to encourage and
assist SMEs to adopt technological innovations to improve their product,
services and operations and thus, boost their productivity and
competitiveness. In this program, SMEs will able to address their
technical problems and improve productivity and efficiency through
infusion of appropriate technologies to improve products, services or
operations; human resource training, technical assistance and

57

consultancy services; design of functional packages and _ labels,
assistance in the attainment of product standards including testing;
database management system and assistance for technology acquisition.
The Business Innovation through S&T (BIST) for Industry program
facilitates the acquisition of strategic and relevant technologies by Filipino
Companies to support R&D activities. The Collaborative Research and
Development to Leverage Philippine’s Economy (CRADLE) creates
synergistic academe-industry relationship to invigorate Philippine R&D.
The NICER program stands for Niche Centers in the Regions for R&D
wherein it establishes R&D centers in the region to promote regional
development. For R&D Leadership (RDLead) program, it engages R&D
experts to lead in strengthening the research capabilities of the Higher
Education Institutions (HEls) and Research Development Institutions
(RDIs).

7.3 Strategies for the private sector
7.3.1 Openness to technology development/innovation

In our modern living, the importance of technology is incontestable due to
the fact that life without technology is senseless. Technological
development is an important factor in increasing the growth rate of
economy at macro level and then tackles about profits and market shares
of the firms at micro level.

Openness to technology innovation and creating opportunities and
partnerships, where R&D activities are funded will help boost economic
activity in our country. Science, technology and innovation (STI) agenda is
key to economic growth and improving the quality of life of Filipinos.

7.3.2 Participation in strategic partnership and alliances

Strategic partnership refers to an agreement between two or more
organizations to cooperate in a specific business activity so that each of
them will benefit from the strengths of the others and gain competitive
advantage (Baranov, 2013). In reducing the risk of disasters, partnering
with stakeholders across different sectors such as health, education,
environment, agriculture etc. is a very essential move. One example that
shows encouraging partnership and stakeholders’ engagement is the
Hyogo Framework of Action wherein the international strategy for disaster
reduction works on multi-stakeholder, inclusive and shared responsibility
approach (UN System Task Team on the Post 2015 UN Development
Agenda, 2013).

58

7.3.3 Develop/implement strategic marketing plan for the product

Marketing plays a key role in the exchange and movement of any goods
or product. These are the activities undertaken by a company to promote
the buying or selling of a product or service. In order to attain your
marketing objectives, marketing strategies helps an organization to
concentrate its scarce resources on the best possible opportunities to
increase company’s sales. Marketing strategy has been described as the
marketing mix or 5Ps which include the people (customer, product, place
(the channels through which the benefits is delivered to customers), and
the promotion (the strategies for creating awareness and generate sales).
The choice of what marketing approach to take will depend on the market
segment that the entrepreneur is targeting. Determining how to enter a
new market is a function of a variety of factors.

59

8. Discussions

Management of Technology is an interdisciplinary field that integrates
science, engineering and knowledge management with practice (Khalil,
2000). Technology Management is concerned with the development,
planning, implementation and assessment of technological capabilities
that allows organizations to manage its technological fundamentals to
create competitive advantage (White & Bruton, 2007). In technology
management, a tool like technology foresight is very crucial for companies
to meet the challenges of a fast- changing environment.

In a highly competitive global environment, successful planning for long-
term decision-making plays a vital role. Nowadays, managers in different
organizations realized the need to understand technological change and
its impact on future activities. Forecasting has become the standard tool
of management in every company to foresee the future and be aware of
the technologies to apply. According to Dr. Posadas, Technology
forecasting is the prediction of how some characteristics of a technology
will evolve within a certain time frame in the future and with a certain
probability of realization.

Implementing a new technology comes without any disadvantages even
you are innovating positively. The catch is that you need to make sure
that the advantages outrank outrank its disadvantages. Undertaking a
technology deployment is not a small task, but having a good plan in place
will help ensure smooth execution off your project. Like in the deployment
of RTE shelf stable disaster foods which is the subject of this study, the
development of the technology is triggered by the focal issues on hunger
alleviation and challenges and issues faced during relief distribution.
Philippines, due to its geographical landscape consisting of mountainous
terrains and coastal areas, disaster support team finds distribution of relief
foods during calamities as one of the challenges. With the objective of
minimizing hunger alleviation, the Packaging Technology Division of ITDI-
DOST developed the “Pack of Hope”, RTE Chicken Arroz Caldo as first
stage disaster/relief food to address the immediate hunger of disaster
survivors and providers of services (medical, military personnel and
volunteer groups) in calamity-stricken areas within 48 hours after the
disaster happened.

With the challenges and issues driving the deployment of RTE shelf stable
disaster foods and Philippines being very prone to natural disasters, a

60

management of this technology is very critical. This paves the way for the
researcher to study the technology foresight of RTE of disaster foods
particularly its deployment. This study is undertaken as a special project
in TM 299, which requires the student to undertake a major project in
technology management involving technology management decisions and
science and technology policy formulation.

The study focuses on determining the long-term future of RTE shelf stable
disaster foods in the deployment in calamity areas through scenario
building exercise adopted by the class in TM 281 with the supervision of
Prof. Glen Imbang. The result of environmental scanning through
PESTLE and SWOT analyses identified the different macro environmental
issues and identified the internal (strengths and weaknesses) and external
(opportunities and threats) factors that are relevant to the deployment of
RTE disaster foods. This characterized a balance on internal factors,
advantageous opportunities and other challenges because of emerging
related technology, deployment and application of other products as well
as the political, environment, socio-cultural, technological, legal and
environmental factors that are considered to affect the future deployment
of RTE shelf stable disaster foods technology.

Moreover, the identification of the key predictable variables in stage 3 and
the critical uncertainties in stage 4 drives the development of different
scenarios which is then clustered into manageable set through
relationship of variables representing the driving force in stage 5. These
three (3) different scenarios were developed in the exercise and named as
follows: Scenario 1-The Big 3 (TeMaSo) Leverage which is characterized
as high impact low uncertainty; Scenario 2-The Admin Influence which is
characterized as the medium impact and high uncertainty and lastly,
Scenario 3-The Indefinite Impact as characterized by low impact medium
uncertainty. These scenarios are considered as the influencing plausible
scenario that may possibly occur in the deployment of RTE shelf stable
disaster foods by the year 2030 as these will be the determinants and
drivers of the deployment and commercialization of this ITDI developed
technology.

Further, the scenario 1 is highly influenced by the association of the Big 3
factors — the influence of the technical aspects, marketing issues and
social concerns. This scenario defines the 3 leading variables in the study
that will influence the future deployment of the RTE shelf stable disaster
foods with high impact and degree of importance. These variables are the

61

drivers of change that will significantly pull the future deployment of this
technology. We can consider this also as the driving forces that will push
the deployment of RTE disaster foods.

The scenario 2 which covers the government policies, support and
prioritization, logistical concerns and the cooperation among the disaster
support teams. This scenario highlighted the influence of the government
to support and implement the policies related they created in relation to
disaster preparedness and mitigation to achieve resiliency. The
government also establishes cooperation and collaboration among other
stakeholders in the successful deployment of this RTE disaster foods.

If the government will take the initiative to promote and invest in
appropriate structures, buildings, other infrastructures and resources, the
deployment of this RTE disaster foods. However, the success of this
scenario lies on the strategies and intervention of our government such as
strict implementation and guidelines in disaster risk reduction
management; massive national campaign on the promotion of disaster
foods and funding/supporting technology start-ups on disaster foods. The
role of the government is very critical in cultivating and sustaining the
deployment of RTE shelf stable disaster foods. Transformation in the
policy and institutional platforms for disaster risk reduction management is
necessary. An integrated institutional framework for disaster risk
teduction is imperative for effective deployment of RTE disaster foods.

In addition, the third scenario is relatively different but with relevant
importance with the other 2 scenarios of future technology deployment.
This is characterized by low impact, medium uncertainty with the following
factors: climate change/natural phenomenon and the rise of new
entrant/possible competitor. This scenario is considered highly uncertain
and undefined because the occurrence of natural phenomenon is
unpredictable. However, the occurrence of this scenario is highly
influenced with the other factor such as rise of possible competitors in the
industry wherein researches, inventions and development are important
elements in the creation and strengthening technological progress.

Based on the assessment made on each scenario, it is evident that all the
technological, marketing and social considerations; government support
and private sector cooperation are the critical success factors in the

62

deployment of RTE disaster foods. All of them addressed the focal issues
of hunger alleviation and the challenges of relief distribution in calamity
areas. In this study, the results were presented on what variables have
impacts and where it matters as well as the interrelationship among the
different components of the technology system for the end goal of
economic growth and development as depicted in the causality diagram
below.

Figure 8.1 Causality Diagram of RTE Disaster Foods

Scenario 1

a | |

Ips A

Marketing}
issues | concerns Ni

Future Economic
Growth and
Development thru |
Technology |
Deployment and
Commercialization |

‘other Goverment ___ [Scenario 2

Factors policies

Government

support &
Saal prioritization
environment

The Indefinite |
PRIVATE Impact
| SECTOR C

Possible
competitor |

The causality diagram of RTE disaster foods deployment describes how
the relationship of the different scenarios will likely occur in the future as
driven by the influence of the different factors, drivers and determinants of
the deployment such as the institute, the government and the industry.

To accelerate the technology deployment and commercialization process
of RTE shelf stable disaster foods, the following determinants such as the

institute, the government and the private sectors must be followed to meet
the challenges and issues for the future deployment of RTE disaster
foods. For the Institute, the strategies include: determining the technical
and commercial feasibility of the project; private-government partnership
for technology transfer and technology offering for marketing and
commercialization. For the Government, the strategies that can be
implemented include: strict implementation of policies/guidelines in DRR
management; massive national campaign on the promotion of disaster
foods and funding/supporting technology start-ups on disaster foods. And
lastly for the Private sector, the following strategies such as openness to
technology development/innovation; participation in strategic partnership
and alliances and develop/implement strategic marketing plan for the
product can be implemented.

Generally, technology foresight is a tool to systematically attempt in
looking at the long-term future of technology. This helps the decision
makers to investigate possible alternatives by thinking beyond the ordinary
perception of reality. This is vital for strategic technology planning to
provide strategies and policy that will shape the future. Thus, in
formulating strategic technology panning, it is very critical to have an
understanding of technology management concepts such as technology
foresight, management discipline, technology deployment,
commercialization as well as innovation to cope with the daily challenges
of real technology world.

64

9. Conclusions and Recommendations

Knowing the importance of technology is a vital force in business
operations. In today’s dynamic technology environment, technological
infrastructure affects the culture, efficiency and relationships of a
business. Nowadays, the environment of business technology can be a
complex place to navigate for the decision makers to decide about
technology deployment and adoption, technology commercialization,
technology investment, technology foresight and planning. Management
of technology is necessary to address the different ways in which
companies should approach the use of technology in business strategy
and operations to achieve competitive advantage.

Understanding the types and the different critical factors affecting the
technology deployment and commercialization as well as the importance
of technology foresight is crucial in the future deployment of RTE shelf
stable disaster foods which significantly address the issues of hunger
alleviation and challenges in relief distribution in the country.

The result of the study are as follows. Issues on hunger alleviation and
the challenges in relief distribution paved the way for the development of
ITDI's RTE shelf stable disaster foods. These were driven and influenced
by political, economic, socio-cultural, technological, legal and
environmental factors that favored the deployment of RTE shelf stable
disaster foods to address the issues and challenges imposed.

There were eighteen (18) key predictable variables identified in the study
such as cost of technology, adoptors/takers of technology. Availability of
supplies and materials, consumer acceptability, shelf life, relief
distribution, ease of consumption, food availability, variability in food
choices, religion/tradition, FDA permits, government procurement system,
warehouse issues, culture, political interest, marketability, adoptors
production commitment and IP regulations. These key predictable
variables were categorized into (5) clusters such as technical aspects,
marketing issues, social concerns, government policies and logistical
concerns.

Four (4) critical uncertainties were identified such as government support
and prioritization, cooperation among the disaster support agencies

65

(NDRRMC, LGUs and DSWD), climate change/natural phenomenon and
the rise of new entrant/possible competitors.

Two (2) technology adoptors/takers signified interest to adopt and
commercialize the technology on the deployment of RTE shelf stable
disaster foods (chicken arroz caldo) with memorandum of agreement
amongst the stakeholders/parties involved. These were the Kai Anya
Foods located in Navotas, Metro Manila and Magicmelt Corporation Inc. in
Lapu Lapu City, Cebu.

Three different scenarios were developed in the exercise and named as
follows: Scenario 1 - The Big 3 (TeMaSo) Leverage shows high impact
low uncertainty; Scenario 2 - The Admin Influence shows medium
impact and high uncertainty and Scenario 3 - The Indefinite Impact
shows low impact medium uncertainty. All these scenarios are considered
as the influencing plausible scenarios that possibly occur for the
deployment of RTE disaster foods by the year 2030.

The implications of the above scenarios highlighted the key driving forces
with varying degree of impact and uncertainty. These different driving
forces with different degree of impact and uncertainty were highly
influenced by the determinants of the deployment. These determinants
evolved from the assessment of the scenario and are believed to be the
actors that push the deployment resulting to favorable future on the
deployment of RTE foods. However, the focus will be on how these
determinants such as the institute, the government and the private sector
would strategically respond to the challenges and issues of technology
deployment to achieve the organization’s objective and understands its
benefits.

The following strategies for the 3 determinants of scenarios were
formulated to meet the challenges and issues for the future deployment of
RTE disaster foods. For the Institute, the strategies include: determining
the technical and commercial feasibility of the project; private-government
partnership for technology transfer and technology offering for marketing
and commercialization. For the Government, the strategies that can be
implemented include: strict implementation of policies/guidelines in DRR
management; massive national campaign on the promotion of disaster
foods and funding/supporting technology start-ups on disaster foods. And

66

lastly for the Private sector, the following strategies such as openness to
technology development/innovation; participation in strategic partnership
and alliances and develop/implement strategic marketing plan for the
product can be implemented.

To address the issues on the catastrophes brought by natural calamities
and disasters, it is recommended to have:

Transformation in policy and institutional platforms for disaster risk
reduction management

Cooperation and collaboration in national government

An integrated institutional framework for disaster risk reduction
Government to invest on appropriate structures, buildings and other
infrastructures with well-designed safety features

Proactive growth stimulating post disaster recovery program

Better weather monitoring, early warning system, well-designed
evacuation areas and well-stocked relief foods in warehouses

67

Bibliography

Alcayna, T., Bollettino, V., Dy, P., & Vinck, P. (2016). Resilience and Disaster
Trends in the Philippines: Opportunities for National and Local Capacity
Building. PLOS Currents Disasters. Retrieved November 5, 2019, from
http://currents.plos.org/disasters/index.htm|%3F p=28077.html

Ani, P., Daquio, C., & Aquino, A. (2015, April). Republic Act 10121: An Approach
in Strengthening Disaster Risk Reduction Management in the Philippines.
Retrieved October 5, 2019, from Food and Fertilizer Technology Center
for the Asia and the Pacific Region:
http://ap.fftc.agnet.org/ap_db.php?id=405

Arayata, M. (2019, Novemeber 1). DOST gives 30K food packs to quake-hit
areas in Mindanao. Philippine News Agency. Retrieved November 5,
2019, from Philippines News Agency:
https://www.pna.gov.ph/articles/1084823

Asian Development Bank. (2019, April). Asian DEvelopment Outlook (ADO):
2019 Strengthening Disaster Resilience. Retrieved October 5, 2019, from
Asian Development Bank: _ https:/Avww.adb.org/publications/asian-
development-outlook-2019-strengthening-disaster-resilience

Baranov, E. (2013). Importance of Strategic Alliances in Company's Activity.
Scientific Papers Series “Management, Economic Engineering in
Agriculture and Rural Development".

Baskarada, S., McKay, T., & McKenna, a. T. (2013). Technology Deployent
Process Model. Operations Management Ressearch.

Bombay, N. (2011). Case Study on the Philippine Government Electronic
Procurement System (PhilGEPS). Asian Development Bank.

Canadian Food Inspection Agency. (2002, 05 31). Flexible Retort Pouch Defects
manual _ Identification and Classification. Retrieved August 14, 2019,
from Canadian Food Inspection Agency:
https://www.inspection.gc.ca/food/archived-food-guidance/fish-and-
seafood/manuals/flexible-retort-
pouch/eng/1350916942104/1350932698250?chap=0

CPES. (2016). Component Four: Extreme Events and Disasters. Retrieved
October 4, 2019, from Philippine Statistics Authority:
https://psa.gov.ph/system/files/CPES%202016%20Component%204_Extr
eme%20Events%20and%20Disasters. pdf

Creden Research. (2018, November). Flexible Packaging Market by Material
Type, By Product Type, By End-Use Industry Growth Share,
Opportunities and Competitive Analysis. Industry Outlook. Retrieved
August 20, 2019, from https://www.credenceresearch.com/report/flexible-
packaging-market

68

DOST. (2017). 2017 DOST Perfomance Report. Retrieved October 5, 2019, from
DOST:
http:/Awww.dost.gov.ph/phocadownload/Downloads/Annual_Reports/Perf
ormance_Reports/2017_DOST_performance_report.pdf

Duffin, E. (2018). Most Significant Natural Disasters by Number of Victims in
2018. Retrieved October 4, 2019, from Statista:
https://www.statista.com/statistics/273894/natural-disasters-with-the-
most-victims/

FAO. (2015). The Impact of Natural Hazards and Disaster on Agriculture , Food
Security and Nutrition. Retrieved October 5, 2019, from Food and
Agriculture Orgnization of the United nations: http:/Awww.fao.org/3/a-
i5128e.pdf

FAO. (2019). The State of Food Security and Nutrition. Food and Agriculture of
the United _ Nations. Retrieved October 5, 2019, from
http://www. fao.org/3/ca5162en/ca5162en.pdf

FDA. (2019). Protecting the public health the enforcement of its standards.
Retrieved Novemeber 5, 2019, from Food and Drug Administration
Philippines: https://www.fda.gov.ph/

Franta, B., Quiaoit, H., Lo, D., & Narisma, G. (2016, November). Climate
Disasters in the Philippines. Harvard Kennedy School Belfer Center for
Science and International Affairs. Retrieved from
https://www. belfercenter.org/publication/climate-disasters-philippines

Fu, B., & Labuza, T. (2000). Shelf Life Testing: Procedures and Prediction
Methods for Frozen Foods. Research Gate.

Global Peace Index. (2017). Measuring Peace in a Complex World. Institute for
Economics and Peace. Retrieved October 10, 2019, from
https://reliefweb.int/report/world/global-peace-index-2017

Global Peace Index. (2019). Measuring Peace in a Complex World. Institute for
Economics and Peace. Retrieved October 5, 2019, from
http://visionofhumanity.org/app/uploads/2019/06/GPI-2019-web003. pdf

Hranjski, H. (2013, May 13). Filipino clans, celebrities dominate midterm polls.
AP News. Retrieved November 5, 2019, from
https://apnews.com/6d6eaf8a04 16484 1b892683a61c88c66

IDMC. (2018). Philippines. Retrieved October 5, 2019, from International
Displacement Monitoring Centre: http:/Avww. internal-
displacement.org/countries/philippines

Imbang, G. (2018). TM 281 Lectures

IPOPhil. (2019). Utility Model. Retrieved November 4, 2019, from International
Patent Office Philippines: https://www.ipophil.gov.ph/services/utility-
model/

69

Jha, S., Martinez, A., Quising, P., Ardaniel, Z., & Wang, L. (2018, March). Natural
Disasters: A Case Study of the Philippines. Natural Disasters, Pubic
Spending and Creative Destruction. Retrieved October 5, 2019, from
https://www.adb.org/publications/natural-disasters-public-spending-and-
creative-destruction-philippines

Jocson, L. (2018, June 25). Study shows how politics affects local disaster
mangement. Rappler. Retrieved October 4, 2019, from
https://www.rappler.com/move-ph/issues/disasters/205491-how-politics-
affects-local-disaster-management-philippines-study

Jun, S., Cox, L., & Huang, A. (2006). Using the Flexible Retort Pouch to Add
Value to Agricultural Products. Food Safety and Technology.

Kanyasan, K., Nonaka, D., Chatouphonexay, A., & Hernandez, P. (2018).
Implementation of disaster risk reduction and management policies in a
school setting in Lao PDR: a case study. Tropical Medicine and Health.

Khalil, T. (2000). Management of Technology: The Key to Competitiveness and
Wealth Creation. New York: McGraw Hill.

Lampi, R. (1980). Retort Pouch: The Development of a Basic PackagingConcept
in Today's High technology Era. Food Process Engineering.

Licuanan, W., Cabreira, R., & Alifio, P. (2019). World Seas: an Environmental
Evaluation (2nd ed., Vol. 2). Academic Press. Retrieved October 14, 2019

Masum, M., & Akbar, A. (2019). The Pacific Ring of Fire is Working as a Home
Country of Geothermal Resources in the World. IOP Conference Series:
Earth and Environmental Science. Retrieved October 4, 2019, from
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/332381997_The_Pacific_Ring_
of_Fire_is_Working_as_a_Home_Country_of_Geothermal_Resources_in
_the_World

Mc Tigue, L. (2018, August 29). How flexible packaging trends are shifting and
why? Packaging Digest. Retrieved August 20, 2019, from
https://www.packagingdigest.com/flexible-packaging/how-flexible-
packaging-trends-are-shifting-and-why-2018-08-29

Mordor Intelligence. (2019). PHILIPPINES PLASTICS MARKET — GROWTH,
TRENDS, AND FORECAST (2019 — 2024). Mordor Intelligence.
Retrieved August 20, 2019, from Mordor _ Intelligence:
https://www.mordorintelligence.com/industry-reports/philippines-plastics-
market

Nakazawa, T., & Beppu, S. (2012). Shifting from Emergency Food to Disaster
Preparation Food to help Disaster Survivors. NISTEP Science and
Technology Foresight Center.

National Research Council. (1991). The National Academies of Sciences
Engineering Medicine. In N. R. Council, A Safer Future: Reducing the

70

Impact of Natural Disasters. Washington DC: National Academy Press.
Retrieved November 5, 2019, from https://doi.org/10.17226/1840.

Nishino. (2001). Lectures on Packaging

NDRRMC. (2015). National Disaster Preparedness Plan 2015-2028. Retrieved
October 4, 2019, from National Disaster Risk Reduction and Mangement
Council:
https://iga.gov.ph/media/uploads/2/Publications%20PDF/Book/NDPP%20
Vol%201.pdf

Pagani, M. (2009). Encyclopedia of Multimedia Technology and Network (second
ed.). Italy: Information Science Reference.

PSA. (2016). 2016 Compedium of Philippine Environment Statistics. Retrieved
October 4, 2019, — from Philippine Statistics Authority:
https://psa.gov. ph/environment/compendium/cpes/2016

Posadas, R. (2010) Lecture Materials on Technology Management
Schwartz, P. (1991). The Art of the Long View. Michigan: Doubleday.

Simpson, D. (1977, May). Key lessons for adopting scenario planning in
diversified companies. Planning Review

Siracusa, V. (2016). Packaging Material in the Food Industry. In Antimicrobial
Food Packaging (pp. 95-206). Itally: Academic Press. Retrieved August
21, 2019, from
https://www.ibef.org/download/Flexible_Packaging060112.pdf

Sovacool, B. (2014, June). Environmental Issues, Climate Changes and Energy
Security in Developing Asia. Retrieved October 5, 2019, from Asian
Development Bank:
https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/publication/42604/ewp-399. pdf

Texeira, A., & Tucker, G. (1997). On-line retort control in thermal sterilization of
canned foods. Food Control Science Direct, 13-20. Retrieved August 21,

2019, from
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/SO9567 1359600056
4

UN System Task Team on the Post 2015 UN Development Agenda. (2013,
January). Building Resilience to Disasters through Partnerhips: Lessons
from Hyogo Framework for Action.

UNIDO. (2019). Technology Foresight. Retrieved November 4, 2019, from United
Nations International Development Organization:
https://www.unido.org/our-focus/advancing-economic-
competitiveness/investing-technology-and-innovation/competitiveness-
business-environment-and-upgrading/technology-foresight

Vutsova, A., & Ignatova, O. (2014). The Role of Public-Private Prtneship for an
Effective echnology Transfer. Applied Technologies and Innovation.

71

White, M., & Bruton, G. (2007). The Management of Technology and Innovation:
a Strategic Approach. Wiley Press.

Wien, M., & Sabate, J. (2015). Food Selection criteria for Disaster Response
Planning in Urban Societies. PMC Nutrition Journal.

World Bank. (2005). Natural Disaster Risk Management in the Philippines:
Enhancing Poverty Alleviation Through Disaster Reduction. The World
Bank Group. Retrieved October 4, 2019, from
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/8748

World Bank. (2019, October). The World Bank Annual Report: Ending Poverty
Investing in Opportunity. Retrieved November 4, 2019, from Open
Knowledge Repository:
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/32333

World Economic Forum. (2018). The Global Risks Report 2018. World Economic
Forum. Retrieved October 4, 2019, from
https://reliefweb.int/report/world/global-risks-report-2018-13th-edition
