LATTICE BOLTZMANN SIMULATION OF THE ADVECTION OF OIL IN WATER

ELMER R. ARAPOC

UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES DILIMAN

MASTER OF SCIENCE IN PHYSICS

JUNE 2015

Abstract

We show a simple simulation of the transport of oil on the surface of flowing
water using a program implementation of the Shan-Chen lattice Boltzmann
method. The oil advection path of the lattice Boltzmann simulation showed fair
agreement with the actual trajectory observed in a simple oil advection
experiment performed on a tabletop setup, supporting the functionality of the
implementation. The implementation is then extended to simulate the trajectory
of of an actual oil spilling accident.

PACS: 47.11.-j [Computational techniques in fluid dynamics], 47.85.Dh [Applied
fluid mechanics], 95.55.-n47.11.Qr [Lattice Gas], 47.11.Fg [Finite element method]

Chapter 1
Introduction

1.1 Oil spill trajectory modeling

Oil spilling is a global concern. In the Philippines, the shipping of oil and
other petroleum products across the archipelago has made it very vulnerable to
oil spilling accidents.

Inorder to mitigate the environmental damage that may result from an oil
spill, containment measures are formulated and contigency response mechanism
are put in place. Contingency planners, response officials, government agencies,
and oil transporters share a keen interest in being able to anticipate oil spill
trajectories for the effective planning and deployment of response personnel and
equipments in order to contain the spill and to protect environmentally sensitive
areas.

However, sufficient lead time is needed before contingency measures can be
effectively implemented. Hence, a timely prediction of an oil slick is necessary for
appropriate action. Also, because oil spill occur in different locations under
different circumstances, each oil spill incident is a unique event in terms of
impact, damages and response challenges. Thus, oil spill modelling tools are being
developed to predict the possible trajectory an oil spill might follow on a body of
water.

Numerical models used to simulate fluid flows are now widely employed
internationally as an important component of contingency planning and coastal
management. Currently available fluid modeling tools include GNOME (General
NOAA Operational Modelling Environment) of the US National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration, MIKE of the Danish Hydrodynamic Institute,
GULFSLIK, MEDSLIK and among others mostly using the conventional
computational fluid dynamics.

In a related study in 2012 by J. Santillan and E, Paringit, the
Eulerian/Lagrangian spill-trajectory model GNOME was employed to model the
oil spill trajectory of the actual Guimaras oil spill accident in 2006, The GNOME,
simulation was validated using satellite data images, but the model showed poor
performance and the results of the actual versus-simulated oil spill patterns
showed that improvement is needed [21].

With the same motivation, this study initally attempts to use a simple
implementation of the lattice Boltzmann method to simulate the advection of oil
on the surface of water. Advection is the transport of a substance, which is the oil
for this particular case, by a fluid due to its bulk motion. The fluid being water.

The study starts with the simulation of actual simple oil advections
performed on a table-top setup. The simulation is evaluated by comparing the
actual and simulated oil advections. The implementation is then extended to
simulate a large scale oil advections, that of an actual oil spilling incident. The
simulations are implemented using an emerging fluid simulation model called
Lattice Boltzmann Method.

1.2 Lattice-Boltzmann Method

Fluid flows can be described at three levels: macroscopic, mesoscopic and
microscopic. In microscopic level, the motion of each molecule is tracked so that
its position and momentum can be obtained and where the molecular dynamics is
described by Newton’s second law. At the macroscopic level, the physical
conservation laws of mass, momentum and energy are applied to a control
volume to establish a set of partial differential equations for governing the fluid
flow, like the Navier-Stokes equations. The conventional computational fluid
dynamics (CFD) is to solve these governing equations by using various numerical
methods.

In contrast, the lattice Boltzmann method (LBM) is an approach at
mesoscopic level. The LBM closes the gap between macro-scale and micro-scale.
The LBM is based on solving the discrete-velocity Boltzmann equation in
statistical physics as opposed to conventional numerical schemes based on the
discretization of partial differential © equations describing macroscopic
conservation laws [2]. LBM considers the behavior of a collection of particles as a
unit and studies the microdynamics of fictitious particles by using simplified
Kinetic models {9].

The fundamental idea of the LBM is to construct simplified kinetic models
that incorporate the essential physics of microscopic processes so that the
macroscopic averaged properties obey the desired macroscopic equations. The

2

essential idea of the approach lies in the recovery of the macroscopic governing
equations, e.g., the Navier-Stokes equation, the shallow water equation, the
diffusion equation, the advection-diffusion equation, etc., from the
microscopic flow behavior of the particle movement as described by
kinetic theory [8]. The discrete kinetic equations are designed in such that they
reproduce the Navier-Stokes equation in the hydrodynamic limit [16]. Chapter 2
of this thesis discusses further the development as well as the theoritical and
mathematical details of LBM.

The kinetic nature of LBM brings many distinctive features such as the
clear picture of streaming and collision processes of simulated fluid particles, the
simple algorithm structure, the easy implementation of boundary conditions, and
the natural parallelism. The versatility and relative ease of implementation
makes lattice-Boltzmann methods particularly attractive for a wide range of
applications in both science and engineering [7]. LBM finds its applications in
simulation of laminar and turbulent flows, interfacial dynamics of multiphase
flows, flows in porous media, particulate and suspension systems, bio-fluid
mechanics, electro-kinetic flows, magneto-hydrodynamics, quantum and
relativistic flows, nano/micro fluidics, and multiscale flows [8].

In this study, the lattice Boltzmann method is used to simulate the
advection of oil on water. Table-top oil advection experiments are carried out
and are then simulated by a simple LBM implementation. Chapter 3 describes
the methdology of the different table-top oil advection experiments that were
performed.

Chapter 4 describes the simulation implementation and discusses the oil
advection simulations results.

While oil spilling is a complex process, the study also attempts a
simulation of an actual oil spilling incident using the same LBM implementation.
Of particular interest are the 1991 Al-Ahmadi oil spillage on the Persian Gulf and
the 2006 Guimaras oil spill accident which are described in Sections 4.4 and 4.5.
The sections also describes the simulation of the spilling incidents including the
limitation of the implementation. Chapter 4 also further discusses the simulation
results followed by a summary and conclusions in Chapter 5.

Chapter 2
Theoretical Background

2.1 Lattice-Gas Automata

The Lattice-Boltzmann Method evolved out of Lattice-Gas Automata
(LGA) [4]. In LGA, the fluid is treated as a set of simulated particles residing
on a regular lattice shown in Fig. 2.1 with certain symmetry properties, where
they collide and stream following some prescribed rules that satisfy some
necessary physical laws. The philosophy behind LGA is that fluid behaviors at
macroscale are nothing but statistical collective results of the micro-dynamics of
fluid molecules, and are insensitive to the detailed information of the individual
molecules [6].

The lattice gas automata is constructed as simple particle dynamics in
discretized space and time. Consequently, all particle velocities are also discrete.
Particles can move around, but only within lattice nodes with discrete velocities
as in a frequently used hexagonal lattice in Figure 2.1.

- @— @-
NN Bowe 5/:
@ to
7 aN. Nee
e-e-

\ PA

Kigure 2.1. ‘l'ypical hexagonal lattice used in lattice gas automata.
Particles are confined to move in discrete velocities @-

A set of boolean (true or false) variables n,(x,t) is introduced to describe
occupation of a particle.

nj(x,t),i

.M (2.1)

where M is the number of directions of particle velocities at each node so that i =
0, 1,..., 6 for a hexagonal lattice.

The boolean variable can be either 0 or 1 particle at a lattice node, i. e.

n(x,0)}=0 no particlesat sitex andt

n(x,t)=1 — aparticleis present at sitex andtimet (2.2)
‘The evolution of the LGA is described by
n(x+e;6t,t+1) = n(x,t) + Q(n(x,t)),  i=0,...M, (2.3)

where ¢,are local particle velocities, (2, is the collision operator, Ot is time step.
There are scattering rules that bring proper dynamics to the system where (2
changes occupation number due to collision at site i.

Configuration of particles at each time step evolves in two sequential sub-
steps: streaming and collision illustrated in Fig. 2.2. During streaming, each
particle moves to the nearest node in the direction of its velocity. During the
collision, particles arrive at a node and interact by changing their velocity
directions according to scattering rules. The key requirement of the LGA model is
that the mass, momentum and energy must be conserved during the particle
collision and streaming process (2]. The resulting system exhibited fluid-like
behaviour.

Collision

Figure 2.2. The evolution of the particle configuration is governed by the sequential
streaming/propagation and collision process.

5

2.2 Lattice Boltzmann Equation

The transition from LGA to LBM was done by replacing particle
occupation variables n; with single particle distribution functions

f,=() (2.4)

4(x,e,t) represents the number of particles with mass m at time t
positioned between x + dx which have velocities between e+de.

The evolution of the particle distribution function is governed by the
Boltzmann equation. Although the LBE evolved from LGA method, it has been
shown [1] that the LBE can be obtained from the continuum Boltzmann equation
for discrete velocities. The LBM simplifies Boltzmann's original idea of gas
dynamics by reducing the number of particles and confining them to the nodes of
a lattice.

There are choices for the dimensionality of the underlying lattice as in Fig.
2.3. These are usually classified using the DaQf-notation, where @ denotes the
space dimensionality and # corresponds to the number of discrete velocities
within the momentum discretization. For a two dimensional lattice with 9
velocity directions @ including zero velocity, a D2Q9 lattice model is used where
the lattice and the velocity discretization is shown.

es ; s
+ ©. ‘ ~

eS? 2

hes

e, Ve,

D2Q9 D3QI5
Figure 2.3. Lattice dimensionality.

The exchange of momentum and energy is achieved through particle
streaming and particle collision. This process can be modelled by the Boltzmann
transport equation,

of 4 e -Vf=alf) (2.8)
ot
where f(x, t) is the particle distribution function, e is the particle velocity, and 2
is the collision operator. The kinetic form stays the same as in LGA. The particle

distribution function is given by

Filxtegdt,t+At) = fix(xt) + Q(F(x,t)), i

0,...M (2.6)

where At is a time increment, f is the particle velocity distribution along the kth
direction. (2, is often replaced by the so-called BGK (Bhatnagar, Gross, Krook,
1954) collision operator given by

1 “EC .
& = —h-f) @n

where Tis the rate of relaxation towards local equilibrium, which is related to the
fluid viscosity. The limit T— 0.5 corresponds to the inviscid flow, while the T>
© limit represents the Stokes (creeping) flow [12][5].

After introducing the BGK approximation, the Boltzmann equation can be
written as

Le vp =f). 28)

The form of the discritized Boltzmann equation in a specific velocity
directions with the time step At and space step Ax, = 6,At is

falmrerQesteae) = filet) AE -f) =)

which is the central equation of LBM, governing the evolution of the particle
distribution function involving the two-step process of streaming and collision,

collision step: Fi(xa.t#0) = flat) —28(f- f°)

a (2.10)
streaming step: f,(x,+e,At,t+Ac) = fi, (x,,¢+At)

2.3 Equilibrium distribution function

Equilibrium distribution function fzg, which appears in the BGK collision
operator, is basically an expansion of the Maxwell's distribution function for low
Mach number M [5][12]. The equilibrium distribution function is of the form

PP = pwlt+3(ey « u) —S(u - ule Sley uf] (2.11)

where k runs from 0 to M and represents the available directions in the lattice,
is the fluid density and w, are weighting factors, where for a D2QQ lattice, the
weights w; are (1]

We = 4
9
1
Weta = 9 (2.12)
-~J1
Wists.e) = 36

In the presence of body forces F, the LBGK equation (2.7) will have to add this
force to the collision process [4]

faleate,dt tet) ~faltat) = 2 fulrst)-8%(r,0)) — Fede (2.13)

in three dimensions r.

2.4 Macroscopic Variables

In the Lattice Boltzmann Method, macroscopic quantities are obtained by
evaluating the hydrodynamic moments of the distribution function f [6].
Connections of the distribution function to macroscopic quantities for the density
and momentum flux are defined as follows

7 7
p= dhe = he
& fe (2.14)
pu = Deh, = Defi?
fd a

where the macroscopic fluid density is defined as the sum of the distribution
functions. Macroscopic velocity is an average of the microscopic velocities e
weighted by the directional densities 4.

2.5 Bounceback Boundary Conditions

Bounceback is suitable in complicated geometries, for example it is used to
model solid stationary or moving boundary condition, non-slip condition, or flow
over obstacles [9]. Bounceback implies that a particle coming towards the solid
boundary bounces back into the flow domain.

For example, we focus on the boundary shown in Figure 4. There is no
streaming from a solid, so we have three unknown distribution functions 5, £2
and £6.

° eo
_ FLUID

SOLID
° ° ° °
Figure 2.4. Bounceback on a fluid-solid wall boundary.

Bounce-back is simply performed with next equations
fs=fs h=fo fe = fo (2.15)

Particles bounce back to the node from which they were originally
streamed. It is important, that streaming process is executed before applying
boundary conditions.

2.6 Shan-Chen Lattice Boltzmann Method

Shan-Chen model is commonly used to simulate multicomponent fluid
flows [3]. The Shan-Chen multiphase method introduces an interparticle potential
to induce phase separation [16]. Shan-Chen LBM is based on the concept of
pairwise intermolecular interactions among fluid particles where the effective force
on the Oth component is defined as

F,(r) = -G¥,(r,t VX wes (r+e,,t)e, (2.16)

where G and G are the two components of the fluid system (oil and water in this
case) and Wo(r,t) is the reference density. The magnitude of G determines the
magnitude of the interaction between components whether attractive (positive)
or repulsive (negative). For phase separation to occur a suitable G must be
chosen, and must be negative and below a certain critical value [16]. For the case
of nearest-neighbor interactions on the D2Q9 lattice, the weights w;? are w(1) =
1/3 and w(2) = 1/2 [17]. The Shan-Chen model defines separate distribution
functions fig for each of the component fluids 0 where the individual fluid
component is modeled separately through its lattice Boltzmann equation.

Chapter 3
Tabletop Oil Advection
Experiments

3.1 Oil advection on a channel

An actual oil advection experiment is performed on a tabletop ripple tank
setup shown in Figure 3.1. An acrylic ripple tank with length and width of 29 cm
and height of 12 cm was filled with water up to a depth of about 0.3 cm. The
wave generator was constructed from a speaker to which a metal strip was
connected to the speaker's diaphragm. The whole wave generator system was
held in a wooden stand so that the metal strip just touches the water surface on
the tank, generating plane surface waves as it vibrates.

Speaker

| Acolic Tank

Signal Generator
Overhead Projector

Figure 3,1. Oil advection experimental setup diagram. A driven speaker serves as a wave
ccuerator for the water on the tank. ‘The tank is placed on an overhead projector so that the oil
low experiment onthe tank is projected to a screen for convenient video recording.

10

A surface flow is generated by a 32.50 Hz frequency wave generator on a
6.5 cm wide channel. A baffle/barrier of around 2.5-cm was placed
perpendicularly on one side of the channel. Canola oil was allowed to spread and
thin out first to around 2.5 cm in diameter before powering the wave generator to
allow the water to flow.

Figure 3.2 shows the snapshots at corresponding times of the video taken
of the actual tabletop oil advection experiment. The experiment was done
repeatedly and showed consistent advection pattern throughout.

66s 738

Figure 3.2. Video snapshots of the actual oil advection experiment at corresponding times.

11

Figure 3.3 shows a similar advection on the channel with two baffles
introduced into the channel.

99s 11.0

Figure 3.3. Video snapshots of the actual oil advection experiment at corresponding times for
iwo baffles.

12

3.2 Tabletop oil advection using Panay Gulf outline
boundaries

An experiment approximating oil advection around land masses was performed on
a larger 0.6 m by 1.2 m tank shown in Figure 3.4 using the similar wave
generator setup as in Section 3.1. The tank setup is illuminated from below using
LED strips with a diffuser placed in between. The oil was dyed using an oil based
food color to obtain better contrast. A Panasonic HDC-HS900 HD videocamera
placed directly overhead the tank setup was used to capture the video.

Figure 3.4. Tabletop Setup. A 0.6 m by 1.2 m aquarium illuminated from below using a
diffused ‘LED light. A plunger constructed and connected to a speaker which in tum is
driven by’a signal generator serves as the wave generator. A videocamera is placed over the
setup.

An outline of the vicinity of the Panay gulf was cut out from a styropor
board. The Styropor cutouts which will serve to provide the land mass
boundaries were then weighted to keep them fixed. The actual oil advection is
shown in Fig 3.5.

OOO

a c

OAC AY

Figure, 3.5, The advection of a drop of oil around Panay gui outline boundaries. The oil

‘was allowed to thin out before powering on the wave generator.

14

Chapter 4
Simulation Results and Discussions

4.1 Implementation

The simulations were implemented in GNU Octave version 3.8.1 on an Intel®
Core™ i3 1.8 GHz CPU running on Ubuntu 14.04 LTS Operating System. Octave
is high-level programming language intended primarily for numerical
computations and is an open-source alternative and highly compatible to MatLab.

‘We employed a Shan-Chen Lattice Boltzmann BGK to simulate the two-
dimensional fluid surface flow using a D2Q9 lattice model and the Shan-Chen
multicomponent model to simulate the advection of oil in water. The outline of
the simulation is as follows:

1. Initialize the density distribution function f for each of the component fluid.
2. Obtain the macroscopic variables (Eqn 2.14)
3. Calculate the equilibrium distribution function (Eqn. 2.11).

4. Obtain a new density distribution function after the collision process and
apply forcing.

5. Consider the interaction between the fluid components described by Shan-
Chen.

6. Stream/propagate the particle distribution function to the neighboring node.
7. Apply boundary the necessary boundary condition.

8. Iterate the steps.

15

4.2 Simulation of the oil advection on a channel

For the advection of oil on a channel, we used a 100 by 250 lattice grid to
cover the area. A continous boundary was imposed on the channel inlet and
outlet sides while a bounceback condition was imposed on the channel boundary
and baffles. We vary the value of G (Eq. 16), ie varying the magnitude of the
interaction between ojl and water. We also set the relaxation parameter t (Eq.
27) at 1.0 at to keep the simulation stable. The snapshots of the simulation at
the corresponding times of the actual oil advection in Figure 3.2 is shown in
Figure 4.1.

0.0s

49s

3.38
58s

66s

Simulation for the oil advection in a channel with a bale. Red indicates a
prabablbey Semslty ior Od while blac indicates no probabiliy for ot in the nego.

The oil advection simulation is shown in Figure 4.1. The color indicates
the normalized probability for oil. Red indicates a high probability for oil in the
region while blue indicates a zero probability.

16

The simulated oil advection shows a fair agreement with the actual oil
advection pattern observed on the tabtop experiment in Figure 3.2. This
simulation was obtained using a value of G = -0.60. The actual oil pattern in
Figure 3.3 f and simulated pattern in 4.1f shows sigificant similarity. Our
simulation however showed relatively more drag after the obstacle towards the
end of the simulation as compared with the actual experiment. The simulation
also showed some oil diffusing out as the oil moves along. Nonetheless, the overall
path of the simulated oil advection agrees well with the actual oil advection.

Using the same parameter values, we simulate another oil advection
through a different obstacle. The actual oil advection experiment through this
new obstacle is shown in Figure 4.2.

Figure 4.2. Lattice Boltzmann simulation for the oil advection in a channel with two baffles.

The simulation yield a similar oil movement consistent with the observed
oil advection in the experiment.

A comparison of the trajectory of the actual and the LBM simulated
advection is obtained by comparing the location of the centroid of the actual oil
pattern and the center of the oil concentration of the LBM simulated advection
at corresponding times. The location of the centroid and the outline of the oil
patterns for the case of a single baffle is shown in Figure 4.3.

66s 7.36

Figure 4.3. The outline and centroid of the oil pattern for the actual (blue) and LBM
simulation (yellow) at corresponding time. q

Computing for the root mean square error between the corresponding
centroids of the actual oil pattern and the location of the LBM simulation’s
central oil concentration yield a value of 6.45 which corresponds to an absolute
error of 0.43 cm.

18

Similarly, a comparison of the trajectory of the actual and the LBM
simulated advection for the case where two baffles were introduced is also
obtained. The centroid and the outline of the oil patterns for this case is shown
in Figure 4.4.

4.08

995 110s

Figure 4.4. The outline and centroid of the actual oil pattern for the (blue), and the
central oil concetntration of the LBM simulation )) al corresponding’ time for
the case of two baffles.

The RMS error yields 5.85 corresponding to an absolute error of 0.39 cm.
Overall, the movement of the concentration of oil in the simulation agrees with
that of the actual oil advection

19

4.3 Simulation of the oil advection around coastline
The oil advection experiment with Panay gulf coastline boundary was
simulated in a 200 x 300 grid. The parameters G was set at -1.2 and the

relaxation parameter T was set at 0.9. Snapshots of the oil advection simulation is
shown in Figure 4.5.

i

Figure 4.5, Lattice Boltzmann simulation for the oil advection around the Panay gulf
coast boundaries.

Figure 4.5 shows that the concentration of the oil drop moves in a path
similar to the path followed by the drop of oil in the actual experiment as shown
in Figure 3.5 where most of the oil moves around the eastern side of Guimaras.

20

‘The simulation also showed the oil diffusing out as it moves. Figure 4.5 h-l
suggest that there is indeed a probability for some oil to move around the western
side of Guimaras. This was observed for the actual oil advection experiment
where oil was allowed to first thin out as shown from Figure 3.6 f, Figure 3.6 h-l
showed some oil moving back along the coast of Negros. The LBM simulation
shown in Figure 4.5 } follows this where an oil probability is seen along the
Negros coast.

Figure 4.6 shows the actual oil advection pattern at specific times.

“eS
AALS
(y iy iy

Figure 4.6. Actual oil advection pattern at corresponding times.

21

Figure 4.7 shows the outline and the centroid of the actual oil advection
patterns in Figure 4.6 (in blue) together with the central oil concentration of the
LBM simulation (in yellow) at corresponding times.

10.0s

50.08 60.0s 70.0s

Figure 4.7, Outline and centroid of the actual oil tern ), and the itral oil
eae er oats DBM inalation (jelow) at oourefoonding taney, cont

Comparison of the centroid of the actual oil advection pattern and the
central concentration of the oil in the LBM simulation yields an RMS error
equivalent to an absolute error of 3.2 cm.

22

4.4 Shan-Chen inter-particle potential G

The Shan-Chen interparticle potential parameter G controls the strength
of the inter-particle force between fluid components, which relates to the
miscibility or immiscbibility of the fluids involved. In the simulation, the value of
G was choosen to closely approximate how the oil spreads out in the actual
tabletop experiment.

Figure 4.8 shows the behaviour of the LBM simulated oil advection pattern
at different values of G against the actual oil advection pattern at corresponding
times.

mulation oil advection pattern at different values of G. The actual
CE ae ee saliern at coresponding Unmes is shown in black outline.

23

Figure 4.8 shows how the LBM simulated oil pattern can easily spread out
at G = - 0.2 while the oil becomes more cohesive at G = -1.0, for which the oil
pattern tends to be more rigid throught the whole advection. Using G = - 0.6, the
LBM simulated oil pattern closely approximates the actual oil advection pattern.

Less negative values of G results to a less cohesive oil in the simulation
which can easily spread out to show detailed oil advection pattern or even
breaking up of the oil. A more negative value for G results to a more cohesive oil
in the simulation which tend to keep the oil together.

While G affects the spread and the pattern of the oil throughout the
advection process, it does not have considerable influence on the movement of the
centroid of the LBM oil simulation pattern. Simulating and tracking the oil
central concentration at much larger scales without much regard for actual oil
advection pattern could use a more negative value for G. Such was used for the
simulation of the advection of oil with Panay gulf outline where G = -1.2. The
simulation of of large scale oil spill incidents in the next sections to primarily
model the trajectory of the oil concentration uses G = -1.0 to limit the spread of
the oil throught the advection.

4.5 Relaxation time T

The relaxation time T determines how quickly the distribution function
relaxes to equilibrium during the collision phase in the LBM algorithm. The

relaxation parameter has to satisfy the condition T > 0.5 to maintain the
numerical stability of the LBM simulation, where T = 0.5 corresponds to a flow
of fluid with zero viscosity [5,12]. The relaxation parameter of T = 1.0 in all LBM
simulation is the safest value in terms of stability (6, 26]. As suggested by Sukop
[6], a relaxation time of T = 1.0 has been used in the simulation.

24

4.6 Simulation of the 1991 Al Ahmadi oil spill

We extend our simulation to actual large scale oil spilling accidents. The
Al-Abmadi oil spillage in January - May 1991 at the Persian Gulf at the height
of the Gulf war is a well documented incident. Oil was released at or near Mina
Al-Ahmadi, some 25 km south of Kuwait City. The actual trajectory of the oil
spill has been extensively documented and several authors have described and
modeled the incident. Al Rabeh et. al used the trajectory model GULFSLIK II
[35] while El Shorbagey et. al used MIKE 3 to model the oil spill incident [33].
The actual trajectory of the oil’s leading edge, as well as the simulation by Al
Rabeh and El Shorbagy is shown in Figure 4.9.

Nc msi

a b c

Figure 4.9, The (a) actual observed trajectory of the oil during the 1991 Al-Ahmadi
oil spill and the (6) simulated trajectory done on GULFSLIK by Al Rabeh, ct all and
(@) by El Shorbagy using MIKE.

25

At the Persian Gulf, the dominating wind condition is the northwesterly
wind field called Shamal. Such wind pushes the current towards the south.
Considering a prevalent wind condition of 5.0 m/s blowing from the northwest
[33], 2 LBM simulation on a 200 x 300 lattice was implemented with G = -0.9
and T = 1.0 as shown in Figure 4.10.

a :
1
I [ss a
|
|
b i
f |
:
} |
" ‘ 4
q | q
da | h 1 |

Figure 4.10. Lattice Boltzmann simulation for th Al-Abmadi oil spill.

The track of the movement of the oil’s central concentration for the
simulated oil advection is shown in Figure 4.11.

4

(0 day) Jan 19,

/

jon 25 fh —— (7-1 days) jan 26
fy

fan29 *—— (10.9 days) Jan 29:
.
.
\ $21.4 days) cab 9
\"

PMs
\

\ 4
March a8 => | 3 635d

@ Actual Oil Sighting ©) LBM simulation
@ MIKE simulation

(a) (b)
Rien 41, (0) Thack of the ols centzal concentration forthe simuiatd oil advectoin forthe
“Ahmadi of {he mulation (yelow), ie shown together with the

Al
Safer ata ah ta pe me a A

Figure 4.11.2 showed that the LBM simulation oil’s central concentration
(in yellow) moves south. This is consistent with the path of the actual oil sighting
shown in pink. A comparison of the different tracks is shown in Figure 4.11.b for
the actual oil sighting, the simulation by El Shorbaggy and the LBM simulation.

At the start of the LBM simulation, the oil moves south along the coast
but drifts more westward as it moves south as the simulation proceeds deviating
from the track of the actual oil sighting. The same is observed for the the track
by Elshorbaggy using MIKE.

El Shorbaggy, et. Al [36] attributed this to the limitation of using a monthly
averaged wind data for their simulatoin. The LBM simulation on the other hand
uses a constant prevalent wind of 5.0 m/s NW.

27

To determine the limitation of using a constant wind data, an LBM
simulation was implemented using the monthly averaged wind data used by El
Shorbaggy et al. The trajectory for this simulation is shown in Figure 4.12.

Jan 19

‘Actual Oil Sighting

(MIKE3 Simulation
(A. Elhakeem, et.al (2007)
RMSE = 6.5 (20,0 km)

LBM simulation

(3.0 m/s and 306"

NNW prevalent wind)
RMSE = 13,9 (42,9 km)

(El Hakeem, et.
RMSE = 8.1 (25.0 km)

Figure 4.12 shows that when using the monthly averaged wind data, the
track of the LBM simulation shifted westward towards the latter part of the
simulation. The RMS error associated with each of the simulated trajectory
relative to the trajectory of the actual oil sighting is calculated. The simulation
by El Shorbaggy et. al. has an RMSE of 6.5 corresponding to an absolute error of
20.0 km. The RMS absolute error for the trajectory of the LBM simulation using
a montly averaged wind data improved to 25.0 km from 42.9 km when only a
constant prevailing wind is used.

4.6 Simulation of the 2005 Goa, India oil spill

An oil spill occurred off Goa, west coast of India, on 23 March 2005 due to
collision of two vessels. Wind analysis indicated that winds were variable: NNE
direction with and WNW direction in the evening and predominantly in the
northwest direction [35].

Figure 4.13 shows the actual sighting of the oil as well as the trajectory oil
the oil using MIKE21 spill analysis model in the previous work by P. Vetamony,
et al [35].

85 15°30"

75 {15°26

15°18

rN

1BrEN

1S'ON

(kilometer)
BS && 8 F&F HSB

204 14" 54

TAGE
Lae

60

(kilometer)

Figure 4.13. Track of the Goa oil spill. Points indicate the actual sighting location
PAE Sate bea time, Soll tack {Som the Smmulaion using MINT wiih micated
date and time [35].

29

The prevalent wind condition is 3.5 m/s NNW [35]. The lattice Boltzmann
simulation is shown in Figure 4.14 using a 300 x 300 lattice with G = -1.0 and T
=10.

Figure 4.14. Lattice Boltzmann simulation for the Goa oil spill

The trajectory of the movement of the oil’s central concentration for the
simulated oil advection is shown in Figure 4.15.

M23, 1340) —

M24, 0640

1315)

2d 715
@ Actual Oi Sighting

° MIKE Simulation
(. Vethamony,
RMSE = 16,2 ras 6 im

BM Simulation
(3.5 m/s NNE

revailing wind)
RMSE = 63.1 (17,9 km)

Figure, 4.15. Lattice Boltzmann simulation for
Pani indicted the ac actual ol sightings. The bue
BM simulation is in yellow.

The LBM simulation shows that the oil started out moving south along
the coast similar to the the actual observation as well as the simulation done by
P. Vethamony [35]. However, at the later part of the LBM simulation, the overall
track drifted considerably westward away from the coast deviating far from the
actual and simulated track by P. Vethamony.

It is interesting to note however, that the LBM simulation produced the
similar zigzag track observed in the MIKE21 simulation. The considerable drift
on the overall track of the LBM simulation can be attributed to the use of a
constant forcing while the actual wind data shows that is is largely variable
around the prevailing northwest direction.

31

Another LBM simulation is implemented now using a wind data obtained
from Vethamony et. al. The trajectory of the LBM simulation using this wind
data is shown in Figure 4.16.

(M24) 0640,

M24)1315
@ Actual Oil Sighting

© MIKE21 simulation
4 etal
RMSE = 16.2 (4.6 km)

© LBM simulation
G.5 m/s NNE
prevailing wind)
RMSE = 22.2 (6,3 km)

The use of the wind data obtained from P. Vethamony et. al. instead of
usng a constant prevalent wind significantly improved the resulting trajectory of
the LBM simulation. The absolute RMSE for the trajectory obtained by P.
Vethamony et. al. using MIKE21 is 4.6 km. The LBM simulation trajectory using
a constant prevalent wind has an absolute RMSE of 17.9 km which significantly
improved to 6.3 km when the wind data from P. Vethamony was used.

4.8 Simulation of the 2006 Guimaras oil spill

The Guimaras oil spill accident in August 11, 2006 in Panay Gulf
southwest of Guimaras Island (N 10 15.31’ E122 29.09’, 13.3 nautical miles south
of Lusacan Point, Guimaras) [20] was considered as the worst oil spill accident in
the Philippines. The oil spillage was a result of the sinking of oil the tanker M/T
Solar I.

Figure 4.17 shows the oil spill detected from ENVISAT ASAR images by
J. Santillan and Paringit. (20]

Figure 4.17. Actual oil spill during the 2006 Guimaral oil spill from ASAR images (20]

33

The prevalent wind condition is Habagat at 7.0 km/br SW. The lattice
Boltzmann simulation is shown in Figure 4.18 using a 300 x 300 lattice using the
same parameter values with G = -1.0 and t = 1.0.

‘Figure 4.18. Lattice Boltzmann simulation for the Guimaras oil spill

The track of the movement of the oil’s central concentration for the
simulated oi] advection is shown in Figure 4.19.

ems 5 km

Figure 4:19, Track of the LBM simulation for the Guimaras oil spill (yellow).
‘The actual oll spill traced from satelite image is shown in sky blue. B

The simulation showed that the oil moved northeast on the southeast
shore of Guimaras, consistent with the actual movement of the oil shown in
Figure 4.17 a. The simulation also showed a small probability extending towards
the strait in betweedn Guimaras and Negros to suggest the posibility of oil
drifting in this direction. Figure 4.17 a and b indeed showed that a small portion
of the actual oil flowed through the strait between Guimaras and Negros.

The simulation showed that the oil’s concentration moved slowly northeast
until it diffuses out. This is fairly consistent with the actual oil spill shown in
Figure 4.17 which showed that the actual oil spill moved around this vicinity
while only a small part goes throgh the Negros-Guimaras strait.

The prevalent wind condition in Guimaras is stable unlike in the case of
the Al Ahmadi oil spill and Goa oil spill. Using a constant prevalent wind gives a
good approximate of the actual trajectory.

35

4.9 Spread of the simulated track with wind forcing

4.9.1 2006 Guimaras oil spill

For the LBM simulation of the Guimaras oil spill, a prevalent wind
condition of 7.0 km/hr SW was used. The wind however can vary between 5
km/hr to 10 km/hr around SW to WSW direction [38]. Varying the wind forcing
condition within these values shows the spread of the location of the oil’s central
concentration after a simulation equivalent to 12 hours as shown in Figure 4.20.

-

Figure 4.20. The spread of the location of the LBM simulations central
oil concentration for different wind forcing is shown in blue. The actual
oil spill from ENVISAR ASAR image is shown in red.

The location of the oil’s central concentration using the prevalent wind of
7.0 km/hr SW is shown in dark blue. Varying the wind forcing shows a spread of
an equivalent of 1.1 km to the right towards east and 0.7 km along north-south
direction in which the actual oil spill fall within much of the region of spread.

36

4.9.2 1991 Al Ahmadi oil spill

A monthly-averaged wind data was used for the simulation of the Al
Abmadi oil spill. An average of 5.3 m/s at 141.7° (measured from east) for
January and 5.5 m/s at 132‘for February was used [36]. Considering the
averaged wind data for previous and succeding months, a range of wind speed
and direction values centered around the monthly-averaged data were obtained
by considering the maximum difference in the data between the previous and
succeding month. Hence a range of wind data of 4.8 m/s - 5.8 m/s along 132°-
152° was used for January while a range of 5.0 m/s - 5.5 m/s along 121°-
141" was used for February. The minimum, maximum and average values for
both speed and direction gives nine combinations for possible wind forcing. Figure
4.21 shows the spread of the track using the given range of wind data.

é _ Pou
a

Figure 4.21. The spread of the location of the LBM simulation’s central oil concentration for
dilferent wind forcing is shown in blue with a circular envelope to include all spread points
The actual oil spill’ sighting location is represented in red while the MIKE simulation
prediction is shown in green.

The average radius of the circular envelope gives a range of 21 km for the
spread of the track around the track using a monthly-averaged data. While most
of the actual track shown in red lie outside the range, all of the MIKE simulation
predicted track falls within the range of the LBM simulated track.

37

4.6.3 2005 Goa, India oil spill

The simulation for Goa, India oil spill used the wind data from the work of
P. Vethamony et al. [35] obtaining the wind speed and direction every 6 hours
from March 23 - 25. A range of wind speed and direction was obtained by taking
the minimum and maximum values within the time interval. The range of values
were then used to obtain the spread of the track of the simulation shown in
Figure 4.22,

M23, 0100

M23, 1000

M23, 1340

M24, 0640

‘M24, 1315

M24, 1715

M25, 0635

M25, 1700 ®

Figure 4.22. The spread of the location of the LBM simulation’s central oil
concentration for different wind forcing is shown in blue with a circular envelope to
include all spread points. The actual oil spill sighting location is represented in red while
the MIKE2I simulation prediction is shown in green.

The tracks has an average spread of 1.6 km. Only two out of seven tracks

of the actual oil sightings fall within the range of the LBM simulated tracks. Four
of the MIKE21 simulated tracks however fall within the LBM simulation’s range.

For the case of Goa oil spill, the LBM simulation does not fair well in
approximating the track of the oil at specific times. The simulated track deviates
significantly at the later end of the simulation where the actual oil sighting is
very far outside the range of the simulated track, which is also true for the
MIKE21 prediction.

38

Chapter 5
Summary and Conclusion

We have shown a Lattice Boltzmann implementation for the simulation of
the advection of oil on water. We performed simple oil advection experiment on a
tabletop setup and simulated the advection using LBM.

The simulation is consistent with the observed movement of the actual oil
in the advection experiment.

While oil spill simulation is complicated, we extended our LBM simulation
to actual oil spill accidents: 1991 Al-Ahmadi oil spill, 2005 Goa, India oil spill
and the 2006 Guimaras oil spill incidents taking only into primary considerations
the landmass boundary and the wind forcing. Our simulation deviates with the
observed oil spill movement particularly at the later part of the simulation which
can be contributed to the compounded effect of the limitation the forcing used in
our simulation, specially for the case of Goa oil spill. For the Guimaras oil spill
however, our simulation showed a movement of the oil consistent with the
observed movement of the actual oil spill.

39

Bibliography

1

10.

11.

12,

13.

14,

15.

16.

Xiaoye He, Li-Shi Luo. Lattice Boltzmann model for the incompressible
Navier-Stokes Equation. Journal of Statistical Physics 38, 314 (1997)

Sauro Succi. “The Lattice Boltzmann equation for fluid dynamics and
beyond”, Clarendon Press, Oxford (2001)

S. Succi, E. Foti and F. Higuera. “Three-Dimensional Flows in Complex
Geometries with the Lattice Boltzmann Method". Europhysics Letters 10,
433 (1989)

Shiyi Chen, Garry Doolen. Lattice Boltzmann Method for Fluid Flows.
Annual Reviews in Fluid Mechechanics 30. 329-64. (1997)

Z. Guo, B. Shi, N. Wang. Lattice BGK Model for Incompressible Navier-
Stokes Equaation. Journal of Computational Physics 165, 228-306 (2001)

M. Sukop, D. Thorne. Lattice Boltzmann Modelling - An Introduction for
Geoscientists and Engineers. 2 Ed. (2007)

C. Shu, Y. Chew, et. al. Progress in the Developement and Application of
Lattice Boltzmann Method, Proceedings of the 12 Asian Congress on
Fluid Mechanics. Daejeon, Korea (August 2008)

Kevin Tubbs, “Lattice Boltzmann Modelling for Shallow Water Equations
Using High Performance Computing”. Dissertation. Louisiana State
University (2010)

Mele, Igor. Lattice Boltzmann method. Seminar (2013)

Z. Ghuo, C. Shu. “Avances in Computational Fluid Dynamics (Vol 3) -
Lattice Boltzmann and its applications in Engineering”. (2013)

X. He and L. Lou, “Theory of the Lattice Boltzmann method: From the
Boltzmann equation to the latticeBoltzmann equation”, Physical Review E
56, 6811 (1997)

Z. Guo, B. Shi, N Wang, “Lattice BGK model for Incompressible Navier-
Stokes Equation” Journal ofComputational Physics 165, pp. 288-306, 2000

X. Shan and H. Chen, “Lattice Boltzmann model for simulating
flows with multiple phases and components”, Physical Review E 47,
1815 (2013)

Dagmar Schmidt Etkin. “Worldwide Analysis of Marine Oil Spill Cleanup
Cost Factor”. Arctic and Marine Oilspill Program Technical Seminar
(June 2000)

J. Delas Alas, I. Bentillo, Simulation of Oil Slick Movement in Brunei
Darussalam. Proceedings of the ASEAN/US Coastal Resource
Management Program Workshop on Coastal Resource Management in
Brunei Darussalam. (1991)

D. Lycett-Brown, K. Luo, “Three-Dimensional Micro-Droplet Collision
Simulation using the Lattice Boltzmann Method”, 3rd Micro and Nano
Flows Conference, (Thessaloniki, Greece, 2011), pp 22-24.

40

17.Q. Li, K. Luo, X. Li, “Forcing scheme in pseudopotential lattice

Boltzmann model for multiphase flows ",

18.H. Huang, M. Krafezyk, X. Lu, "Forcing term in single-phase and Shan-
Chen-type multiphase lattice Boltzmann models”, Physical Review E 84,
046710 (2011).

19.H. Huang, Z. Li, S. Liu, X. Lu, "Shan-and-Chen-type multiphase lattice
Boltzmann study of viscous coupling effects for two-phase flow in porous
media”, International Journal for Numerical Methods (2008).

20. J. Santillan, E. Paringit, "Hydrodynamic and Trajectory Modeling of the
August 11, 2006 M/T Solar 1 oil spill in Guimaras, Central Philippines
with validation using ENVISAT ASAR data”, 33rd Asian Conference in
Remote Sensing, (Pattaya, Thailand, 2012) pp. 418-428.

. J, Santillan, E. Paringit, “Oil spill detection in ENVISAT ASAR images
using radar backscatter thresholding and logistic regression analhysis”,
Proceeding of the 32nd Asian Conference in Remote Sensing, (Taipei,
Taiwan 2011)

2

22..A. Abella, M. Soriano, “Visualization of wave phenomena and liquid
transport on surface flow”, 32™ Physics Congress of the Samahang Pisika
ng Pilipinas, (Quezon City, Philippines, 2014), (to be published).

23. J. Lizada, “Direct use value of environmental damages due to oil spill in
the coastal areas: The case of Semirara and Guimaras Islands,
Philippines”, 11th National Convention on Statistics, (Makati, 2010)

24.8. Ha, N. Ku, “Lattice Boltzmann simulation for the prediction of oil slick
movement and spread in ocean environment”,International Offshore and
Polar Engineering Conference, (Rhodes, Greece,2012),pp.784-788

25.K. Lagman, “Tracking and modeling of oceanographic features”
Undergraduate Thesis, National Institute of Physics, University of the
Philippines-Diliman (2007)

26.M. Dabbaghitehrani. “Lattice Boltzmann method for two immiscible
components” Master’s Thesis. Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm,
Sweden (2012)

27.V. Sunio. “Indoor temperature modeling and control of the Kawilihan
gallery of Vargas Museum” Master’s Thesis. National Institute of Physics,
University of the Philippines-Diliman (2010)

28. Philippines: Guimaras Oil Spill OCHA Situation Report No. 2.
http: //reliefweb.int /report/philippines/philippines-guimaras-oil-spill-ocha-
situation-report-no-:

29..A. Maslo, J. Panjan, D. Zagar, “Large-scale oil spill simulation using
lattice Boltzmann method, validation on Lebanon oil spill", Marine
Pollution Bulletin 84(1-2), pp. 225-235, 2014

30.M. Nagheeby, M. Kolahdoozan, "Numerical modeling of two-phase fluid
flow and oil slick transport in estuarine water”, International Journal of
Environmental Science and Technology 7(4), pp. 771-774, 2010

41

31.

32.

33.

34,

35.

36.

37.

38.

39.

H. Chen, S. Chen, W. Matthaeus. “Recovery of the Navier-Stokes
equations using a lattice-gas Boltzmann method” Physics Review A 45.
(1992)

A. Gunstensen, D, Ruthman, et. al. “Lattice Boltzmann model for
immiscible fluids” Physics Review A 43. (1991)

D. Zeigler, “Boundary conditions for Lattice Boltzmann simulations”,
Journal of Statistical Physics Vol. 71, (1993)

T. Inamuro, M. Yoshino, F. Ugino, "A non-slip boundary condition for
lattice Boltzmann simulations", Physics of Fluids 7 (1995)

J. Beegle-Krause. “General NOAA Oil Modeling Environment (GNOME):
A New Spill Trajectory Model”, International Oil Spill Conference (2001).

A. El Hakeem, W. Elshorbagy, R. Chebbi. "Oil spill simulation and
validation in the Arabian (Persian) Gulf with special reference to the UAE
Coast” Water, Air and Soil Pollution Journal. 184:243-254 (May 2007)

K. Aghajanloo, M. Pirooz and M. Namin. “Numerical Simulation of Oil
Spill Behavior in the Persian Gulf "Int. J. Environ. Res., 7(1):81-96,
Winter 2013

Al Rabee, et. al. “Modeling the fate and transport of Al-Abmadi oil spill”,
Water, Air and Soil Pollution (November 1992).

P. Vethamony, K. Sudheesh, et. Al “Trajectory of an oil spill off Goa,
eastern Arabian Sea: Field observations and simulations” Environmental
Pollution (2007)

42

